All right, John Kerry, Occo. Welcome back, my friend. Thank you. It's good to be back. I'm excited to talk to you today. The world is up in smoke right now. Yeah. Lots of crazy things are going on. Not. Is Trump the most pro Israel president we've ever had in this country? I would say yes. I think it's by far probably. You know, if you just look at the decision to move the embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, that in and of itself does it. In the 1990s, Congress passed the law saying that the American embassy should move from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, but not until there's peace with the Palestinians. So each successive president has put a hold on it and then Trump's like, no, we're doing it. All the stuff that's happening right now is just is so crazy to watch, you know, especially all like these top political pundits who are backing Trump when he was running for president that are starting to question what he's doing, which I think is like a new thing, you know, like during Obama, like when Bush happened and you had all like the left wing pundits criticizing Bush's foreign policy and the war stuff and then Obama comes in and starts doing the same thing. They weren't calling out the hypocrisy at all, but now we still don't want to talk about it. Right. Exactly. But now to the credit of the people like like Elon and Tucker, even Joe Rogan have been Marjorie Taylor green, even right, right. Yeah. And he's doing, you know, he quite literally ran on, on releasing these Epstein files. And I think the whole idea of the Epstein files is kind of like gaslighting because what even is, we don't care about that like the file. What are the files? We want the hard drive right. Well, to pair it to paraphrase Bill Clinton, it depends on what the definition of a file is, you know. Right. Like what is it like this, is this some concocted file somebody in some back office at Langley, you know, put together with a couple names in the black book because the black book been available for how many years now? Like we can see all the addresses in there. The black book went to auction recently. Oh, really? There's an auction house on Maryland's Eastern Shore called Alexander auctions. They specialize mostly in World War II and even then mostly Nazi stuff. But they, they also deal in Americana like, you know, paintings by Charles Manson, for example. Oh, wow. Yeah, it's cool stuff. Um, they, they tried to auction the black book recently. The estimate was 75,000 to 100,000 and it didn't sell. So the book is out there. Why then does the FBI not have a copy and then release the copy? If we know who was in the black book, why haven't they told us to me, that would be part of a file. It would be part of a record. What you're talking about is even more important for junior Jew free, who recently committed suicide, but who very bravely testified against Jeffrey Epstein, angling Maxwell. Or how about the Lillene who I hit by the truck? Yes. Okay. Yeah. She killed herself a couple of weeks after that. She, she testified that there was a room at Epstein's mansion in the Caribbean where from the floor to the ceiling, it was just monitors. Right. And there were guys in there monitoring the monitors, every room in the house and every bathroom in the house was wired for video. So where are the videos? Why have we not seen anything? Why have we heard nothing about about Prince Andrew or about Bill Gates or Bill Clinton or Alan Dershowitz or any of the other, you know, A list people who we know for a fact were at that house. Yeah. It's like the JFK conspiracy where everybody knows if you pull every American in this country who's paying, you know, even a little bit of attention, they all know that this was some sort of conspiracy coup, you know, Oswald wasn't the only shooter. But the government just like says, shut up. All you want, make your podcast and your documentaries, but nothing you're never going to find out the truth. It's almost the same thing here where they're just, they're just holding it back and they, they know everybody knows, right? Right. Everybody knows Jeffrey Epstein was working on the behalf of Israel intelligence. They know, I mean, just the fact that who Barack was at his apartment and working in his office all the time was his handler. Yeah. All the stuff with, you know, even with Robert Maxwell and you like Maxwell, right? Like it's, it's so obvious in plain sight. My question is why can't Trump admit that? I don't know. I was on another podcast yesterday and, well, Patrick, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. And he said that this is the first real scandal in this second Trump administration. He said that the White House completely misread public opinion on this issue that people not just believed him when he said he was going to release everything. They expected that it would all be released so that we could get to the bottom of this for once. And then you've got, I mean, you saw that press conference with cash, Patel and Dan Bongino. I felt pain for them. You could see it in their faces. Like neither one of them wanted to say he killed himself and would it and find anything. Meanwhile, these are the guys who've been on podcast for the last two years. Exactly. The table that Bill Gates is lobbying Congress to squash the Epstein files. We got to get this out and expose all these leftist blood sucking Democrats. Right. Second they get into power. It's like everything changes. They go into a dark room. They come out. B. Epstein killed himself. B. Gone. It's, it's, it's complete. You, you and I, you and I've talked about this in the past, I, I always believed that Epstein killed himself only because of my own experience in, in prison. And I can lay that out. But the only thing that gives me pause is that Dr. Michael Baden, who is one of the foremost, a forensic corners in the world said that his highlight bone was fractured, which was indicative of a strangulation of a homicide is what he specifically said, a homicide. Now he may be wrong. There are lots of different ways to break your high-wood bone. It's very fragile. He could have broken it when he was, you know, strangling himself with the, with the sheet. Who knows? Mm-hmm. But for Dr. Baden to come out, like definitively and say, I believe this was a homicide, it gives me pause. There's a lot of other things in there too besides that that are very fishy, you know, like the news. Oh, all parts of it are fishy. Yeah. The thing about the high-wood, high-wood bone is there was some sort of, there was some sort of statistic that was looked at in medical research where they looked at people that were hung or died by hanging like a legitimate hanging where your feet can't touch the ground, right? Where there's actual like trauma. Yeah. Right. And, you know, out of, I think 25% of those hangings that they looked at, the autopsies, 25% one to two of those bones around the high-wood bone were broken. Mm-hmm. Epstein all three were broken. And he was in a little cell with no real height to jump from. I mean, how high up the top bunk on a bunk bed? That's not high enough to, you know, do a bar zone to create. Right. Right. Right. Where's head pop stuff? Yeah. His brother Mark Epstein has pointed out a lot of other weird things like the news. They said that it was cut like, like the actual photos they took and the descriptions they gave do not match up at all. They said the news was cut. They had to cut it with scissors or whatever. But when you look at the photo, it was actually a hemmed seam. What? Yeah. All kinds of very, very odd things that just don't add up whatsoever. And the photo they released of his jail cell. Yeah. Right after it happened. Yeah. The photo, not the image of the security footage. No, completely two different cells. Yes. In fact, they, I saw yesterday that there were 12 people in the cell after he was after he died, 12 people in the cell who had nothing to do with the case. They just went for, you know, take picture with their phone or hang out or check it out or they could totally contaminated the scene. Hmm. That's the other thing. And granted, MDC Brooklyn is a maximum security pad of t entry and I was in a low security prison. But if a, if a prisoner in my prison was suicidal, which happens every once in a while, what they do is they put them in a, in a cubicle where three of the walls are just glass. Okay. They take all your clothes, so you're naked and they just give you this paper smock to put, to put over yourself. And they hire other prisoners. They give you five bucks for a four hour shift and you just sit in a chair in front of one of those, you know, glass walls just staring at the guy. And if you tries to kill himself in there, you run and get a guard. So what they did with Epstein was they put him in a cell with, you know, another prisoner to watch him. But the prisoner was in on, on multiple murder counts. He was a serial killer. Why, why in the world would you put him in with a serial killer? Right. Why don't you put him in with, you know, the trustee or better yet, take him to medical, which is where they, they take suicidal prisoners and other prisons, take him to medical and just have him sit in medical. Right. They knew he was suicidal. He said he was suicidal and they took him off suicide watch two days before he died. Exactly. Whose decision was that? Mm. That, you know, in my mind, there are so many different people who could be prosecuted for a whole bunch of different roles in this death, whether he killed himself or somebody killed him. There are so many people beginning with whoever was monitoring those monitors at the house, whoever was serving drinks and saw girls, underage girls being being, I'm sorry, I shouldn't say that word on you. You can say that's fine. Okay. As said, um, when, when Pam Bonnie came out the other day and said that there will be no arrests beyond what, Geline Maxwell is the only guilty person here. Right. With the, it was just, yeah, just the two of them. They, they were super people and they did all of this on their own. There was nobody else behind them and then nobody wants to talk about Israel, as you said. Right. Nobody wants to have that conversation. On top of that, we talked about last time you were in here with our friend Andrew Bustamante for that fun podcast. That was a lot of fun. That was, that was electric. I would do that again. Um, we, we mentioned Jonathan Pollard. Right. And Jonathan Pollard's handler was pardoned by Trump, right? Yes. Yes. You know, I was on, uh, Pierce Morgan a couple of weeks ago. Okay. Yeah. I guess on the panel. Well, there were four of us. Scott Horton and I on the one side and the other side was Alan Dershowitz and General Dan, Danie saw this. And, and the general, he had been the head of Mossad and he's like chuckling and like I would say Israel spies on the United States. Oh, he would laugh. Well, and then Pierce Morgan says does Israel spy on the United States? No, not since Pollard got caught. And the prime minister said no more spying on the United States. And I said general with all due respect, that's just simply not true. I joined the CIA in 1990 and literally on my first day we were warned about Israeli espionage against the United States. What year was Pollard caught? Uh, he was caught in 95. And then I said through the 1990s, the FBI identified 187 Israeli spies in the United States. 187. That was an FBI number. And where were they? They had infiltrated American defense contractors all across the country. But there is really. And we're going to probably give them 95% of that tech anyway. So nobody does anything about it. And then he just goes, Oh, like, okay, you caught me. And then Dershowitz, you know, flipped out like a crazy person. Right. And when I said that I believe, and I always couch my, I'm always very cautious when I talk about this issue. I say, I believe that Epstein was an Israeli access agent. And I lay out what I believe is a convincing argument for that. And I'm happy to repeat that here. And Dershowitz flipped out and he said, if he was an Israeli access agent, he would have told me I was his attorney and I could have gotten him off. I could have gotten him less time. And I said, by confessing to espionage, you could have gotten him less time. I would have hung him from a gallows if he had been an Israeli access agent and he admitted to it. So who knows? My, my position is and forgive me if I keep repeating myself. But if you are a foreign intelligence service, especially the Israelis who have access to all aspects of American society, right? If you're an Israeli intelligence officer and you want tightly closely held information that somebody like Bill Clinton has or Bill Gates or Alan Dershowitz or you know Prince Andrew, you're not going to recruit any of those people because they don't have traditional vulnerabilities that a CIA officer would be trained to look for like a need for money, for example, or hatred of your government or you know, you know, your wife is sick and she needs cancer treatment that's not available in your country. None of those work in a case like this. So you're not going to recruit Bill Clinton. You're not going to recruit Bill Gates. What you can do? Give Bill Gates a thousand dollars a month to answer your classified questions ridiculous. So you do the next best thing and you recruit the guy who has access to them. Or times in full swing. That means it's time for you to unleash those pay legs with the new lined swim collection from chubbies. My favorite part is the built in boxer briefliner. These aren't grade school trunks. It's trunks the way they should be. These are the least restrictive, most stretchy comfortable swim trunks I've ever used. And I can even use them when I'm surfing, swimming, paddleboarding, jet skiing, you name it. They fit my activity. These make swim trunks so comfy and modern that it has to be technology reverse engineered from UFOs. I'm talking wild prints so fun that your trunks themselves will get the party started. And liners that prevent chafing and uncomfortable pinches because it has four directional stretch. This is what I mean when I say you've never experienced shorts this comfortable for. It's like the technology was sent back from the future. After your thigh liberating splash, you can continue the same comfort experience on the street with the chubbies everywhere shorts. You will then begin to wonder why you even own other shorts. And for a limited time, you can use my code, Danny, for 20% off at chubbies shorts.com. Whether you're getting dressed for the workday, a workout, or a weekend getaway, chubbies has you covered. For a limited time, chubbies is giving our viewers 20% off your order with our code, Danny, spelled D-A-N-N-Y at chubbies shorts.com, spelled CHU, BB, I-E-S, S-H-O-R-T-S, dot com. Please support the show and tell them we sent you. Don't blend in with the crowd. Stand out with chubbies. And you set them up in this beautiful mansion. You wire the house for video and audio. You give them plenty of money. So he hires this staff. You bring in young girls and reach girls. And you don't necessarily have to use any of those videos. But just in case, you have them in reserve. And then over martinis, as you're becoming the best friend with these people, they start confiding in you sensitive information, maybe in some cases classified information. And then you pair it that back to your handlers. That's what an access agent does. In and of himself, Epstein didn't have access to classified information, but he got classified information from people around him who had access. I told you once before and I've said this on another podcast, but I'm going to repeat it. One of my instructors at the CIA when I was going through the operational training told me that the best recruitment he ever had in 30 plus years was the copy machine repairman. Because he was able to put a device inside the prime minister's copy machine. So every time somebody made a copy, it transmitted a copy back to CIA headquarters. That's an access agent. That's gold. Now one of the things I think a lot of people are confused on is conflating Mossad working on operations and the CIA working on operations when it comes to anything, especially as things like Epstein or even stuff that's happening in the media. Is there any chance that the CIA and the Mossad work together on things and share intelligence? Not on an issue that includes American citizens or more specifically what are called US persons, American citizens or anybody in the United States on a green card. So how would you imagine if the CIA was involved in Epstein and he was a Mossad access agent? What would be the CIA's involvement? CIA's interest would be in doubling him back, but the CIA doesn't spy on Israel. Do you think it's possible? The CIA does not spy on Israel. Not since Richard Nixon was president for biden. Seriously. Brilliant. So do you think it's possible that CIA caught wind of what Epstein was doing and what the Mossad was using him for and said, hey motherfucker, we see what you're doing. You got to pay your tax to us to Epstein and made him be like, you got to give us whatever it is. 1% positive information that you're giving to Mossad. Well, but not likely because what they would have had to do, this would have been a turf battle like to end all turf battles. You know how the CIA and the FBI are with each other. So the CIA would have had to go to the FBI and the FBI would have made that approach because not only are you dealing with American citizens, you're dealing with American citizens who for the most part are doing these things on American soil. Right. Yeah. The CIA certainly, you know, it would have come to their attention. Sure. But they would have had to go immediately to the FBI. So in the CIA and the Mossad work together, they work together in foreign countries. Yes. Foreign operations. Exactly. Like something with Iran or something like that. Exactly right. But in a case like Epstein or anything to do with America, American institutions or American people, there would be no chance. Zero. Like what is the overall sentiment at the CIA of the Mossad? There is great and deep respect for the Mossad's operational abilities. And that was enhanced greatly by this pager and cell phone operation against Hezbollah. I'd love to talk about that. Yeah. We have a minute. Otherwise there's we've never gotten along with Mossad. Over the years, like going back to when you started. That close at all. Not close at all. Why don't you get along? Because they're constantly trying to recruit us to spy on us to plant bugs in our headquarters. They harass our officers. Like as a matter of policy. And then, you know, the chief has to go in and say, stop harassing my officers. You know that they're not working against you. They're working with you and you still harass them. And then they say, Okay, okay. And they back off for a year or two. And then they start up again. You know, they, they, somebody I'll put it this way. Somebody shot out the ambassador's tires. Right. And, you know, some very helpful fellows happen to pull right up and to help them, you know, change the tire. And then when the ambassador and the driver got back in the car to continue on, he realized his briefcase was missing. Oh my God. How could that happen? Stuff like that. Because that really necessary. That that's basically the picture that's been painted to me by not just you, but by other people that I've talked to like former intelligence community folks. It's not the same thing. It's it seems like more of a like fed up annoyed. Just like they're, they're kind of a nuisance to us. Yes. Because they are so effective and they are so persistent. And oh my God, they're so effective. And they're effective because they, they can't lose if they lose they die. Right. Right. This thing, I'll take kind of something funny. The day after the page or operation where they essentially decapitated Hezbollah right now, Hezbollah doesn't exist as, as what it was. It's going to come back of course. But right now there is no Hezbollah. So the day after I got a call from a Russian news channel and they said, would you come on and talk about this operation? I said, sure. And they said, so this is a war crime, right? And I said, well, yeah, technically because you know, we know of several cases where the guy that had the pager took the pager off his belt, put it on the table, sat down with his family to have dinner or the pager blew up and killed the nine year old daughter. Right. So technically, yeah, that's a war crime. So yeah, can you say that? Can you say it's a war crime? And I said, well, no, I think the point is that this is probably one of the most brilliant acts of genius operational planning I've ever seen in my life. Imagine the moving parts involved in an operation like this where you have to control everything from manufacturing. Right. They had to start a shell company in some other countries. Right. And they had to start a company in some countries, hungry, Taiwan. Not only do you have to manage manufacturing, you have to manage the entire supply chain, intercept these things at some point, pack them full of C4, but not too much because they need to still work as pagers and then put them back into the supply chain again. And then once they arrive and leaven on, make sure they get to your targets. And wasn't it like something around 10 years from the time they sold them to Hezbollah? Yes. From the time they actually played the bomb. Six generations old. Crazy. Yeah. But Hezbollah didn't have the money for the new stuff. So they said, well, we can get thousands of these. I remember watching this incredible, I think it was a 60 minutes thing I saw on this. But they were shut, they created full on advertising campaigns, commercials, beautiful websites, they had salespeople, credit were showing and displaying all this stuff to these people. And like they literally created a whole fake company marketing campaign that was totally believable to these people. And I think in that, I mean, I don't know how accurate or how real 60 minutes is. I mean, I'm sure it's pretty produced at some point, but they had a Mossade agent that was like under behind a shadow, under a mask, they changed his voice or whatever. And he was saying to this 60 minutes interviewer, he said, we are the directors, the writers and the producers of the movie that you call reality. He's like, it's all a stage. He's like, that's actually pretty profound. You think in that case, in the case of the exploding pages. Yeah. You know, having, having worked in operations for quite some time at the CIA through things like, you know, the manhunt for Miriam Al-Konzi who murdered two CIA officers and wounded whatever it was seven others in front of headquarters to the hunt for Osama bin Laden or Carlos the jackal, right? I've been around some pretty creative guys and they're almost exclusively guys. Pretty creative guys. I've never met anybody in my life who could come up with an operation like that. Nobody. This was genius. Yeah. And then the Russians were like, well, um, so do you think that somebody's going to be prosecuted for this? And I said on the contrary, somebody's going to get a promotion and a medal and a picture with the director of Mossade. This is like the greatest thing in somebody's career, whoever came up with this. Right. And what other operations do they have cooking right now? Seriously, right? Right. That are like that or even more impressive. We've talked about Fouda, the TV show Fouda. Yes, the streams on Netflix and that amazing show. That Shin Bette, which is the domestic counterpart of it's the FBI of Israel. Right. And look at the the Hollywood ask operations that they come up with. So multiply that times 10 and then throw in the Iranians and the Houthis and Hezbollah. Incredible. Looking back historically, what was that guy's name? It was like Eli Cohen or something like that. I think it was Eli Cohen. Do you mind Googling it? Yeah. I think it was Eli Cohen. Anyway, in the in the 50s, the early 60s, there's this guy like Cohen, he like works in a dry cleaners in Tel Aviv and he applies to Mossade because it sounds exciting. And they're like, yeah, thanks. We don't have new openings for dry cleaning clerks. But he spoke absolutely perfect accentless Arabic. And so a couple of years later, there we go. There we go. Eli Cohen. There he is. Elia, who Cohen, Eli Cohen and Chip Shimhorn Israeli spot. Right. So they call him back a couple of years later and they said, Hey, we decided we do want to hire you for Mossade. So they hire him and they said, we want you to move to Syria. We're going to give you money. And we want you to wind and dine all the movers and shakers in Syria and secretly report back to us. He was so good that he ends up being considered to be the deputy minister of defense of Syria. Wow. So the Russians, the KGB said to the Syrians, there's something about this guy that's not right. So the Russians started to surveil him. He didn't see the surveillance. He had collected classified information. He was secretly transmitting it back to the Israelis and the Russians picked up the radio burst, the transmission. If you ain't horny, you ain't healthy folks. Low libido is often a sign that your body is out of balance. And poor sleep and chronic stress are two of the biggest culprits. When you're under slept, your levels of testosterone, estrogen and dopamine all drop crushing your mood, energy and sex drive. And then you had elevated cortisol to the mix, which is the stress hormone that spikes when you're burnt out and your body goes into survival mode. It's just down everything non essential, including desire. Your body isn't broken. It's just exhausted, which is why I use evening being by versa. It's made with clinically studied ingredients shown to reduce stress and anxiety, lower cortisol and calm the nervous system. It also supports your body's natural ability to regulate hormones, improve mood and boost libido. Because when you sleep better, your whole body functions better, including the system that supports intimacy and love making. It's so effective that one of their customers left to review saying they were able to get off ambient, which is a heavy sleep pharmaceutical drug. Click the link in the description or head on over to vr.so-danny. And use the code, Danny at checkout, to save 15% off your first order. Again, that's vr.so-danny and use the code d a n n y at checkout, just say 15% send off your first order. Again, that's vr dot s o slash Danny and use the code d a and n y at checkout to say 15% off your first order. And thank you to Verso for sponsoring this episode. And so they were able to triangulate the source of the transmission in his house was right in the center and they got him and they hung him in the in the main square in Damascus. He's a huge hero in in Israel. They're schools and streets named after him and all kinds of stuff. He was going to be the deputy minister of defense of Syria. He's a friggin Israeli citizen and an Israeli Mossad spy. And then they did the same thing in Egypt around the time of the Suez crisis. So, you know, where where we at the CIA sit around the table and like to think that we're so smart and we're coming up with these outside the box. I hate that term. But these outside the box operations, we could never come up with something like what the Israelis come up with. How many undeclared spies you think are in the country now? Do they even need them anymore? Because they have they basically have a Congress bought and paid for right like bots and paid for. They probably have a couple of hundred. And you know, the crazy thing is I'm going to use the F 35. And what do you think they're doing specifically? Oh, it's all it's all about defense. All about defense. Because they have convinced themselves over the years that we're not giving them everything. And we pretty much are. Yep. But they think that there's more that we're holding back. And the F 35 is the best example. So when Lockheed Martin came up with the F 35, it's supposed to be the fighter jet that that beats all other fighter jets, right? That was a mistake. But we're committed. So we've got this billion dollar plane. And the Israeli said, we want the first ones. And we said, okay, we'll give you the first ones. But what we're going to do is we have the F 35 and we're going to give you the F 35 I. We're going to call it I for Israel. Yes. And we're going to just very slightly degrade the avionics. Mm hmm. Just in case God forbid, you guys get shot down. And the plane is confiscated by the Russians or the Syrians or the Iranians. Then they don't have the top top secret avionics. While they set out to just steal the avionics because damn it, they wanted the F 35, the same one that we flew. And then the Emiratis are like, look, we love you. You love us. We want the F 35. We said, okay, we're going to give you the F 35. We're going to call the F 35 E for Emirates. And the avionics are going to be slightly degraded. And they said, okay, why didn't these Israelis? I wonder like how deep they've gotten into some of our the military private sector companies that are developing like super sophisticated back. You've seen, you've seen the TV series, the Americans, of course, about Soviet sleepers in the head of. Oh, you're going to want to binge this thing. The Americans. It's written by a former colleague of mine, Joe Weisberg. Joe was a real sweetheart. He worked in the counterterrorism center when I was there. And recruiting spies to steal secrets just wasn't for him. He had a conscience and he just wasn't good at it. And so he resigned. And he decided since he was unmarried and didn't have any kids, he's going to go to Hollywood and find his fortune. So he writes a novel that was actually very good. It was heavily redacted. Even though it was a novel, it was fiction. They still heavily redacted it. But people are like, hey, this guy's a really good writer. And then he came up with a pilot for the Americans. It was bought by, I think it ran on AMC and it ran for six seasons. And he made more money than he can count. Yeah, he really made it. But man, the show sleepers, Russian sleepers in Falls Church, Virginia. And the reason I brought it up is because it's very, very similar to what the Israelis do, where, you know, there's this guy over here. And he's the manager of a travel agency, an insurance, an insurance agency. Is he really? Or is that his cover? And he's actually recruiting employees of Lockheed Martin to steal those, those avionics plans. Right. You know, or is he trying to recruit a, a PhD physics student at Stanford? Mm. That kind of thing. Right. The, the PhD physics student is going to end up in DARPA. And who wouldn't want to have a source inside DARPA. And remember, the Israelis, the good guys, right? They're not the Russians, the Chinese, yeah, the Israelis, we love the Israelis. We're friends with the Israelis. We share everything with the Israelis, right? I just find it like going back to the Trump stuff, you know, like in that video of him and Pam Bondi at the, when the, when the, yeah, that was really a question. Not well handled. And he was like, look, are we still, are we over this? Do we're still interested in this? Like this creep? Bro, you came, you came on this. You came on this. You came on this. Yeah. What, what do you mean? Right? And, um, like, you know, that combined with the cash, tell us to, and the, the other thing about Trump is like, he's not an idiot. He, he, he very, he has the temperature on culture. He really does. And he can really read the room on every single topic and see where the consensus is in the public online. And he's, he's wrong on this issue on this one. It's like he's Helen Keller. Yeah. It's like he just, he doesn't know what's going on. So, so what the hell is that? It's so bizarre. Yeah. You know, that combined with the fact like, he doesn't seem like the kind of guy who would just be like caving to every demand of a foreign leader to support their work. I mean, especially when he campaigned on ending all the war. He is. And he's literally doing everything this guy is telling him to do. Yeah. Which is not his M.O. at all. See, that makes me think that Patel and Bongino went to him and said, Mr. President, um, we found some fucked up stuff. And it's not what we thought we were going to find. It's this. And he says, hmm, we should probably try to kill this. I, that, that's the only conclusion I could do. But here's my thing though, if Epstein was an Israeli access agent and he had obviously, we know he had every single room, why, with hundreds of cameras. And he has a obviously multiple hard drives with lots of video footage on it. Right. That is a thermonuclear weapon for whoever I would assume is real. Absolutely right. Right. So if you let that information leak out to the CIA, your weapon is worthless. Yeah. So how do you think Bongino and cash hotel would, would be able to see an an under and know what they have? How would they have access to this stuff? Well, I mean, in a perfect world, the FBI would have access to all of it. Now, yeah, you and I know that that's not the case. Um, but I think I would expect that they would have access to significant portions of it at least. Hmm. And then getting back to trial. Well, just because the federal government has been working this case for so long. Remember his Epstein's first conviction was in 2006. Right. So I mean, they've got to be volumes of files on him. Volumes of them. Um, it's not like they're starting from scratch. They've known for a long time who Jeffrey Epstein was and what he was doing. Right. There's probably, right. Yeah. There's probably an endless amounts of of footage and that's right. That probably implicates a lot of people's tapes. But I bet you like 1% of that with like the Bill Gates and Donald Trump's of the world, those ones are lost away in a ball. You know what? There was a guy who was very, very close to President Reagan. His name was a blooming deal. He was the founder of Bloomingdale's department stores and the guy was a billionaire and he was a member of what used to be called Reagan's kitchen cabinet. So it was all these, these multi millionaires and billionaires old white men. They were all friends with Reagan going back to the 40s. Right. So when he would return to California, they would always get together and the ranch and they would play golf and they would talk about the issues and he would take advice from them. So Bloomingdale was banging his girlfriend and he had a heart attack and he died on top of her. Okay. And somebody leaked the story to the press. And so Reagan's knee, your reaction was to say, yeah, you know, I didn't really know him very well. I met him a few times and then people are like, come on, man, he was your best friend. You've known him for 50 years. And so somebody inside the white house got to Reagan and said, come on. So he came out and he made a completely different statement and he said, um, he was my best friend. I liked him and trusted him. Yeah. I'm sorry that things worked out the way that they did. That's between him and his God. It's like, okay, now, doesn't it feel better to tell the truth? Right. Yeah. Yeah. If you have nothing to hide, you didn't do anything. Right. Just come out with the truth. That's how I feel about the sepsiting case. Why are they still hiding it? If, if, if cash, Patel and Dan Bonjino and Pam Bonjean, Donald Trump are not involved, just come out with it. What do they have to lose? They have a lot to gain. There's a hard drive sitting in Tel Aviv right now. There has to be. There has to be that has to be it. That's the only thing I can come up with. Right. This is the most obvious thing. Right. If we want to obey a Occam's razor. Exactly. That's the most obvious thing. It's lazy. You know, like the cover up is very, very lazy. Yes. If there is a cover up and it's not, it's not thought out. And especially when you have Elon going nuclear like this on everything, like you just said Steve Bannon was in it. Yeah. And we know Steve Bannon the day, uh, the day Trump fired him drove to Epstein's house in New York and did that interview with him, right, which is allegedly hours long. Footage has been released of it. We're like Epstein basically said Trump is my best friend for two years. Um, you know, talked a lot. I said a lot of crazy details that came out, which was like, I was like, two minutes or five minutes or something like that. But we know Bannon's been really close to him and has a bunch of footage of him. So, you know, yeah, it's just a, it's just a messy entangled web. And there are lots and lots. It seems like whatever it is, it's got to be like the Rosetta Stone to basically kneecap every single powerful person in the world. Yeah. Except for Dershowitz because remember, you have to underwear on at least he told us that he kept his underwear on as the 16 year old was massaging his 86 year old body. Oh my God. One of the victim, the first two victims, the two sisters, it was Maria Farmer and I think Annie Farmer. Yeah. We're some of the first two, right. They were ignored when they talked about that they were they gave their stories in the beginning, very beginning before Epstein done. And they came out and they were explaining, you know, how, you know, Maria Farmer, she worked the front desk at his Manhattan office and she talked about Bill Clinton. And you know, all of the, the right wing Clinton haters were like, thank you. Maria Farmer for coming out and exposing this Bill Clinton stuff. And she was like, you guys are living in La La. And you don't get it. She's like, you don't understand. Trump was here three days a week. And she's taught and there was the, and there was an interview where she was on video saying that talking about the day that Epstein brought Trump in for the first time and he was like looking her up and down like and then Epstein goes to her says to Trump, she's not for you. Like they want to ignore that, right? Like everyone, everybody was it was a part of this. And it's like, it is, it's it's mutually assured destruction. If it gets out in an awful system, we had it is a fucking disgusting. And you know, but I will never ever accept that there is not one single person worthy of an indictment besides Galen Maxwell. It's just not possible. Yeah. And then the whole didty thing too, you know, apparently like the didty thing was also like a similar operation. But I'm proud to say that from the very beginning of the didty thing, I followed it very closely. I said, he's an asshole, but I'm just not seeing a crime here. Right. And that's, that's yeah. A lot of people and that's another another take that I've heard or my friend knows actually recently on here, I was asking about the didty stuff. And he was like, I don't care. He was like, he goes, got me this. He goes, I assumed didty was doing this. Sure. He's like, he's a billionaire. He can do anything. Exactly. It's like, oh, oh, oh, you were what was the cage they were keeping you in? What did that cage look like? Oh, you went home every night. Oh, what did the cops say? Oh, the car, oh, you didn't, you didn't go to the cops in the fuck out of here. He gave you 50,000 dollars. Right. Right. Oh, he's the same thing with Harvey Weinstein. Right. The one thing, one of the victims, like, oh, my God, he said, if I didn't fuck him, I couldn't be in a bunch of movies. Like, what would Harvey, what would you say to Harvey Weinstein if he said, blow me and I'll put you in a bunch of movies? Yeah. No. I guess I'm not going to be in a bunch of movies. Yeah. I guess I'll find another trade. And it was a Brad Pitt who went to like punch him in the nose. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Oh, it was a group. Whatever her name is that punched him in the nose. Oh, he was dating her. The one that sells the vagina, uh, uh, sent it candles. Oh, I don't know who was that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Her mom was a big Broadway star. She won an Academy award. Um, Gwyneth, pal. Gwyneth, pal to me, stating with paltrow and she went back from this meeting back home from this meeting with Weinstein. And she said, he told me I couldn't get the part unless I gave him a blowjob and exactly the pit drove over there to punch him in the face. Really? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I think like, are these people like sick? Yeah. But, you know, it takes away from the real atrocities of like hundreds of thousands of children missing being trapped across America. Got that. You know, everyone was paying attention to Diddy in the second parties and, you know, and these, these people that are 18 and older doing sick to pray shit to better their careers and to rub shoulders with more powerful people. But it's all distraction. Yeah. And then you, you go to the, for example, the New York Post every day I do. Um, and they're like, Lara Trump shows off her amazing abs in beach photo. What you need to know. It's like this, this is the news. Yes, that's what we need to know. Right. Um, so another thing I want to talk to you about is not only this debacle with all the Epstein file stuff, but this, this whole war and Iran. Yeah. Um, you know, another thing that Trump campaigned on was no more wars. We're going to end all this more stuff. And it's not just Iran. Now he just said he's going to give a bunch of more weapons to Ukraine. And it turned out that Hegseth cut off the weapons to Ukraine just a couple of days ago without telling Trump. Oh, really? Yeah. That was what the associated press reported today. Yeah. Wow. So Trump reversed him. Oh, Trump reversed it after he cut it off. And then, uh, I want to talk about Russia too, but so, um, the Iran stuff, like that, that's another thing where it's like, it must be some sort of unbelievable leverage that he's able to pull Trump into this war with Iran. I've told him before every single time Benjamin Netanyahu came to, uh, to Washington going back to the early 90s. He's been here three times this year. Yeah. He would ask whoever happened to be president to bomb Iran. Yes. I mean, he, he was not even prime minister at the time early on. He was, he was Israeli ambassador to the United Nations. You have to bomb Iran. Help us bomb Iran, bomb Iran, and every single president said no, um, until Donald Trump said sure, well, bomb Iran for you. And, uh, you know, I know they have their slogan death to America. Yeah. Everyone's going to have their slogan. Yeah. You know, and watching the Tucker document or the Tucker interview he did with the guy with the guy, the president the other day was like 45 minute interview, whether he's full of shit or not, it seems like his, the sentiment there was, it was like he doesn't want to fight. He doesn't, right. No, they don't want to fight. Things are actually going really well for the Iranians right now. Uh, economically, they've got robust trade relations with the Russians, the Chinese and the Indians. And despite the fact that we pulled out of the JCPOA, they continue to trade with the UK, the European Union and Japan. Mm. So why upset the Apple cart? I have a, a very, very close friend who is Iranian American and goes to Iran two, three times a year. Oh, really? Yeah. And she, she told me she has sent me like, she's sort of live streamed, um, while she was there. So I could just see what how long ago, um, a few weeks. Oh, wow. And they lack for nothing. They have everything they need. It would be nice for them. If they could buy spare parts for their old Boeing 727s, it would be nice if they could buy American dredging equipment to, you know, make it easier for ships to come in to pick up their oil. But they don't have to have that stuff. Right. So our, our sanctions have failed. Oh, yeah, failed, especially in Russia too, right? Yeah. Like they, there we are. Oh, no, they're perfectly fine. And what is that? What does that tell the rest of the world when they find out our, our sanctions? Just we're a paper tiger paper tiger. You know, I went to a Hong Kong last year, last year. And one of the things really, the only thing that surprised me about Hong Kong was in most places I went, I couldn't use my credit card. Um, they didn't take Mastercard and Visa. They took what they called Panda card. And so I asked a Chinese, uh, national, a business woman. What, what, what this Panda card? What is that? And she said, oh, it's, it's our version of a, of a credit card. And I said, why, why use that instead of Mastercard of Visa? And she said, because every Mastercard and Visa transaction goes through New York and then his subject to sanctions and Panda card goes through Shanghai. And then they can tell us to screw our sanctions. Wow. Yeah. It's, uh, it's crazy. And Tucker posted those videos in Russia of the grocery stores. And he said it was beautiful and like this amazing, they lack of sanctions or messing them, messing with them at all. And you have a, all the gas that they could no longer sell to Western Europe. The Indian said, well, take it. So do you think, do you think Iran has a ton of sleeper cells here in this country that could threaten us? No, I think they have some sleeper cells. Yes. Um, not just here in the United States, but in Canada as well and probably in, um, in the UK and France. Uh, in the 80s, they were far more active with sleeper cells. And they assassinated a lot of people, mostly in France, like former prime ministers, a former president. Um, the FBI has arrested a handful of people for allegedly targeting Iranian journalists or Iranian dissidents in, in Brooklyn and Toronto and Vancouver places like that. But then, you know, other Iranians say, those, those people that were being targeted allegedly were nobody's with no, with no authority, you know, among the diaspora. And so is this governmentally sponsored or is it just criminal activity? But my guess is sure they probably have sleeper cells. We all do. Mm. Every, every, you know, major country that has a serious intelligence services going to have sleep ourselves. And, and obviously, there's a lot of foreign countries that like affect our media and that try to disseminate propaganda in the US. Yeah. How much do you think, how effective do you think they are or active are that is Iran in when it comes to like media and propaganda in the US? Almost they're, they're not very active. And no, no, and not much of an influence at all. In fact, you can't even go to press TV anymore. Press TV is the Iranian English language outlet. The FBI seized press TV.com back in 2019, maybe. Just like they seized Telesore, the, the Venezuelan website. So you can't even, you can't even get press TV. You have to go around it. Now it's like press TV dot IR. I think is what it is. But no, it's, it's, it's hard for them to, to sort of get a foothold in the American media. You know, the Russians were accused of, of having done that very successfully. And, and now we all know that's bullshit. And now, now John Brennan and, and Jim Comey are being investigated for lying to Congress about it. Yes, I saw that. Yeah. And God forgive me for gloating, but it's about time these guys got to taste their own medicine. It's about time. So what do you think is going to happen with this Iranian conflict? Like what, what, what if you like in your best guess, how this plays out with your experience and what you know about these places, these guys that are behind all this, what, how do you think it plays out? Well, I'm going to give you two answers. I'll give you how I think Donald Trump wants it to turn out and then how I think it's going to turn out. Trump really is the, the deal maker. He wants the big over-arching all settling deal, which is what he sees the Abraham Accords being. You know, you bring in the Saudis eventually and declare victory and get your Nobel Peace Prize and go home. Um, so I think what he wants and I think what he thought he was going to get by, by, um, attacking Iran was that he was going to frighten the Iranians into going to the negotiating table. Well, they were already at the negotiating table. We had had at least three rounds of negotiations still at the technical stage, but negotiations nonetheless face to face for the most part. Um, and the day of, this was a 60 day, a 60 day negotiating period or whatever. And like the last day. Right. Yeah. And then he bombed them and then he says, now they're going to go to the table and they were like, screw you, we're not going to that. We were already at the table and then you bomb us. Yeah. It's Israel bombed them, right? No, we bomb, we bombed them with the 50,000 pound bombs. So the 30,000 pound bombs. I thought we did that after Israel bombed. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Israel bombed the first right. Right. And then we went in with the big ones to the bunker busters. Yeah. It's like we were sitting at the negotiating table and then Israel blew up the negotiating table, which was the plan. Right. So I think Trump believed that this would force the Iranians to accept a deal that they might otherwise not have accepted. What I think is going to happen is, hey, guys, if you're not already subscribed, please hammer the subscribe button below and hit the like button on the video back to the show. Because we're the only ones who don't seem to realize that sanctions don't work. And the Iranians don't really need the United States for anything. And we're too fickle to deal with anyway. If you're Iran, you know, with banking sanctions and personal sanctions and dual use sanctions. And I mean, we can't even bring carpets and caviar back into the country. So they're like, it's just not worth dealing with the Americans. They'll negotiate a deal, then pull out, then they want to negotiate essentially the same deal. And then they blow us up. And then they tell us we want to negotiate a deal. It's like screw that. We're going to go with Russians and the Chinese. Right. I think that's what's going to happen. It's interesting that the Russian, there doesn't, I had nothing that I've noticed. No chatter from either of their governments about this Iran. Isn't that interesting? I said the same thing in an op-ed that it was very surprising to me that even the Russians didn't say anything. Yeah. Nothing. You know, the Chinese have this long history of anti-imperialism to bet aside, we can have a whole conversation about Tibet, you know, someday. But they had like a little border skirmish in the 70s with with Vietnam. They had a little border skirmish, two of them with the Indians, where they'll fire, you know, a couple of rounds across the border. That's it. The Chinese don't go around invading other countries. They just never have. It's just not, right. I mean, they were invited into the North Korea. But anyway, they're not like us where we, we will invade, you know, Iraq, Afghanistan and Somalia, Libya and Syria and move here and move there. And the Chinese don't do that. Right. So the Chinese will make a little vanilla statement at the United Nations saying, it's wrong to bomb Iran. Shouldn't have done that. And then that's, that's it. That's the end of it. They would much rather focus on Belt and Road and investing in infrastructure and, you know, exchanging cultural delegations. They're much better at that than we are. Well, I can see like from a wrong point of view, I don't know whether they have been trying to make a nuke or if they do have a nuke or well, I don't know, I don't know, Jackson, but I would imagine if I was Iran, I would want to have a nuke. Well, now you have to. You have to. Right. Because the only people we don't fuck with are the ones that have nukes. It's like, look at North Korea. That's right. Kim Jong Un is probably going to die in his bed of old age. That's right. Cause he decided, because Kim Jong Il decided to start the nuclear program and they have fucking tons of nukes. And we don't mess with them. So I agree. If, and I don't believe that they had a weapons program, you know, the CIA has consistently published national intelligence estimates, saying that in 2003, I told him and I ended what had been a nuclear weapons program and they have not had a program for the last 22 years. They just made a policy decision not to have it. But the more we were a threat and the more these Israelis were a threat, then they started enriching uranium to more and more purity. So from 9% it went to 35 from 35 to 67. It needs to be in the 90s to be weapons quality. Even then, they don't have a delivery system. But you know, if they wanted to have weapons grade plutonium, they could. They've chosen not to. I think now they're going to have to to protect themselves. And then what happens? Then the Saudis are going to want. I mean, the Saudis have long wanted a nuclear weapons program, but they never had the guts to do it. You know, in the face of American opposition. So did the Saudis then try to develop a program? Did the Egyptians? We must know. We must have people. We must see. I must have people embedded in Iran's nuclear program or inside with the scientists, right? I don't know, man. I'm not sure that we're really that good. I know the Israelis do of course because the Israelis are constantly killing these guys, whether, you know, it's in Tehran or it's at some seminar in Vienna or Geneva or whatever. I'm just not sure that we have the language abilities or the ability to get inside the country. See, one of the things that the Iranians are very good at is when the Israeli started killing nuclear scientists outside of Iran, they just stopped letting their scientists go outside of Iran. So you have to actually be in Iran to do it. Well, we don't have a presence in Iran because we don't have an embassy anywhere. Well, there's a diplomatic relationship. But the Israelis have a lot of Iranian born Jews who speak fluent, flawless, accentless, farsi and who can fit right in and they can identify the apartment blocks where these guys live. And then the Israelis can fire a rocket. And if they have to kill everybody in the apartment building or everybody on that block, they'll take out every leader of the Iranian weapons program. I see I was just watching this show. It was called what was it called? It was a show on Apple about basically about CIA about this guy worked for the CIA. And there was this girl that they were bringing up this young girl. And they were basically training her to go to call it. about CIA about this guy worked for the CIA. And there was this girl that they were bringing up this young girl. And they were basically training her to go to college, go to the, you have to go to this college just to get her degree in this, in this program with this, this group, some sort of scientific thing. And she had to rise all the way to the top. And the head of that PhD department at that school picked three people every year to go to Iran to do, to work on some sort of abroad program that Iran invites people to do. And she figured out a way to make that happen to where like she got picked by this university to go into Iran. And it was just like everything about her was Kefake, right? Like she like, she wasn't even interested in that in that study. But she had to do it. She had to get the degree, the PhD over years, somehow like convince herself to like, to like seduce the guy who made the picks, who got to go to Iran at the top of the college program and like, and like eventually get into Iran and like the people within the IRGC who starts like interrogating you and you get there. So like, I don't know. I mean, obviously it's a fiction show. But you know, usually the sci-fi stuff or like the fiction is more close to reality than like the documentary stuff. See, and that's something that the Russians have been so good at for so many decades. We don't have sleeper cells like the Russian definition of a sleeper cell. We have non-official cover where you're, you know, some deep non-governmental cover and you're in a country for 10 years or 20 years or whatever, not 20, but 10 years. The Russians though will send you, you know, you turn 18 and they'll send you to college here and nobody knows your Russian because your English is so good or they think your, you know, Brazilian, which actually happened a couple of years ago just a couple of years ago. This Brazilian guy was arrested and turned out he wasn't Brazilian at all. He was Russian pretending to be Brazilian. But they'll have you just work a normal nine to five job and you might do that for 10, 12, 15 years until you're activated. And then when you're activated, then you go operational and you do what they trained you to do. But you may sit there for decades and do nothing, just knowing that someday you're going to get that call. Yeah, I was reading an article about this that this guy Jack Murphy did. And he was talking about these, these sleeper cells that were inside Russia that have been in there for decades or over a decade. And they had, I forget what the word was, but they had places where they buried ammunition and weapons. Right. And they would like those with the Mars, like when they got the call or when they got the signal to activate, they had to go into the woods and like dig up all the weapons and the stuff that they buried there, you know, long time ago. Yeah. And this was like I think during the beginning of the Ukraine war or whatever. And these guys were conducting like sabotage operations inside Russia. Right. And it was a proxy. It was like a proxy. It was a NATO proxy intelligence service or whatever. Sure. Because the, because CIA couldn't, it wasn't enough. Can't do it. It's denied area. Did you watch the sopranos? Oh, of course. So do you remember when junior was first starting to lose his mind? He couldn't find his money. And he said, he said, pussy, Pussy, my Langa had stolen his money. And Tony said, did you wrap it properly? If he didn't wrap it properly, he can get moldy. It's because they bury their money. It's the same thing. All that stuff has to be perfectly preserved. So it doesn't get rusty. It doesn't get moldy. It doesn't just sort of fall apart because someday you're going to need to give somebody a map with a little X on it so he can dig it up and use it for an operation. Right. Yeah. Could you imagine what the decade would do of a, like in this alt rifle being buried or like an explosive? Yeah, that's serious. What do you make of this, this stuff that just came out, Trump said that he's going to bomb Moscow for some reason or whatever. Like he's not getting along with Putin right now. What is this Trump is Trump is just apoplectic that Putin is not doing what he tells him to do. When, when Trump said during the campaign, I'm going to end this war in 24 hours. He believed that he was going to end the war, not in 24 hours of great, but he believed that it was just a question of talking tough and forcing both sides to the, to the table. And I think Trump really believed during campaign too that it was the Ukrainians who were being intransigent. And as it turns out, it's not the Ukrainians being intransigent. It's the Russian. What does that word? intransigent that they're, that they don't want to do as they're told. They don't want it to go to the table and give up their liberty and their sovereignty. Okay. So he's had several conversations with, with Putin and Putin has told him to go fly kite. And then Putin made a comment the other day. And this is what led to the Trump statement. Putin made a comment that, you know, maybe I'll take all of Ukraine after all, because the official Russian policy has always been done at Skynluhansk, right? The Donbass and Crimea. Right. Now, now maybe I'll take the whole damn thing. And what led him to say that? I think he's tired of Trump calling him up and yelling at him and saying, settle this thing. He doesn't want to settle it. Yesterday, yesterday, the White House announced new sanctions on Russia. I saw that. Like what sanctions could possibly be left? Right. Right. Yeah. And how would, how would that work? Do you think there was something I just read it this morning where there was that drone swarms Russia was sending into Ukraine? Yeah. On an unprecedented level, yeah, hundreds and hundreds of drones and they're hitting civilian targets too. Right. They blew up. They blew up one of the Ukrainian Orthodox cathedrals yesterday. Like in, in, you find that story. Is it Sumi? I think it's the name of the town. Yeah. Cathedral's like 800 years old. They just blew it to bits. Yeah. Laps the dome. Yeah. It seemed like it was calming down and now all of a sudden it seems like it's heating back up and like how would, and he's sending more money to Ukraine now. Yeah. What, what the fuck is happening? Well, you know, I think, I think that, that Putin is making a, uh, making a tactical mistake here too, in that he feels emboldened because he has essentially an unlimited number of North Korean troops that are being sent to fight. Yeah. Right. And the North Koreans fight to the death. They, they don't want to be taken prisoner. And their bodies are found like with propaganda stuffed in their, in their pockets that your, your last, your last sentence has to be to glorify the great leader. For example, um, but where I think he's underestimating the effect of the war is that every Russian family has been touched by loss. It's, it's like how during the American Civil War, every American family was touched by loss. A lot of people have died. Like how much, how much longer can you go? There are only so many North Koreans that are going to fight for you. But otherwise, you know, this whole generation has been devastated. Did you see there was, um, okay, what is this? Oh, the CNN Russian drone swarm Kia from all sides and a parent shift of tactics. Go to the, uh, the top hundreds of Russian drones flying from all directions, uh, attacked Kia of can you zoom in a little bit overnight into Thursday in an apparent, uh, new Russian tactic, making a second consecutive night of ferocious, ferocious attacks on new crayons, at least two people were killed, including a 22 year old police officer. Wow. Uh, Russia launched 400 drones and 18 missiles, including a ballistic six cruise missiles, according to telegram posts from UK Ukraine president, Baltimore, Zelensky. This just posted. Wow. That's, oh, that's, that happened just in the last couple of hours. That was just posted this morning. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. Or sick and scripting everyone from the prisons in Russia. Yeah. There's something prisoners out there. Yeah. Right. So where they say they're saying they're saying you can be released and go fight go fight and try to, try to survive and try to save your country or you can stay locked up. Yeah. It's not a good situation. I actually feel for Trump on this because I, I believed what he believed that there was this issue of saving face. And if both sides could save face, I thought that the, I thought that the crayons would agree to give up the Don bass and Crimea. Well, I mean, they've already, they lost Crimea 11 years ago, but just to make it official, but all those people that live there are ethnic Russians anyway, right? Um, and then there would be a fast track to your opinion, your membership. Hmm. But, uh, but no, I was wrong. So I don't understand like why what is getting in the way of this? He's not like so, so what is Trump want from Putin that Putin is not willing to, not willing to work with him on this and making him do stuff like this and send these 400 drones and just like escalated even more. He wants that agreement. Yeah, he wants that agreement that he won't push past on Boston, Crimea. And Putin is saying no, no, see, that's not what I, that's not what I imagine that was going to, I thought before all this, yeah, before Trump got in, I imagine Trump or Putin would be more than willing. We all did. Yeah, we all did. And even in the beginning of the war, I think you might be the person, you might have been the person who told me this, uh, in like the first year, maybe even exactly one year into the war, one of the top military generals, uh, came out and talked about how we had Russia on their heels after this one big battle victory that we made that we had. And that was the in time to go to the negotiating table, right? And then Biden and minister, the Biden people just said no, no, we're not going to go to the question. Yeah, no negotiations. That was the Biden position. No negotiations. Yes. Remember it was even regime change for a little while. Yeah. Second, who fuck are we to decide who's going to lead Russia or any other country? Do you think it's what was this, uh, Lindsey Graham came out and said, there's trillions of dollars, trillions of dollars worth of natural resources and minerals. I remember that in Ukraine. Rare earth metal, rare earth metals. Yeah. And we can't let China get them. Right. Well, you know, the, the ugly truth of that is that the Chinese are the only ones willing to take the financial loss of mining and refining the ore. Rare earth metals, of course, are important because they go in everything. Everything from, you know, from missile cruise systems to our cell phones to car bumpers. They're in everything. And we, we really need them. And most of these rare earth metals are in places like the Democratic Republic of Congo, Mexico, Mexico, Australia, the United States, especially Alaska, under the consultancy in California, Afghanistan, and Ukraine. The problem is that you've got to mine like tons and tons and tons of ore to get just a little bit. I mean, of, uh, earth to just get a little bit of, uh, of these rare earth metals. So their money losers. Well, we don't refine any of it because it's so expensive and you just can't make a profit. Chinese are happy to do it. So almost all the rare earth metals that are mined are processed in China. So here's the United States. We need, let's say, um, I can't even think of chromium. We need chromium for something. And we don't have chromium Oh, thanks. We don't have chromium. So we buy it from the Chinese. Well, what if we needed for missile systems? Are the Chinese going to cut us off? Maybe they haven't in the past because we would treat that as an act of war. And, you know, it's an existential threat. So I mean, I don't know, are we willing to take that on so far? The answer is no. Yeah. And it's crazy too that the Chinese that they're mining, mining lithium everywhere. You know, it's right on the American Mexico border. Yeah. That's crazy. And they're hiring the cartels to be to be security. That's right. You know, I saw something in the associated press today that was shocking to me. You know how, sorry to change the subject, but talk about the border. You know how when you go to a bank, if you deposit or with $10,000 or more, you have to fill out a form for the IRS, right? And it's to prevent money laundering. Today, the Trump administration changed the rule so that if you're in a border county, that is a county that borders Mexico, California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, the limit is 200 bucks. Before you have to fill out 200 bucks. Like, how can you live? That's crazy. Every time you go to the grocery store and you stock up on groceries, you have to tell the IRS. There it is. That's it. There it is. El Paso, Texas. The federal government is expanding its financial surveillance efforts targeting cash transactions over $200 in select border communities, including El Paso, the new geographic targeting order GTO issued by the Treasury Department will require businesses to fill money orders and cash checks to report any transaction to $200. Wow. Amazing. So this scares the shit out of me. That money laundering by Mexican cartels. This scares the absolute crap out of me a couple months ago. Look at all those counties. Look at all the zip codes. Oh my god. Incredible. That's insane. Wow. There's one, two, three, four in Imperial County, California, San Diego County, one, two, three, four, five, six, at least seven in San Diego. That's a lot. That's a lot. Yeah. Yeah. The bank was happening. Like the banking, the central banking system is really scaring me lately, especially because what happened to me a couple months ago, I tried taking a bunch of money out of my, one of my bank accounts, one of my checking accounts and putting it into Coinbase. Sure. And I went to the, I had to do a wire and I tried to do the wire online would let me do it. So I went into my local bank branch and sat down with the guy in the little cubicle office or whatever and like walked it through brought my show to my ID. I need to wire this amount of money to this coin base account. And I was like, okay, yeah, no problem. Whatever. We did it. I sat there for 10, 10, 15 minutes. We did it. And it got denied. What? I got, I got a call from Chase fraud. And they made me answer all these weird questions. Like what was the color of your first car? Have you ever heard of Coinbase? Who told you about Coinbase? What is your education on crypto? Who told you about crypto? All these really obscure questions that was like, it was like going in a circle and it was like, some of them were irrelevant. Some of them make sense. Like if you want to confirm that I'm me transferring this money out of my account, right? But you were sitting in there with the guy at the, I gave him my ID. Yeah. And I answered all the questions, whatever, on the phone, 10 minutes with this person. And then I get a message an hour later, you're, you're denied the, the fraud department says, no, this is too risky. So I went in again, then the following week to do the same thing again. Wow. I end up going into the bank, the bank, physical bank doing this process like six times. And every single time fraud kicked it back and would not let me wire my money out of my, my bank account, your own, my own, my own money. Eventually after like two months, I finally got up to work after they like, they escalated it and escalated up the chain of command at the bank because of like, we have no idea why this is happening. Like usually there's like a, a, a, a reasonable amount of security when you're trying to transform, do a wire to a crypto company like coin based for the first time, right? But this is ridiculous. Wow. This is ridiculous. And that scared the shit out of me. Like how much of my money do I really have access to if I need it? Yeah. You know, like I really have to diversify. That's the first time hurt. Yeah. This happening. Yeah. And then like what we're talking about before the show started with this, with this genius act and the stable coins. I had this lady come on here and articulate this really beautifully to me. Her name is Catherine Fitz. She was the head of the, uh, that she was head of the department of HUD during Clinton, I think, or no Bush one, maybe, Bush one. Oh, I remember it. I thought it was HJ. H W Bush. Okay. There we go. Yeah. Yeah. Cause it was during, it was during all the financial fraud. It was the, the, oh, sure. The housing fraud stuff. Sure. And she was brought in to try to like fix that problem, right? She's like a math genius. And she was explaining to me how with the genius act and how they want to bring in these stable coins and make this like the primary way that transactions are done. And she was saying like to incentivize people to use these stable coins, like, uh, they're going to start like giving you loan incentives. Like remember how they dropped off all those pouts of cash and Afghanistan. It's like it's going to be the same thing with stable coins. They're going to get everyone hooked on these stable coins. And they're going to use that to control people with a, with a digital social credit score system. Right. Because so, so, so this is laid out of black mirror. This is how she explained it to me. Right. I mean, and this can be, you know, sometimes really, really smart people can be crazy. Right. And this sounds crazy at face value, but, but just, just try to stick with me here. She says, Elon, which is true, has been really obsessed with the, uh, the Chinese WeChat system, where basically they have social media, banking, communication, personal communication, all in this one little WeChat thing, right? Where the CCP can monitor it and, and then everything. And if you're not Chinese, you have to be invited into WeChat by a Chinese city. Oh, I didn't know that. Yeah. So when he bought X, he was kind of like bragging about how impressed he was with WeChat and it would be cool to be able to do all this kind of stuff on X. So then he did doge to find all this waste fraud and abuse. Right. And he started ripping through the IRS data, the HHS data, the treasury data. And he was at the same time getting a bunch of money with, with X AI and he was developing X AI and he was partnering with Palantiers AI. Yes. And Palantiers just like two, three weeks ago got a $800 million, uh, paycheck from the Pentagon to do whatever the hell Palantiers doing with their AI. And so, so he's using X AI and Palantier AI and integrating it with all this data that they're sucking out of the IRS, the HHS and the treasury department. She said, if I wanted to create a complete digital social control grid in the United States, that's exactly what I would do to do it. She goes, I would take all that data and then I would bring in stable coins and it would be the perfect fucking, uh, digital social credit system in the United States. If you got all that, if you had all that data and you integrated with AI and then you brought in stable coins. Oh, God. So that, that just like, so these people jumping up and down about about, well, this is her other point. The day before 9 11, what was it, rum's failed came out and said there was $2 trillion missing from the Pentagon. Right. Right. That's now since balloon to like 20 something trillion. Yeah. I think it was 23 was the last number. So she goes, if I'm Elon and I'm looking for missing money, waste fraud and abuse, the Pentagon has $21 trillion missing. Why are you fucking around with the IRS? Yeah. And so an HHS and all this stuff. Yep. Right. Yep. In fact, Trump, not too terribly long ago when, when he was still speaking to Elon, um, said that he was going to pursue a 40% cut at the Pentagon over, I think it was 10 years or eight years or whatever it was. And I was like, oh my God, kudos to him. The thing needs to be slashed. And then that just went away. And in the latest budget, you know, they have over a trillion dollars just for the Pentagon. Yeah. That's exactly what the debt is too. Right. I think that I think our debt, our interest per year is like a trillion dollars. It's the same. Yeah. I was just listening to the interview with Thomas Massey. He did, I mean, it was great. He didn't interview with Theo Vaughn. Right. And he was explaining my stuff. Thomas Massey, interesting guy, man. He lives in like a trailer or something like this. And he like does his own farming. Yeah. He gets these chickens. He raises his own chickens. And the chicken coop is like a Roomba. It like moves around the yard so the chickens can roam and not be like in their own shit all the time. That's funny. Wild. I've been to a couple of baseball games with my friend and attorney, Bruce Fine is his attorney and legislative advisor. And Massey is a big baseball fan. So we got a few national games every year. He is a sweetheart of a guy. His wife just died though. Last year. Yeah. It was my understanding that she had been suffering from cancer for a while. Right. Right. But one of the things about Massey, he's the young Ron Paul. And he's not afraid of anybody. Right. There was a piece in the Washington Post today saying that, you know, Trump is already laying the groundwork to primary Massey, right? They're going to find somebody to run against Massey. And in Massey's district, nobody cares. They love the guy. He does exactly what he says he's going to do. Right. And so they're not afraid of any primary challenger to him. Yeah. He was explaining how his relationship with Donald Trump has been up and down over the years. It has been. Sometimes there, there, as close as close can be. And other times they're at open war. Yeah. Well, he was, he was explaining a moment where after his wife passed away, how Trump called him up or sent him a long text, one of the two. And he was just like, you know, really, really apologetic to him and just like saying, you know, I'm really sorry, you know, all this stuff. You're you and your wife, your wife was tough. So were you and all this stuff? He was being very kind to and Thomas was like, you know, I'm glad you called because I was thinking about endorsing you. He's like, Oh, that's great. Isn't that wonderful? But like it seems like they have it like a, I don't know how what their relationship is now. But it's he didn't really he has had a lot of nice things to say about him. What's funny, Trump says a lot about Massey. Massey never says anything about Trump. Hmm. Yeah. Massey talks about policy. Yeah. And policy disagreements that they have, but he never ever attacks Trump. Interesting. Yeah. So, so the store with Massey, he is one of the only guys in Congress that will not accept any sort of political donation. Absolutely. Right. Or is it only from for government? Um, oh, no, no, you can't accept anything from foreign government. Oh, but a pack, a pack is technically American. They're special. Right. Yeah, they're special. Yeah. There last time I was, I was here talking to you. We talked about William Proxmire. Do you remember that? And the Golden fleece award. We talked about that. Uh huh. So William Proxmire was a senator, a democratic senator from Wisconsin. He won a special election in the 1950s to replace it. Oh, I remember that. Joe was healthy. Yeah. Right. And he would give this Golden fleece award. Um, every couple of months, he would just pour through the federal budget line by line. And he would find like, oh, $6 million to study the sexual habits of, you know, cockroaches. Right. Yeah. That's waste for underbused. Actually, there is no program to study the sexual habits of cockroaches. That is a slack budget. That's just embedded in the budget that nobody's supposed to notice. Yes. So they hated in the studying game monkeys in the Congo. But anyway, in the almanac of American politics, every two years when it would be republished. And it would have the campaign finance information. Right. Where everybody's like, well, how much money did they spend in their last reelection campaign? 36 million, 120 million for Proxmire, zero. Every single time, he would go to the local courthouse. He would pay the $15 filing fee out of his pocket. And then that was it. There was no advertising. There was no campaign office. There was no travel. There was no nothing. How many times did he win? He won from 1957 until 1990. Wow. Six, maybe 98. Yeah. Yeah. That's wild. Massies like that. Yeah. Yeah. I have great respect for him. Well, because you can tell him you could tell he's speaking from the heart. You can tell he's being honest. Yeah. He's the cleasal, the actual complete opposite of Ted Cruz. Paul, did you see the Ted Cruz Tucker Carlson? I did. Tucker humiliated. Oh my God. And he wanted to read and why did he even agree to that? Yeah. Why? Because the second the second the camera started rolling, it was just like they were going at it already. He is so arrogant to think that he just doesn't have to prepare for things like that. And Tucker Carlson is one of the most intelligent people I've ever met in my life. She knows every little obscure fact. He does every conflict that's ever happened, but the US has been involved in anywhere. Like it's crazy. That's right. You know, so much. And he can he can do deep dives on all kinds of different issues. So Cruz went in there like what a fool. He just didn't bother to prepare. Like you want to launch war on Iran and you don't even know how many people are there. What kind of military planning are you going to participate in? It's amazing to see people like I told you in the beginning. People like Tucker, people like, you know, lover or hater, whatever your things are on our Candice Owens. Sure. I've actually begun turning on Candice Owens. Yeah. Yeah. She's actually been okay. Yeah. She hasn't been bad. There's some crazy stuff. Yeah. There's a great stuff. The whole thing with that with like, you know, God bless her, but she's doing this whole thing on the macroned thing. Like, yeah, that's a scene. Like that. Like that. Yeah. And then she, you know, whatever. Anyways, like so so her Tucker, Elon, even Rogan, like these guys seem to be like slowly starting to like peel themselves away from the Trump thing. And they all like fully endorsed him, obviously. Yes. Um, but there's like, it seems like there's a shift happening. And I don't know if it's ever going to be possible for there to be another party, like a third party, like Elon's talking about. But it's not 1880 anymore. Yeah. Yeah. No more third parties. Not real ones. But it's wild to see that because all those people have the biggest voices, right? They sure do. And it's it's insane to me that these people in Congress, even Trump, can just go about their days, ignoring this, you know, when it's like a very strong undercurrent in society right now that everyone's talking to them. Don't forget the Trump doesn't, it Trump isn't running for reelection. Right. That's true. She's got like, he's got like 1200 days left. Yeah. I'm not sure he really cares. Hmm. I think he's starting to think about his legacy like every president does in the second he's thinking about the Donald Trump presidential library. He's thinking about that Nobel Peace Prize. Hmm. And he wants to leave something that's permanent, like like the Abraham Accords, for example. I think he doesn't really care if there's a split between the magga Republicans and the neo-cons. He got his big beautiful bill through Congress. I think he probably has concluded he's going to lose the house in the next election. I think Republicans are safe in the Senate, but it'll lose the house. So any big legislative act has taken place. It's done. His big beautiful bill that's going to be the end of it. All right. Hold that thought. I'm going to get a little quick. We'll be right back. Really? Yeah. Why are they saying that? Because you can't go back for reelection. Oh, to say it does can't run for reelection. And, um, and the Senate seats are taken. So he's done. Really? He's going to go practice law someplace. Nobody's ever going to, they're not even going to remember his name in a couple of years. It's crazy because he was like on the top around Mount Rushmore and for doing COVID. As he was, he was. Love handled it very well. Yeah. He did the best probably. Yeah. He handled it the best. Right. You know, we had the monocle during COVID. As he was, handled it very well. Yeah, he did the best, probably. Yeah, handled it the best. Right. You know, we had the monoclonal antibodies before Biden pulled him. Yeah. And this whole thing about him literally going to a foreign country to sign a freaking blasphemy law in Florida about like, it's like a, it's like an affirmative action law. Yeah. Right. Basically, yeah, isn't it? We had the last 10 years or whatever of like, fuck your feelings and snowflakes. That's right. And then now we come and do this. And it's like, oh, it's like a, we're just adopting all the stuff that the right wing people are just adopting all like the DEI woke stuff that they were accusing the left people of absolutely true implementing these parties are the same. They are. They really are. That's why you know, I got such, I am getting such chuckle out of this America party. We've got a right of center party. And we have a farther right of center party. And now we're going to have a party that's in the middle of the two right of center party. It's like, what kind of system is that? Is there any way to fix this stuff? This, this lobbying in Congress and, and like stuff that Thomas Massey points out, not if you are not willing to go after a pack, you have to go after a pack. And that's our fault, right? That's not their fault. That's our fault. That's our fault. We let them do this from the very beginning. How do you, how do you get rid of that? Who's blocking that? Is it the people just in the government? Just like that big money people? They are. They are. Everybody's afraid of a pack. Because if you look at them, caught guide, they're going to primary you and nobody wants that. And they have success. You know, look at Cory Bush. She was a Congresswoman for what? Two years. And they were like, yeah, we don't like her. She's gone. And then she was gone. But don't other foreign countries lobby to here? Like do it through shell companies kind of like they hire lobbyists and those lobbyists register. As sorry, do I keep kicking you? No, good. Okay. They register as as representatives of a foreign, of a foreign government. It's easy. You just fill out a form. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, wow. But these Israelis are like, oh, no, no, no, a pack is totally independent of the Israeli government. They're notized. The Israeli government, they're acting completely on their own. They don't represent us. Right. It's like, okay, sure. And now I guess Harvard is suing Trump and Trump suing Harvard. Yeah. And because they're saying if you protest, if you protest the Israel war, if you're protesting against Israel, you're losing your flu. You lose all your funding. It's where you're legally get deported. Yeah. And he did the same with Columbia, which is first of all, it's distracting because it's stupid. It's just a stupid policy. Right. And secondly, it does damage like constitutional damage to freedom of speech. You know, GW is the same way. I stopped giving, I graduated from GW. I had both my degrees from GW. And I stopped giving money because I got one of these automated emails from the new president of the university. This is when the little tent cities were popping up on campuses. Yeah. And she said, we will do whatever we can to crush them. And we are bringing in the metropolitan police. And they're going to work with campus police. And we're going to destroy the tents and rest assured we stand with Israel. Why? Why you stand with Israel? Were you standing with Israel when they blew up the oldest continually operating church in the world, St. Porphyrias and killed 24 women and children inside? You're standing with them then? Are you standing with them as they blew up all seven of Gaza's hospitals and killed now how many hundreds of thousands of civilians? Right. Because if you're standing with that, I'm not standing with you. Yeah. Yeah. Like why is it our responsibility to on fuck Gaza? Exactly. That sounds like a that's not a we problem. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. When 17,000 kids are reported to be dead. Exactly. What is there for us? Real estate property. Is that really it? Is it real estate? Like what I do think that Trump is that cynical, that it's it's about real estate in the back of his mind or maybe it's in the front of his mind. But my God, the problem is so much more important than that. You know, I went to I would say Israel twice in 2022. The second time I was there. First, yeah, no, the first time I was there in 2022, I went for the elections to cover the elections. And I was much more portly back then. And my very last day, I had a stretch of time where I was free almost the whole day. So I thought I'm going to go do the things that I haven't had a chance to do. So I wanted to see like the Virgin Mary's tomb, for example. And I wanted to go to the Garden of Gethsemane. Jerusalem is very small. You can walk to everything. It's it's really like crazy. Where's the Garden of Gethsemane? It's directly across from the dome of the rock. Really? Outside the walls. Yeah, crazy. It's like, yeah, that's the I need a photo of the garden. I guess so many. I'm sorry. So continues. I was portlier at the time by about 115 pounds. And it was hot that day. So the Garden of Gethsemane is up on the on the Mount of Olives. Yeah, that's it right there. Wow. Look at that. It's beautiful. It is. It's gorgeous. And those olive trees are direct descendants of the olive trees that were there 2000 years ago. Really? It's a DNA testing. It's very cool. They're unique to that location. Those trees have seen some stuff. Seriously. So I'm walking around and it's really hot. And I thought, I'm going to go back to the old city and buy a souvenir for my kids. So you go down the Mount of Olives into the valley. And then you come back up at what's called the Iron Gate. The Iron Gate is the sort of the back entrance to the old city of Jerusalem. And I was winded. And I'm sweaty. And there's a there's a bench there right outside the Iron Gate. So when I say right outside, I mean like 20 feet. Okay. And there's a woman sitting there. And I said down. She says hi. I said hi. I said, where are you from? She's from Brooklyn. I said, I'm from DC. You hear for vacation? Yeah. Here for vacation. So as we're talking, I'm looking at the gate. And it's not really a gate. It's just an opening called the Iron Gate. And it's been there for a thousand years, a little more than a thousand years. There are three IDF soldiers standing in the gate. And there's this hustle and bustle of Palestinians just in and out. And they're balancing like crates of fruits and vegetables on their heads. And you're going about their business, normal normal business for a morning. But there's this one Palestinian guy and he's just kind of milling around. So I notice him. I'm looking right at him as I'm talking to this woman. And one of the IDF guys notices him. So he walks like eight feet over to ask the guy, what are you doing here? But before I could even get the words out, the Palestinian pulls out a knife and stabs him twice in the stomach. And then one of the other guards shoots him and kills him right there in front of me, 20 feet away. This woman screams. And I said, we better get the fuck out of here. So we ran, I was directly across the footpath from the back entrance to the Rockefeller Archaeological campus. So we ran there separated. I went back to my hotel, armored personnel carriers are coming. They steal off the gate, helicopters flying around. So I wrote it up as fast as I could. And I turn on the Israeli news and they said there was this assassination attempt at the iron gate. And then their interviewing Israelis, I didn't see any Israelis there. This was the Palestinian part of the old city. But they start interviewing these Israelis and they're like, they hate us more than they love life itself. It's like, seriously, that's what you're going to go with here. Wow. That's what you took from this. They hate us more than they love life itself. But there's complete disconnect in that country. And the crazy thing about it too is their, their ancestry is identical. They're all the same. They're they all both of them came from the Canaanites. Exactly. And then at some point in history, they went like that. But they're the same people. Same exact people. Exactly. Just nuts. It's an awesome place to visit. I can't imagine living there. I can't imagine it. I would hope that that would never get to that kind of a fever pitch in America. But it seems like here, we're in this country of mostly the same people. But with like the more, you know, the more it seems like the more technology develops, the more people have the ability to just communicate their, communicate their random thoughts off the top of their head before thinking before processing it. You're right. It seems like it's, it's, it's dividing people more and more. And when that kind of stuff is able to be exploited by people that want more division, whether it be foreign agents or bots or whatever it is to, you know, some people think that, which is probably pretty legitimate that like countries like China are doing this specifically to just create more divide in the United States. But like, if we go in that direction, could we ever end up like that, you know, like it seems like you imagine it seems like the people that are the most different get along the most. Right. Like if you go to a place like Brooklyn or New York, right, melting pot, all these people where they make fun of you for your race, right? You make fun of the fucking, you make fun of the era, but the Muslim or the Christian guy or the Jew, right? But they do it like in like a friendly, well, it's part of like building a relationship and trust with somebody, right? It's almost like if you go to Brooklyn or these places and, and you can't make fun of somebody else or they're not making fun of you for your race or your ethnicity or whatever. It's like you almost don't trust that person. You know what I mean? And the more, more people are the same, the more it seems like in just that case, specifically, it's like the more they want to like just find differences in themselves. You know, Texas is in the process or was it has been in the process this week of passing a state law in the legislature to ban Sharia law in Texas. First of all, I didn't realize Sharia law was a problem in Texas. Secondly, I don't think any of them actually know what Sharia law is. Right. What is it? Well, it's a combination of different things. It's the way that you address the day-to-day aspects of life. For example, Sharia law says that when the head of the household dies, half of the money goes to the wife and the other half of the money goes to the sons. Okay, big deal. Sharia law says that you can't charge interest on a loan. It's not appropriate. You can charge a user fee, but you can't charge interest. You can't call it interest. You can't call it usually. That's Sharia law. There's no religious stuff baked into it. You know, occasionally there are little tenants, but not really. No. No. Yeah, it seems like like here too, like not just with that law, but there's a seems like there's a huge undercurrent or a rise in Christianity. Right? Like Trump appointed somebody to be like the head of Christian something in the White House. Yes. What was that? I'm going to teach. Yeah. See if you can find what that was, Steve. There are somebody who has like a their little their literal title. You've seen that YouTube video of that blonde woman from Fredrick Maryland who's his Christianity advisor. Oh, that's what I'm talking about. In Africa, in Africa, in Africa, in Africa, in Africa. In Africa. Remember that video? Absolutely freaking hilarious. I don't remember that. Oh, you have to see it. It's like nuts. What? How would you find it? Yeah. Put Trump Christian advisor, Africa. Hmm. How long ago was this? Who's in the first term? Okay. Yeah. And there's also like this lady who just went up in front of Congress who was supposed to be, I think she got asked, but she was going to be like the, the, the liaison to the UN or to the, to NATO or something like this. And the ambassador to the UN maybe I think it was. And she was saying in front of Congress, they asked her like, do you think Israel has a biblical right to the West Bank? And she's just like, absolutely they do. There's peace in the New York Times yesterday about one of the last Christian villages in the West Bank. It's being invaded by Israeli settlers from New Jersey and New York. They're throwing all the, all the Christians out and just seizing the land, confiscating it. Holy shit. It's, it's bad. Yeah. And then on top of that, you have like Peter Thiel. Yeah. Who that's her. Oh my God. Paula White. Oh my God. The, the, the video. YouTube video is ridiculous. I think, I think I found it. I'm not quite sure. All right. So there's a, that's it. That's it. And there's a guy just wandering around behind her. Oh, I think I have seen when I walk the house grounds, God walks on White House grounds. I had every right in authority to declare the White House as Holy ground because I was standing there and where I stand is holding. This woman's been divorced three times, by the way. That's right on par. Yeah, right on brand. Now to present Trump would be saying you took off. And I want to do that. We are in a spiritual war right now. Let every demonic network that is aligned itself against the purpose, against the calling of President Trump. Let it be broken. Let it be torn down in the name of Jesus. No one to tell you what my thoughts are. The thoughts of the King of Kings, the thoughts of the Lord I'm downloading heaven. What is that? Oh, she's speaking in tongues because the Holy Spirit has seized her. Oh, my God. Personal pastor and spiritual advisor. I am Paula who is pretty. Well, maybe I'm not going to be pretty. What I'm 90 years old. Here's this former messed up Mississippi girl who lived in a trailer that they called trailer trash. Daddy committed to not pregnant out of white lock been married. Been divorced. Not just once. Twice. People go. Three times after the advisor of the president will get to that later. It's all in there. Michael Jackson, Kid Rock, the president. It's all in there. All right. Thank you Paula. What a great job you do. The evangelicals. I hear we're more popular than ever with the evangelicals. You're the only one that you'll tell the truth. You'll only tell the truth. Southern California is looking at bent. Well, there's already law. This past through the governor that says the Bible is a book of hate speech into ban the cell of it. Next chat was created is the largest human trafficking because the greatest people on there were human traffickers because the FBI and because intelligence could not do it because it's live in real time and they can track your kid in a less than a second and take them. If there's a department of treasury and God is watching over everything you do and you are storing up eternal treasure that will go so far beyond. I think that we can even begin to match it. Do you need this in in 3500 dollars? You need this in in 35000. You need this in in that hundred thousand dollar check. If you do not write that PO box and you do not call that toll free number and you do not become a ministry of sustainer you will never see sustainment in your life and your dream will die. Your call will die. Wow. Yeah. Oh yeah. Three million dollar condo. Look, now they're laying the laying on of hands. Do you really think he's like religious? Not at all. He's just using this stuff as absolutely. There's the video of him from his first term where he's holding the Bible and he's holding it like it's a dirty diaper. Yeah. I think he's just using this stuff to like Panda do it. Have a one autograph to the Bible. Oh my God. You know, I've seen him for sale. Autographed Bibles. Is there a more obnoxious signature that exists other than like that is the most obnoxious signature in the world. It's a very, very unique. But anyways, like yeah. And then so Peter Thiel is there it is. Is that a draft Bible? Oh, look at that. It's only $7,000 signed by Donald. That's sort of 37000. We need to get one of those. Oh my goodness. That's amazing. Wow. Yeah. So like Silicon Valley is now becoming the Christian. Like Peter Thiel is trying to map Christianity on everything Silicon Valley is doing. You know, a place that's been historically kind of like not religious, right? Almost almost anti Christian. Sure. And now it's becoming very Christian. There's this church there that all these people are going to and all these defense contractors, the head of Andoril and Peter Thiel are holding these big Christian conferences and I know he's doing from Silicon Valley there. That's curious. It's interesting. You know, like why? Why? What is he doing? Right. Does he know something that we don't? I don't know. Is he covering his bets? I don't know. I don't know what to make of that. I don't know what to make of that either. You know, unless it seems like you know, he obviously he's very much invested in the national security. He makes literally look, you know, he makes most of his money from the defense department with with Palantir. Right. They created Palantir was originally funded by NQTEL. That's right. And they get all their their money. You know, they just got another 800 billion or 800 million. That's right from the DoD for Palantir. And like one of my kind of I think it's kind of a weak hypothesis, but as a hypothesis is that maybe he thinks that if the United States was a the majority of the citizens of our country all subscribe to one religion, maybe that would make the United States a better more powerful country. You know, like because there's when it comes to wars, you have people in other parts of the world that are so devoted to their God or their religion that they're willing to strap a bomb to their chest and die for it. Right. We don't have that at all. Right. Maybe he thinks it's like a national security thing that we need to be, you know, the whole country needs to be, you know, devoted to Christianity. And it would that that would be a common evangelical theme. Mm hmm. You know, there are a lot of people who believe that. Yeah. And you see it too, like with people on the internet, you know, a lot of like the biggest political pundits and a lot of the biggest podcasters are are like converting to Christianity and getting baptized on YouTube. You know, one of the guys was Russell Brand, you know, right. He's a big one. Right. Yes. So like, yeah, I don't know. I don't know what to make of it. I just find it super, super interesting. This is like sort of like groundswell of Christianity. I think I've mentioned to you in the past that from from 2008, 2012, I was an adjunct professor of intelligence studies at Liberty University, which is Jerry Falwell's evangelical university. When they called me in 2008 to offer me this job, I said, why would you want me? We probably disagree on 99% of the issues. And the Dean said because torture is not Christian. And I said, okay, I'll do it. And I I liked it. I enjoyed the job. I enjoyed the people that I worked with really good people, but they have some really scary political views. And and this, this blind support for Israel is not really what it seems to be at first glance. There's no real love of Israel. The reason why they so stridently and steadfastly support Israel is because they want to hasten the second coming of Christ. The Bible says, the book of Revelation says that when all the Jews returned to Israel, that's when the Messiah comes and the end times are upon us. So they think that through political activism, they can help to to force this to squeeze the timeline and make it happen like now sooner rather than later. Peter Teal talks about that a lot too. You know, an interesting thing, Rogan was telling me he has this, he has this idea of the second coming of Christ. And if like Jesus coming back in another form, and he was using like the analogy, so like Jesus was born of a virgin, right? He's like, well, if Christ is going to come back, something that's divine and something that has comes from God or that is like a God, he's like, would it that be AI if AI became sentient? Oh, and if we reached a technological singularity, AI would be like a God and it would be it would be of a virgin. Okay, that's I robot. Yeah. And yeah, we don't want that to happen. No. Oh my God. That's a pretty great thing. Just the, I mean, and like the unregulated race to AI is is also scary because we don't know. We can't we can't like it's it's a double edged sword because like can we do we regulate it? Is China regulating their AI? You know, we're gonna have to do something for to do that. I fear that it that we can't in the near term because we don't fully understand it. Right. You know, AI lies to us and and it makes shit up. I've been trying to experiment with it a little bit. And when it was first released, I went on and I wrote who is John Kiriyaku? And it says John Kiriyaku is a, you know, former CIA officer, whistleblower, author, blah, blah, blah. Okay. He earned a bachelor's degree from the University of Maryland and a master's degree in peace studies from the University of Ghent in Belgium. First of all, I don't even know where the University of Maryland is. I know it's called College Park. I've never been there. I've never been on the campus of the University of Maryland. Not sure how I'd even find it. I didn't know there was a University of Ghent in Belgium. I've never seen it. I did not get a master's degree in peace studies there. So I wrote, you are incorrect. John Kiriyaku earned a bachelor's and master's degrees at George Washington University in Washington, DC, Enter. And it comes back and says, no, you are incorrect. John Kiriyaku studied at the University of Maryland and the University of Ghent. And I just stopped. Which I, which AI was us? This was chat, GPT. And then recently I was teaching this class in Spain. It's a graduate school class in intelligence that it was the history of terrorism. So this is my sweet spot, right? I love this stuff. So I wrote this very detailed syllabus. And then I put a bunch of books that, you know, friends of mine have written professors and spies and stuff like that on Carlos the Jackal and the Palestinian groups and all the different eras. So I put it into chat, GPT. And I asked if it if it would give me links to scholarly journal articles specific to each one of the notes, right? So we start with, you know, terrorism in the Bible. And then we go to, you know, whatever, the medieval times. And then we go to, you know, the Israelis doing terrorism against British troops in the Palestine mandate all the way to the current times. So it gave me all these different. It was like 14 scholarly journal articles for the seven notes. And every single one of the links was fake. There were no such journal articles. It just made shit up. Wow. Yeah. Literally not a single one of them was real. So I don't know what to make of this AI. Someone was explaining to me the story of their day on how the Russians were using AI LLMs to convince Ukrainian soldiers to lay down their weapons and retreat and quit the war. They were using somehow, they were somehow getting into their phones and reading like all their communications with their relatives. And they were, the LLMs were faking, texting them or like messaging them, being their relatives, convincing them, be like, come home. We want you back. We want you to leave like emotionally. Well, just what this week, some some hacker called Marco, not called Marco Rubio, spoofed Marco Rubio, his voice through through AI and called what three foreign leaders, reclaiming to be Marco Rubio. Oh, I didn't even see this buddy of mine that's here with us today. I was telling me about it. No way. This stuff is very dangerous. You know, yeah. Oh, yeah. What if somebody spoofs the Turkish, you know, president and has them call the Greek prime minister and says, right, I think you suck. We're going to invade. We're going to invade in two hours. Right. You know, or Putin's voice saying, Hey, I'm sorry. There's been a military coup. The rockets are flying. Take cover. Other it is. Oscar uses AI to impersonate Rubio in contact for and US officials. What is the first? What does the subline say? Wow, the State Department is warning US diplomats to attempt to know that was an attempt to impersonate Secretary of State, or Marco Rubio, and possibly other officials using technology driven by artificial intelligence according to two senior officials and the cable sent to all embassies and consulates. This is a major security incident. Yeah, because like, how do you address it? Right. Like how like, you know, how often do all these people and these leaders stay in contact with each other? Right. Like this was the big thing about an Andy Jacobson's book about nuclear war. She was saying, you know, it's not like a quick thing for the president to go on the phone with Putin. Right. Like it. It takes time. If there was a nuclear war, and there was if our satellite systems detected some ICBM in the atmosphere, like we only have a 10 minutes to respond to like to retat because we have our user lose at nukes like in the Midwest that are like the ones that are stationary. That's right. Like if we have a rocket coming towards us, we have to use those or they're we have to assume that they're going to be hit and they're going to destroy it. That's right. So we have 10 minutes to get on the phone with Putin. And we just tell us if you got where this thing came from. Right. And then if it did come from in her book, hypothetical situation was it came from North Korea. And if we had to launch our nukes back at North Korea, they would have to over fly Russia. Right. So we would have to get Putin on the phone immediately to tell them to tell him we have we have ICBM going for North Korea. They're going to over fly Russia. They're not coming for Russia. But like when's the last time we got Putin on the phone in less than 10 minutes? Who just told me a story today or yesterday about Jimmy Carter about something like this happening with Jimmy Carter? None. I don't remember if it was Sean, my buddy or maybe it was yesterday. I can't remember. But anyway, the way the story went and I have no idea if this is true or apocryphal. But um, I don't remember if it was Sean, my buddy, or maybe it was yesterday. I can't remember. But anyway, the way the story went and I have no idea if this is true or apocryphal. But, Norad said that they detected one missile coming from the Soviet Union over the poll and it was on its way to the United States. And they asked Carter, you know, what do we do? Do we launch? We have to defend ourselves. And Carter said, I'll call Brezhnev. So he calls Brezhnev, and Brezhnev said, no, it's not us. It's probably some kind of, you know, magnetic anomaly. And so Carter told Norad to stand down. And this general, I guess, asked him, how can you be so sure? And he said, because I woke Brezhnev up. And he said, I've spoken to him many times. I know what he sounds like. He was sleeping. Mm-hmm. If they were launching a nuclear attack on the United States, he wouldn't be sleeping. Right. And it turned out to be nothing. Just one of those magnetic anomalies. Yeah. That's a close card. There it is. There it is right there. Oh, but it says 1400, Soviet ballistic missiles. Oh, yes, I remember hearing about this. Yeah, Jimmy Carter. Yeah. One of the scary things too that Annie was telling me is that we only have 40, 40 interceptor missiles. Are you kidding? 44. So much for the, there's like a couple. Right. Yeah. There's a couple in at Vandenberg. And then there's a bunch of them that are in Alaska. Right. Cause they would be coming over the pole. Yeah. But if you, if you, if you initiate a nuclear war, you don't just send a couple missiles, you send the mother load. Right. So 44. And the, the accuracy of those interceptor missiles is like something around 40% accuracy. Cause it's like, it's equivalent. It's like shooting a bullet out of the sky with another bullet. That's right. You know, it's exactly what it is. And they're merbed a lot of them are merbed. So they have multiple warheads. Yeah. They go speed up. After they get into the atmosphere, multiple reentry vehicles, but like, yeah, the, so the, the golden dome and then like the star war stuff where they're, they're trying to, they're trying to get satellites into space to take out ICBMs. The all the satellites that are. Yeah. I'm going to fly back home. I mean, it makes sense why it makes sense why Elon's not going to attack the Pentagon for all the missing money. Cause I'm sure a lot of it's going to stuff that he's doing. Sure. Definitely launching into space. Definitely. No. Uh huh. And Bezos too. And Bezos too. Yeah. With Amazon, AWS, Amazon, I don't know, something services. Anyway, that's the, that's the unit of Amazon that deals with the CIA. Oh, really? Yeah. You know, they asked, they asked him about you have, every time he gets asked about UFOs, he's like, I don't think it's anything. He's like, there's aliens. As sure they sure are, uh, they sure are sneaky. Cause I've never seen any evidence of that. It's, he's weird. And then, you know, with the, with the stuff that he's doing to another thing, I should have brought something to the beginning when we were talking about the Epstein stuff. But he, you know, he's like going, he's on a jihad right now on this Epstein Trump stuff, saying like, you know, Trump's implicated the Epstein, Epstein, Epstein, Files, Bannens, implicated in the Epstein Files. See, but he wouldn't have access to the Epstein file. So where does he get his information? I don't know. Right. Right. Well, the interesting thing is Trump sues everybody. Right. Anybody who talks shit about him says a lie about him. Oh, yeah. Whether it's the news or whether it's a poll that he doesn't like, he calls us lawyer. I mean, he sues, he sues anybody and everybody. You know, if the wind's blowing the wrong direction, he's the su God. Um, but he didn't sue Elon. No. Why didn't he sue Elon? Good question. If, if he did sue Elon, would there have to be some sort of discovery? Yes. Although the FBI could do exactly what the CIA does, you go into the, uh, the courtroom and you say, uh, your honor, national security and the judge says case dismissed. So in the case where there was there, he had to be discovery and they did have to bring evidence of these files or whatever there is and trumping implicated in them. There would be a way for them not to not to bring it into discovery, even if it was. Yeah. See, it, see, I, does it all the time all the time. So you don't think it's possible that Trump said to his lawyers go to Elon and they're like, we can't sue Elon because then this stuff will have to come in to discover. like that's, that's not possible. I think, well, it, it would probably be called into discovery and then the justice department would have to say, you know, based on national security grounds. We can't go forward with the suit. So wouldn't make any sense. Yeah. Like when my her are the, uh, the Canadian professor that we kidnapped and sent to Tunisia for torture or Syria for torture. Um, sued the, uh, sued the CIA. Um, I'm, we tortured that poor guy mercilessly for like nine months and then the Syrians come back and they said, you know, we think this is the wrong guy. And so the CIA's position was we never, we never grabbed him. We never sent him rendered him to Syria and it turned out that he had flown back to JFK. The FBI grabbed him. We're coming off the plane, turn him over to the CIA, CIA flew him right back to Syria. But he had bought a pair of sunglasses for his wife on the onboard duty free. So the guy just vanishes for a month. His wife finally gets the credit card bill and there's the purchase because the airline kept saying, nope, he wasn't on the plane. Never got on the plane. American government's like, we don't, we never heard of him. We don't know what's going on. And there it was. He bought these sunglasses on the plane. So then they said, okay, well, you know, he's, he's al Qaeda. He's connected to al kaido. So, you know, he's, he's being detained. We was being tortured. And then they said, that's the wrong guy. So he flew back. He filed a lawsuit against the, uh, the CIA and they go into court in the Eastern District of Virginia. And, uh, he says, you know, the CIA kidnapped me. They sent me to Syria. They tortured me mercilessly. And so I'm suing. And then the judge says to the CIA, your response. National security judge says case dismissed. And that was it. Wow. So he ended up suing the Canadian government because the Canadians of course were in cahoots because it's a five eyes country. And we told the Canadians, look, he's al kaido and they said, okay, we're just going to pretend we don't know anything. So he won $6 million. But the last time I spoke to him, the guys, the guys, the political science professor at the university of Toronto. Um, the last time I spoke to him, he told me that his PTSD is so severe that he hadn't left his house in six years. He teaches his classes online. That's how traumatized he is. Yikes. There's this, uh, what, what do you think about this new Guantanamo they're opening up in the Everglades? Oh, yeah. They even have streets or road signs. Alligator alligator alligator alligator alligator alligator. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's not good. It's not good. Yeah. Okay. You want to, what happens when went when like a super left wing person gets in power again. They see gets in power and once the, you know, use that to lock up her enemies. Exactly. Where's the national consensus on these issues? Because you know it's going to flip it always does. Mm hmm. And then what right then you're going to start screaming about this, you know, hell hold dungeon that's down in Florida. Right. There was one funny thing that happened this week. I don't know if you happen to see it in Politico. Um, the administration wanted to sell like vast swaths of public land out west. Right. Oh, yes. See this. Yes. I did see this. He was Republican senators who killed it. And did you happen to see why? Because I came Jeffrey said, you know what? This is a great idea. Let's sell off all these giant parcels of land because when we get to the end of the year, we're going to get to the end of the year. And because when the Democrats take over again and we will, he said, we're going to use it to build affordable housing for poor people. Right. And they were like, Oh, no, no, no, nothing's for sale. The whole thing's dead. It's killed. Well, there was a huge when they were when they were trying to put that in the bill. There was like everybody was losing their shit on social media. Like people were doing podcasts about it. Right. Like, you know, you know, big time, like activists and like hunting people were like complaining about it. Yeah. Like why? Why are you going to do this? For section eight housing. Like, and it's amazing that they were able to strike it out of the bill. Yeah. You know, and that's that's one of the things that and that was that in the big beautiful. What was that? It was originally supposed to be about that. And that's one of the interesting things that Thomas Massey was explaining to Theo Vaughn and that thing. How they just pack these bills full of so many things that you know why? Because there's a rule in the Senate that you cannot filibuster a budget bill. What is what is English? So if you sponsor a bill, you're a senator. Yes. And you sponsor a bill to make, you know, national spring water day. Okay. Okay. Maybe I don't want to make a national spring water day. So I'm going to say, well, I'm going to I'm going to give a speech and my speech is going to be unlimited in time because I don't like this spring water idea. So in order to force me to stop talking, you need 60 votes, right? But if there's the federal budget and you put a little amendment. Oh, and it's the federal budget, the national spring water bill day, day bill. You only need 51 votes. Right. Well, federal budget is tied to it. If the federal budget's tied to it, so there are 53 Republicans and 47 Democrats. And they're so partisan that the votes are going to be 53 47 52 48. If it's somebody that's really unpopular like Kennedy, it's going to be 50 50 and then Vance breaks the tie 51. So they're not going to pass anything in the Senate. Nothing's getting passed because you need 60 votes, right. Except for the budget. That's why the big beautiful bill had literally everything that Trump wanted budget or not budget or just stuff that he pulled out of the sky and had them put in one day because he knew that this was his one and only shot to get the stuff passed into law. And the other thing that he was saying that they do is they'll put things in there like, you know, they'll put something in there. For example, that like the Democratic party will absolutely never vote for and they don't want and they'll put also. So like if you're voting against it, they'll put in there like support for homeless veterans. Yeah. I think it's like, oh, you don't care about homeless veterans. Exactly. Do you remember the Simpsons movie? Yeah. Okay. So remember there's going to be this dome over Springfield. Yes. Yes. So Congress, Congress takes up the issue of evacuating the citizens of Springfield. So they're in the House for Representatives and they're debating it and it's going to be unanimous. They need to save the people of Springfield. And then at the last second, this liberal congressman puts up his hand and says, Mr. Speaker, I would like to attach an amendment to the Save Springfield Act. It is to appropriate $100 million for the perverted arts. And then the speaker says all those in favor of the Save Springfield fund the perverted arts bill say I all those opposed. No. The bill fails. That's hilarious. Yeah. That's exactly because that's what they do. That's Washington. And they don't even have the time between when they when they're brought to the floor and when they're supposed to be voted on, they'd like there's no time to read all these hundreds of pages of stuff. Yeah. Let alone for the public to go through it. The big beautiful bill was 1600 pages long. That's insane. And the Democrats insisted on the Senate side they insisted that every word of it be read. Right. It was a stalling tactic. Okay. Because usually no bills get read right floor. It took 14 hours, 16 hours to read the bill. That's why it was delayed a day on the Senate side. Remember the House voted and the Senate was supposed to vote the next day. It was two days later. But then they also pulled another procedural thing. The master's degree in legislative affairs. I love this stuff. What happens usually is the House passes a version and the Senate passes a version. Right. Okay. But the House they put, you know, maybe AOC has an amendment and mass he has an amendment and somebody else has an amendment and then the Senate does it and then you know maybe Murkowski wants to build another bridge to know where and Lindsey Graham wants to give money to the homeless veterans or whatever. So the bills aren't the same. They'll vote on it in the House. Let's say it passes. The Senate votes on its own one and it passes. But the bills are different so they can't go to the President. So they go to something called conference committee. So the Democrats appoint their representatives to the conference committee from the House and from the Senate. The Republicans also do it from the House and from the Senate. They negotiate the differences between the two bills. They come up with one unified bill and it goes back to the House for them to re vote and then back to the Senate for them to re vote. And if the identical bills are then passed, then it goes to the President for his signature. This one was so close and so controversial that the House passed its version. The Senate passed its version which was different and then the Speaker the House said whatever you guys passed, we just will take it. We don't need to hammer whatever just ignore our amendments. We'll just take your amendments. Why? Because they were afraid that the likes of Thomas Massey. We're going to convince just two more people to vote. No and the whole thing would have been dead. Wow. Yeah. Right now because of deaths and retirements, mostly deaths. The Republicans have a majority in the House of three and it's the smallest majority in American history. So Massey's an O vote that only leads to malcontents if they flip their votes all over. Jesus. This whole thing. I mean, the whole congressional bill passing stuff. Our system's broken. It's designed to be confused. It is. It is because it forces negotiation. You know what I mean? It forces bipartisanship. Or in the beginning of the Republic, multi-partisanship and now it just pisses people off. So like, now that the big beautiful bill is passed, like other than the fact that they've like, what are the biggest things in your mind about that bill that the huge amounts of money. you'd amount some money for Border protection okay. Yeah. Oh, yeah, it's like $15 billion. Yeah, more money than they'll be able to spend and And gigantic increases yet again for the Pentagon. It's crazy. Yeah, 15 billion for border production seems insane Yeah, what are they gonna do with all that? Yeah, like how do you like literally what are you gonna do with all that? Yeah, the rate I mean like the the ice stuff and like the rate like that's another thing We haven't even talked about but that's another thing all all of the like the Would you call them like that the high IQ? Mugget people are are really really questioning and pushing back on like right because these guys are wearing masks They're not wearing uniforms that there's no identification. You don't know if they're ice or if they're a kidnapper or a Tell a guy or you know some nut who you know wants to be and they're showing up a construction sites and home depots and and arresting workers right and and hand-cuffing six-year-olds. Yes And not going after like real Bists and criminals and people who are like doing really bad shit I know that you didn't intend for this to be the you know the massy appreciation society show About this on on the floor of the house the other day Saying this doesn't make any sense. No, if you want to if you want to fulfill your campaign promises Promises let's grab the murderers and the best and the robbers and people who have been convicted of a crime or Even if they've got minor crimes on the record if there are career criminals Yeah, grab those people and send them back to you know You know, we're saying send them to wherever they came from you know, there's the situation In Djibouti right now too. Have you followed this? I have not so we've got eight guys that we grabbed Every one of them has been convicted of either murder or armed robbery. Oh, I did hear about this and they're being held at the at the joint U.S. Chinese drone base in Djibouti Camp lemon yay, I've been there. It's the it's like out of the twilight zone um And we're find Djibouti on a map. I need to see I can't picture where the hell Djibouti is It's a little teeny tiny right in the horn on the on the on the horn about yeah, just at the top of the horn so um The trumpet administration wants to expel them to south Sudan Hell on earth Literally the poorest and most war-torn country on the planet None of these guys are from south Sudan But the Supreme Court said last week. There's Djibouti. Zumout. Okay. Yeah, that's where I thought it was Right next to yay, man. Yep 16 miles right across the Babal Mandeb That's where the Houthis are Are rocketing ships right oh really God Yep, so these dudes where are they originally from? They're from all over Africa They're from all over Africa none of them are from south Sudan and and who caught them CIA? No, well, it's unclear maybe okay. Yeah, could be CIA could be FBI You want to take a minute Djibouti and send them to Sudan. Yeah, why? What what what what they're living on the base right now in oh on our base. Yeah Okay, we just want to get rid of them I mean they'll they'll likely starve to death in two or three weeks in south Sudan like everybody else is right Yeah, yeah, the crazy thing about the the ice stuff is like so my friend I have a good friend who has a big concrete construction company and He had all his Mexican like his co-compelling Mexicans basically all the workers even like the the project managers the supervisors all the top guys are Mexicans that they have like their crews or whatever and Like he knows that they're trying to raid construction sites and stuff So he's for fucking power. Oh, yeah, I don't put him out of business One of his guys got pulled over and got popped one of his big top guys and then they put him in a holding facility This dude just had a kid three weeks ago. So he's got as like wife who's in her mid-20s and her newborn who like They're they're some of his co-workers that worked with him at the construction company are like helping her like They're like giving her money to help like feed the kid or whatever, but the guys just like I think he's waiting. I don't know how long he's gonna be in this like detention facility before they figure out what to do And I don't know like I don't know what his options are. I don't know like I heard that you can elect to just be deported Yes, or you can stay there. It's called a self deportation But I don't know if he's allowed to take his his wife and kids with him or whatever But so what my buddy did now is he's hired all of his Mexicans to have personal drivers Who are legal? So now like if they get pulled over the cops can't ask for their IDs Right so so like he's like protecting himself But it's crazy. He's paranoid. It's heads on a swivel all the time Because he's worried about this stuff happening and these aren't these are bad guys. No, no these dudes literally Their biggest concern is can they work Sunday too Like they want to work eight days a week It's all they care about is fucking working and like paying for their families or whatever Whatever they're doing with their money But like these guys aren't committing crimes they aren't freaking kidnapping people. They aren't bad people And like there's got to be some sort of like middle ground there where you if you have if you are my friend who owns that Company and you have a bunch of illegals working for you He's not underpaying them by any means like you would pay them the same price you would pay you some white dude But they work harder. Yes, they work more Yes, so like can't you figure out a way to make those people who own those companies like responsible for them somehow you know in in The six or eight months before the 9-eleven attacks the Bush administration had negotiated a deal with the Mexican government to change the status of Undocumented workers in the United States Mexican workers specifically where they would be given nine month work visas They would have to pay federal income taxes At the end of the nine month visa, they would go back to Mexico for three months and reapply for the following year So they could work nine months a year in the United States and then Mexico three months The only reason why that wasn't ratified was that 9-eleven hit and it went out the window That was the closest that we've ever come to solving this problem That's another thing like the taxes and it's not amnesty because there's no path to citizenship You want to work picking vegetables god bless there's no Americans don't want no path right you have to go go back But if the idea is and I agree with you 1,000 percent these guys will work harder than any American We've ever met yeah to support their family in many cases extended families back home Mm-hmm and so they'll take whatever opportunity they can get if they can be legalized Like this so they don't have to constantly look over their shoulders It's better for all of us. Mm-hmm. So is it and I'm I'm I don't know how it works But if you are if you do own a company and you are paying a bunch of illegal guys to work do it's a federal do you pay money to the table? In most you can't just you can't write them they can't get a W. They don't have yeah, they don't have W. And I say that's actually security numbers right right So everybody's in trouble right? Everybody's in trouble right? Yeah, there's got yeah There's got to be some sort of loophole where like you can if they are illegal You can figure out a way to take to tax them and give them some sort of like that makes a lot of sense Yeah Because you need that labor Definitely we need it and this is not incentivized for people people are going to college to work construction They aren't gonna go there are going to college to learn Ask any young guy they don't want to learn trade work. No, you know if you look at things like Like chicken and pork processing plants no Americans work there That is really hard work and they're all Latin Americans go to any restaurant in New York None of the the kitchen workers right our Americans maybe the chef is But everybody else for whatever reason they tend to be Ecuadorian I mean the whole country's economy is going to just grind to a whole yeah is ice rating no boo in Los Angeles exactly Exactly Oh god, it's crazy. This man We're living in the twilight zone mr. Keri Aku and I'm not liking it very much Well, thanks for coming on and It's for having me explaining all this stuff to me. It's always great to see you. Yeah. Always very happy of course and You just started a new podcast on YouTube. Yeah, I've got I've got two one by myself is called deep pro I'm sorry. It's called deep focus with John Keri Aku We get down in the weeds on on these issues. The other one is with my friend Ted Raw who was He was the editorial cartoonist at the LA Times for more than 20 years two-time Pulitzer Finalist that one is called deep program And then no more sputnik radio no more sputnik radio no more team television There we go deep focus. That's awesome. Yeah, that's not us. I had to Ted and I had Jake Tapper last week and We have the Iranian like this is Mohammed. Mironi He was a member of the Iranian nuclear negotiating team. Oh really? Yeah, he was good Got a lot of different this is perfect for you because you have all these people that you've been around in your whole career You know the act for the most part there my friends. Yeah Funny enough you got to get the um the king of not Bahrain him too, but the other guy the king of the guy who lives in New Jersey and goes to the shopping malls Jordan the king of Jordan. What are your friends with him? No, but no, maybe it's the wrong country. I'm thinking of the wrong country country The the Shah of Iran lives in Potomac, Maryland the Shah Yeah, yeah Although he was just in Jerusalem On his knees in front of the Israelis. Oh my god. Yeah, oh he'll be popular in Tehran Yeah, that's amazing. Yeah, the crown prince about rain and I went to college together. We still text each other really. Yeah But he's he's too important to come on, you know john's podcast You got to get Sasha Baron Cohen on there. I thought about that. All right john. Thank you so much man We'll link all yourself below. Thank you We have some patreon questions for you. Okay. Our patreon's people asked you some questions So we'll go do those we'll wrap up the podcast now for YouTube. Thanks again. It's always super enlightening. Thanks for time Can everybody