Just in case you were a little confused about how the justice system works and who the laws apply to, last year Hunter Biden blew off a congressional subpoena. Hunter Biden, the president and son, he decided he didn't want to testify before Congress and he didn't have to. Then this year January 2024 he showed up at a congressional hearing, but then a member of Congress appeared to speak and Hunter Biden as an expression of contempt for that member and for Congress itself just walked out. What happened to Hunter Biden? Well, he's still selling his childish artwork for hundreds of thousands of dollars of peace to Democratic donors who are reaping the benefits of that. You can be certain that will donation to the Hunter Biden lifestyle fund. So that's Hunter Biden's experience for justice system. Now Peter Navarro, who is a college professor for years and not especially political, president, went up in the Trump administration as a trade official trying to narrow the trade gap between the United States and China. He got caught up for reasons that were never clear in the January 6th committee. The fake partisan committee run effectively by Dick Cheney's daughter that we now know did nothing to bring the truth to light about January 6th, but abetted a cover up of what actually happened that day. And yes, it was a setup and that's not a conspiracy theory. That's an obvious conclusion based on the now emerged facts. So Peter Navarro did not testify before that quote, committee. What happened to him? Well, Peter Navarro was just sentenced to four months in prison for that dastardly act, defying a congressional subpoena by the fake committee. Okay. So you would think in a functioning country where people had a commitment not just to party but to principle and in living together peacefully, maybe for the next hundred years or so, people would be standing up for Peter Navarro. No. Here's one of the dumbest people ever to serve the United States Senate, Claire McCaskill of Missouri, celebrating that sentence on MSNBC Watch. Well, you know, as a person, I wish it was four years instead of four months, but it is always heartening to see the system work and to see someone who has more in a suit and tie to work forever and has been in the halls of power, be held accountable for refusing, you know, I wish more people had been charged with contempt of Congress. I understand why they weren't, but Congress has to work on oversight. He should do four years in prison, four years until he's dead. Where they told us had female leaders are going to be more compassionate, empathetic and kinder. A lot of them turned out to be bloodthirsty and punitive. Maybe we should reassess that assumption. But in any case, Peter Navarro is all things being equal headed to prison very soon for the crime of not obeying Dick Cheney's daughter. We thought we would talk to him before that happens. He joins us now. Peter Navarro, thank you so much for coming on. Tucker, so much appreciate this time. The best way folks out there in Tucker's America can help me right now is to go to my legal defense fund, givesendgo.com forward slash Navarro that's givesendgo.com forward slash Navarro. I've already had to lay out them over half a million dollars in legal fees for the lower court that found me guilty of this charge. But Tucker, the good news here is that this is just going to be in my hope and judgment a landmark constitutional case on the constitutional separation of powers and the use of executive privilege as a tool of sound presidential decision making. The remarkable thing. Hold on, wait, wait, wait. Peter, for one second, first of all, I could not support you more vehemently. I think you're being railroaded for political reasons. I think it's very obvious to any reasonable person watching this whether that person voted for Trump or likes you or not. But I don't think we're at the stage of regime collapse where constitutional precedents maybe are the operative question. I think it's about force and they're trying to put you in prison because they don't like you and they want to send a message to others that if Trump gets elected don't serve that administration you want to like Peter Navarro spending your 70s in jail. So my question to you is and this has got to be obvious to you if they I think it's 57 or so days from now they can put you in prison no matter what you say whether it's appealed or not. Yes. If order to go to prison why would you comply with that? Like at certain point do you just say to yourself this is all fake it's not our system you're upholding it's our system you're destroying and I'm not going to participate in it. No, I look. I obey the law. I obey the law when I feel the respondent congressional subpoena because the law tucker for more than 50 years across Democrat and Republican and the president sees has been that senior White House officials like me alter egos of the president shall not and cannot and legally cannot be compelled to testify before Congress and and the reason is very simple is because executive privilege is something that goes right back. George Washington our first president who understood that confidential communications within the White House or critical to affected decision making that something that's a pre-court has long recognized and that's something that the Pelosi Congress with the J6 committee trampled all over. But you're kind of making my point army though aren't you we don't want aren't you making a point for me which is everybody knows that it's long established air colder turn is your blue off of congressional subpoena from a real committed this is January 6th whatever that body was. Was not a real committee it was a cover up operation that committed crimes okay so they didn't have the moral authority to tell anybody to do anything they should be charged but. Their president was very very clear you're not the first White House officials say you can subpoena me so they knew that when they. Sentenced you to prison so they don't care about the law only you care about the law so isn't it kind of asymmetrical here. Well it certainly a sermanical they have the power and it's it's my firm belief as is yours that we live in a world where the justice system has indeed. been weaponized they mean look they want to put Donald Trump in prison there's no question about that I'm I'm the appetizer as it were the chum. In the water and we do have an election going on it's very important to get him elected but look this issue from a legal point of view is is interesting talker. Because I literally am the first person ever in this republic to ever be actually charged all the other people you mentioned never got charged so there's no what they call. The central legal question is whether people like me can be compelled to testify for for for Congress the law is not settled on that there's no the law is not settled on questions like what's the burden of Congress. To get the information and see they're not supposed to have investigations the punish people they're supposed to see the information among one of the remarkable things Tucker. That from the outset I said look president has invoked executive privilege which he undeniably did. It's not my privilege by law to wave and that I'm more than happy to comply with you Sabine if you just call the president. And ask him to weigh the privilege you know what not one single phone call either either from the j six people or the government. And instead the government instead this is your two tier system instead of like calling me and saying okay we got an indictment please peacefully surrender like you do with everybody else they put me in leg arms leg iron. We're seeing talk as they get to Roger stones and a lot of other people that you. Yes. And that's one of my questions.