Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Stop it. How are you? I'm good. It's good. It's really exciting to be here. And right before we got rolling, I was mentioning, I tweeted back in April. We'd love to go on Joe Rogan's podcast at some point. Is that when the documentary series came out in April? Yeah. So it premiered in March, like end of March. And then it was rolled out in two episodes per weekend installments. So it took three weeks for the whole thing to release. And it was actually really exciting because you had the audience reacting in real time. And then there'd be a week to see, OK, well, how is the community receiving this? How is the mainstream community? The community. You really said that? Yeah. Is that what they call themselves? I mean, I have so much of this, like, lexicon. Now that I can't avoid, it's just, I think at the beginning of the series, like it seeps into your thoughts, it really does. Right. Clinton body count. Right. Clinton body count. Yeah. Can't see that without thinking to you. Right. Impossible. Just a number. Yeah. Well, it was really well done. I just want to say. You did a fantastic job. It's really excellent. Thank you. And it's such a compelling subject. And it opens up so many conversations on censorship, like what is the truth? And how important is it to know what's real and what's not real? It's such a complex and unusual conversation that we have to have today about misinformation, propaganda, and this whole Q thing, which is just like, it to me embodies the perfect example of what's like worst case scenario. If someone just started making up some wild shit, we assume making up wild shit online. It's safe assumption. And got an enormous group of people to go along with it. And then they wind up attacking capital. I mean, when they attacked the Capitol building, when they stormed the Capitol building, and you realize like, oh my god, this is literally like the wings of the butterfly create the storm. And then here it is like a thing that looked preposterous just a couple of years ago when people are talking about all the Q drops and all this like, oh, the people that I knew that are in the Q and on. Jamie pointed out earlier that a lot of them were the same people that are in the flat earth. It's the same sort of folks, like kind of without, you know, uncharitable terms, unsphisticated, gullible, and into secrets, into finding out secrets. I mean, I would say that in my experience, there weren't too many QAnons who were also big flat earth or maybe they had been upset that aside a little bit. But you see in episode one, Liz Croaken, who is a big QTuber, big sort of celebrity, in terms of like analyzing Q drops and talking about the meaning, you know, she, I bring that up to her. I'm like, well, what about flat earth? She's like, you know, tell me, nothing's too crazy, right? You know, and this is the thing about Q. It's like Q, and I think a lot of people were attracted to this premise because it feeds correctly into this notion that we should be skeptical of things was question everything, question everything, you know, question whether or not the earth is flat, question whether or not, you know, and in the beginning, that included question Q. And that faded away pretty quickly, you know, a few months into QAnon, you could question anything as long as it, you didn't question Q. And it was in, you jumped right to January 6th, right, sort of the finish line. You know, when I think of Jansix, like I don't think, I don't think it would have happened without QAnon. I also don't think it happened solely because of QAnon, right? There were a lot of forces that coalesced that day. Yeah, I would agree with you, 100%. I think it's such a strange time, you know, where people are learning how to use social media and then we're also where that social media is heavily manipulated by foreign countries. That there, you know, I'm sure you're aware of the internet research agency and Russia, the whole essentially a troll farm that's designed to fuck with us and very successfully and Renee Dorestas highlighted this really well. And it was really interesting to talk to her and find out how deep the rabbit hole goes to this stuff. And hundreds and hundreds of thousands of memes, often hilarious memes that get shared on social media created by Russia. I mean, can you imagine getting that job in Russia where it's like your job will be to be a meme Smith. Your job is make funny with the MIDI components. Good luck. Yeah, like what do you start? Yeah, that was one of the questions I've had when you're looking at something like HN, now a coon where Q had been posting. And we talk about free speech on those platforms and this idea that anyone can post whatever they want within sort of the limits of free speech, right? Like there are certain things which are illegal. But does that protect people who are abroad as well? You know, free speech traditionally in America would protect American citizens. But in the case of the internet, the internet is global. So that means that you can have actors in South Africa or in Russia posting on these sites, protect it under the same premise as what Americans are accustomed to and able to use speech against America in certain instances. So what you're describing, you know, these kind of memes, myths and Russia are in some ways using free speech against us, right? I guess, yeah, I mean, I guess. I think what it's doing, this is an odd idea. But I think what it's doing is it's forcing us to adapt and evolve our ability to detect, to detect bullshit. And it's doing it almost like in immune system response. Like what we're reacting to and what we're recognizing from all this stuff was like, oh, we didn't know what this was. And this is resulted in this riot, whatever you wanna call the Capitol Hill attack. And now we're looking at more censorship on social media. We're looking at, you know, like them trying to bat down the hatches and figure out how to handle something like QAnon or the people that were allegedly promoting these ideas. A lot of them that are banned from social media, the stuff that you highlighted in your show. We have to figure out what's true and what's not true. And so there's been some sort of draconian measures that have been suggested, you know, like hiring some sort of a team that goes over social media and make sure that everything is according to what they deem to be correct or incorrect, which obviously is subject to biases. And we're very aware that that's going on today, that there's a lot of that going on today. Where the necessarily a truth doesn't, like the Hunter Biden laptop story's a great example of that, right? Like the social media platforms, they censored news from the New York Post, one of the oldest newspapers in America, on the Hunter Biden laptop story, because they decided that somehow another, it was propaganda or somehow or another, it was not good to get that information. But it was news, it was real news, it was a real story, and they decided it was too close to the election. This could hurt Biden, we don't want Trump to win. So you're dealing with biases. This is not just like simply, here's information that we know to be true or here's information that we know to be alive, we're gonna stop that from getting through, no, they knew it to be true, but they decided to stop it because it wasn't convenient or it didn't fit the narrative they were trying to promote. Right, it's very, and how do you find a neutral arbiter of the truth? Right, right. If you are going to entrust someone with that responsibility, and I think that it's just an incredibly slippery slope. Incredibly slippery. And what these big tech companies have suggested is that, well maybe we don't use humans, maybe we use algorithms, right? To moderate everything. And the algorithms had, in many ways, had bolstered something like Q, because they're basically sociopathic when it comes to just trying to drive attention as much as possible. So now they can kind of invert those algorithms and punish those who talk about that kind of content. And oftentimes, even if their goal was just to prevent, I don't know, conversation around Q and on because they consider it to be problematic, what else gets swept up with that? I mean, I saw a lot of people who were reporting on Q and on maybe coming from the side of critiquing it. Their videos were being wiped out. People who were documenting January the 6th, their content was being wiped out. People who were critical of Q and on, they had websites that were sort of on the other side. That was being wiped out as well. And that's because, of course, it's a, it's sort of this blunt force that an algorithm wields. So people even, people that were analyzing the move and from a critical standpoint, people who are looking at like how ridiculous this is, look at this, they had their channels wiped out as well. Yes. So any content on Q and on, they just want to erase it from the internet, essentially. That seemed to be the initial response. Yeah. So strange that it all moved together and sank. I mean, I think that if I did not have, HBO and my sales with this project, it wouldn't have seen the light of day. Really? Well, can we try to put it on YouTube, you think? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Even when we, so when we first released the series, there was, there was some articles floating around, like, oh, maybe this is going to make it things worse. If I typed in Q into the storm into YouTube, it wouldn't auto-populate at a certain point. It started out auto-populating and then that went away. So yeah, I wouldn't feel confident at all that if we didn't have a gorilla in our corner, that this story that revealed ultimately who was behind Q and on would have been seen, would have been able to find an audience. And that shot out to HBO. Yeah, shout out to HBO. I mean, they really had my backside. They've been amazing for decades. You really think about it. I mean, they're the people that when Bill Mars show political incorrect, I pulled off of, what was it on the ABC? Forget? Yeah, not sure. Network television, they immediately took it, brought it over, turned it into real time, and made it even better. It was uncensored now. And in my opinion, real time with Bill Mars probably one of the very best social commentary shows and comedy shows that really doesn't pull any punches on any network ever. You wanna hear something fucking crazy? So yes, just yesterday, I was talking with someone who's helping distribute the film. And I said, well, what about Amazon? Are we gonna be able to put it out on Amazon internationally? And they said, well, as of the last year, they've stopped taking documentaries. All documentaries. What? You cannot publish a documentary. What? On their platform. And the reason was because that I was told is because, you know, there was all this conspiracy flatter, stuff, and they were getting blowback. That eventually they said, we don't wanna have to decide what we publish and what we don't, what's real and what's not. We're just not gonna publish anything. And the example they gave me that they couldn't get published was the cove. I don't know if you saw that documentary. The dawn of the dawn of the dawn of the dawn of the dawn. The dawn of the dawn of the dawn of the dawn of the dawn. It won an Oscar. Yeah. And just to check it, I looked it up and sure enough, the cove wasn't available on Amazon. So those who said that there wouldn't be a slow creep of censorship, kind of starting with things that I think everybody agrees should be. They wouldn't like to be in society. Things like the daily storm or maybe a lot of people don't want a chance. There's a progression until you end up. It seems like something like, you know, the cove can't find an audience on a major platform. And I don't wanna conflate government censorship of the corporate censorship too much. However, in a lot of ways, it does feel like the government has passed the buck to these corporations to do what they legally can't. Which I think is the same thing we saw the government do with privacy, right? Like they wouldn't have been able to get all of this data from us directly. But if you give it to a Facebook or a Twitter, it's very easy for the government to then go and get access to that information. So I think what we saw happen with the fourth amendment we're now seeing happen with the first amendment. Where they can say, well, look, we couldn't restrict conversation around certain topics. We couldn't directly decide what's true or what's not. We're gonna put that in the hands of these companies. And of course, these companies have intimate relationships with many members of the government. There's a revolving door there. So when people wanna talk about what limiting what we can say online or limiting disinformation to other things, I think that it's almost the wrong place to start. I think we have to go back to the privacy issues. And I actually think if we had not let privacy be eroded online, we wouldn't be having this debate. Because if these gigantic companies hadn't collected thousands of data points on us, didn't know our fears, our desires. If they hadn't built these psychometric profiles, they wouldn't have been able to manipulate us, use these algorithms to drive us into echo chambers, which have really created these disparate realities. And now these disparate realities can't agree necessarily on a set of facts. Sometimes you're considered, sometimes people will be ostracized or even to talking to somebody from the quote unquote other side, right? And so now there's this conversation about what should be allowed to be set online. And I think that that's simply a byproduct of a privacy having been eroded. So if I was to do anything about these issues, I would start by restoring rights. I would go back and say, all right, well how do we get ownership and privacy rights online when it comes to our personal data? Let's start there before we start going after the speech itself. Do you think that the algorithms are designed to do this? Or do you think that it's just a function of human nature that we tend to gravitate towards things at outrage us and then huddle up together in echo chambers? That this is just a natural tribal behavior. And that what the algorithms do is essentially just highlight what we're really interested in. They magnified in a feedback loop, right? So you're right to say that humans do have these trades. You know, and I haven't designed the algorithms, but I've also talked to people who have and you know, a lot of, they don't even understand how they work at a certain point. Like they're off to the races. Have you seen the social dilemma? Yeah. Yeah. Would you think about that? It's great. Yeah. Yeah. And scary too. The conclusions that they draw. Oh, certainly. I mean, yeah, I made a film about eight years ago called terms and conditions may apply. You know, and that came out right before the Edward Snowden revelations. You know, when it came out, the initial response was like, oh, this is maybe conspiratorial. Surely the government doesn't have this much insight into our behavior and access to our devices and our personal information. And then the Snowden revelations came out. And then it was like, oh, well, maybe the series didn't go far enough. You know, and I, and back then we had talked about the idea of how is technology influencing us? How is it changing us, manipulating us? And it didn't feel like that was the biggest story at the time. And this question of privacy and how our rights are being eroded through these agreements that nobody ever really reads. And you could find all kinds of juicy tidbits hidden in there in terms of what the companies were actually doing and kind of revealing this unholy collusion between the government and big tech. But at the time people would often say, well, what's the cost? What's the big deal if they're mining my personal data to serve me with ads? And I'd say that the environment we find ourselves in now is the cost. Do you do anything to personally protect your data? Do you like use DuckDuckGo for searches and things on those lines? You've brave as a browser? Like, do you do that stuff? All that. Yeah. Yeah. You signal VPNs. Yeah. VPNs. I mean, I do my best. If a government actor really wants to get at you, they're going to be able to. Yeah. I mean, you saw the NSO clicklists spyware. Oh, right. Yeah. I mean, if there's a zero day that allows you to get access to a microphone and everything that someone's doing on their phone without them even having to click on a link, it's game over. Of course, governments will abuse that. Yeah. And probably are right now. Probably are right now. Yeah. Where's there? Where are phones at? Right there. Yeah. It's interesting because you would think that there would be a market for a platform that becomes bulletproof. And there have been some Linux based cell phone operating system phones that they sell like the biophone. You get a Google phone, they de-Google it and put different software on it and stuff. But I'm not sure if that's like, if you're diluting yourself into believing that you're actually protected with that stuff where you're actually protected. I would think they could work around all those things, especially something that's, I mean, it's essentially like open source, right? Like if it's a Linux based operating system, there's some super geniuses out there. I'm sure they could be able to hack into that. Yeah. I mean, I think with stuff like signal, you're just protecting yourself as best you can. Right. You use something that's end in encrypted. You're doing better than 99% of people who are out there. You're making somebody really have to work to get access to your stuff. And if you're using a VPN and you're using DuckDuck. Go. Then you're minimizing your digital footprint. And you're not as, you're not worth as much of these companies and they're not able to manipulate you, I guess, in the same way through these algos. But let me ask you this. I mean, what would you do about the algorithm problem? Because on the one hand, algorithms are necessary for something like a search engine. On the other hand, they drive the most sensational content, things like QAnon. And I think have largely facilitated the situation we find ourselves in now. It's a really interesting question. Because on one hand, for me, when I go to my YouTube page, it highlights the things that I'm interested in. And when I go to YouTube in general, I'm interested in entertainment. I mean, that's all I get. I mean, I have a very boring YouTube page. If you go to it, there's a few political talk shows that I listen to, like breaking points. And Jimmy Dore and Kyle Kolynsky and a few other folks. And then there's a lot of like billiard's matches and moyteiffites. Like that's like most of my YouTube. So it's boring. You know, it's like for the average person, there's not, it's not suggesting anything to me that it's going to lead me down to rabbit holes. Or because I don't use it for that. I use YouTube, like, oh, I got 10 minutes to kill. Let me watch something stupid. You know, let me sit here and watch a pool match. That's what I do. But if you're a person that is, and I've been that person in the past, it's like God in a conspiracy theories. And like is this real? Like who built the parents? And then the next thing you know, you're going to- we're not gonna swear. Right. Yeah. And you're going down this rabbit hole and then that becomes your fucking life. Like one of the things that to me was so fascinating about your documentary series was seeing into the lives of these people that were utterly obsessed with these cute drops. And it becomes a thing that gives life meaning. When, you know, for lack of better terms, a lot of those folks in that documentary are misfits. Like a lot of the people are a little goofy. They're, you know, the way they talk about things and think about things as a little goofy. And when QAnon came along, it gave them something to latch onto that was bigger than them. They're a part of a movement. And you see that same sort of thinking, that same sort of mental pattern in people that get obsessed with UFOs. You see it in people that get obsessed with political dogma. You see it in a lot of things. They become a part of a movement that's far bigger than them. It's one of the reasons why people get so invested in political candidates and political campaigns. It's not necessarily that they're looking at the big picture objectively and they think that this is, this, this politician's gonna be better for their lives. It's gonna, they're gonna highlight, you know, problems that we have that are, you know, problems that we have within equality or problems that we have with laws. But mostly they want their team to win. You know, there's a lot of that with a lot of people. They connect ideologically with a team. And then they get very tribal. And you see, that was a thing that I saw in that documentary. I'm like, this is a pattern of human behavior. And it's the QAnon thing just locked into it because it was secretive. It was interesting. The idea that Trump had this insider, and this insider was like dropping all this information that it was all going down. In Trump, we had this guy that was gonna clean up the swamp. He was gonna find those people that were eating babies and, you know, then- Yeah, and it was a narrative that, that contradicted what people were seeing in the mainstream media as well. And I think that a lot of those individuals who voted for Trump and also gravitated towards QAnon, they wanted to believe that there was this sort of secret story that was happening behind the scenes, you know, where all of these arrests were coming, where, you know, what they had hoped would happen would actually happen. And I think that, I think you, I mean, you hit a lot of the big points there. You know, and that's why QAnon is sort of part religion, part political movement, part interactive game. And it draws in people from the UFO crowd. I mean, it's a big tent for all kind of conspiratorial, fringe thinking or, you know, sort of strong religious convictions as well. I mean, you see a lot of people who are evangelicals who also believe in QAnon. There's a big overlap there. So I think it's individuals who are looking for community as well, looking for purpose. And, you know, I spent so much time with these guys, right? And I would get phone calls in the middle of the night or they just wanted to talk. A lot of times, because they just found me to be a grounding force in their lives. And so I would try to always take it when I could. And just, you know, give them a more neutral perspective versus what they might be hearing, especially some of the QTubers. So some of the QTubers, like they were going down these paths or these, you know, they were in these rabbit holes and then they would call you and go, hey man, is this, does this make any sense for my outline? Because they were wrapped up in it and they saw you as an objective sort of voice of reason? I think so. Yeah. I mean, I, you see an episode five, one of the craziest things in the series, which is that these ex-millguys, whether it's General Flynn or in this case, General Paul Valley or Major General. I see one's head of Major. Anyway, he, you know, he's using his ex-millguys to see his political agenda with these QTubers. So what happens is they suddenly have someone who is claiming to have this super secret intel reaching out to them and saying, you know, Osama bin Laden's actually still alive. Would you like to talk about that on your QTubestation? And they're going, well, you know, and they're useful because someone like in the case of Craig and his site, Justin Form, talking, he had like half a million or more followers. So they're a useful inflection point. So he would be someone who might call me up and be like, what do you think about this? Like why are they telling me this? You know, what's their motive? Should I, should I tell this to my audience? I'd be like, it didn't really matter what I said. He usually just ended telling it to his audience, but you know, I would try to talk him through it. Did you try to get ahold of General Kelly? I did not. I did not. The only general that I spoke to and it didn't, he didn't end up making an appearance in the series just because I wanted to keep the series focused primarily on the investigation into who was behind it was General Hayden. The Kelly one is interesting because when he's standing outside in front of his house with his family, he's like, where we go one, we go all and they're reading the whole speech, the QAnon speech. General Flynn. I'm sorry General Flynn. This would tell you, sorry Flynn. That was so interesting. I tried to get ahold of General Flynn and to do an interview with him. Of course I would have. He was, he was going through some legal troubles at the time. So he was not making as many public statements. He was not really giving interviews. So what you saw was his family, you know, Joe Flynn, Barbara Redgate, I think was her name. Some of these characters who were in his orbit family members who were kind of speaking on his behalf. Meanwhile General Flynn was messaging QTubers behind the scenes, bolstering this. And you got it, he had like $5 million in legal bills or some crazy amount of money that he had to spend in his legal bills. So he needed all the support he could get. And I had talked to some individuals who had helped him in his fundraising efforts from nearly the beginning at one of these Q conventions. You know, and they said internally within the family there was debate as to whether or not QAnon was helpful or harmful. But ultimately they all gravitated towards it. So do you think he was using it just as a fundraising thing? Like he was attaching himself to that because he knew that they would support his legal defense? I mean, I do think that that's a part of it, right? And you have an incredibly passionate base who see most of them believe that Flynn was Q, right? That was the predominant theorem on QAnon's. Because Flynn was so central to the Q narrative. He was a good guy in that narrative who warranted their support and was kind of working against the cabal. So he asked most QAnons and Flynn would be very high on their list of suspects for who might be behind it. And it would not be until the last year in the approach. He asked most QAnons and Flynn would be very high on their list of suspects for who might be behind it. And it would not be until the last year in the approach to the election that Flynn would openly embrace it. Doing what I think you were describing where he raises hand with the same fourth of July and they'll take the QO. Whoa. Yeah, that was wild to see an actual general do that. And then you saw all of the QAnons doing the same thing. So then they went on YouTube and started taking the same kind of oath. You saw how much power he had really generated vis-a-vis QAnon. What's even more wild though is that in Japan, there is a huge crowd that supports Flynn there. So there's like Q Army Flynn, Japan. And there's over 100,000 people in Japan who are giant Flynn supporters. There's like a religious offshoot in Japan. There's two different, two different big primary segments there of QAnon. But one of the biggest ones is really centered around Flynn. And that's always shocked me. I mean, imagine if there was a general in Japan who had a big following in the States. Then you managed to do that through four-channel H.A. and Riku or whatever. Well, that was another aspect that I thought was odd is that how people in other countries like the guy from South Africa are so into American politics. Like it's hard to try to get their perspective. Like I would imagine that it's just very different being there and looking at us. I think America is such a bizarre anomaly. But America has so much influence on the world policy that if you want to influence world policy, you influence America. But it's so, it is really unusual that we don't, we barely know who the fuck the Prime Minister of Canada is. You know, right? We know very little about Canadian politics. We know true dough, right? Handsome guys, he and my TV, a lot of Canadians hate them. That's what we know. You know, I mean, we really don't know anything about all the other people. We knew about that guy. What was his name? The one who was the mayor of Toronto who was out of his funk forward. Remember that guy? I do remember it. He was crazy. Yeah, it just requires a big splashy story. Yeah, so you got to be in the table or something that something something big has to happen. But that guy in South Africa was fully invested in American politics. Oh, I mean, living and breathing in a huge conspiracy theorist too. I mean, he's also my sort of prime suspect for the original cue. Really? Yeah. Interesting. I mean, I don't say it in the series because I couldn't prove it definitively. And I didn't want to, I didn't want to, there are, it is possible that there are, I've sort of two other theories for whom they have started it. But he's the, he's the predominant one. Well, he was so adamant that the second cue wasn't too. And I was like, hmm, how does he know that? Like why does he think that? Why is he so convinced? I mean, if he doesn't have access to like raw, like some, some data points, if he doesn't have access to like whatever it is, like the, the location or something, the ISP, like what the IP address rather like what, what is, what's his reasoning for saying definitively to Ron Watkins, you know that's not cue. Right. What was that? How does he know? Right. How is he so sure? Based on a couple of posts, you know, style that suddenly cue is posting from a static IP as opposed to a, a dynamic or changing IP? Yeah. How, how could he be so sure just based on that? I mean, there's a lot of reasons to think that that Paul would have been running it up until that point. And there's a lot of reasons to think why code monkey or slash Ron Watkins would have taken it from him at that point. I mean, he was posing a real threat to the, you know, quote unquote operation. He, he just appeared on Alex Jones. So this is late December 2017, cues been actively posting for about two months at this point. Who would just appear on Alex Jones, Ron? So Ron did not appear anywhere. You know, the first recorded interview that I know of that he gave was with me, you know, a year and a half or so or a year later. This is when cue kind of gets its first, I consider Alex Jones to almost be mainstream. He has a big enough audience, right? You know, he, it brings it out to a new bigger audience. It escapes the chance through Alex Jones. And this happens in late December 2017. And Colby Rogers and Paul Ferber both appear on his show. This is when Alex Jones is not banned from social media either. Correct. So he's still got to reach. Yeah, he's got to reach at this point. So Jerome Coracy, who had been talking about cue drops sort of famed conspiracy theorists responsible for the largely responsible for the, the brother, brother movement thing around Obama, Swift boat with John Kerry. You know, he's, he's been doing this political operative stuff for years. He brings it to Alex Jones and Alex Jones brings these two guys on his show late December. It's Paul Ferber and Coleman Rogers. Um, you know, Coleman Rogers would go on to start a 24 hour news channel devoted to cue. Paul Ferber, you know, was running the board that cue was posting on. And very suspicious. Very suspicious, you know, for some reason cue leaves for Chan and late November, 2017 and jumps over to, to choose his Paul Ferber's board on a chance for some reason. You know, like, there were many play, why didn't you create a tone board? Why didn't you why that board and was he on Paul Ferber's board on four chance? Did Paul Ferber have a board on? No, so, um, you know, cue was largely posting on pole on four chance. So they didn't have control. There was no, yeah, it's like, impolitically incorrect. Is it POL? POL. Yeah. And that's where you usually pull on four channel H and is where you see the, the, the most race you can anti-Semitic white supremacist stuff. If you're going to see that it's there and you can never really tell when you're on that, that board if people are being ironic or posted. Right. You can't really tell. But anyway, that's, that's, you know, that's the board that when, these chain, when the chance get reported on usually they're, they're pulling screenshots from that. So cue was posting there and, and people on four channel were like, this is a fucking larp, stop it. What is the first post? They were, they were, they didn't like cue very much. They thought it was bullshit. They thought it was bullshit. Yeah. And in fact, actually, um, I brought a chart, but you can actually see that, um, cue was the the amount of times that people were calling cue a larp on four channel was increasing. Um, almost exponentially at the very end up until, uh, cue decides, I'm, I'm out of here. You can see, and then that right at the end there, that's when cue jumpship and goes to, goes over to H and now they would also say that, um, you know, cue had been banned on four channel and that would also motivated the leap. But I do think that it's interesting that, uh, was it banned on four channel? So my understanding is that the trip code itself, like cue is no longer able to post using, I think using the trip on, on the trip code. Explain that. So it's, it's just a cryptographic function that allows someone to type in a password, um, a simple password. It's eight characters long. Um, and they will produce a code and that's called a trip code. And this is a way of anonymous or pseudo anonymously kind of identifying yourself. So if I have the password, cues password, a character or so password, type it in, but, but, but, but, but it's going to produce a code and that code will appear on every post, um, that the password is entered for. So this is how people knew the cue is posting. And in fact, the first 127 posts didn't have a trip code. So there was no way to even know who cue was in the beginning, right? The in fact, the anons had to go back and review all the, the old posts just to see like, okay, which ones were cute, which ones weren't. So like the first 127 drops, like anybody could have been coming in like larping is cute. It's going to jumping in trying to write in this style. And the idea of cue hadn't even been established yet. I mean, cue itself. Yeah, anybody, any asshole on it. Like you could have, of course. Yeah, you could have done it. Anybody could have done it. Paul Furber could have been there doing it sometimes, but someone else could jump in, you know, kind of put on the hat. And lots of people were trying to do that in the beginning. So like when you post there, you don't have like a screen name. No, there's no login. So anybody can post without having to log in. That's the sort of, that's what makes the chance really unique. There's also no algorithms on the chance. But it's, it's, if you're using a VPN, which, for a chance makes that very difficult, a chance less so. Or a kun. Now, if you go there and you, you know, you wanted a ship post and you don't want to have it trace back to you, you can do that. So that's why people, you know, it gives them this true sense of anonymity without having, you know, all of their posts be logged and associated with their IP. How does that establish a community though? Because like when people do have like, whether it's a Twitter or whatever, people find people based on their screen names. Well, it's more of a culture. And I think that those who are heavy chain users would, they would, they would, the term is fame fagging. That's what they would say. Where people use a name like Q, to, you know, to bring more notoriety. You know, they want, in their minds like the best ideas rise to the top. So they don't want to, they don't want to have, they don't want to give, they don't want to have the, I guess the power that's associated with identity. And that's part of why they were so annoyed when Coleman Rogers and Paul Furber went on the Alex Jones show because they were, you know, doing what, Chan users would call fame fagging at that point. So, and that's a term they'd love to throw around on the chance. So if you had a screen and Q was doing that too. So Q by using a trip code would, would have been, you know, that, that term I, they threw out. It's, when Q started posting, Q was not known as Q at the time. Q was just a random anon, writing stuff. And it wasn't until... No, there was no Q at all in the beginning. So that was that concept wasn't even developed yet. And it was not until drop, I believe. It was like, I have, I have it, maybe I brought it with me, but it's like drop, let me look this up. I don't want to get it wrong. Drop 34. A drop 34, that's the first time we see Q clearance patriot. And so, you know, some anon just signs off Q clearance patriot. And the larp kind of continues. And so it's almost like an improv game where people are jumping in and they're like, oh, what's the story that we're developing? Let me try to add something new to the story. You know, drop, it's not until drop 61 that you see the idea of Q. Signing off is a Q. So the first, you know, 60 or so drops, that's not even a thing. And it's not until drop 128 that Q signs off using a trip code. So at that point, one individual locked it down with a password and then started, you know, writing from there. So it's possible that that password could have been shared between multiple people. You know, that was the story that Q told that, you know, that there was a whole kind of like less than 10 people who had, who had knew the full truth about Q, right? And this is something I'd hear a lot of Q-ons. So yeah, you, but most likely if you were just a old school troll on, on four channel H and you would just want it all to yourself. You're really going to share the password with other people because someone else could easily just change the trip code and lock you out. And you could also reveal that the two of you were in on this together if you have a falling out. Yeah. And we haven't seen that happen. Nobody has come forth and been like, okay, actually, here's what was going on behind the scenes. And you expect there to be some kind of a leak around, around all of this. And you asked about the community thing, you know, that term I used before, there's tons of terms like that and just, and a culture that exists on four channel H and that is very abrasive and is designed to keep normies out. And they try to keep normies out. They want to be as edgy as possible. You know, it's, it's a, it's a game of being most, who can be the most provocative in a lot of instances. So that, that's largely what drives those communities. And people will have friends on there and they'll become friends through discord channels and stuff like that. And sometimes you can have a handle like code monkey as a handle, right? People know him as code monkey. But the thing about being anonymous is anyone can larp as you. How do you know if you're talking to the same person or not? That is crazy, right? So anybody can jump in and pretend to be code monkey. Mm hmm. A fascinating aspect of this whole thing is that. In his case he has his own trip code and his trip code produces oad monkey. Uh huh. Okay. Yeah, but it's actually pretty easy to hack a trip code. You are with them for how long when you were doing this documentary series. I was with them. I mean, we were filming on and off for about three years. Over the course of that time, like runs story evolves or either he for a couple of years. Forget what he told you initially or he forgets the way he was sort of describing. Q and his idea of politics and what he feels about politics and towards the end. He's saying essentially he's been educating normies on how to do politics. And you'll like, hey, what the fuck? Like what is this like, but along the way, like part of it, the thing was analyzing the the difference between the original Q and then the queue once it goes to eight. Chan, right? Like there's a different style of communication. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, so the two points there. So when we get to the end, we can go into all the reasons that Ron is Q. Um, but if we're just talking about the early days, because I get a lot of people asking me, okay, well, who was the original Q? Um, what you were, what you were describing, uh, that style shift, that's a huge indicator. A, that there was only one person writing at one point and then another person writing at the next. And B, it tells us when the shift might have happened. So, you know, that shift that's most detectable is somewhere between the jump from four Chan to H and and the, a little bit after when Paul loses control of the board and believe the queue has become fake. And, uh, and that's the, you, the queue starts posting really, you know, obvious doctored photos. There's, um, you know, punctuation changes. You know, you can see that it's someone who's trying to emulate punctuation changes. Yeah. Like way more exclamation marks. You know, just, and stuff to be clear, it's this kind of punctuation I've seen Ron use on his telegram feed extensively since, since, you know, he was Buddhist, his winner in January. Is he leaning into it? Well, so I, after the series concluded, you know, Ron, Ron messaged me. Um, and that was the first time he had seen it. He was watching it alongside everybody else. And he messaged me and he said, Cullen, you know, I identify more with villains. Um, he said something to the effect of, um, I learned a long time ago that you have to make internet personalities larger than life because it makes for more entertaining existence. Um, I'm not queue, but I may as well lean into it. So he's all, he has the key continue to deny queue being queue, I think, um, in his mind for whatever liability might come with that. You know, he's, he's always, he has, he's like, he comes as close to admitting it without, without, you know, yeah, there's that moly, you know, without, without getting rid of the plausible deniability. Um, just, and I think he also assumes that all of our communications are being monitored. Right. So, uh, we should probably are, but I'm sure there. 100%. There's that moment where you, you're both laughing where he's laughing where he talks about that that he's been doing this 10 years anonymously, but, but he's not queue. And then, and then you laugh and then he laughs. He breaks first. Right. And then which is a huge tell as well. Like he realizes he just fucked up, but he realized he just slipped. Yeah. And, uh, yeah. And I have, uh, run has some tells, you know, clear his throat. Um, that's a big tell for when he's, when he's lying. Um, but, I mean, that was, uh, that was after three. He, you know, three years of this kind of cat and mouse thing. And he had always denied being, being really involved in the boards at all. Um, you know, he would kind of pretend not to know certain things about queue. Um, so this was a big, a big shift for him to come out and say, yeah, actually, like, I was leading digs on the boards, which is basically, um, finding and sort of curating. Um, the, the research or evolving theories or, um, you know, and this is what happens on poll. It's what happens on queue research is that they're going out and collecting whatever stuff they find on the internet and then, and, um, and saying, okay, you know, something about whom I add to you or something about, um, you know, nuclear subs. You might just get this sort of lengthy list and those are the digs and then they keep getting kind of recycled. And so what queue would really do was just look at all of that research, you know, kind of pick the, the best, you know, the most spicy stuff, ask a question about it or reference it in some way, shape or form. And then it would make those who were on those sites feel like they were part of the game. And they go, oh, we're on to something, you know, uh, this insider is, is, is looping us in. So to be queue, you didn't need to be a secret government insider. You just needed to know what the anons were already thinking. Hmm. You need to understand that culture and you need to spend a lot of time on the boards. You need to kind of be, you know, a, a ball. I was going to say king of those boards, but just an edge Lord to pull it off. And that's where that's where it's. That's what's interesting, right? It's like you could not be a deep government agent and some, some person who was in the White House, who had massive responsibilities, who was side by side with the president and have the knowledge of that community really almost wouldn't be possible. No. And, and you would be potentially criminally liable. Right. Like if they went into your White House laptop and he go, hey motherfucker, what are you doing on eight Chan? Like with, what's up with all these frogs with Hitler arm bands? You know, like, like guys, if you think it was, if you think it's really general Flynn, like, do you think he would tell you? Right. Or do you think he would at least have like layers of layers and layers between that? Like he, the only reason he would lean into it is because it, it can't come back to haunt him in that, in that, in that same way. And someone like Ron, you know, is what Q did illegal? Um, that's a big question. Right. Is it in sightment? Um, that's, that's a, that's a tough thing to prove. Right. You know, Q, pretending to be a government insider have with Q level clearance. Well, what, who, who were you pretending to be? Well, you're not only that, you're doing it again on a website that has a lot of frogs with swastikas. Yeah. You know, like what are we supposed to believe that's real? But at a certain point in time, it becomes very clear that there's a massive movement behind this. Like literally millions of people believe this. And they don't, some of them don't even go to those websites. Correct. Like there's individual websites that collect all the drops. Oh, sure. I mean, most, most of those who were following Q were not actually engaging with the site where Q was, Q was posting. Um, that, I would say that is most. Yeah, the, the vast majority. So what have actually really been to, been to HN and you, you see that moment in the, in the series, right? I talked to Liz Croakin, you know, who, who was a gossip columnist for the Tribune once upon a time. I think she, the real for like the star, the inquirer one of those rags as well. But, um, you know, she's like, there's, you know, child porn on those sites. That's news to me. Right. You know, it's like, well, it gets deleted because HN moderates just like every social media company has to moderate. Um, you know, they, I think they moderate sort of the, the absolute limit. Um, you know, but, uh, yeah, I mean, she will also didn't, didn't want to engage with that material. It's an uncomfortable place to be for a lot of people. Yeah. So that's part of why in the series I want to say, well, look, you need to, in order to understand Q, you have to understand the entire mentality of the world from which Q he was born. And in fact, the person who is the architect, I believe, behind all of this. And I think we proved to be the architect behind all of this is, um, you know, an edge lord of that space. It's the exact kind of person who would run that kind of campaign. And I don't think for a second, like no one could sit back. I'm going to create this massive global movement. Right. It's just, this is the one that kind of stuck. I mean, there have been other larks in the past, you know, other people who kind of come out and then these, these secret add-ons. I mean, before Q, there were a couple of other prototypes. I didn't mention this in the series, but, you know, there was like an FBI and on, I guess CIA and on, Omega, non, and mega or mega mega mega, this is just like a, someone in that case, it was supposed to be kind of like someone who had a good insight to Washington, DC politics and had good sources and was, was writing on the, writing on the channel and was supposed to be female. And, and yeah, this, this has happened kind of in the year running up to Q and, and tailed off at the beginning of 2018, this, this other kind of heightened and non, but you can go all the way back to the early 2000s with art bell and coast to coast. You know, there was a, there was somebody who pretended to be a time traveler from the future who was trying to prevent World of War three, John tighter. Oh, yeah, I remember that. Yeah. I didn't know, were you into it? No. No, but that was a fascinating one that the time traveler one. I had a comedian send me this like he was serious about it. Like, dude, I think this guy's for real. Like, I don't have to change my number. I think that's a fucking time traveler. But this, this eight-chan thing, what's fascinating to me is how many members does eight chant have or how many users does eight chant have? There are a lot of, there's what Ron would say. And then there's probably what the sort of truth is we did some analytics of the, of the traffic. You know, and it, it, it certainly went way up, thanks to Q. Way more, way more users until Q had become the predominant reason that people were visiting eight chant. Oh. You know, so we're talking, it looked like over two million, you know, we're actively engaging there during sort of the peak of Q might have been higher than that before. It was a little difficult because they got wiped from the web and a lot of the data around, you know, usage got wiped as well. You know, when Q was really booming right after the Epstein incident, you know, that was after Epstein's death. Yeah. Yeah. There was another shooting and then that, that, as you see in the series kind of triggers a series of events that causes eight chant to get pulled from the web. But the New Zealand shooting. So which one actually does the Christ Church might have been the way at that point? No. So, Poet was in April and then there was, Poet was another, it was a synagogue shooting. So there was, there was Christ Church and there was Poet and then there was another shooting that took place, El Paso in August. There's so many shooting, I can't keep track of all of them, which is its own story, I guess. But you know, in 2019, and that was the third one that became the point that there was a lot of public outcry, largely led by Fred Brennan, their opposition to wipe the site from the web. And I think the assumption was that people were being radicalized on each and that they were being exposed to dangerous ideas and this is what was leading them to these, to these shootings. One of the things I tried to point out actually in the series was that that's kind of a misguided assumption. You know, I think that we can look specifically at the New Zealand shooter, right? Lots of headlines were saying that the New Zealand shooter had done so because they were radicalized on each. But they had, I think they visited the Baltics, they donated to white supremacist organizations and they had, even in their own testimony, said that they'd been radicalized on YouTube. And it was like the YouTube algorithms that had drawn them to a lot of this material once upon a time years earlier. And so I think that's yet another example where you say, okay, well algorithms are driving people in a certain direction. I'm in a conversation about what kind of seat belts you might want to put on algorithms, but in the each hand doesn't have any. So it was interesting that it was almost like the big tech was passing the buck, that each hand was the low hanging fruit and it's like you get rid of each hand, you've solved the problem, right? And like in reality, something like Q wouldn't have been successful if it wasn't for big tech. It was, these chance, chance are old, they've been around for decades. And Q just escaped the chance and it escaped the chance thanks to algorithms and, and, you know, people who were susceptible to a narrative that they wanted to believe was true, wanted to be a part of something. I mean, these were misfits a lot. And I think that that seems applicable in a lot of cases. You know, they're, they're, they're larping. You know, like I made a film about larpers in 2008, but it was called Monster Gap. Very DIY little film back before people really knew what larping even was. You know, and I saw some parallels here. People who don't have a lot of, you know, sort of close friends in their lives and are, and are looking for meaning and, and, and I guess, you know, kind of want to feel special. Yeah. And, and I think what you see actually over the course of the series and this is why we structured it this way. I mean, Q did really kind of start as a, as a sort of interactive game that took on a life of its own. And it, and it grew really rapidly until these, this, this, you call Q a meme, until it memed itself into reality until, until someone like Ron Watkins was advising President Trump near the end of, of Q and near the end of his term. You know, what's mean? Me really? Yeah. I mean, I, I can't, I don't have an interviewed Trump on this, but I mean, I do know that he was communicating, you know, with Giuliani, he was advising them on, on what to do in relationship to the election. How the fuck does that happen? Trump was retweeting him. Right. But how does Ron Watkins get a hold of Giuliani? How is he, what, why is he taking any advice from him? He was, they, I asked Ron the same question, you know, he's, this is true option of last resort. Yeah. But this is 100% true. I mean, I have not talked to Giuliani, but you can, you can see in the data trail, you can see him. Yeah, you can, you can see that Ron was, was openly was open. up to Giuliani, but you can see in the data trail, you can see him. Yeah, you can see that Ron was openly, was openly advising them on what to do in relationship to the election. He has been at an advisor ever since. It blew my mind. Still right now. Yeah, he's like, I mean, he was deeply involved with all those stuff with Lindell. You know, he was he was. My glendale. What is the whole symposium? The like, I feel like my, oh, okay, my pillow. Good guy. I shot that guy off as soon as I hear him talking. I don't know. The audit in Arizona, Ron's been advising on that. Really? Yeah, yeah, he's been working. Did they watch your documentary? I don't know. And if they watch your documentary, wouldn't they go, okay, what the fuck are we doing? Who are we talking to here? Yeah, I mean, I don't, uh, I'm not sure they all saw it. But that's wild. But he also still has a huge following. And he was. So where is he as a falling now? And you have to offer this makes you wonder if they had a relationship before he migrated from, you know, Q-shirts down right on election day. And then Ron starts actively really posting on Twitter. And all, and the fact that he was able to build such a massive following and quickly started advising on election fraud issues. Thanks, you wonder if they had a connection with the administration in some way, shape or form before that. You know, Ron would often say, well, it was filming with them that it was a market and campaign. Some would describe it, which is kind of a glib way to do with a marketing campaign. Yeah, that it would end at the election. You know, he and Jim would say, Jim Watkins, his father would say that often. Um, you know, a glib way of putting it. But, uh, someone might describe it as a sigh up, um, you know, and, and so it is, I consider it a possibility, especially since HN was a, uh, was, was directing a high amount of traffic to Donald Trump's website in the first election cycle that, that a relationship had formed somewhere along the way. Maybe there were payments. I don't know. I can't, I haven't been able to prove that. But how does someone like Ron Watkins go from, you know, obscurity to suddenly being, you know, a, a celebrity, um, in those circles almost overnight. And to being the guy who's like, yeah, I'm reading a, you know, this election manual. Um, let me, let me give you some advice on, on how to do it. I mean, he said he's like, I must have just been the option of last resort. But, but here's the question. Why would they even, if he's not admitting he's cute? All he is is a guy who's running a chance and then a cone. Why are they even communicating with them? Like what, at all the human beings in the world, all of the political experts, all of the military experts, all of the, the people that are, you know, the heads of whatever friendly media organizations that would communicate with him, why is he communicating with Ron? Well, I think you became very useful to the Trump campaign in the last year. So there knew that he was cute? Well, I don't know that. So why him then? But we do know that Jason Sullivan, who was Roger Stone sort of, head of social media, was using his algorithm hijacking tools on, on Twitter to amplify, to amplify Ron. And he was hoping to get a hold of, of cue. You know, it is, it is possible that there was that something along those lines was happening behind the scenes there. It may just be the case that Ron was able to leverage his position in those relationships over time, because he was telling them what they wanted to hear. You know, every, his lawyers, everybody's saying like, what are we going to do about this? And, and Ron's like, I've got a plan. Right. And, but it is, it blows my mind to this day. You know, I, I, my jaw dropped when I saw Ron appearing on OAN with his black hat on, you know, that we, you know, he bought when I was filming a big black cowboy hat. And, and suddenly he was the election expert. And that suddenly he was advising these guys. You know, that tells you, that tells you a lot. OAN is so strange. Whenever I watch, there he is. There he is. Yeah. Cyber analyst on Dominion voting, shocking vulnerabilities. When, when, when I was you when he, so when he, when I spoke with him after he had been on the air with Chanel Rian on OAN, you know, he's like, well, cue actually did a drop while I was on OAN. So I can't be cue. It's like, you know, the more he tried to make it seem like he wasn't cue, the more he made himself seem like he wasn't. He'd gone through that massive, massive effort to make it seem like Bannon was cue, right? Right. Huge effort. I mean, I even, I even, people haven't seen it yet. First of all, go see it. Well, it's on HBO Max. Go, go, go watch it. Please, it's so good. But thanks for watching all six hours. Yeah, I have more than that. I want to work out while you're watching it. Some of the time I was actually on a treadmill or the Stairmill rather watching. And, you know, you kept me distracted. Um, but I watched again last night, I watched a few of them last night. I watched two of them last night. The, because I just wanted to kind of refresh my brain, the, the thing that I was getting at initially is like, the band and thing. Well, let's, let's just do the band thing and then I'll get to the thing I was getting out earlier. Okay. Where I got distracted. So he sort of tried to, it was very strange that he was doing that, but he was like outing Bannon, right? Super strange. Why would you have Bannon was cue? Why would you do Docks. Right. And he's using, he's saying that what is using his IP addresses and then he's isolating it to a very specific location that is very near where Bannon's house is, right? Correct. Yeah. So the, the very first time I met Ron, we shot an interview in the Philippines. You know, I had gone there saying, you know, primarily it's going to, I'm interested in, and looking at free speech through the lens of cue. That's what I, you know, that was sort of the pretense. And at the end of my interview with him, he pulls me aside and he says, you know, no one's really been looking at this, but I think Bannon is cue. Very first time. What's explained, Bannon, Ben, Steve Bannon, he's a Donald Trump's advisor. Yeah, he was the, he was sort of the architect mastermind behind the 2016 campaign. A lot of people have probably not paying attention to politics. Yeah. Okay. So that's the big. Okay. So then, so he pulls you aside, you know, who, who eventually kind of gets booted from Trump's inner circle right before cue gets started. Yeah. So now he's a pod tester. He's a podcaster. Yeah. He's got his, he's got his more room or whatever it is. Yeah. The more room. I don't know if Ron's appeared on it yet, but this is the space room. This is a great room. Thank you. Great room. Really. Yeah. I just want to like hover in here. I feel like we should be floating right now. We can if you want to go there. Is there time? There's always time. Yeah. Especially once you've started. Yeah. But yeah, so, so, so, so, so, so, I'm, so, I'm pulls me aside. He's like, yeah, it's this guy. Steve Bannon. No one's looking at it. You know, I've got my, my absurd amount of research, you know, I got infinity board, thousands of assets. I've got timelines of all the possible suspects for cue at this point. You know, and Bannon was a prime suspect just based, just surely on kind of the, the circumstances around him, like his character, you know, would, he knows that he knows the chance. He knows that world. He knows how to, to co-opt it for political games. So, you know, he, he makes for a possible suspect. Well, who will you have? I've been considering Bannon. Now, why would Ron, the very first, you know, first off, like, trolling journalists, and I don't consider myself a journalist, but trolling journalists is like the gold standard for trolls on the trans. Like that's, if you can get them to publish something fake, that's their dream, right? So like, I'm just thinking, okay, well, why is he telling me, Bannon, very first time? I mean, fine. And you say, all right, can you show me some data, so see what this he's like, I'll get around to it, you know, and, you know, some, some time goes by. And I think, you know, six months later, he could really tell that the heat was on him. My, I have Sarn, wrong. I think that's who it is. He's like, I got a, I got to throw this guy off the, the trail. He's like, oh, okay, I've got the data that shows that it's Steve Bannon, you know, and you can see in the series in episode, episode four, you know, he's like, I know it from the beginning. I'm known it's Steve Bannon. Can I stop me for a second? Yeah. Why was the heat on Ron at that point? Well, all of the evidence pointed to him, you know, I had a massive list of, of evidence pointing to Ron. And like, for example, oh, he would say like, while I would be with him, he would say things that like, cue is going to start going on the offense. As we're like coming down the mountain. And then during the interview, he brought that up again, cue is going to start going on the offense. Two days later, cue rides going on the offense. This is not something that cue does often. I mean, there was one more usage of the word offense in all, in like the thousands of drops that had occurred up in time. Like that's okay, fine. One, that's one data point, right? But I have many, many more data points like that. And in fact, actually, Ron, after watching the series and he saw that scene, I was going to get around to this after the whole band. But he ended up throwing his own right hand man under the bus. He's like, well, I had this guy with me that day. He must have been taking notes and maybe he's cue. He must, that's, that's how it must have. That's the only way that could have happened. All right, fine. Like you've already convinced me of Bannon, but now let's try to, let's, let's throw your right hand guy in the comments. But, interesting. I mean, all of, first off, he would be able to access the trip code. It wouldn't be hard for him to easily hijack it at any point in time. You know, he could he falsify IP data? Like how's he getting you this data? Well, so the data set that he presented, I believe he had been larping his band in for some time. Oh, Jesus Christ. So he, yeah, he had put on the hat of Steve Bannon. I believe it's probably some time. He was like, who's a likely suspect? He done the same thing I did. He's like, who could I pin this on? So it wouldn't be traced back to him. And I think when we see that static IP, this is my best guess. You know, what you can do is set up a proxy server. You know, you can just run it, run all your traffic through that one IP address. And so from that point on, that IP address can also serve as a verification method. And can you make that IP address appear to be in a very specific location? Yes. Oh, okay. So in Roman, you know, I do that. Right. So if, if what you want to do is, and that would also make it so that the trip code doesn't end up having to be the primary verification method. And those who run the boards, the admin, obviously the admin, but the moderators in the board owner who can see a bit of the IP address, can go, okay, like even though Q has been hijacked, say the trip could have been hacked. Well, it's the new IP address. So Q could always use the, the static IP to fall back on as a verification method. And this is what Paul was complaining about. He's like, okay, well, suddenly Q is using this new IP. Now, interestingly, Ron's right hand man during one of these other interviews is like, let me show you, Ron was actually messaging me all the way back in early January of 2018 that he thinks it's Steve Bannon. So, and then actually when this takeover, I think took place when the, um, um, when Paul Furber, the previous board owner of Q says that it's a fake Q, some of the first things that get posted are in relationship to Steve Bannon. It's like a Steve Bannon article. So it really looks like right from that moment someone, most likely Ron, was laying the pipe, um, to create a forensics data set that pointed to Steve Bannon. And I think he was rather disappointed that nobody had picked up on it. You know, and he's like, let me, let me show you. You know, it's so good. You know, we've even, we even staged a whole thing where we sent someone out with cameras in front of Avenatti's office, you know, shared that stuff, you know, who lives like 20 minutes or so away from where Steve Bannon's house was. Um, you know, staged this whole thing so that there was a forensic trail that wasn't pointing in their direction. And that's why it confused the hell out of me. I was like, how, you know, all this data would be such a pain in the ass to fake. Well, it wasn't that the data was fake. It was that the data was designed to look like a certain thing because of course, Ron would know how to do that. And I'm sure he was just like, oh, he wanted better competition. He wanted somebody to see how smart he was. How much time did you spend thinking about this? I mean, I, I spent a lot of this a few months just trying to like, I'm going to show that like, remember, I'll re upload it all. Yeah. So what I wanted to get to before is, um, when the initial cue drops and when all the stuff starts happening, how does it leak and become a mainstream thing? How does it get out? Like, what is, what's the, is there a specific moment or is it just a slow sort of recognition by people who are conspiratorly minded that there's this gentleman or person or whatever that's posting, pretending to be this Trump insider? Like, what is it that makes it become this huge thing? I don't remember when I started hearing about it, but I assume by the time stuff reaches me, it's leaked down to the mainstream. Yeah. So what, what was the event? People started talking about this anonymous insider on the chance almost immediately. It was almost instantaneous. And I think that for those who were trying to get an edge on YouTube, you know, having this being able to say like, oh, there's this secret government insider who's releasing drops and all of our dreams are coming true. So you had, you had people like Tracy Beans, Jordan, Sather, right from the start kind of being like, is this legit? Here's what they're saying, you know, and then, and then it kind of built from there, people are following them. Start checking out, you know, the chance. But it was still fairly contained. It was fairly contained up until late December of 2017 when these characters, Tracy Beans, Paul Furber, and Coleman Rogers. And I believe it was Tracy's idea. Say, let's, let's start a board on Reddit that's devoted to QAnon. That's going to reach, that's going to reach, you know, a much wider audience. And it's an extremely, 2017. So Reddit is where it branches out. Reddit branches out, and then it also branches out when they go on the Alex Jones show. And that becomes a big, a big boom. So then it becomes fun. That's when that's when people, that's when the excitement kind of kicks up. But you had a lot of the anions who were pissed off that they had gone on Alex Jones, they were going mainstream. They wanted, they didn't like to stay anonymous. And they didn't like the celebrity status. Yeah, that's fascinating. Here's that same part of the culture, right? So here's really fascinating. And you can see it even in Q's mentality, towards Tracy, because he, okay, so this is, this is great. I had talked with, I talked with all of the board owners for, for Q. So everybody who had ever been in charge of the, like, craziest thing on the internet that's QAnon, right? Like, where Q had been posting on their board. I asked them all like, okay, well, did Q ever communicate with you, right? To Q ever, you know, send you messages. And they said, well, not like direct messages. But Q, because of that IP address, would sometimes post anonymously, openly on the boards so that only the board owner or the moderators would know it was Q. So it was a way of communicating with those who were running the boards without the entire public knowing it. And so they would be able to just go, okay, say my P, bring it up. And there was one in, and they didn't, Q didn't do this very often, very, very rarely. But one of the board owners was like, there's a really unbelievable moment. Like, my jaw just dropped that Q was, Q was saying this stuff. You know, and I was on this call with like a couple of other, you know, folks who were, who were big into Q at the time, I think like, anyway, they were all like, wait, what is it? What is it? I think we have the, it's like secret Q drop. But oh, this is great because Q is just shit talking, Tracy Beans and some of just writing like trash talking an on. And so this was after the switch to HM? Yeah. So this is April, I believe it's from April of 2018 and Q, you know, people really started to monetize Q at this point. You know, Tracy Beans is kind of moving away. She's, she's built this huge audience off of Q and on. She's kind of rejecting it. And Q, if we scroll up, you can see the ID right there, the F, see whatever. This is something that only a board owner or an moderator would be able to see. It's right next to anonymous. So then you see that little F, C, F, E, three, I. So if you scroll up and you can see a Q drop, that one right there, it has the same ID next to it, the F, C, and that's, that's because it's like the representation of the like a hash representation of the IP address. So it's the same. So you know that Q, even though they didn't use the trip code, was also posting these anonymous drops. So all, and we included this in the series. But this is kind of wild that Q was actually making posts that, you know, as that, that, yeah, those who were running the boards could actually see. So you have this one here, R equals 18. Why is that interesting? Why is that unusual? That he's making well, because he's secretly communicating with the board owners and only they would be able to, and moderate and only be able to see it. But if you scroll down, so this is only to moderate or something. Yes, well, the ones that have Q were public and everybody would know, the ones that are anonymous. No one knows that these are actually Q posting, except for the moderators. So you can see there, it says beans. Hey, patrons. No up above that, it says beans, you are shit. It's Q writing. Interesting. That doesn't seem, you know, it makes any sense. You go down here. It's like, help me change the world on us, but her scam scam scam, what it is. Grace. So this is Q being very upset at Tracy beans for monetizing Q for, you know, for pivoting mainstream. And that's her YouTube channel. What is, what it says fake outlets like CNN, New York Times. So that's what it is, like going on those outlets and promoting her YouTube channels. That what it is promoting our YouTube channel, trying to get people to give her money, basically, you can see here being started at AK followers now 77 K because of Q. This is Q writing. Now pushing for more money and the drops Q and, oh, say now pushing for the money and drops Q to be more accepted mainstream. So Q is like she got famous off of Q and now is dropping Q and Q is not happy with this. This is someone upset that someone's getting famous. Someone's riding it out. Well, but this is Q writing it. Right. A lot. Yeah. Whoever, you know, which is, which was likely Ron at this point, writing, which seems like, yeah, this is not like, why the fuck would a government inside of give a shit? Who's becoming famous from distributing what's supposed to be real information? Right. Yeah. And just coming on here and just writing like a typical anon, just, just like shit posting and bitching. Right. Right. Exactly. Like, what Q is like riding to the border? Just like another anon. How many people at one point in time were doing Q related YouTube videos? Um, I mean, I don't a lot. A lot where there were, I mean, there were, I think 15 or 20, you know, who were like the predominant ones, you know, and maybe like 10 really big ones, big accounts. We follow a couple of them in the series. You know, Craig had a huge following, Liz had a huge following, Dustin had a sizable following, Jordan Sathar had a really big following, you know, and all, and they kind of came at it from different angles. Like Craig was the evangelical approach. Um, you know, I, Dustin was more of the, the truth or who kind of went after everybody. Craig was a guy who had Donald Trump on his wall. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, and then you have someone like Jordan Sathar who is, who comes from the like David Wilcock, UFO, like New Age crowd. Um, like the reptile people, people or whatever, blue avians, that's, that's his, that's his, you know, five G baby kind of. Yeah, they're a thing. So, yeah. So, uh, you can, and so for them, it was like, okay, well, here's a whole new audience that maybe we can, we can tap into. And as Q became this umbrella for all beliefs, all conspiracies, all every, you know, you, the big tent, it was, it was very useful for say someone like Wilcock or Jordan Sathar who'd be like, okay, well, let's inject our world view into the broader narrative. Um, and I think that's one of the most interesting things about Q is that, you know, Q didn't have complete control, right? It was kind of calling response. Like what does the audience want to some extent? Um, and it, because it was a evolving narrative. Um, and, and, and the idea that lizard people or blue avians got introduced to a subset of that near, you know, subset of that ecosystem isn't something that was introduced by Q itself. It was just something that others who glommed onto it introduced. So, um, I don't know, that's it, it's, it's, it's kind of fascinating to watch how it took on a life of its own. And in some ways, you know, Q didn't have as much, quite as much control as you might imagine. I mean, Q even did Q and A's at one point, you know, where people would ask, really? Yeah, people ask a question and then Q would be like, well, um, no, 9-11 not an inside job, you know, aliens, um, real. Uh, you know, those, those kind of things, earth is not flat. I was in time for this. I mean, if you go to Ron's telegram, look at how much he's been posting every every day. If it's wrong, if it's, I mean, if it's a, you know, I'm convinced 100%. Wow. I mean, I'm not convinced that Ron was doing it entirely autonomously. You know, he had support. There were overlapping networks that made this possible. Um, but, uh, but, but was Ron, you know, the linchpin of it all. Did he have control of the Q account? That, yes, that, that, that I believe 100%. It seems like it because the shift from eight Chan when eight Chan was taken down, and then they come back as eight Kuhn and then Q starts posting before anybody can post. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Right. I mean, that's, that's a big dog, right? We're a huge one. Yeah. That's a giant, like, hey, fuckface. Don't, do you think we are? Right? Like, that's like, no one else has the ability to post. And you don't know who Q is and you know, aren't in direct communication with Q, but Q posts. Yeah. Yeah. Somehow. Yeah. So no one else was able to do it really, but like, I was in there trying to say, well, Q must, you know, Q has high end military. Who knows how he was able to do it? Just like, how did Q know, how did Q know, how many users were on a, a, a Chan, you know, posting is I don't even know that. Okay. Okay. Okay. Uh, yeah. That was a, that was a huge tell. I mean, there were, there were like lots of little clues that wasn't able to include as well. Like, you know, went through and like, analyzed reflections and some of the photos, you know, that, that showed like how Q was holding the phone when they were taking pictures and it was like left handed. And both, um, both Jim and well, I wrote about this on Twitter and then Ron, you know, message me is like, well, I'm ambidextrous. So, oh, God. Uh, Jim is a character. Jim is a fascinating person. Like, I don't know anyone like that guy watching that guy just talk and communicate and watching his mannerisms. And, you know, how old is he? Oh, I don't know his age at the top of my head mid 50s. He looks a lot older. Right. He does. He looks like a man who's lived. Yeah. Like he's had a hard life. But it's the way he's communicating. It's like, uh, he's playing all the time. Like everything's playing. It's very playful when he's talking to you and his explaining things. Everything, he's got an incredible sense of awareness of how he's being perceived and that the what he's projecting. Like I'm watching the way he's talking and like this guy, this is not like a, this is not his first dance. You know what I'm saying? Like he knows how to talk to people. Like, it's like, well, he was a recruiter in the military. So he did that for a long time before. So he knew how to convince somebody to, you know, pick up a gun. Yeah. And, you know, so that so he has the gift of gap and, you know, that that that requires some pretty solid communication skills. But it's interesting that that's lost when you communicate in text. Like what his, what's interesting about him is when he talks and you can see him. And, you know, there's, you get the whole big picture of who he is. This oddball character in the end. He's got the crazy facial hair and all that jazz. Um, but all of his weird quirks, all the weird things about him. If the guy should have a fucking podcast, I don't know if he does. I mean, he, you tell us regularly. Doesn't mean your bit shoots or he has his own thing. Like, are you allowed? Is he allowed to be on YouTube? I don't think, I mean, he's, I'm not sure if he's on YouTube anymore. He created his own version of YouTube. He did. Yeah. He created it. Yeah. It's called, that's not quite YouTube. But what is his tiger network? Is the name of it? Tiger network? Yeah. Yeah. Uh, but I mean, while I'm watching it, I'm listening to him talk. I'm like, well, remember, it's funny. Yeah. So it's, it's, uh, you know, you're cutting out all of the stuff that's not that not doing telling. Um, I understand. But what I'm saying is it's like, he's really aware of how he's being seen. He is. And I think that that playfulness is very intentional. Yeah. And it masks something more sinister in a lot of cases. And you see that on the sixth, right? On that on when we're approaching the Capitol, you see that, that kind of crack. Yeah. What do you, what do you see when you see that the whole six thing with him? I mean, he's, he's a little in the approach to that. He's he's almost starry. I like, like, he's looking around and going, I mean, he says it, right? He's like, this is the most non business thing I've ever done. Right. Um, and he, I think it drained him financially, keeping you online. Um, in the long run, I have to tell his pig farm. Um, how did it drain him financially? Like, what was the hit? Well, it was expensive to keep a channel online for one, expensive to run. Mm-hmm. It's, you know, as, as they describe, it's a yacht, you know, the just sync money into and Fred, Fred, Fred Brennan, their opposition who had created a chain made it difficult to, to keep it going. Um, made it expensive legally and, uh, technically for them. You know, they had a lot of legal costs associated with all of that. Um, I don't know, uh, you know, they, they had to, to change locations for their businesses. They had to change server setups. I mean, you know, um, he just, he just made things more costly. And, and, um, Jim and, or Tom, I guess said that, you know, Jim is somebody who, when he gets money, kind of spends it. So he, he sometimes, he has a lot and sometimes he doesn't have very much. Um, you know, Fred would say that that's all bullshit and that Jim is actually super wealthy and it's all just, uh, character he's playing, you know, because they have five channel in Japan, which is an incredibly popular chain that's, I think where the majority of their income stream comes from. Um, and you see some of that chandron will play out where, you know, this split with this old business partner here, you can use super famous in Japan might also explain. comes from. And you see some of that chandron will play out where you know, the split was old business partner here at UQC, Super Famous in Japan, might also explain why there's the whole Q Japan Flynn thing we talked about earlier because they have headquarters there, so if they're going to get Q to be popular anywhere, it's going to probably be in Japan. You know, and chand culture is also much bigger in Japan, I guess, in part because if I was to guess or I sort of heard that when you're in an environment where you feel like you're socially not as free, you need more outlets in the chand service that outlet. So, chands in Japan, are they in Japanese characters? Yeah, and can you translate it? Is it translatable like is there a button that you can hit it? I don't think it's quite that that convenient. It's not like it's not like on Twitter or like translate tweet. So my point point was like it's all Japanese traffic. Yeah, yeah, Japanese traffic. And it makes it really hard to really know how it's like what's going on in Japan. If you want to have your business operations somewhere, like it's difficult to do research. I mean, we just released the series in Japan, you know, with the Japanese dub and everything. So I'll be very interested to see how it's received received there. And that's where Ron is still. I mean, we never, that end sequence where I sort of confront him on why he, why I think he might be cute or any kind of comes out with it. Initially, we were supposed to meet again to film and I wanted to kind of confront him on sort of the list of reasons I thought it was cute. And he wanted to do it on an ice wall. So like ice climbing, he had just gone on one ice climbing trip. It only has a YouTube channel where he talks about God and things, him's that sounds about me. Yeah, it's like it's unrelated to all of his other stuff. Oh my God. There's only one video on it right now. And that's it. Just one things might have gotten deleted. Oh, I mean, this is what he's he'll he'll call some walk in, Watkins Xerxes. That's how I had to find it. It wasn't coming up. He's in the Philippines still. No, he's in California. Really? Oh, that's right. Yeah. That's right. He moved to California. Why do you have to do that again? I think that I mean, I usually try to keep people's families out of it, but it was a family reason. Okay. So the January 16th, again, you were saying that you see more more of a sinister aspect of his personality on the January 6th thing. Like what what do you mean by that other than the fact that he said it's the most. You can see a fire in his eyes. Right. Don't you think that that's also just the moment itself before anyone attacks the Capitol building itself? You know, you're there in this wild, crazy mass of humans. Have you ever been to like, but I mean, I had seen that look in his eyes before, you know, that wasn't the first time. Was this when I just seen that before? When I would bring up Fred, do we get upset? You know, I think the first time that we when he when he had to go in confront Congress, he was obviously pretty pretty riled up about that. I mean, you know, he's used to being the boss in the Philippines. So being in a situation where he maybe had less power and he would even tell you that he's, you know, he can be volatile. And the the first day we met a film of them, you know, at the end of that day, he said to me, you know, you're the enemy, right? And I was like, I don't I don't think I'm your enemy. Well, if you were the enemy, why is he talking to you? It's voluntary, right? The whole thing was voluntary. Like why did they agree to do that? Did they think that they were smarter than you? They were going to be able to like keep shucking and jiving to the very end and at the end of it, you would think it was Steve Bannon or whoever. I mean, in the beginning, I at first reached out to Fred and I didn't know that their relationship was dissolving, that the tension was growing between Fred and Jim and Ron. You know, and I was genuinely interested in in the free speech side of what H.M. was doing. And and and I didn't think that they were behind Q when I went there. I just went to talk to them also in part because if anybody knew who was behind Q would be those with the technical everything else is just a you know, is is can be noise. You can you can you can sort of see what you want in the in the writing. But the data itself was sort of the most valuable. Of course, after I left, you know, it's like, God, these guys are suspicious right away. Oh, right. I mean, as I was doing those interviews, it's like, what is going on with me? The tape on the glasses. Also, like, fucker. You got an expensive watch on and you got tape in your glasses. Like, what's going on? You know, Ron reacted to that, right? Yeah, he's like, it was dental floss reacted to what your me, you really? Yeah, yeah, he was using dental floss instead of tape. That's what it was? Yeah, I guess so. Um, I had spine new pair of glasses. Well, he's I mean, look, I think I even told you, I think it's a, I think it's just part of the character you were playing, right? Like, yeah, that's what I thought. Oh, I have a bunch of comments from him. You know, his telegram and shit too. And if you want to look at him, no, I don't probably not. Um, was he upset about it? I mean, he was just being, he was just being a little sassy about it. That's all he's just like, an opportunity to be like, actually, it was dental floss. Well, whatever the fuck it was. But it's part, I think it's so on the nose. It's just a character on his plane. Ron is a theater nerd, you know, he's a huge theater nerd like I played sports, but I was also a theater nerd. And so you know, both worlds and in both worlds. Yeah. I mean, I definitely know the type, the Ron just takes things to the extreme more than anyone I've ever met. Um, we, we've discovered when we were going to Reno that we had both been in the music man and both been in the barber shock quartet and both still remembered the music to it. You know, so, so Ron, but Ron has a this idea that like we're all, you know, the whole shake their thing, like we're all just actors on stage. Um, but then the question is like, what part do you want to play if that's true? And, you know, he, he seems to like that villain role. Um, um, he's drawn more to that. Um, and I think that the glasses are just a character. I mean, the watch he was covering up his watches, um, these fancy fancy watches. And, and when he stopped covering it up is when we were in Reno filming and then he like kind of rolled it up to show me that he was now wearing a casio watch. And I went back and looked through all the footage and just like, okay, like, you know, did he have on fancy watches, you know, because Q, you would use fancy watches to confirm it was still in fact Q and fountain pens. Yeah. You know, and that was a good, that was a good red herring for Bick. Cause I was just like, well, and maybe Jim was also in honor of got in on it at some point, right? Cause that's really it depends. He's super and depends. I mean, as Ram was saying, he's like, autistic about patents would be Ron's wrong definition of it, but, um, but Ron's into them too, you know, he kind of let that slip at one point where he was also in the pen. He's like, oh, I tried to buy this $3,000 pen and I couldn't get it. And you can hear it. It's in one of the scenes in Reno. But, um, so yeah, Ron's also, you know, super and found pens just not, not as obsessed with what a bizarre thing you get into pens. Yeah. So, but then you write a lot. You can see this is all for show, right? So that like he puts on the cast. He's thinking very much about the image he's presenting and how it's going to be interpreted. Even the green hat, you know, that, uh, you know what the green hat means in China? No, means you're a cook. Really? Yeah. Yeah. So he's been like, you've been made a cuckled of, um, cuckled dove. Yeah. Oh, I never heard that term. Or maybe I'm maybe I'm using it wrong. I made it. You're a, I mean, if you invented it, congratulations. That's a good one. Here we go. But, uh, cuckled dove is fun. Have you heard a cuckled dove? No, Jamie's pretty deep. All right. I'm here. I might have been. How would you spot? Well, no, like, you've been made a cuckled of like, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, two separate words. Well, I think you just, in it, verbally made a good word. Cuckled dove, cuckled dove, cuckled dove is nice. Like a dove, a pair of them. Yeah. Cuckled dove. Like, you're like a little peaceful cuck. I'm like, third day at Christmas. You love me. I mean, dove is the peace bird, right? Yeah. You're a cuckled dove. I like it. But, uh, yeah, that's, you know, you wear that green hat around China and women will approach you. And this is like, where is it? They will approach you and do what? Be like, you know what that green hat means. So it's a, it's a pickup trick. What kind of, when also he like, and also like, you know, it's part, he's leaning into the, the cuck aspect. Was it a baseball hat? It's just like a big green kind of baseball hat. Yeah, it's like a baseball hat. Okay. So that's why he wears that hat. Yeah. So it's very, he's very conscious of his image. The whole martial arts thing was odd too. When I'm watching him like punch the Mackie, wara and all that jazz, yeah. Cause it doesn't look like he does that a lot. You know what I'm saying? I, I, I don't, I'm not a martial arts expert. So it's very performative. It's even very performative because like I'm watching him throw the punches and it's, they're not, they're not efficient. It's not like a guy who's done that a lot. Like, have you seen, have you watched video footage of someone hitting a Mackie wara? Like, you know, like, like people who do that on a daily basis? I did not side by side them now. But, no, you don't need to. He just seems like a guy was like, you know, maybe he's done it a few times. But he's making it seem like this is like a common aspect of his day, this practice. Right. Well, he exaggerates everything. Yeah. So, um, like he recently on his telegram. He's like, I do ice climbing, I'm a nice climber. And then he like posted images from the only time I know he's ever done ice climbing. So I imagine it might be similar with a martial arts thing where, you know, he, well, if you do martial arts a couple times, you're technically a martial art. Like, I play basketball with my kids sometimes. I am not a basketball player. But I guess I could say I play basketball. Ron, he right. Ron does a lot of things. You know, he, he's a, he's a jack of all trades. You know, he, he said, you know, after Q stopped posting and he stopped being the admin of a cone right around the same on the same time at the same time. He's like, I'm going to be a woodworker going to start, uh, I'm going to start making, making, uh, crafts. I'm, I'm leaving 8 coomb behind to become a woodworker. You know, he actually posted this really absurd video where he, he went out into the woods and, uh, and kind of, this happened a couple of this happened at like maybe a month or two after the series aired. And you know, it's like, here's my new character that I'm playing. And I'm, uh, you know, leaving the old Q thing behind. I think I have the video here. Um, it's sort of like he feels like he's playing the ASMR crowd a little bit and he, he dubbed the whole thing. It's, it's very the ASMR crowd is strange, but it's really compelled. Some of it's very compelling. Like there's one guy I go to his channel and he cooks out in the woods and, uh, he chops the wood and he makes the fire and there's no conversation at all. It's crackling and then he's eating the food. And it's like, you know, video might be 30 minutes long. And it's got millions of views. Like this is wild. Like people are really into just like listening and watching people do stuff where they don't talk. I mean, do you want to listen to Ron? You know, I don't know put your head on your pillow at night. You're okay. If you just know on this voice, rolling me to sleep. Well, that's not necessarily ASMR, right? Well, if you you heard that you heard the way he did it. Okay. It very much feels, it feels like he was going for the ASMR crowd. It's so that, I mean, he like his dad, their clever and it's funny how playful this sort. It's like an internet person out in the world sort of interacting. We'll hear this. I don't know if that's six. This is the end of it, I think. Leaving 8-kun, I have hand built many wooden toys. Donating to children, orphanages throughout my region of the world. That's the exact thing that I'm no longer affiliated with 8-kun and have no interest discussing 8-kun or Q-related material. I have always been opposed to violent criminal acts in the name of any group. He's a master. Master troll. Master troll. I do believe strongly in the fundamental right to legally express our beliefs and ideas in ways protected by the Constitution. Is he speaking in Japanese and then dubbing it? I mean, just wait for the last watch this. I am not Q and I've never posted as Q. I mean, the whole thing is just like a, it's great. It's great. I mean, it's very entertaining. It's very fun. Shitting in the town square. That's why I ain't including the town square. Yeah, because he's just messing with people. He's kind of of hijacking culture to, I mean, get us talking about it to get people. But is that what he's doing or is you just having fun? I mean, it's kind of having fun. That seems like fun to me. I mean, look, he's a black hat. Yeah, I never posted as Q and then look away from the camera. It's super fun. But it's also the weirdness of the dubbing. What is that? What's the original is it originally in Japanese? I mean, Ron would never, it's like he would always do a funny walk, you know? I have no idea if he even said the same things. He probably just went out recorded himself, came back in and was like, all right, I'm going to, you know, read my script now. But he's talking in the thing and it doesn't match up. Yeah. He did not. I brought that out. He didn't worry about that. I think he did on purpose. Oh, he definitely did. It's just to make it as weird as possible. Exactly. You know, but why do you say that it's like hijacking? Well, the idea is like to, so the reason I included that Diogenes bit in one of the episodes is because I felt it was the most illustrative of Ron's worldview. What is it? What's the Diogenes? The cynic. So cynicism. And this is something that Ron had brought up along the way. This idea that like a dog can shit in the middle of the town square. Why can't I? Okay. You know, so it is super performative. And I think what he's just, he's, he's leaning into assumptions and trying to and, and I mean, you could also just call Diogenes a troll. Like that's the same thing. It's like, why can't I do this thing? It gets people talking about the, you know, look at that guy. He just took a shit in the middle of the town square. Who does he think he is? That's so, you know. And I think that that really helps explain how Ron sees the world. You know, he's, um, uh, and partially treating it like it's a game. But, uh, if he has any religion, I would say it's, um, that, that flavor of cynicism. And it's like Socrates gone mad. I don't know, man, that was funny to me. Oh, it's funny. I mean, that's why I brought it here because I thought it was like, yeah, it's super weird and like, kind of hilarious. And I do not dislike them at all. I mean, I don't, part of me with all this kind of queuing on stuff is like, uh, and, and, and many things online that in, and it gets into this conversation of censorship and whether or not censorship is, uh, necessary or whether it's evil, whatever. It, the thing about it is all these things is it's not, it doesn't work on, that doesn't work on me in terms of like, I like the queue drops on all this stuff. I'm not, I never got interested. Right. So I never, I never got invested in it. I never, I mean, I got invested, but in the way that I wanted to figure out who is behind it. You make a documentary. Different flavor of obsession. But so it's like, but I mean, Ron is fucking with misfits. If you look at what he's done in, in recent, I mean, the, look, like there's, I think you can find likable things about anybody. And I think that if you look at what Ron's been doing since, since, um, since, you know, he, the queue sort of stopped and what he's been up to on telegram. I mean, he's been running these same kind of like hype trends and get people really excited that something is gonna happen and that it doesn't. I think the most insane one, though, that has happened in recent times, he got this, you know, woman who was working, um, in an election office, in in Colorado to like, she like sent them some, some documents that, uh, he started Trump, like, trumping up this idea that there was this whistleblower, this Dominion whistleblower is going to be the, you know, the, the end all be all that they had, you know, she revealed the, the passwords to the system and, you know, this is going to blow up in the whole thing. He gets tons of new followers on telegram, you know, he's saying like he's telling people spread the video, you know, spread it far and wide. Um, you know, this is this person's a hero and he releases this video and people immediately start going like, wait, this isn't anything. We already knew all of this stuff and people started reporting that it had come with malware. So like, basically it's yeah, and they started showing their calendars that were full of like virus notifications, things couldn't be shared. So it sounds like he told people to spread this video far and wide and it was laden with malware. And what was the malware attempting to do? I don't, I don't actually know what the malware, probably create a botnet, something like that. So do you think might have been a prototype release the malware? So you can see this is what people were showing on their, put down and protect your priceless data. Oh my God. And this is a Google calendar? Is that what this is an eye calendar, I think, someone's iPhone. Wow. You know, so lots of people were saying this. And then it gets even crazier because Lindell has his whole cyber symposium. They're going to reveal the whole election was a fraud. They bring the whistleblower out. You know, what happened is she run doc essentially, docs, when he released the information, even though he said that he was like scrubbing everything, he released some password that got traced back to her. And now she's like entangled in a big, you know, legal suit. But essentially, she ended up doing the thing that she had claimed the other side was doing. You know, she revealed she somehow got access to the password that the secretary of state, I think, you know, was supposed to be the government was only supposed to be the ones who had access to this. And then she ended up releasing it. So it's a, it's a huge like legal problem for her. You know, Ron didn't really protect her in that situation. And it's created, it's created chaos. So talk about fucking with misfits like, like it's just, it's just a, he didn't know about the trade. No, because he like cut the video. He put it together and then he released it. He was preparing that his video purposely had malware in it. That is what it would, that is the indication. Yes. Based on all of the comments after the video got released from people who had been following his telegram from some time, like this thing's full of malware. Why the fuck would someone do that though? It seems like it would be so obvious that that's what, well, maybe you didn't know what the outcome would be. You know, could have been a prototype. I don't know why he would bother doing something like that. But again, like he, he is someone who go back to the diogenes thing. You know, I think for him, all of this is just entertainment. So even releasing malware would be fun. Like, ha ha, I got everybody clicked this video. It's all shit. You already knew. And now you've mounted it. What you is malware, you know, it's like, it's releasing a, a lot of like ideological or conceptual viruses into the into into people's minds and getting the belief that like all these arrests we're going to happen that never happened. It's keep me on telegram because I don't, I know very, very little about it. I've never been on telegram. Is it essentially for people that got banned from other social media platforms or that feel like they're being censored? Yeah, it's a, I mean, it's an encrypted platform. Is it all like winged? Doesn't use algorithms. No, I mean, it's messaging, it's a messaging platform. Oh, so it's not like a Twitter. You can, no, it's not quite like a Twitter. So how the hell do you can, you can just follow people on there. So it's a mess, it started as a messaging platform, but you can have gigantic groups. And the guy just started it like, you know, he, I think he used to, and this is a little outside of my expertise. He was, I believe like, he's rushing. He had, I think maybe he'd worked at contactive before. He left, started telegram, Russia, not his biggest fan. They raised a bunch of money and some crypto ICO. I think it's probably helped their technology to scale. And they are, you know, far more, far more permissive when it comes to people using their platform. Technically, unless you're a member of the group, you shouldn't be able to see what people are posting. But you can forward messages now from, you know, what one person wrote to another group, you can follow people on there. And so Ron has actually managed to accrue hundreds of thousands of followers. And he's over like 430,000 followers at this point on telegram, where he can post something and share it and then people can just comment in the aftermath. And there is a kind of retweet functionality in the forward, in the form of forwarding messages, but it doesn't have the same kind of amplification tools built into it. So it's just, because there's no algorithm. But so is it like Twitter where you could just like, I could follow you on Twitter and I can go say, Oh, what's he up to? And then click on it and then see all of your tweets. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You can go back and see everything Ron's done or anybody who has telegram feed is done unless they've deleted it. So it's a messaging app, but it's also like a social media app as well. I think it's evolving into a social media app. So it's okay. So it was initially just like signal. Yeah. I mean, that's how I use it initially. And then I was surprised here. Oh, wait. People were, they create, it's been sort of retooled to be, you know, to follow it. But how great sort of big followings on there. And how does someone become aware of it? Is it just word of mouth in terms of like following people and things like follow this person. So if you have a big telegram account, you can, you can forward somebody else's message or say like, Hey, here's another, you know, handle follow this person. I'm, I'm not the foremost expert on telegram. So I may not know exactly what a to origin was, but I do remember that initially, I was using it primarily as a messaging and encrypted messaging tool. And then pretty quickly, several years ago, you know, crypto groups, other things were using that as a, as a, you know, means for, for communicating with a, with a large audience. So it's not essentially designed as like a Twitter replacement, but it's being morphed into something along those lines. It's being utilized in a similar, but I think better way for society. I think the fact that he doesn't have algorithms makes it a, and the fact that it's encrypted and that the company itself isn't mining your data and that's not the, I don't know what their business model is, but maybe they don't know yet. Right. Well, didn't Twitter lose a massive amount of money for a long time, like they weren't making any money, right? But they were worth a lot of money on paper because users are. Yeah. Yeah. But they didn't exactly, I don't know. I mean, maybe they know how to monetize it now. Right. Um, the longest time, yeah, they've, yeah. Yeah. I mean, once they, once they went public and then kind of figured out how to use the conversations that were happening, have people pay for, I don't think it's a good stuff trending and have ads served. Um, what is the replacement for Twitter? Like when people get kicked off a Twitter, what is the standard, where's the standard place to go? I mean, there's a lot of companies that are trying to be the, be the replacement. I don't think any have really stood out. I think Telegram is winning at this point. Um, because it is a little bit of a, it's a little evolved compared to like a a gap or something along those lines. Yeah. It's kind of a thing that had really picked up. But, you know, Telegram just has better technology too. I mean, the fact that it's, the fact that it is encrypted makes an improvement. It's not mining user data in the same way. So, um, how many users does this gap have? Do you know? I don't know. But is that number? That became popular for quite a few people that did get banned from social media platforms, right? Um, yes. So I think, you know, Ron and Angie Torbo, I believe is the CEO of that company. Um, and Ron had had an account there. I think they had some kind of data leak that was problematic for them. But the Ron had a data well, not Ron had a data leak, but the Gab had a data leak. Oh, that was, that was problematic for them. And then there's mines too, right? There's, there's a bunch of these, these, platform. Mm hmm. Yeah. Well, they say that they're, but what do we even mean when we say that, right? Because, you know, I think one of the things that people misunderstand about section 230 is that it doesn't, it actually, what it does is it protects companies who want to moderate. Explain section 230? So section 230 is this, uh, it was, it's part of the communication and decency act that, that many people in the digital rights space would say, you know, it's sort of created the internet. In some ways, it is the first amendment of the internet in that it allows companies to, um, to foster speech on their platforms in line with the first amendment or, or not. Um, it can, it can either, it can either be as permissive as you want it to be, or you can moderate as kind of as much as you want. Um, and in fact, there was a court case early on that is what led to this, where, you know, I think this prodigy was being sued for something that someone had posted on their site and, um, and then they started moderating, you know, moderating and, and this is what, this is when they determined that actually, you know, you're not, you can moderate but not be responsible for the content that's being published there. Um, and so this is what allows comments sections is what allows for social media to exist. Um, it really is the thing that, that, that drives the internet and a lot of times, people will say, well, this is a handout to, to big tech. Um, which isn't quite accurate either. It's, it's really the thing that allows small companies to survive as well. It's, any kind of competition would rely on the fact that people can post stuff on their platform and that they're not going to be liable for that. Now, if they write their own things on the platform, think roommates got calm, got in trouble for something that they kind of bias that they had built into their, into their, um, engine itself. Um, you know, then they can get in trouble. But, um, you know, if we got rid of section 230, which I've, I've heard, you know, people say, well, if I can't say whatever I want on Twitter, let's get rid of section 230. It's like, well, do you think that these companies are going to be more or less permissive if they're liable for every single thing that's there? And really what's going to happen, what some of these bigger companies are going to drive towards is using AI moderation that only they can afford. And when something goes wrong, they're just going to blain, you know, say bad AI, right? Um, and then meanwhile, you know, competitions, smaller companies that can't afford that moderation will simply be edged out. So if you, if, if Twitter was something somehow liable for everything that was on the site, they would probably integrate a lot of this AI moderation tools. And, um, we've seen how well that works. Right. You know, it's not particularly good at determining what, uh, shooter should not be allowed online. And it ends up taking casting a far wider net. Yeah. Um, so yeah, I don't, uh, that doesn't seem to be the solution here. But I do think that we have a challenge given the scale of these companies, you know, how many people use Twitter, how many people use Facebook, when they become the, um, arbiters of truth and our, the primary place that many people are getting their information from or news is being created. I think we do have to ask the question. the Arbitors of truth and are the primary place that many people are getting their information from or news is being created. I think we do have to ask the question, well what, you know, what? Should there be rules in place that require them to keep treat content more neutrally or do we want them to operate as autonomous businesses even at that scale that can dictate what people see and what they don't? We just never seen anything in our lives where, you know, hundreds of millions of people were using the same thing and there was an entity that could determine what should be allowed. And you could make the public square argument around that as well and say like so many people are using it that this has become a kind of digital public square. But as the law currently stands, you know, it's a private company that can do what it wants. What are your thoughts on this? Especially because you're so deeply invested in this queue phenomenon and we see how that went. I mean if you ever really wanted to suppress free speech, what you would do is engineer something like queue and then have it reach this boiling point which is January 6th where you have an arguable point, you know, if you wanted to say this is what we want to avoid. And this is why we need at least some form of censorship. I mean I think that, and this is what drew me to the story in the beginning, you know, queue was testing the limits of free speech. And that's kind of how you know whether or not you have a right whether or not you can have dangerous ideas whether or not you can say unpopular things. And that's why I was drawn to queue in the first places because Reddit had banned it and that seemed novel at the time. And it seemed like maybe, well, is this where the internet is headed? So you saw that and that's what led you to start investigating and setting up this documentary series? Yeah, because I had a background covering digital privacy. Did you bring this to HBO and say, hey, very late in the game. So I had been shooting this entirely independently up until September 2020. You find that set yourself? Yeah. Whoa. Yeah. Risky man. Wow. It was, it was a gamble. Big gamble, right? Yeah. And I hit off. Holy shit. In this case, it did. You know, you got to HBO and it worked out because it wasn't, but there was no guarantees that that was going to happen. Well, also there's no guarantees you're going to have an ending like January 6. I'm not saying that you were like rooting for something crazy like that to happen, but boy did that pay off. I mean, it is, it's almost like you have to predict where things are headed in order to tell the story like this. Yeah. I mean, we had put together that whole opening sequence that takes place in DC before January 6. I mean, that the ideation for that had started in November. It gave it a whole new meaning, of course, when you see these kind of all of these beliefs and conspiracy theories or whatever you want to say. kind of overtaking DC. And you see the kind of characters, meaning themselves into, into existence in that opening. But would this series have been substantially different if that hadn't happened? Of course. And it wasn't even that obvious to most who were working on it in the lead up to the six that I needed to go. You know, I was, because we were in the throes of post and it was an incredibly aggressive post schedule. Really aggressive. I mean, we were, we were turning, I was turning out 16 to 18 hour days. Everybody was working around the clock for five months straight on this thing. So for me to step away to go shoot at that point, a lot of people thought I was out of my mind. Like what could possibly be so, so important that you would, you would drop, you know, editing on this incredibly aggressive post schedule to go and document Jim. And thank God you did. Right? I mean, when you must have been at the end, like on January 7th, you must have been like, fuck yeah. I was just like, oh, fuck. Actually, I, on January 7th, I would, I think everybody was in a state of a little bit of state of shock. Yeah. And didn't really, I hadn't even seen all of the news report. I hadn't seen what everybody else had been seeing because we were on the ground. You know, so it wasn't, it wasn't until it was started looking at all of the footage and all of the archival from other sources that you're like, holy shit, this is what was going on inside. So what did you see? I mean, we were on the side where the scaffolding was where people were climbing all of the scaffolding. I was, you know, following Jim that day. I was very anxious going into it. I didn't really sleep the two nights before, really. Because I thought it was going to be bad. I thought it was way worse than it was. I actually thought it could have broken out into a civil war that day. That's how bad I thought it might be. And what would most of you think while most other folks who, if you, if you weren't tracking all of these movements, you know, I think that they, they were absolutely, their minds were blown that, that this could even happen. That's me. So I, I had no idea. Right. I had no idea that anything was boiling below the surface. But you apparently, you thought that it was going to be way worse than what it was. Yeah. And what were you tracking that led you to believe this? Just, I mean, all of these kind of instigators around Trump, Steve Bannon, Roger Stone, General Flynn, you know, they were all, they were all stoking the flames to the max. If you looked at the chatter on the chance, if you looked at the chatter on social media in general, around, you know, that this, you know, Trump asked for a wild protest. I mean, I think as soon as I saw that knowing what the community thought, and knowing what some of these other organizations thought, I mean, I knew more about sort of the cue perspective going into it. But it's like, okay, well, if he's asking for a wild protest, shit's going to get real. What were his actual words? He said wild protest. I mean, he wrote that. Like, he was on Twitter. Yeah. He either, he, we could, I'm sure we could pull it up. Like he asked for a while. He's like, he's going to be a wild protest on that. A wild protest. And this was the protest what he believed was election fraud. Right. And if you listen to his words in the speech that day, you know, he's, he's them's fighting words. You know, we're going to go to the, we're going to go there and we're going to take it, take it back. And so there were a lot of different forces who were pushing that day for something to happen. And, you know, for Trump to invoke the insurrection act. This is something you'd hear a lot. You know, Ron was saying Trump needs to cross the rubicon. Like there was this idea that he needed to, that the only way that they could keep democracy was to overthrow the, you know, overthrow the, take, you know, take things over. It's here. It says, this is Trump's Twitter. It says, Pete and Navarro released a 36 page report alleging election fraud more than sufficient to swing victory to Trump, a great report by Peter's statistically impossible to have lost the 2020 election. Big protest in DC on January 6, be there will be wild. And what is this 36 page report? Did you get into that? I don't know the specifics of that. Who is the Peter Navarro about that? Do you know that Peter Navarro is? There hasn't been anything, you know, of all the lawsuits and everything that's been kicked out there. Nothing is, nothing is stock. So this is the director of the Office of Trade and Manufacturing Policy, Peter Navarro. Yeah. So he thought at the end, I mean, he thought essentially that getting these people to protest and that this 36 page report, that there would be enough data and then eventually someone's somewhere would reverse the decision and prove that there was an election fraud to reinstate him or to flip the election, give it to him. Right? Is that the idea? I mean, that day they were certifying the vote. So animosity had been directed towards Pence, who I believe they incorrectly assumed if he didn't certify the vote that it would, that, you know, or that he could be the same. You know, or that he could somehow, you know, you usurp authority in that case. Yeah, they're calling it traitor. Yeah. And Ron stoked the flames of that, of course. Like they wanted to release something, they released something that night that made it seem like Pence was trying to run a coup against Trump. To that. To agitate people as much as possible. They released Ron and Jim. So they released, you know, they tried to release these documents that that, you see it in the end of the series. Where, you know, you're saying the mother of all bombs is coming when it comes to, you know, an information drop. And that information drop was specifically targeting Pence. And there was, there were so much anger towards Pence. And this is as Ron and Jim. It's not as cute. Correct. Just at this point. Yeah. He was done at this point. So now Ron was just that. Yeah. Right. Yeah. It's just, I mean, how coincidental? Sure. And you call it a coincidence. Let's do that. What is the motivation? Like, why do you think Ron is doing this? Like, what is the, what's the reason? Well, he, he does treat the whole world like it's a game. And if you're, what are the objectives of that game? Maybe gaining power. Right. Because he's in contact with the administration. I mean, think about it. This guy was just running some fringe website out of, you know, Southeast Asia. And Japan. And suddenly he's advising, you know, the president. Like he's, he's gotten to the seat of power somehow using that website and, and cue and his sort of fame that was developed through cue. I mean, remember cue mentions Ron code monkey very early on in the narrative. So cue right at that hijacking point early in January. He's like, Ron code monkey. How odd. Yeah. A little bit of like, a little bit of theater. You know, that means cue is deeply invested in the community of the board, right? And it means the community is deeply invested in, and Ron. And so he was able to pivot that notoriety from, from obscurity to infamy. And he is interested in infamy, you know, he will embrace infamy as he has said. So he's a character, you know. I mean, you couldn't ask for better characters. I mean, if you had developed this as a drama, if this was fiction. People wouldn't, people wouldn't believe it probably. I don't know. I mean, there's something to be said for, it's like the two of them, particularly Ron and Jim, and then even Fred, like all of it is just, it's so weird. Oh, I mean, they're unbelievable characters to be sure. Yeah. And you have to say like what, what kind of person would be drawn to being, becoming an edge lord on something like that? Right. Hey, Chan, right? And so, and what, and Ron grew up with his dad running chance. I mean, what was like in that household growing up? Right. Right. So, yeah, I mean, very, very fascinating character studies to be sure. And if, I mean, so much of human history, though, is, is written by people with, I think, not identical tendencies, but people who are, who are driven for power and are, and are willing to do things that others aren't. Do you think you could ever get Paul to admit that he was the original cue? Would it be in trouble for that? I mean, because if you could, if he admitted it, that would, that would really pull the floor out of the whole thing, wouldn't it? I mean, I think that the fact that the first 127 drops were anonymous in the first place, that, you know, there's all these shakeups, there's a style change. Like, I think that, I think there's a lot, the fact that the vast, vast, vast majority of things that cue prophesies, that people believe didn't come true, all the central tenants, you know, the arrests and all that, you would think that that would be enough. If you could get Paul to come out and say, yeah, I was it, I mean, people who don't even believe that, if he came with the data and even then, many still would be like, man, it's the deep state, it's this, it's that. Like, they'll come up with some explanation to write it off. You know, and Paul, he released a whole book after, after this took place, you know, explaining, you know, his, his telling his story from that time period. So he was incentivized to keep the narrative alive. And I think that he, he told me, he's like, I asked him this. I was like, well, if cue was this great military operation, why would, why would they just let a fake cue take it over? And why wouldn't they try to reach out to you and reclaim it? And his answer, which I just think is how he was thinking about it, is, well, maybe they just wanted it to continue. You know, and he seemed, he, he thought of it almost like a child, like a, like a baby that had gone out into the world and it had become this, it was becoming this big movement. And he wanted to see it continue to grow. Oh, I don't know. How odd. And so Fred started eight, Chan. Fred started eight, Chan on a mushroom trip. Real on the come down from the mushroom trip. You know, he wanted to take the, the board creation of Reddit and the anonymity of four, Chan, and basically turn that into eight, Chan. And what was the difference? Is it a lack of moderation or this? Anybody could create a board. So, but what that meant was that people would go there and create boards with a lot of legal content. So we had a huge moderation problem in the beginning. Because they could post illegal content there, you know, you, you child porn or something like that. Right. And they, um, and first off, there could be hundreds of boards. How is he just able to manage all of that? You know, and they could do it totally anonymously. And if someone does post stuff and then they take it down, the person who posted that stuff can still post. They can still post. Because they can't. It's not like a, like a Reddit user where you could ban the user because they posted illegal content. And you can ban an IP, but if they're using a VPN, which, someone who's doing something illegal like that probably would be using a VPN, unless they're real dumb. Um, you know, it makes it very hard to track. Now, eight, Chan does respond to government requests for illegal activity like that. Um, I mean, all the, all the websites do. I mean, Facebook has tons of take tons of issues with, with that kind of material getting posted. So, you know, people does it with Jim. So Fred creates this thing. Um, you know, he creates a Chan. It revs up and it's not really, it's not really a huge hit overnight. It's not until gamergate happens when Chris Poole, who is the, um, owner of four Chan at the time, says, gamergate, you know, what's going on with these gamers and, and this, this, this whole like attack strategy that they're using too much. I don't want that on this site. He bans all discussion of gamergate bans, talk around it. It creates a lot of animosity in those communities and they're looking for a new home. And the new home that they go to is a, Chan. Um, so suddenly Fred has a huge influx of users. It's like, what do I do? So he needed more resources. He was cash strapped. I mean, he was just like operating out of, you know, like a, a, a very, uh, low rent situation in, in New York. Um, so we start getting offers and he felt that Jim and Ron had, had experience running Chan's and would be the best partners. They offered, you know, service space for him. Um, they offered a fly him out to the Philippines where he could continue to run, run each hand. So, you know, for him at the time, that was, uh, that was a pretty good deal. So he got on a plane and headed out to the Philippines. Um, and, uh, you know, their relationship over time started to devolve. What caused that? I mean, Fred, Fred is Fred would, I think say that he started to depart philosophically. Um, that maybe, uh, they made him kind of uncomfortable in certain situations like that they weren't taking a safety series, like things like that. Um, but he also found a wife in the Philippines and his wife was, um, her dad was like a priest. And he has since described it as a, and people who I was shooting with there would describe that religion kind of as a cult. So he was newly religious and eight channels. So doesn't jive super well with that philosophy. So, you know, maybe probably he believed in a lot of that stuff. Um, I think Fred, Fred is, um, impressionable and he's also going through life faster than the average person because he doesn't think he's going to live that long. Um, so that could have, that could have factored into it. Um, you know, and the big, the big riff though that happens between them is, you know, Fred just doesn't really want to work on any channel anymore. They're giving him too much responsibility in his mind. He doesn't show up to work one day. Doesn't show up for a couple of days. Maybe he's going to stop working on it. And that's when Jim, who was, um, giving him, who had given him a place to stay in the Philippines, um, free of rent, but that Jim owned, just barged into his apartment. And it was like, why aren't you at work? Um, and this, uh, Fred, you know, account is that it was very traumatizing for him. And he knew he needed to get out of that situation immediately. So I'm sure that there was a confluence of factors that led to, um, led to them kind of pulling apart. And also Fred was young when he created a channel. You know, he was like 18. So we're talking about somebody who's still growing up. Right. You know, and like, it's 21. I'm like, how would I do this? Maybe I don't want to be the, the, right. You know, but he still likes those, that world. You know, and Fred is a, um, a very, like, central character. And he likes to lean into that eccentricity as much as possible. And who Fred is online is very different than who Fred is in real life. And, um, I mean, both he and Tom, like Tom, he see who's Jim Watkins, kind of right hand man, artist in college. I think that Jim was hoping that Fred was going to have a similar relationship to him that he would take him under his wing while he was like, you know, 19 or 20 or whatever. And that he would just continue to be a part of their organization going to later years. And, uh, you know, and Tom, I didn't mention this in the series, but he's a psychodont. Psychodont. So he loves to experiment with psychedelics. That's like his, that's his jam. So he and Fred would, would, would do psychedelics like on occasion. So I think that they, they had a good relationship for a, for a long time. Um, and, uh, that's why I think Tom is the one that you see when they're trying to smooth things out, um, in the Philippines. And Fred's really gone after them trying to get the side offline. That's why Tom is the sort of most suitable peacemaker in that situation. Um, he's, as Fred would say, sort of the ice to Jim's fire. And then, that's also why Tom's pupils, I think, are like this in that one scene. He said it was just the lighting, but I think, you know, he's, he really is into that. Is Tom the guy who Fred records the conversation they're having and puts it all in line? Um, yeah, Fred's, Fred records that conversation and puts it all in. Without Tom knowing about it. Correct. Yeah. So, you know, that's not really the most noble approach when you're trying to negotiate with somebody. Um, I think that Fred, uh, is maybe interested in, in, I mean, he was, he had gained a new following. Um, he was, he had appeared on a lot of news outlets and stuff in the run up to that happening. And, uh, I don't know. He, he's also known as copy paste. So, anything you send to Fred, you know, it's, it's possible that he will simply screenshot and then share it with someone else. What does he do? That's kind of his tech. That's just his, his deal, his technique. What is he doing now? Um, well, the other thing that Fred really likes and, you know, I was saying, yeah, you should, you know, focus more on this other thing is fonts. He designs fonts. Right. Right. So, I think font work, um, for a variety of companies. Um, I don't know. He's probably working on a, who knows what else he's working on. Um, but, uh, he's living with his, his family now on, on the East Coast. And, you know, his mom and his brother have the same condition he does. Oh, wow. So he's helping his mom out living with her. Um, you know, he's, he's still pretty, he's still pretty prolific on Twitter. He posts, he posts a lot. He hasn't been banned. Um, he's also into furry culture. What culture? Furries? Yeah. Oh, okay. Furries culture. Um, which he's been posting about more lately. Um, but yeah, I mean, I think he's actually doing a lot better. I think that him being back at home with his mom is a better situation than he's not in trouble in the Philippines. Oh, he's in trouble in the Philippines. Yeah, you can't go back. But they don't extradite. Uh, no, we don't know. They, they can't extradite him for a cyber libel charge. You know, that was all in the craziest things to me and all of this. It's like, here you're running an absolute as free speech website. You know, taking it right to the edge, but you're going to go after somebody for something they said on Twitter. Right. And he's, and the thing is that he was saying like, there's nothing I can do. Now he's like, he's in trouble with the law. Right. There's the way it works in the Philippines is that you, um, it becomes a, like a criminal so the state takes it over. Right. If they determine that there's a case. So when Fred was leaving the Philippines, uh, he got advanced notice that an indictment was going to drop. Yeah, I saw that part of it is very compelling because it's like, he's under the wire, like barely gets out. Yeah. And he would have been fucked. He would have been fucked, especially because COVID was on our heels. Right. And if he gets COVID, I mean, he's already, probably, you know, could have been game over. Especially at that time we had no, we had no idea. Right. And if he goes to jail, it's most likely he's going to get COVID. Well, especially in the Philippines. I mean, the, the B. Kooton detention center, which is for foreigners, he would not fare well there. Right. Yeah. And with the, you know, COVID stuff ramping up, I have no idea. It would have, it could have likely died. I don't think that that's an exaggeration. No, I don't think it is either. Um, at all this, all the time you spent working on this, when you're, you're alone with your thoughts. And what, I mean, I think that this subject highlights some very important questions and important conversations about free speech and about what roles if any, these platforms, whether it's eight, chan or Twitter or what have you, have in protecting free speech or censoring questionable behavior. And I mean, obviously this did not end well. You know, I mean, and whether or not eight chan is responsible for some of it or whether the queue movement is responsible for some of it or what percentage of it is. It's clear that this becomes, it becomes a vector for a lot of like very questionable ideas and questionable behavior. And what should be done? Like, well that's part of why the approach I took was to be as neutral as possible going into this world. You know, create a historical document and show the mechanics. And, you know, how did all of this actually work? Don't look at the magic trick. Don't look at the spectacle as generating. Look at, you know, look behind the curtain so that that magic trick can't work again, or at least the exact same magic trick, right? It's like you watch pen and tell her and when they reveal the magic trick, sometimes it's actually more magical. But, but now you know how the magic trick works. Right. You know, I struggle with this question, would you rather live in a world where something like queue is possible? And if not, what's the cost? And this has always been the challenge with any case that kind of tests the limits of free speech. And, you know, it always seems like, well surely this is the, this goes too far. But I think that's why you always get sticky things kind of like this testing free speech. It's not going to be something light and fluffy. It's going to be something that actually has a significant potentially damaging impact on many people's lives. Right. And then we sit back and go, well, what do we do about it? But I think that all rights come with a cost. You know, it's usually on a spectrum of security to freedom. And how much freedom do you want to give up for how much security? Right. So, I mean, what do you think? Do you think that you would you rather live in a world where something like queue is possible? I'm torn, right? Because one hand, one hand, my perspective is that wouldn't work on me. Like this, the flat earth doesn't work on me. This doesn't work on me. Like these movements, chemtrails don't work on me. All these movements don't work on me, right? Right. So, but would they work on me when I was 15? I think the answer is yes. You know, that, that, there and lies a problem. Would it work on me when I was 20? It may be. 25, likely. 30, maybe not anymore. Like then I'm online. And then I'm starting to piece things together in a broader perspective. I'm not looking at things at face value and saying, oh, this is true. I'm going, hold on. And now I'm operating out of a lot of experience. And I'm operating out of, you know, an understanding of how all the shit works in terms of like propaganda and nonsense. And shitposting and a lot of these things. So should we protect people from things that wouldn't work on you? Like I'm sure QAnon's not working on you. Right. You have a much more sophisticated understanding of how the internet works. So it is, you know, all these things. Like what are we supposed to do? So the rational argument is you counter bad speech with better speech. Like you explain things in a much more educated or a much more precise. Well, that's what the series is doing in relation to Q. For sure. I'm packing it. That's exactly what your series does. And at the end of it, it looks preposterous. And it's not going to like, of a queue drops tomorrow. People are going to be like, bitch, I saw that series. Right. So this is the argument for free speech. Because imagine if in a world where you are like what you were saying earlier that if it wasn't for HBO and their balls and their, you know, their bravery. I mean, HBO's like they can do whatever the fuck they want. Their HBO. Right. And they're like one of the few who still will. Yes. One of the few who still will. And they did. And, you know, and again, I go back to Bill Marb. But I think he's got a very important show. And it's one of the few that did, you know, one of the few networks that did support him and that kind of program where you are allowed to talk about controversial ideas. If they're taking out people that are criticizing Q as well as supporting Q, then you've got a really weird slippery thing. And they're kind of a race reality. So what happens to the people that were invested in this? You know, they don't get closure. They don't get some an understanding. I would hope that a lot of the people like that one family, the guy with the big neck and this little kid, I would hope they would watch this series and go, Jesus. We got duped. This is kind of nonsense. I would hope, right? I mean, I hope a lot of these folks. And a lot have. You know, a lot of folks who are big Q believers or people who have family. I mean, it has, there's been a de-escalation quality too because when you understand that group people into this, you know, it's often the view of them. And when somebody who believe in all of this sees what was going on behind the scenes and actually engages with the material, for some of them, you know, they can go, okay, well now I have new information. of them. And when somebody who believe in all of this sees what was going on behind the scenes and actually engages with the material, first some of them, you know, they can go, okay, well now I have new information and I can arrive at a new conclusion. You're not telling them how to think. You're just presenting them with ideas and saying, you know, what do you think now? And this is the argument for free speech, but it's also it shows how complicated it is to unpack something like this. I mean, the amount of time and effort that you put in to expose what this really is is pretty substantial. It's substantial. Yeah. And difficult. I would imagine not just amount of time, but you have you have to frame this. You have how many hours of footage did you have to go through to come up with six episodes? Holy shit, man. It was a lot. It was a we had multiple angles, you know, right? But a Herculean effort, but you really managed to nail it. You did a fantastic job. And this is the argument for free speech because you show that this is most likely 99.999% nonsense, right? We don't sometimes post sometimes you'll get a hit, right? But the point is it's like through free speech and through your ability to accurately disseminate information, you've produced a really amazing and entertaining thing that gives people an insight into the psychology behind the folks that believed in this. The psychology behind the folks who are likely perpetrating it. It's an argument for free speech, but it's also shows how fucking difficult it is to really parse this out. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I look conspiracy theories or painting your enemies in a black and white, heaven or hell, all in an ether terms. That's something that humans have done forever. I mean, even during the Revolutionary War, there were a lot of theories going around about King George. We wanted to turn everybody into slaves. There is, so this is this and I'm sure that 15 year olds and 20 some things were impressionable and it motivated them in those situations. And I do think that the international component does add another element to this that's a little bit different. But that's why I always bring it back to the privacy side. I'd say before we worry about putting deciding what shooter should not be set let's restore privacy rights. Let's give people ownership over their data. Let's make it so that these companies can't know more about us than we know about ourselves and see what impact that has first. It does seem like that is where everything got really crazy because your data became a commodity that you didn't know you had. Like you didn't know it was valuable. So when you signed off on the terms and conditions and you just started posting things and you allowed these companies to track all of your information and all your stuff that you do online, you didn't realize that you were creating these enormous companies with massive amounts of resource that just collect data. They don't necessarily have a process to complex. They have products, essentially, Gmail is a product, Google's product. But really you're the product. You're the product because you're what they sell. These things they just offer you that so you give them the data and then once you give them the data then they sell it. So you're essentially a customer but you're also what they're selling. I might argue, I think you can argue that January 6th is a byproduct. How so? If you trace the lineage of data harvesting to psychometric profiles, to the psychometric profiles being used to target us with information that is tailored to our insecurities and desires, it drives us into more extreme groups. And then when we move in those more extreme directions, we're less willing to entertain an imposing reality. And then when we're less willing to entertain a reposing reality, we become less willing to hear things from another side because we only believe in our one truth. And then we become more interested in silencing whatever that one truth is. We become more angry. As they say, the hostility of suppression speeds up the treadmill of extremism, the more you shut someone up, the anger that become the more it validates the very thing that they were trying to stop in the first place. And then you end up with a cultural climate or a social climate where something like January 6th is possible. So I think that I don't think it's the only reason, but I think it was a huge, I think that the data mining was a huge factor in the data mining and concert with the algorithms because those algorithms, of course, use what was reaped from that data mining in order to drive people towards the crazy shit on the internet. You know, cue wouldn't have been possible without the algorithms. Bottom line, just wouldn't have, it wouldn't have escaped the chance. So algorithms essentially are, there's a problem in the inherent manipulation of people's viewing habits. And they're doing it to accentuate their profits and they're doing it to accentuate the amount of time that you spend online. So, and to feed us with whatever is most sensational. Yeah, but it's not necessarily, right? We talked about like what my algorithm show. That's what I'm interested in. Like my friend Ari Schafir pointed this out, like he decided to do a test where he only looked up puppy videos on YouTube. And then YouTube just started only recommending puppy videos. So it's like the argument becomes- We get driven into it. It learns very quickly and then it reinforces those assumptions. Right, but it's human nature is the problem. It's what people are actually interested in is the problem. Algorithms, they take advantage of our human nature, which is our human nature is to find these echo chambers is to like find confirmation bias. For sure. Yeah. I mean, I don't, I think a bigger question might be our algorithms free speech. You know, do they have, do they have, is that an expression of free speech? I mean, we, we have a a court case that I disagree with that asserted that money is free speech. Money is an amplifier. What court cases is? Citizen United. What was the case? You know, this is the flagship Supreme Court case that actually Barr, who is Jim Watkins attorney in DC. He was a part of that that case bringing it to the Supreme Court, which basically said that you could use money in political campaigns, right? It couldn't be directly connected to that politician. Either I had to be the, at least the facade of separation. See, that's where super PACs came from, where you could get huge amounts of money to run what you could call disinformation campaigns against the candidate. And this idea of disinformation also isn't new either. I mean, in my lifetime, the biggest lie that was told was the one that brought us into Iraq, ultimately, weapons of mass destruction, right? Like that got broadcast and cost how many lives. So these, these things aren't new. The idea that like a lie can have huge consequences in the world aren't new. But the algorithms are and I do think that there is a bigger question to be had around around, you know, should, should there be some restrictions placed on them? You know, what, what limitations might there might we put in place so that, um, so that we at least know what's what, what the rules are, you know, it's, it's a, it's a black box of amplification. And it gives, um, incredible power to those who run that black box. Do you think it's, it's at all possible that algorithms could be exposed in a way where people with the narrative shifts and we realize that algorithms are actually problematic. And that, that it has done irrevocable damage. And it's moved our society in this way as highlighted in the social network, the social dilemma rather, as highlighted in that where you're realizing like that the ultimate path for this sort of separation and this reinforcement of tribalism and that it really leads to like conflict, like almost undeniable. Like yeah, that yeah, I mean, we could do something where we could recognize that first of all, these corporations only exist because we didn't realize that data is a commodity. Once we do realize that data is a commodity, people are giving up that data almost, uh, against their understanding. They, they don't really understand what they're doing until it's too late. They're being duped, right? There's like this gigantic three card money game going on with your data. And then then you have the algorithm problem. And we're recognizing that this is essentially being manipulated. It's being manipulated by foreign entities like the IRA. It's being manipulated by who knows how many other countries that have similar programs installed. What do we do? Yeah. And you, what do we do? And you look at, you look at Twitter, and do you get rewarded for saying something neutral? Or do you get rewarded for saying something hostile, hostile, you know? And the more hostile, the more, you know, the more it satisfies the audience, the more the person who's posting is trained by that. They're trained to go, okay, this is the thing that people want. So it does drive that tribalism. And then it also makes people very sure of whatever that worldview might be because they can feel that there's a lot of people who like the same thing that they do. I mean, I know with absolute certainty that the Cuteubers were reinforcing the same way because they told me that they were. You know, I had Craig who was in it, you know, we talked afterwards and he would, he would discuss how like he knew what the audience wanted, what he couldn't, could not say. And he wanted to keep that audience. And he was trained over time to say things, you know, around QAnon that would drive more eyeballs. And but at the same time, it becomes his, that became his livelihood. And in the end, after the series came out and, you know, he had said at one point, you know, I still have all these people who follow me who, who like want to believe that that it's all going to come true. But he's like, look around man, it's a fairy tale. It's like our team, it's like a basketball game, our team lost and we're, you guys are still just dribbling around shooting hoops and, you know, the score is over. Right. Um, what does he do? But at the same time, he, he at that point was not willing to say that to his audience. Right. But because they were still his audience. What does he do now? I don't know. I mean, he, he expressed to me that he was trying to step out of the spotlight some. But I, but I, I think he's sad that he, I mean, he's told me he's sad that he, he's like, I just wanted to be a YouTuber. That's all I ever wanted to be. And now I can't be a YouTuber. Wow. Um, you know, and, so he can't come back with another channel. He's banned on everything. He probably go on Tiger Network. So, but I don't know how, how stable it is. I don't know anything about it. I haven't really used it. But um, in the real problem with banning people, it's like, I wonder, one of the craziest things though, the Craig told me, you know, it was in that hot tub scene in the end after he'd just been banned on, on YouTube. Um, you know, and you could see that that was coming in the right up, right up towards the election. The things were going to crescendo in that direction. And he's like, he admitted something to me, which is just that he knew all along that it was the idea that this is a military operation, and the Trump was behind in the beginning. He's like, it was a bunch of, you know, that was a bunch of bullshit. I never believed that. You know, in the beginning, um, he's like, the, we're just kidding ourselves. It was just a bunch of A-holes larping on each hand, and then suddenly, or for a channel, and then suddenly, you know, in his mind, the military got involved. Because he had these guys, these ex-military guys reaching out to him and sort of using him as a conduit for their agenda. Um, and so it's, there's that crazy aspect of this too, that, but it is fascinating to me that he, um, you know, that he openly admits that it started as a larp, but it memed itself into reality. And that's what you see come January 6th, as this thing that was casting this imaginary view of the world was trying to make itself real. And in many ways, it didn't, it didn't actualize all of the beliefs, but some of the central ideas of it, you know, if we assume that Ron is cute, well, Ron eventually managed to get access to the seat of the Capitol. If you want to say that there's, the storm is coming, well, a storm eventually came. Um, this is, this is me magic at work. Um, this is like a collective imagination that will something into existence. Um, and, uh, I know that's a little bit of a derail from what you were saying before about that. No, but it's, it's relevant. Was this ultimately satisfying for you? Like what, what, like, obviously your investment paid off, you know, I mean, it really, you put together a masterpiece, really did. What awesome team, but with everybody involved put together masterpiece, shout out to everybody. Um, but was this ultimately satisfying to you or does this leave you with like a sense of impending doom or both? Well, unpacking the mystery is satisfying. Um, reaching a conclusion is satisfying. But do I think that we're out of the dog house? No. Do I think that these patchwork solutions of censorship on these platforms is going to solve the problem that they think it is. No, I think it's going to make it worse. Um, do I think that it's driving more of a wedge in society? Yes, I do. So if, if it is in fact the goal to deescalate things or to, um, you know, make, make the polarization and society go away. That's this strategy historically and at present, I mean, there's lots of historical examples of how this doesn't work. Um, um, and why it ends up having the, why censorship ends up having the opposite of its intended effect. And I think we're watching that in real time. Um, but all of these people who are being banned censored, they're not disappear just because you don't see them on Twitter. They're mad, you know? And, and they'll find other platforms. But you got to, I think you had to let it work itself out. And if you're going to tinker with something, tinker with the business model, but these companies are never going to offer that as a solution. Of course. Ever. Well, the amount of resources that they've managed to acquire is staggering. There's never been a company like Google before. Imagine company like YouTube, they own YouTube, right? Yeah. Both of them together. I mean, either one individually. There's never been anything like them. The fact that they're both owned by one company is fucking incredible. And then there's Twitter and then there's Facebook and they're both amazing and Facebook also has Instagram also an amazing new thing. Like God, the reach and the reach is global. And that's why when we talk about, you know, are we getting out of the, the quote unquote dog house here? It's like, whatever the next war will be if there's going to be another war will be borderless, right? Because these ideas, seep across borders, the internet is borderless. And the internet is the new world. You know, with its own laws and its own regulations and the companies that are running, running the rules of those places. And I saw this when I was traveling. I'm just, you know, South Africa, Macau. I had production assistants who were working there who were totally red-pilled on Q related stuff that they had experienced on YouTube. So the ideas are penetrating abroad. So if these, if the polarization continues, it is not just in America, you know, it is happening ideologically on a global scale. And so it wouldn't be nation versus nation. It would be, you know, these patchwork, civil ideologies where people have very disparate views of reality. And that's why I'm such an advocate for, you know, folks talking to people that they've, they've sort of stopped listening to. It is, you know, if you people who have Q friends or family or if you believe in Q, like reaching out to family members again, you know, that's going to be a necessary step. But until we fix the privacy problem, I just, I don't see any of this going away. And it may be a runaway train. I hope it's not, but it feels like it feels like it right now. I think that's a great way to wrap this up. And thank you. Thank you for being here and talking to me. And thank you for your incredible amount of work that you put into that HBO series. It's amazing. I really, really appreciated and thank you for having me on. And for watching all six episodes and then rewatching my pleasure. It's just, yeah, it's been a great conversation. Thank you. We're fucked by everybody. But there's hope. There's hope. I guess we're here. We're okay now. We can try without hope. Yes. We can try without hope. All right. Bye everybody.