The general gonna experience I've been down so many rabbit holes so many nine eleven rabbit holes so many You know bohemian grove rabbit holes. I bought my one bones. I got kicked out Grove yeah, oh shit, why'd you get kicked out? Good weird Fucking weird I punched a kid in the head you punched a kid in the head and a heaming grove Yeah, it turns out it turns out this fucking kid was an infiltrator So then after that I was kind of this hero like a year or two later He'd come back as like I'm not coming to your little fucking weird party out in the fucking woods I was like I went once and ate that cool so the infiltrator What happened with you and the infiltrator? We're sitting on we're sitting on this fire you have these little They're kind of like tree houses or campsites, but they're really nice and everyone has a private chef Got like you know really yeah, you do share room being Jimmy John shared a room. That was fun And a camera kids talking on his fire and he's pops our pop and that shit and I just Fucking one out. Oh game a couple helped him up. It's like hey We good Well, we were I think you know we weren't on great terms I think we had an understanding it was it was just you know one of those things and then I couldn't go to the To the concert that night or things Zach Brown or somebody's playing like you can't come I just sit on like I was in fucking time Loud or something. I'm like fuck this place meanwhile your kid rock and you're getting left alone by these people with some fucking crazy person and you defend yourself Fucking weird there's gonna be a certain percentage of people that are just out of their fucking minds And if you haven't vetted them that's on you. Hey, hey, for all I remember it could have been drunk shit or whatever It wasn't down in the world. It was a little toss a little hit the ground maybe a punch here in there It was like you know those done. It wasn't like you know But it was a fight Just nice guy you didn't beat him. I was a tussle you're a nice guy But it's um how many people infiltrate that place because a bunch of people have filmed videos right now I Have no idea Alex Jones was the first him and John Ronson This is back before Alex Jones's persona non-grata and people would do legit like legitimate journalists like John Ronson would do these things with them I've never met her you never seen that video of them and go have you ever John Ronson John Ronson say brilliant guy You see what what is this? He's an author He wrote that book so you're getting publicly shamed about like social media shaming You know like he's an interesting guy. He's a very funny guy But he so he went with Alex to be him and growth and they filmed these rituals These people dressed like droids and they're burning this effigy in front of a giant owl statue Oh, I was it yeah, I was statues. He's fucking hilarious. So I'm there on day one, right? What drinking beers like it's pretty laid back there's some really cool talks remember this dude talking about Shoot asteroids out that might hit the earth in so many years shit like that. I'm like fuck This is cool But the first day it was the first evening and you gather on whatever the owl by this lake if I remember correctly Which could be a little hazy it was a long time ago and like I'm I've heard about this place I'm like this is some real secret ass shit man. I can't believe I'm fucking here, right? And it's just a troll of celebrities fucking everywhere you turn. It's just fucking hey fucking hey So you go there and I'm like thinking we're gonna hear some shit right? They're good they're about to introduce the first speaker and I'm like fuck this is gonna be some shit and they're like and No offense against this guy we could we consider him friendly. We have very good mutual friends But they're like ladies and gentlemen Tony Danza, I'm like I'm like what I'm like come on man. Who's a fucking boss tell them bitches Which you would have just gone up there, man. Who's a boss bitch? That's hilarious. I was like no fucking way man. I was like we came all the way to secret ass shit I love Tony fucking love him, but I'm like come on man I was like they brought Reagan back from the dead and he's gonna speaker hologram or some shit like you wrote for some devil shit That's just some crazy shit. We're the other he's very good speaker. I gotta say but maybe they toned it down Maybe they told me 20 years ago. Oh really I'm terrible with dates, but it's long time Okay, because when Alex snuck in was like This is like the 90s Jamie. What was it? Like when Alex Jones and John Ronson stuck in the behemoth grow that's when they first got that video I want to say it was in the 90s I was saying it was like 99 or something like that. I did have some fun there I gotta say it's fucking weird. I met like God Paul Pelosi and a son. Oh boy And like Chris Matthews Like you know, but let's hang it out with them. We have a cool conversations It's kind of weird and then they asked me like I had to come play my guitar. Oh No, I like to say it one of these camp things. I was like I'm so dirty like I don't do this shit man with the fuck Yeah, that's gotta be weird. Hey man plays the song Well, it's kind of like a unspoken requirement like a wink wink Like you need to take a guitar over there. You know if you want to Be in good graces or be a team player type deal and I'm like I really don't