The Jerogean experience. So they lead you from a hut, you're staying down. They stop, they go stop, listen to the insects, and the river, that's going to be amplified soon. I know, okay, it comes and the woman, the shaman wears his headdress, and she beats you with these leaves, and rubs his, says whatever chance she says, and rubs his stone all over you, gives you the ayahuasca, tastes like fucking ass, tastes like whatever's left in this ashtray, and you just drink it down. They say, you're a partner, or the side of the fire, you're on this side of the fire, you don't talk. He's having his trip, you're having your trip, that's it. You might throw up, because that is the ayahuasca doesn't make a trip, the ayahuasca takes everything out of you, and then the cham, I've written down actually. Chocruna, what's the difference? Yeah, so ayahuasca clears you, unless a chocruna, in this case, they showed me where the ayahuasca came from, planted 80 years before, they planted it. So, drank it, I'm laying there on a mat, it's just like a thin, thin mat, and it's just fire in this like, hot hut. I'm a bit worried about like anacondas and jaguars and stuff, but like, so she says, the shaman says, I'm your mother here, the ayahuasca, the root, is your grandmother, my son, who's training to be a shaman, and he's your brother, and the fire is your ancestors. So, I drank it, he said, stare at the fire for about five minutes, then go lay down. My partner started throwing up 10 minutes in, going to the edge, there's two entrances to the thing. I just wasn't coming, it wasn't coming. A little bit of like a light cap and a stem mushroom feel, about, I don't know, hour and a half or so, and then I started getting nauseous, but I'm trying to choke it down, like don't, oh, I think I'm supposed to like, supposed to throw up. So I kind of like, pitch black, I mean, away from the fire, went to the edge, and then like, you know how you can like sort of like, and then barked like a little bit, and then just unload it. I was afraid it would be like, wretching and wretching, it wasn't that. Just like unload it, and then he's right there. The shaman's like, trainee, son, with a bowl of water. He was, swish around, don't drink it, and he goes, are you having visions? Dude, I don't know how he was, I don't know how he was communicating with that. He didn't speak, I barely speak Spanish, and he barely speaks Spanish. But enough, I guess. I was like, he was like, you haven't visions, and I was like, yeah, they're more of like kind of mental, like the mental mushrooms, a mental, and he goes, okay, go back, be strong. I don't know how he was conveying this to me. But he was like, okay, go be strong, go lay down there, and like, you have to like be strong. So then it just opened up. And so more than an hour and a half in. More than an hour and a half in. Of a seven hour trip. Wow. Yeah, it took a while. Partner was going immediately. But like, I see these like fractals and like, and geometric shapes, and occasional splashes of, and this is the fat roof of the hut, right? So nothing's there. And in occasional like real splash of like vivid neon light. And then I started seeing these like orbs, kind of like going up into the fractals. And then the more I look forward, and back on my back, the more I look forward, back beside the side, there's just hundreds or thousands of these orbs, these small orbs going up into the fractals and just sort of like playing with each other. These orbs, they were kind of like had a life to them. So like, and then at some point, from me comes this orb and sort of like goes up. And then I started examining what the orbs are. So look, I don't know. I don't know about any of this stuff. But this is just what it gave me. I don't know, you know, same as mushrooms. I don't know if it's just scientific, or if it's like another realm, whatever. Right. The orbs were, I call it when you peer something, when you peer it. To me, they were moments of pure artistic expression. You ever have a set or a role where you're like, I hit every fucking move. You get in the zone. In the zone, sure. You pureed it. You know, in golf, Jamie, you might know, it was like when you fucking hit one, and you're just like fucking, but like, oh, but you're like, I can't hit the green from here. You do see it go perfectly and bounce. And it's just a pure moment of artistic expression. And generally when I see that, it makes me cry. When I listen to never mind, I start, I know, I tear up. You know, every hear that album, and you're like, oh, this is, they nailed it. They nailed it. They nailed it. The cigar different milieu in Barcelona. This church that was, it's being built still, is a 200 year plan to build this, the perfect church. Same Peter's Basilica in Rome. Okay. And you see it stunning. And I weked in there, I just, I mean, I started, weked. Start crying. It's like, I don't know. It's just like, it's very overwhelmingly perfect. It's art. Yeah. Other moments, I was it, it's not to be big moments. It could be small moments. I was at the haunted ride at Disney back in LA. And I was with some chick and I was like, some guy was like, oh, right, this is the, you know, and like, pitch, he's playing the role, whatever. And then like he left to go greet the next like car and as you're slowly moving forward. And then I was like, oh, I was creepy, right? And then he was back on me to go, oh, is this like frightened me? And that guy nailed it. And that moment, we were both fucking jumped. He fucking nailed it. He peered it. And what you want in those moments, you did it, right? You made this thing and that's the orb. And what you want is to make it for sure. But you also want is some recognition. You want someone to say like if you hit that golf shot, you look around like if you're playing by yourself and someone that next to he's like, dude, fuck it nice one. You're like, yes, thank you. You saw it. You saw it. Right. So there's been two things I've gotten that way. Two things that I've had that I'm like, I pureed it. One was that storytelling show. This is not happening. I just think it was like, I mean, I don't want to talk about myself, but it was cool. And it was a way for other comics to show themselves. No, you did. I can express it for you. You did an amazing thing. And those opening sequences where you'd have like these animated fight scenes and shit, they were awesome. It was just made it cool and fun to watch. And let people go, hey, hey, we're not going to censor you. We want you to do your thing. Your fucking strip club in the wood story is like these moments that I'm also allowing other people to like, so I figured out my orbs, what I do is make stuff myself and then also give a chance for other people to make this. It's one of my things that like making you have the same thing. Where you like having other people make their things. It's one of your art forms is allowing other people to make their art. Another one was this last hour I did, the two hour. It was good. It was really fucking, it was good. And so it would have bothered me at the time. I wasn't able to like make it as special. But it was able to in that moment to go, but I made it. It was good. I made a really fucking really mindful kind of perfect thing. And yeah, maybe whatever happened, like I wasn't able to make like millions of people saw it. But like thousands of people saw it, maybe 150,000 people saw it live, you know. But like I made it and I cried hard for that, for this not happening. Not so much that like for the loss, but for like for like when I was able to. I was able to. I was able to step back and go like it's done now. I made it and it hit me like, oh damn dude, that was fucking good. And I just kind of said goodbye to it. And that orb went up and played for eternity. Every time you do something like artistically pure like that and nail it, you pure it, those things are up there in the heavens and the whatever, they're playing with each other. All the forms that guy had Disney, the guy who made the basilica, nep the fucking crocobaine, never mind, not crocobaine, never mind is up there playing with each other, enjoying each other's company forever. And I saw myself in 50 years dead and the orbs are still playing. And I'm decaying and the orbs are still playing. They'll be there forever. And I was able to sort of like put that behind me and say, I'll move on to my next thing because what I want to do is want to make things right? I want to make another orb and that's kind of all I want to do now is just make another thing. And I won't always get there. But even if you fail, even if you're like, ah, that was still so you know it's getting you closer to a fucking perfect set. And sometimes it's just a 15 minute set at the fucking whatever club, you know, governors or some shit where it's like, oh, I fucking nailed that. Sometimes the 10 minute pop in you're like, that earthquake thing that I saw at the hot, that was one because there was some kid, some young one year comic watching that going like, oh, my God, he fucking pureed it in that moment. Yeah. But you want someone to fucking notice it once in a while. You just, you do catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience on Spotify. You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data cost all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.