Good morning everybody. It's morning. It's like a real job. This is like a regular Like a regular job This episode of the Joe Rogan experience is brought to you by Naturebox Naturebox is a way that you can get delicious healthy snacks delivered To your home or your office. I haven't delivered to my house But they're the official snack of the Joe Rogan experience now fish. Oh really yummy stuff And you can get it as good for you as you like meaning you know You can order pretzels or if you want to you can go gluten-free low sugar They have zero trans fats zero high fructose corn syrup nothing artificial and they're great. They taste delicious There's there's a ones that you guys will never see there's this sriracha Caches they're not getting in here. They never make it. They they get to my house. I open the box I pop it open. I said where the fucking cashews? Oh, give me them bitches I never I'm never bringing them in here. I'll just tell you right now. Jimmy you never getting in them. Shuracha cashews Unless he's sending like a triple order. They're too good. They're my favorite new snack But Naturebox has free shipping anywhere in the US and it's it's just an awesome alternative to vending machine snacks if you're at work and you're looking for snacks all the time and You hit that vending machine like what can I eat here that doesn't make me feel like a piece of shit Usually the answer is nothing, you know, maybe you might go with potato chips over candy bars or fucking cookies or something stupid But you could you could eat fairly clean. I mean you could you could get really clean where you could have like They have these spicy pistachios. They're delicious or like I said you can go with pretzels But I recommend the Sriracha cashews. Oh, they're so good. They're so good dude. Trust me It would be your favorite thing if I ever bought a man They've never make it in any of his son but Naturebox just allows you to eat healthy and have it delivered to you and Cut out all the nonsense of that that terrible feeling that you get when you eat crappy food and Just get angry at yourself But they have South Pacific plantain chips or another one fantastic. They're never making it in here. They just they get devoured But go to nature box calm slash Rogan And say 50% off your first box. That's nature box.com forward slash Rogan nature box calm forward slash Rogan enjoy it I enjoy it and like I said, they're the official snack food of the Joe Rogan experience Which say enjoy it and enjoy it and Brody Stevens and enjoy it We're also brought to you by on it calm that is oh and NIT on it is a human optimization website We sell you the tools that you can use to optimize your health your life your fitness We sell things like strength and conditioning equipment like kettlebells and battle ropes and Mace balls and these all these things that we use for steel maces all these things that we use for strength and conditioning workouts as well as healthy foods like hemp force protein powder Earth grown nutrients, which is an excellent supplement to your average diet the average healthy diet Most folks the reality is you don't quite get enough nutrients. You don't quite get enough healthy Protein don't quite get enough good foods in your in your diet most of us are too busy most of us have jobs most of us work There's there's certain ways that you can add To your diet where you can give yourself the building blocks give yourself the tools that just the healthy nutrients that your body needs Like earth grown nutrients and earth grown nutrients is an awesome new supplement that we have that's a combination of a bunch of different things and antioxidant brand blend that is all food based based on things like Peruvian purple corn acai fruit grape skin to a ton of different ingredients and it has a jaw dropping 75,000 or rock score the or rock score is the anti-accident score All that is explained on on it far better than I'll be able to explain it to you It also has a power green blend with spirulina alfalfa Oakgrass kale barley wheatgrass all these different things you can add it to a smoothie You can add it to just a glass of water and drink it and what it does is it gives you a little cushion and it gives you just sort of a Nice supplement to cover the distance between what most folks eat and what really your body actually needs and deserves and what on it is designed for and what we're what what our goals are is to give you Everything that you need to Optimize your health and your fitness and just to just sort of bridge the gap between What the average person takes in in their life and then it has in their body and what you really could actually use a need and When it comes to the strength of conditioning equipment, we just buy the best shit. We can possibly find whether it's a ab wheels or medicine balls or kettlebells We try to find the highest quality stuff We try to find the stuff that we find that is the most beneficial for strength and fitness and then we sell to you The most reasonable rates that we can if you use the code word Rogan you will save 10% off any and all supplements at on it That's oh and IT and use the code word Rogan all right Randall Carlson is here. It's early in the morning. Why fuck around you? Q the music The Joe Rogan experience Trying to get the old brain fired up in the a.m. It's very unusual that well I usually get up around this time so do a podcast around this time Randall Carlson ladies and gentlemen I first met Randall quite a few years back in Atlanta He and he blew my brain open with a bunch of crazy talk about asteroids and just all kinds of crazy shit sacred geometry and you're a very interesting cat and you you got a lot of cool stuff to talk about So I'm glad we finally got you here on the podcast your a much requested guest on my Online forum so folks know about you. They know about your work Oh All these years of And anonymity and now I'm suddenly I don't know if I'm ready for this Joe I think you're ready dude. I feel it from you. This is your time to shine. All right Joe Coming from you. That's all it all it requires Well, we had a great conversation when we first met and we did ever since then I've been trying to figure out a way to To repeat it online. There's videos of us actually having parts of the conversation, but It's there's music in the background. We're at the comedy club and the creative Yeah, so You you first I don't remember what we first started talking about but you blew my mind when you started talking about the Holocene crater and that this pretty distinct evidence that You know there's been more than one events on this earth besides the one that everybody knows about the 65 million year ago one with a big chunk of rock hit the eucatan and killed the dinosaurs But there's been a series of those and that these things may very well be responsible for a lot of the cataclysmic Stories that are in epic of Gilgamesh the Noah's Ark story all these different fables and and tales of Ancient traditions may be based on these cataclysmic disasters and now Since we've spoken Science has started to validate a lot of your theories and ideas even more substantially The discovery of this nuclear glass that they find all throughout Europe and Asia Tell me about all this stuff Well, did you catch the thing about a month ago? I'm think was in the New York Times most of the major newspapers a group of former NASA astronauts and scientists came out said we were New evidence was showing it. We were probably somewhere between three and ten times more likely to encounter things than anybody had previously been estimating even five to ten years ago Yeah, it was a pretty major article in most of the mainstream media You mean by encounter things by getting hit by something. Yes. Of course you remember what happened on February 15th of 2013 right what happened on February 15th Was that very Russian? Yeah And what was really interesting about that is because everybody was at least people who are interested in this sort of thing We're kind of looking to the sky anyway because this was the closest Pass of an asteroid Coming within 17,000 miles of the earth at the same time this object totally out of the blue came in and exploded over Chelsea and bince Siberia So it was very interesting in coincidental if There are such things as coincidences that here When we're expecting this very close fly by of an asteroid in your earth asteroid coming actually within our Geosynchronous satellites within the orbits of those satellites At the same time that this object is coming within 17,000 miles of the earth suddenly unexpectedly here comes the second object and explodes With the force of about a I believe it was about a 50 kilotun nuclear weapon and of course it had exploded quite high about 20 I believe 18 to 20 miles in the atmosphere and so It didn't kill anybody however The thing to bear in mind is if that object had been just a little bit better Or it had been a little bit denser or the angle of approach had been a little steeper instead of 1600 Injuries there probably could have been 1600 or more casualties at that point. I think the world would have really sat up and taken notice But it was basically just a warning shot It seems to me that our knowledge of asteroids and meteor impacts and things of that nature Our actual experience on it is based on this short window that we call human history Which is for the earth such a brief tiny blink of an eye It is Although I like to point out there that you know when you say human history we're talking You know 4500 to 5000 years ago Generally, I think most Historians of ancient History will usually say that the emergence of kine of form writing in the Middle East marks the beginning of official recorded history But you got to bear in mind that we modern humans have been around a lot longer than that Right now the as far as the hard evidence goes is which which is what I like to refer to Which means skeletal remains skeletal remains of humans that as far as we know are basically no different than modern humans If you put a flesh on them and dressed them up in modern clothes and they walked down the street you wouldn't think they were anything unusual Modern skeletal skeletal remains of modern humans are now dating between 150 and 180,000 years So when you think about that you know compared to what we actually have our our record of history Our record of history is one 20th one 25th one 30th of the actual time That we humans have been here now now it could be that modern humans have actually been here much longer than than 180,000 years We have no way of knowing at what point we moderns first appeared on this planet, but when you think of 180,000 years compared to let's say in round numbers 5,000 years it means that there's a lot of the human story missing and The thing that's always intrigued me is that given the assumption that they would have had the same Intelligence is us the same they they've got the same brain case size the same cranial capacity So one would assume that with brains as big as our modern brains they were able to think they had forethought they were able to plan ahead presumably have a You know have some kind of a tradition that could be passed on from generation of generation and accumulated learning But what we see is that there's basically no record to speak of of what people were doing culturally and that has led a lot of Scientists to assume that for all those tens of thousands of years and hundreds and hundreds of generations that people were essentially living nothing more than a subsistence Kind of hunter-gatherer existence, right? But what they haven't taken into account is the extremity of some of the global changes that have occurred in the interval that we humans have been here and as we go through our discussion today and I'll we'll pull up some images I think you'll begin to get a an idea of How extreme and how sweeping some of these changes have been and why any aftermath of those changes? We wouldn't shouldn't expect to find a whole lot of hard cultural evidence because what you'll hopefully begin to appreciate is that were some of these events of the scale and magnitude that have happened probably a dozen or more times In the the hundred and fifty or two hundred thousand years that we've been here were those events to occur today 10,000 years from now Archaeologists would be sifting through the through the rubble looking for any kind of evidence that we had ever been here And that's the thing we have to to get into our consciousness You know, I guess if there's any any implication of the the work that I've been doing is that we certainly can't take our present position for granted it seems very difficult for us to put into perspective numbers like 10,000 or a hundred thousand or a million we know that the universe has been around allegedly for 14 billion Yeah, so what the earth is 4.6 billion those numbers are so weird to it. They don't register They're just like I know four billion is more than 400,000 but both of them are alien You know what I mean? It's like I don't think we could really wrap our head around the idea that 10,000 years is such an incredible A length of time that if you left a car out for 10,000 years within You know three or four thousand it would be absorbed completely by the earth Joe within three or four centuries really Oh, yeah, I mean if you look at I mean steel body cars I remember very well as the kid not far from where we lived there was a auto junk auto graveyard and All the teenagers around there who were racing cars back into 50s and crashing them up and everything they seem to end up there And as a kid I used to like to go and Kind of hang around there and play in some of the old cars But they were already after sitting out there for 10 years I mean already well underweight or to rusting away I mean once that process of oxidation begins to take place it it accelerates not far from where I live in Atlanta. There was an old Iron bridge that had been built around the 1890s And it's no longer there, but by the 1880s it had almost rusted to nothing in within a century it almost rusted to nothing Yeah metal does not last long when exposed to the elements there was an interesting series of shows a few years ago I think it was it had to do with the idea of if what if humans just suddenly Departed what if we took humans out of the equation? What would happen to all of the infrastructure left behind just under normal kind of Gradualistic change that we're used to within you know the last few centuries The upshot of it was is the 10,000 years from now It's pretty much gone, you know, I mean If you look at the the the great buildings that that make up all the metropolis and metropolitan areas now of the world most of them are steel frame structures And they're you know clothed in in a skin that that will keep the elements out maybe for a half a century But without maintenance I mean you know that the that the golden gate bridge up in San Francisco is Constantly ongoing undergoing maintenance because if you stop maintaining it immediately it starts decaying immediately it starts rusting and Interesting if you think about if if we suddenly if humans left the planet 10,000 years from now some some Interstellar anthropologist arrived What would they see that would indicate that we had been here? What what do you think would still be left after 10,000 years? There's actually two things that they named in this particular program A bitch you can guess one of them out Rushmore. My rush more good good guess. Yes That's one of them and of course the great pyramid right the other one and that's it You know everything else is gone Wow now when you when you now begin to factor in the thing that I've been Basically working with is the idea that we have these intermittent I call them non-linearities discontinuities within the Normal orderly progression of things the catastrophes if you will super impose a few of those in the process and Basically five thousand ten thousand years from now You're not going to find much to show that we had been here That's incredible and when you see structures like go backly tippy which is Within the last couple decades been on earth in in Turkey Which is really thrown giant monkey wrench into the timeline of the hunter-gatherer transition into the modern agricultural City We're we're in a weird state because people are starting to dig up these things and go backly tippy was a completely Unknown structure until this one farmer or herder had found a stone and Started unearthing it and then realized it was these huge stone pillars of an unknown civilization carved with three dimensional shapes of these animals some of them weren't aren't even native to the area so it's incredibly confusing and purposely covered up 14 to 12 to 14 thousand years ago Which means that who knows how long it was there before it could have been Several thousand years old when they decided to cover it up But it was purposely filled in an enormous area purposely filled in somewhere around 12,000 years ago could it have been purposely covered up in order to protect it and preserve it could be right that we were hoping What they were hoping rather that someone like us would come along not us like doubling on me Maybe you but someone would come along and uncover it and then go whoa What's what's this all about like maybe they knew that there were going to be moments in time where these things happen these impacts these asteroidal impacts and That they're needed to be some sort of a way of of keeping track or some sort of a way of preserving Well, that that would probably be one way of preserving it for sure and the other thing would be it's just like you We mentioned you mentioned we the two things Mount Rushmore and the Great Pyramid of course are both built of stone Which is obviously much more durable than steel or you know the fabricated Materials that we're making today Even plastics even plastics are going to degrade over a few millennium But if you want to preserve something for millennia Make it out of stone and make it monumental And you know we're looking at it something like you just made an interesting point about it could have how much Previous to the to the burial headed actually been there And you know, it's difficult to date stone the way you would date snow and is you know You can use various um Ocosmogenic ways where when you expose stone to atmosphere It's going to accumulate cosmic rays which Cause changes within the stone that can actually be measured But if it's buried it's not going to be subject to cosmic rays so that you can't date it that way Which you'd probably have to do is date Find some organic material within the soil matrix or matrix of material around it and date that material But even there see that's not going to tell that's only going to give you a minimum date So in other words the structures there for who knows how long they decide to bury it They bring in the material and bury it and if some organic material is in that soil It's not necessarily going to be indicative of the age of the stone structure itself It's going to be indicative of the time at which it was buried And how did they determine that it was buried at 12,000 years ago? Was it the uniformity of the depth of I would assume now I haven't made a study of go backly tippy yet I'm hoping that when I get a chance to hang out with Graham Hancock I'm going to get filled in on all the details of that um I don't know specifically about that um Other you know monuments I do suspect that you know, it's been hanging pidang is probably very old in Indonesia A lot of the monumental stone work that we find like a bailback where you have these monstrous Megaliths Probably go back to place to see times and when I say place to see and I'm talking about The period from like 10,000 years back to about two and a half million years ago The time during which there has been this succession of glacial ages and interglacial ages um And you know, you mentioned term Holocene we talked about that Holocene is essentially the modern geologically popped We've been in this Holocene Epoch for Generally they say 10,000 years in rough numbers although it's becoming much more precisely dated Now you'll find a lot of references in the scientific literature that says gives the date 11.6 or 11,600 years As being the onset of the Holocene Which is an interesting date for me because I don't know if you've ever read Plato in his accounts of Atlantis There's two of his dialogues, Cretius and Tameus in which he describes Atlantis and he gives the dating in there At least on three separate occasions and he always places that you know There's this whole Success the whole lineage of the story goes back to Solon Who was a historical character an authenticated historical character who lived at about 600 BC And he was a log giver and poet in Athens and Due to political pressures and stuff he went into a 10 year exile and during that 10 year exile He went to Egypt and it was there that he presumably heard detail of Atlantis from elderly Egyptian priests and He was told and came back and then told the story to his grandson who told it again to to Several individuals before it actually got to Socrates and then Plato who presumably wrote it down But what it's interesting is that in Plato's account He gives the dating for the demise of Atlantis as 9,000 years prior to Solon's Exile to Egypt. Well given that that took places giver take a decade or two 600 BC We go back. That's 2600 years ago. Okay. Add that to the 9,000 years and we've got 11,600 years ago Now according to Plato's account he Says that it was shortly after this great war between the Atlanteans and the proto Athenians that there was this tremendous cataclysm and Atlantis sunk beneath the waves So he's giving that date at 11,600 years ago We now know from the scientific record That at 11,600 years ago. There was a major climate transition and there was a catastrophic warming spike that was associated with a Megascale meltdown event of the great ice sheets that were covering North America It was this event at 11,600 essentially jerked the planet out of the the depths of this ice age It had been in for thousands and thousands of years With that melting you had a rapid rise of sea level So it's very interesting that the date that he gives is precisely now the date that The scientists are giving for This transition from what's called the Younger Dryas. I think Graham has mentioned that in some of your Interviews with him the Younger Dryas which was this climate spasm that ended the last ice age so If we look at the chronology of events Around 26,000 years ago We were in the latter phases of a what appears to have been an interglacial period Not too much different from what we're in now Around 26,000 years ago the climate rapidly degenerated and these massive glaciers had expanded During this what they called the final phase or or the late Wisconsin they referred to it because Initially they were looking for this evidence in the state of Wisconsin So they they named it this last final phase the late Wisconsin So around 26,000 years ago We see the the launching of this final phase of the ice age the late Wisconsin Then at around 13,000 years ago as the dates are now giving it There was this enormous spasm of warming and this seemed to be associated with Rapid melting and the first real Rapid sea level rise Okay What happened is after a very short interval of time the climate snapped back into the full depths of glacial Cold now what had happened was if you go back 18,000 years ago. This was the coldest Part of the ice age. I mean this was bitterly cold period of time Where I live in in Georgia was the forests that grew there were like the forest you find in Canada now You had tundra up in northern Kentucky and southern Idaho tundra in southern southern Ohio. Excuse me um So it was a really really different climate and Once you got to northern Ohio and the northern United States When New York City as Chicago the Great Lakes The decodest all of that was under this massive ice sheet thousands of feet thick when you go up into Canada Over Canada the ice sheet was up to two miles thick I mean to think about that two miles thick of ice and it reached from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean And from the northern United States as far south as the 45th parallel all the way up to the Arctic circle Now that is Adrastically different world Bear in mind too that with that much ice piled up on the surface of the land Sea levels which contributed the water that formed that ice had to go down And it's now well documented that sea levels during the depth of the ice age were at least 400 feet lower than now Which which means that the continental shelves of the planet were basically exposed now Um Where I live in Georgia if you've got and stand right now into beach like a Cumberland island which is beautiful wilderness preserve you stand there on the beach If you were suddenly transported back to the depths of the ice age you'd be in the middle of a boreal forest Meaning a northern forest with spruce trees large trees all the trees the kind of trees you find now in the northern United States Canada that area and The beach wouldn't have been anywhere anywhere close. There would be another 50, 75 hundred miles further to the east Because as the sea level drops what happens it recedes right and so when This final phase of the ice age came on Sea levels begin to drop and So what it did was it exposed all of the shallow marine ecologies that that Rammed all of the continents to the atmosphere and basically would have caused enormous ecological havoc Well, then within a millennia or so the forests had expanded and had now grown out so now off the Eastern seaboard of the United States They constantly will find the remains of tree stumps and forests that had been growing there 14 15 16 thousand years ago Now the ice begins to melt sea level begins to rise Now it's important to realize that if we look at the way modern civilization has evolved What do we see is where do the first cities show up? Don't aren't they mostly trading cities that show up? They're port cities that if we look at the way modern civilization has evolved, what do we see is where do the first cities show up? Aren't they mostly trading cities that show up their port cities? They show up along the confluence of rivers. They show up where rivers meet the oceans. They show up on the coastlines. Okay, so if you had major cities during the ice age, it has Graham has pointed out. They're now 400 feet underwater. So you begin to appreciate when you begin to really look at the history of our planet. What you realize is that it's just almost unimaginably dynamic. This, an alteration from a interglacial to a glacial age is an extreme process. And so I guess the upshot of it is is that when we look now at the climate record that we have in hand now, which has been pretty much reconstructed with a fair amount of accuracy back to about 400,000 years. And these are primarily based on ice cores extracted from Greenland extracted from Antarctic extracted from mountain glaciers and mostly mostly Antarctic and Greenland. When you pull out that ice core, it's layered. Think of cutting down a tree and looking at the annual layers where you can actually count the number of layers in a cross section of a tree log and you know how old it is, right? Well, it's very similar in an ice core. You've got layers, annual layers because each year there's snow that falls. It gets compressed into fern, i.r. n, which is the transitional phase between snow and glacial ice. And it eventually gets compressed into glacial ice. And when you look at a cross section of the ice core, you'll see these fine layers in there. Right? So they can go back and they can look at these layers. They can count the layers. And there's a lot of things going on in these layers. Oxygen isotopes are critical one for ascertaining climate changes because oxygen isotopes are a function of temperature. And we have a graph here. We'll pull up in a minute. We can actually look at that. But what we see is that the climate has constantly oscillated back and forth. And when we look at the Holocene going back 10,000 years and then we take that comparatively and we go back 250 to 400,000 years. We can now begin to reconstruct these intervals of glacial periods interglacial. And here's the thing that should be sobering to everybody on the planet today as we think about climate change and all of this because obviously it's constantly in the news and all. The longest interglacial period now on record for at least the last quarter million years, the longest one, the longest unbroken period of interglacial warmth is the Holocene, the one we're in now. We've already exceeded by several millennia the longest previous period of interglacial warmth. I don't hear him talking about that. I don't hear Al Gore talking about that. I don't hear anybody talking about that in mainstream media, but it's hard scientific fact. Yeah, we would be shitting our pants way more if it was a global cooling than if it was a global warming. Let me tell you, we're going to pull up another graph. We'll pull up a graph in a minute. It shows you that even within the last couple of thousand years, periods of global cooling have not been pleasant times. periods of global warming is when we see human population expanding when we see cultural advancement when we see life spans increasing when we see infant mortality decreasing periods of global cooling are when we see populations going into decline when we see. life spans diminishing. We had a period of global cooling that began between 536 and 540 AD. It was this period of global cooling that launched what we know of the dark ages. This has now been well documented by Dendrochronologists, Mike Bailey is one of the leaders of this who's been looking at the climate changes of the last couple thousand years as preserved in the tree ring record. Between 536 and about 544 AD, we find that forest growth in the northern hemisphere almost came to a stop. And one of the consequences of that was this it was associated with a global cooling. And for multiple years running there were agricultural collapses where because of the cold and the damp that came on with this. You know the historical record is interesting because you read some of these accounts that were preserved from that period. They talk about weeks at a time where they couldn't see the sun they talk about when it did show up it was just a feeble imitation of itself. They talk about you know years with no summer basically. So what you had was succession of crop failures that led to people becoming malnourished. Once they became malnourished their immune systems became weakened and in 542 AD about six years after this well documented transition occurred. We had the onset of the Justinian plague which wiped out a third the population of Europe. And it took 300 years to recover from that. And it didn't we didn't recover from it until the climate shifted again and we went into what's known as the medieval warm period. And the medieval warm period was the time when the Scandinavians were farming on the west coast of Greenland where now it's perennially frozen. And for about the next couple of hundred years the climate was according to some researchers and some scientists as much as two degrees warmer than now. And you think it had to have been warmer if if they were farming in Greenland where it is now frozen ground. It had to have been warmer. And one of the things that happened with was with this warming you had an expansion of the growing season. And you also had the latitude belt at which viable farming agriculture could be practiced shifted three to four hundred miles north of where it had been which meant that for the first time England actually had a flourishing wine industry. It didn't exist previously and it has only existed until recent times because of genetically modified crops is now allowing them to grow grapes where they haven't been able to grow wine grapes until we go back to the medieval warm period. So what happened was now there was a lot of food for people to eat right people got healthier. But human population began to increase right we begin to accumulate wealth we begin to carry on commerce and trade after this three hundred years of dark ages where learning receded into the into the monasteries and life was very unpleasant very short very brutal very unpleasant. Now we had this warming period okay with the growth with the expansion of agriculture and the abundant food supply and the the prolific harvests people were getting strong healthy again. Statured and it's been well documented during this two or three hundred years of the medieval warming period human stature actually increased by inches average human size okay. By eleven fifty this accumulated wealth that had ensued from the benign climate of the medieval warm period is what allowed the the great cathedral building here to ensue which began between eleven thirty and eleven fifty A.D. And what we see is he'll make niphisant cathedrals if you bend the europe and visit any of the cathedral put that on your to do list yeah get there and look at some of these extraordinary works of art that were. Built during the high gothic or high middle ages between like I said about eleven fifty and the early thirteen hundreds they built eighty about eighty of these gigantic magnificent cathedrals that that required the the. Organizing of thousands of highly highly skilled craftsmen armies of workers and craftsmen you had stone masons and carpenters and glaziers and astronomers and geometritions and and all of these people brought together to create these incredible cathedrals and it was made possible by the fact that. And so I think that the entire society had become relatively wealthy and this wealth was brought on by this global warmth right now what we see. Go ahead to the to the begin to the end of this magnificent gothic building boom and by the way there's about five hundred smaller abbies. And so we're constructed during this interval this was a very prolific time for a number of reasons this was a time that you had the template nights forming you probably heard of the the template nights I'm sure. You had schools of kabala being founded in Spain and and you had the rise of cathearism you had the true biddhors you had these amazing spiritual. and so on. Amazing culturally it was a very extraordinary time those high middle ages. Well a lot of those gothic cathedrals were never finished and what we see is that some of them have the appearance you know I'm a builder by profession. And you know it's I've looked at some of these and what it's very much like is they're going along building and then all of a sudden one day nobody shows up to work. And there's still tools laying around there still materials that are often a pile that we're waiting to be incorporated into the structure. And what happened was that the climate began to cool again between 1315 and 1320 precisely when we see the end of this tremendous gothic building boom is when the climate began to cool. And it cooled for the next several decades and what we then see is a repeat of what happened between 536 and 542 AD agricultural collapses crops rotting in the fields people going hungry. Between I think it was around between 1340 and 1345 the onset of the black plague. And once again the population of Europe was decimated and it took 150 years basically to recover from that. And what we see is that what what was happening is the plant was shifting into what's called the little ice age. We probably heard that term the little ice age right there was two phases to the little ice age. And the first phase began like I said around 1320 lasted about 150 years and then there was a break. And it was during that break that warm period that basically the Renaissance kicked in and we began to really move forward. The second phase of the little ice age came in during the 1600s and it was actually even colder than the first phase. And worldwide glaciers expanded to the largest they had been in 10,000 to 12,000 years since the end of the big ice age throughout the whole Holocene glaciers had been smaller. Now during the big ice the little ice age they grew and they grew to the biggest that they've been in 10,000 years. It's important to have that context of understanding when we talk about glacier recession because the glaciers begin to recede around the middle of the 19th century worldwide as the little ice age begin to wane and global warmth, warmth begin to return to the planet. This happened in the mid 1800s around 1840 to 1860 we see the little ice age coming to an end. And at that point the glaciers worldwide begin to recede they begin to contract. They've been pretty much contracting uniformly since then. So when we're talking about glacier recession it's important to understand that the glacier recession really began a century and a half ago or more. And has basically continued more or less uniformly since then with no real change with the advent of human fossil fuel to the atmosphere. Human carbon dioxide which began really in earnest during the Second World War is when we begin to add significant amounts of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. It's important to realize that the glaciers had been receding almost a full century before that point. So when you see all this modern hysteria about global warming and the human created global warming that we keep hearing about in the news and that our influence on the atmosphere does it drive you crazy? I think it's silly. Obviously human beings are contributing to the carbon footprint. Obviously. And obviously that has an effect on global warming. Yes. But you've got to bear in mind that carbon dioxide is only one variable in a very complex equation. There are many factors influencing climate of which carbon dioxide is only one. The problem with so much of the stuff that's coming out in mainstream media which is coming through the intergovernmental panel on climate change is simply that when they were instituted back in early 90s by the United Nations, the United Nations framework convention on climate change basically gave them a mandate which is demonstrate that humans are causing climate change. They focused exclusively on carbon dioxide but there's all kinds of other things going on. For example, cosmic rays are constantly bombarding the earth, right? Cosmic rays produce clouds. The more the cosmic rays penetrate the atmosphere, the more low altitude cloud cover there is. Low altitude clouds reflect heat back into space. Now the amount of cosmic rays penetrating the atmosphere is a function of a couple of things. You've got the heliosphere which is the whole essentially the energy envelope of the sun which encompasses the whole solar system. The sun actually is fairly variable. What it means is that when the solar wind is in more intense phase like when the sun spots for example are very active, the solar wind is much stronger. What that does is it serves as a buffer that prevents cosmic rays from penetrating the atmosphere of the earth as strong as they did previously. Also the geomagnetic field of the earth acts as a buffer. So here's two things that are completely not included in the scenarios of the IPCC but probably have a very profound effect on global climate. The earth geomagnetic field is you know probably know that the geomagnetic field has periodically throughout earth history disappeared completely. Sometimes it's disappeared and come back with reverse polarity. Well that geomagnetic field acts as a buffer which helps to reduce the amount of cosmic rays penetrating the atmosphere. How does it disappear completely? I don't know and I don't know if really anybody knows. I haven't kept up with all of the most recent research on what the geomagnet is. But you know when you've got a little compass in your hand it points to north. Right? Right. Okay that's the geomagnetic field that's being measured by the compass. It's moving, it's fluctuating. And for whatever reason throughout the history of the earth it has completely disappeared at some points and has reversed polarity. It was the reversing of the polarity of the geomagnetic field that helped to prove the reality of continental drift. Because as the mid-Atlantic ridge separates and lava flows out it crystallizes and locked into the crystal and structure of the lava is the direction of the magnetic field. And the polarity of the magnetic field is imprinted in there. If you look at the research going back to the 1950s they realize that you had stripes effectively as you moved away from the mid-Atlantic ridge. As the lava flowed out and crystallized locked in the geomagnetic field they looked at it and they could see that there were times when it had completely reversed itself. And so this was like very powerful evidence that the theory of continental drift was right. That the Atlantic Ocean had been spreading. And getting back to this whole Atlantis thing which is interesting to me is because when you look at repladoes account he describes Atlantis as being west of the pillars of Heracles which of course is the Straits of Gibraltar, the mouth of the Mediterranean. He describes how if you go you come to some islands then you come to some more islands and that was the island complex of Atlantis and beyond that was another cold continent he describes that. If you look in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean you've got the Azores Plateau which is now a couple of thousand feet under the sea. The Azores Islands are the tops of mountains that emerge from the surface of the ocean. And they sit right on the Atlantic, the mid-Atlantic ridge. Now the mid-Atlantic ridge is some of the thinnest crust on the planet right. And it's like a giant suture or a giant crack that runs up halfway around the planet. Well when you have an ice age and you start piling ice up onto like the North American continent, what happens is the weight of that ice begins to crush the crust of the earth down into the mantle. It's called isostasy which is a vertical movement. Continental drift is horizontal isostasy is vertical. Now it's just like right now you're sitting on that soft chair and your ass is creating a depression in the cushion of the chair. That's isostatic depression. You didn't realize that did you. That your ass is creating isostatic depression. And when you get up and you walk away then you'll have isostatic compensation. You'll have isostatic rebound because the cushion will now rise because the weight has been removed. It's the same thing with the ice mass on the continent. The ice mass was hundreds of billions of trillions of tons of ice. It pressed the center of the North American continent or the center of at least Canada down perhaps as much as several thousand feet into the mantle. With the removal of that ice the land begins to rebound. Hudson Bay is the depression left over from the thickest part of the ice. Now our photographs we could probably even pull some up here in a minute. There are photographs taken where you can see the elevated shorelines surrounding Hudson Bay because it's still rising. What's interesting too is if you look at the distance between these shorelines you'll see that early on there's a greater distance because the land was rising faster. As the millennia have gone on the distance separating each shoreline has diminished. But now you have to think that all of that weight is being transferred back into the ocean basins. A lot of it was dumped directly into the Atlantic Ocean. Either via like the St. Lawrence River up there, the Hudson River up in the New York area, or via the Mississippi River into the Gulf of Mexico. Now you've got all this water dumping back into the ocean like I said ocean levels are coming up hundreds of feet. So now you're adding all of this weight to the ocean basin. And now you've got the Mid-Atlantic Ridge which is some of the thinnest crust on the Earth. This is what it's doing. It's like a hinge line, right? So now you picture during a glacial age when the weight is taken out it does this. Lifts up. Lifts up. Listening. Now I'm watching. Yeah. When the ice melts the water goes in sea level rises it subsides. Now you look at the Azores Plateau as a chunk of the African plate that got left over when the continent separated around 70 to 80. million years ago, right? If we, you've seen the maps and showing how you can fit the continents together. Yeah. If you fit these back together, if you reverse continental drift, go back about 70 or 80 million years and it's all fits together like a piece of the puzzle. But when it's separated, a piece of the African plate got left behind. And this is what is the Azores Plateau. And it sits right there astride the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. It's maybe a little bit smaller than the Iceland, which is considered to be an island, but a pretty good sized island, right? Now, if you're doing this and you have as much as two or three thousand feet or maybe more of this vertical movement, right? And you add to that the 400 feet of sea level rise. Now you can, I think, begin to get a scientific rationale for how you may have had a large island in the Mid-Atlantic back during the Ice Age. Also, additional evidence has suggested that the Gulf Stream, which now basically brings subtropical warmth up to Northwestern Europe. I mean, if you were to terminate the Gulf Stream, England would have some pretty malignant times, so in Northwestern Europe, because the warmth is being brought up by that Gulf Stream, right? Well, during the Ice Age of the Gulf Stream, diverted to the South at about 45 to 46 degrees, which was hundreds of miles farther south than it now goes. And essentially, if you look at the Azores Plateau, a big chunk of that Azores Plateau would have been above sea level during the Ice Age, and that Gulf Stream with its warmth would have just basically embraced it. So if you suddenly, Joe, found yourself transported mysteriously back to the Ice Age, that's probably where you might want to go, is the Azores Plateau. There might have been one of the most benign places on Earth to live during the Ice Age. And if there was a place where civilization could evolve, that would be a very logical place for it to occur. There's nothing really pseudoscientific now about assuming that there could have been some type of historic reality behind these stories of Atlantis. The problem is, is the Wuhu factor that has gotten so grafted onto these stories, but crystals and aliens and flying ships. I mean, we don't know, but we don't have any hard evidence. But the hard evidence does suggest that there could have been some very benign, habitable islands, large islands, intimate Atlantic during the Ice Age. Wow. So that's intense. That's so incredible. It's so crazy to think how much things have changed while human beings have been here. The idea that during Go-Backly Tappy, which was 12,000 years ago, that North America was covered with ice. And this was when these people in Turkey had created this incredible structure. So when you see this, the modern hysteria about global warming, which has really essentially been like a wrestling match between the left and the right, it's this weird thing where the right wants to support like burning coal and they don't want to diminish the economy by putting all these environmental regulations on natural resources. And then the left, which is screaming at the top of their lungs that the sky is falling, the oceans are going to rise and people are going to drown. When you know so much about what has happened over the course of the Earth, when you've studied this for a great deal of time like you have, what has your take on all this stuff? Well, I guess my take is fairly simple. I tend to think that if you look at the whole process of, if you look at the carbon cycle for example, what you see there is interesting. We have to place- You can talk to this as much as possible. Yeah. Have as little variation in the tone as possible. Thank you. You know, putting this into context, we have to say right now we're approaching 400 parts per million of the ambient amount of CO2 in the atmosphere. At the beginning of the industrial revolution, it was about 100 parts per million less. It's, you could say basically that over the last century we have increased the amount of CO2 measurable CO2 into the atmosphere, assuming that it's all from us now. I mean, there's questions about that too because if there are other factors inducing global warming, such as changes in solar irradiance, the amount of insulation penetrating the atmosphere and so on, it means that the oceans are warming as a result of that. Oceans are a gigantic carbon dioxide sink. When they're warm, they exude carbon dioxide when they're cold, they absorb it, right? So if you have a natural warming, it's going to expel some carbon dioxide. So it's not even clear necessarily that that 100 parts per million is totally the result of fossil fuel burning. But for the sake of argument, let's say that it is. Okay. 100 parts per million. That's miniscule trace of this very important constituents of our atmosphere. You know that carbon dioxide is what fuels photosynthesis, right? And if you start reducing the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and you start, once you start dropping below 200 parts per million and you get down to about 150 to 100, photosynthesis plant photosynthesis starts shutting down. I mean, it's kind of like the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere right now is at the very bottom of the scale. You know, if we look at history going back when you mentioned the Cretaceous tertiary when the dinosaurs ruled, there have been many times more the amount of CO2 up to well in excess of a thousand parts per million, several thousand parts per million in the atmosphere. But if we have increased the amount of CO2 by 100 parts per million in 100 years, it means we've, for every million molecules of air up there, we add one molecule of CO2 every year. Or to maybe try to make it a little bit more comprehensible. If for every 100,000 molecules of air up there, every 10 years we add one molecule of CO2, I'm not convinced that that's going to lead to global catastrophe. I mean, think of this one, you've got a huge tank with 100,000 fish in it. Every 10 years you throw in one more fish. Are you even going to notice that? You know, I think that what's happened is that CO2, like I said, is one variable in a very complex equation. But all of the other variables as far as the government funded research goes have been excluded from the debate. And what disbays me is that we're told that all scientists agree on this. No, all scientists don't agree. When you have, though, a major government funded program, like climate change research, which is funded to the tune of about $2 billion per year, you're going to have a large vested interest in basically, I mean, if these guys came out and said, no, CO2 is really not a big deal. It's perhaps fueling plant growth. And this is an interesting aside. You know, if you look at the projections of forest inventory back into 50s and 60s based upon deforestation as a result of timber, as a result of agriculture, the projections that at how quickly forest inventories we're going to rebound. If you look at those projections back into 50s and 60s, and then you realize that in the ensuing period of time, we've now got exhaustive, highly accurate satellite surveys that can actually count the number of hectares of forests. What's interesting is in the 90s, when they really started looking at this date of just how much forest there was compared to what the projections were, there was like 25 to 40% more forests worldwide than anybody had produced. What fueled this prolific forest growth? Well, it's very likely that at least part of it was because of the slight increase in CO2, there's a result of as well as the least part of it was because of the slight increase in CO2. There's a result of a result of old, this prolific forest growth. Well, it's very likely that at least part of it was because of the slight increase in CO2, as a result of our fossil fuel burning. Now, we put in, every year we burn about, introducing to the atmosphere about six billion tons of CO2. Well, there's about 750 or 760 billion tons of CO2 in the atmosphere naturally. And at least a third of that is cycling through from atmosphere into the biosphere, into the oceans, and so on. So our contribution isn't really that significant. But another part of the argument is that, and this has been admitted right in the IPCC reports, is that based on the amount of fossil fuel that we're burning, there should be twice as much CO2 into the atmosphere in the atmosphere as we're now measuring. So what they have been talking about for about 15 years now is where's the missing carbon? What's this missing carbon sink? Well, probably some of it's going into the ocean, but most likely a lot of it is going into fueling plant growth and forest growth worldwide. And there's a lot of studies that are beginning to come out now that shows that perhaps some of the desert areas of the planet, rather than expanding, are actually contracting. So at this point, there's a lot of things we still have to learn. When it comes down to understanding the climate, we're in the infancy. You can't talk to a single climatologist and come up with a one single coherent answer or agreement on what has actually provoked the planet to go into a full ice age or what has caused it to come out of an ice age. If you don't have, if you don't know that, we still have a hell of a lot to learn about how the climate works. So I get really frustrated when I hear this claim that the debate is over, the debate is over, because the debate hasn't really even begun yet. You see, we need to really look at all of these other factors as well. I mean, when you look at wind currents and ocean currents, you have the El Nino Southern oscillation. You have the Indian Ocean dipole. You have the Pacific Decadal oscillation. All of these things have a very profound influence on the climate. But they're essentially being ignored within the government-funded science to a large extent. And you have a lot of scientists who have objected to some of the claims of certainty made by the IPCC scientists. And for the most part, the left likes to demonize them. This is people like, I think probably the leading demon of climate deniers is Fred Singer, because he once was given a $10,000 unsolicited donation from Exxon years and years ago. But you've got guys like Roy Spencer and Craig and Sherwood Edso and Robert Balling and Timothy Ball and the list goes on and on. These are distinguished climate scientists that have devoted their lives to understanding climate science. Who say, well, there's a lot of flaws in the methodology of the IPCC. But by saying that now they have entered the spawn of hell according to the left. Now, in your right, see what happens. It's turned into a political football. It's an ideological debate. It's an ideological debate, a political debate. And it's just too bad that the science of the thing has been the suffering, the consequence. It is fascinating because even hearing you say this, I'm thinking it starts popping triggers. Like, I'm not the type of person that worries too much about being labeled because I've been labeled a million times already as an idiot. It doesn't bother me to start contemplating the possibilities of controversial ideas. But when I'm listening to you saying this, all I'm hearing is the knee-jerk reaction of climate denier. Climate, always a climate denier. This guy's a climate denier. And seeing these fucking things that we've grown to be accustomed to on television where you have a guy on the left who has one point of view and a guy on the right who says something wacky. And then everybody fights about it. And then the YouTube clips, you look at the comments and it's filled with this guy's a faggot and that guy's a faggot. This guy eats shit. I hope your house goes underwater. You fucking climate denier. It's just, and when I'm listening to you, and this podcast has been over an hour already, and it's incredibly complex. We have barely scratched the surface. And you're never going to hear anything like this on any television show. Because most people feel that the general public does not have the attention span to absorb all of this information is really complex explanation of the known science of the changing of the atmosphere of the earth. So when people start talking about climate denying and what is going on with climate change, what they're really doing is establishing their position on what side. I am the side of, I'm a rational person who believes in science and education. But how much of this of you actually explored? How much of it as anybody actually looked at? Well, I'm a person who supports industry. And I'm a person who believes that United States needs to recover from our economic disaster. And if we got to frack a few wells, so be it. You know, there's these two very distinct and oftentimes shallow ideological perspectives. And when I say shallow, I mean shallow from the point of the general public person like me who's not a scientist observing it and just picking aside with very little information, really. And you talked to, I would like to grab the average person, the average lefty and the average righty, the things that they're, you know, they have an opinion on global change. And just do me a favor and just write down what you know. Just write down. I don't want you looking online. You have opinion, write down what you know. You know dog shit. Most people know dog shit. It's true. It's true Joe. It's so fascinating. It's so fascinating to me because it becomes another one of those things. Ideology is, I mean, I don't remember who said it, but it's the enemy of free thinking. Maybe you get in these ideological clusters and then anything outside of this thing, these pretty term patterns of behavior that you've described to, anything becomes forbidden. It becomes, you can't even entertain it. You can't even approach the idea. You see it with everything. You see it with atheism. You see it with, you see it with any isms, with feminism, with the men's rights. You see it with people who subscribe to the right, people who subscribe to the left. Any variables that don't fit into their equation that they've already subscribed to, they don't want to be labeled as that other side. And anytime they don't want to be labeled, they start ignoring any evidence or any ideas that don't fit within this really rigid description. That's exactly right. I mean, that is, you hit the nail on the head Joe. I mean, that's so weird. That's so weird. People get locked into these ideological paradigms. And then from that point on, basically, their perspective is modified more by emotion and rationale. More by, you know, their feelings rather than real information. And it's too bad. I mean, I don't know what to blame it on. Maybe the fact that the government runs all the schools, I don't know. You know, the government monopolizes the education system. So they're not teaching people, critical thinking skills. They're not teaching people how to actually become, how to be scientifically literate, which is really sad. But you know, it's like, you know, you, we keep hearing the term climate change denier. Right. Well, there's no such thing. I don't think you're going to find a single climate scientist of any persuasion that denies that the climate is changing. And you've got to realize that the terminology has shifted. It was global warming originally when James Hansen gave his testimony before Congress in the summer of 1988. You know, and proposed these potential tipping points and catastrophic outcomes of our burning of fossil fuel. We've gone from there to the United Nations getting involved in the United Nations setting up the whole the IPCC and channeling all of this funding to it. And I think the consequence is that, you know, when you say, again, excuse me, we went from global warming to climate change. Why did they not really use global warming as a term anymore is mainly because for 15 years, the average global temperature is flatlined. And this is based upon, you know, the most accurate like satellite surveys. The IPCC generally focuses only on ground-based sensors, which are subjected to, perhaps, some considerable bias because, you know, your picture of ground-based sensors, most of them are sitting at airports. When these things were being put in, post-World War II, the bulk of them, 40s and 50s into the 60s, many of these airports were rural. They were, you know, adjacent to small towns. They were surrounded by fields and farms. What's happened is the urban area has encroached, you know, every when you when you create streets, pavement, buildings, all of this absorbs heat, right? And no one has really done an exhaustive study of the potential bias that's introduced into the ground-based sensors that part, at least part of the warming of these ground-based sensors may have nothing to do with carbon dioxide at all. It may just have to do with the fact that they're sitting next to a huge parking lot, you see. And I mean, you know yourself, if you walk out, you know, if you're walking in a field and then you walk onto a asphalt parking lot, immediately it's much, much hotter. You see, Anthony Watts, who's another one of the dissenters that was demonized, is the only one who has really attempted to exhaustively document the accuracy of the ground-based sensors. And what he's come up with is that perhaps as much as 30 to 50% of the perceived warming of the last century, which is about eight tenths of a degree centigrade, is probably as a result of that bias that's been introduced by what's called the urban heat island effect. And all of the major, say, LA has a urban heat island mitigation program underway. All of the major metropolitan cities are now trying to mitigate the effects of this heat because of all of the cement and the buildings and the pavement and the parking lots, they're always hotter than the surrounding rural areas. So the question has been legitimately raised how much of a bias has been introduced into the ground-based sensors? Well, when we turn to the balloon sensors, the radio-san balloon sensors and the satellite sensors, basically what they're showing is that the average global temperature has been flat for 15 years. Well, because of that, and many of the key scientists like Phil Jones of the IPCC has basically publicly admitted, yeah, when you look at the average temperature from that perspective, it hasn't warmed in 15. Now, there are regional pockets of warming and records being sat all the time because local conditions will affect change enormously. Just like I was talking about the urban heat island effect is a local or regional condition. But because of the fact that the climate hasn't warmed statistically significantly in 15 years, now we don't talk about global warming, we talk about climate change. But those two terms are not interchangeable. Global warming is a very specific model of climate change, which is that you've got this 15 micron wavelength of CO2 in the atmosphere that's trapping infrared radiation emanating from the earth. But if you're talking about climate change, now suddenly, our umbrella goes much, much huge. And it now encompasses all of these other things that I was talking about. And to question the consensus idea, to question that CO2 is the primary or sole driver of climate is not to be a climate change denier, see? Because no, I would challenge anybody who even uses that term, well, show me an example of any climate scientist, no matter where they fall in the argument, that is denying that the climate is changing. I mean, anybody who has studied the climate all knows that it has changed dramatically and dynamically on any scale you can look at, whether it's the decade scale, the centennial or millennial or beyond. It changes on every level. And that's the thing we have to recognize that if we stopped burning fossil fuels tomorrow, we didn't drive another car, we didn't, we shut down all the coal plants. I'm going to tell you this, the climate would not stop changing. When you see a story, like here's one, it's in the news about US Senator Marco Rubio's denial of man-made climate change should play well with his tea party base whose support he'll need if he indeed runs for president in 2016. But in taking this position, Florida's Junior Republican Senator ignores the vast majority of the world's climate scientists who say human activity is contributing to climate change and rising sea levels. Human activity is contributing to climate change. No doubt, there's no doubt that human activity contributes to climate change. Human activity, again, is one variable in a very complex equation. I wish Marco Rubio would keep his mouth shut until he goes and spends about six months or a year really doing the homework because any could talk a little bit more intelligently about it. But that is the problem, right? It really does take that long. It does. Like I know you, I've, one of them, you six, seven years ago, something like that. Yeah. And you had already spent decades observing the effects of climate change and of asteroid Olympics and the history of these things. I mean, the amount of time just absorbing the information so you could rattle it off like this in a podcast. I mean, what the fuck got you into this? Like how did you get down this rabbit hole? Well, this is an odd rabbit hole, right? It's an odd rabbit hole. It's a fascinating rabbit hole. I'm so thankful not only that you've gone down, but that you're willing to exchange this information with us or imparted on us because it's, it's a very different perspective because I know you're not a right wing lunatic. You're a very science based guy. But you're, you're looking at this in the way your explaining is incredibly rational and incredibly frustrating to me that there's not that many people that are that are that are saying this. Well, the upside, I think, of the whole global warming issue or the climate change issue is this that if, you know, the thing is, I made the point that even if we stopped all fossil fuel consumption tomorrow, the climate is still going to change and it's going to change dramatically. It's going to change sometimes even catastrophically. What we need to do from here on out is basically think about strategies of adaptability. If as a result of this whole issue, even, even though I think it's miss-based, you know, miss applied, if part of it that comes out of this is that we begin to develop strategies of adaptability, that would be a good thing. If, however, we focus so exclusively on carbon dioxide to the exclusion of everything else, that could be a bad thing because the climate is going to change. No matter what we do or where we go with it, the climate is going to change. So you could put up solar panels until the cows come home, the houses that are on the beach and malibu are still going to be underwater in 100 years. Well, not necessarily. Not necessarily. So by real estate in malibu. Well, see, the thing is, if you look at the, I mentioned earlier that there was a break in the little ice age of about 150 years that basically led to the Renaissance, right? Well, we've been in a recession of the little ice age, an interruption of the little ice age for about 150 years. And right now, you know, and again, the IPC, one of the things that frustrates me is that they basically exclude solar physicists and solar scientists, who are essentially saying that insulation levels in insulation, the amount of solar energy, penetrating the atmosphere, is at one of the lowest levels in thousands of years. And, I mean, there are solar physicists that are saying, you know what, we could be at the beginning of another phase of the little ice age. Now, if our CO2 is helping to ameliorate somewhat a return to little ice age, that would be a good thing. So muscle cars are green. That's what I'm getting at this. Coal and muscle cars are good for the forest. Well, the property, the problem with coal is not so much the CO2 is to me, it's just the particulate matter. Right. You know, that's a different question altogether, the pollution, the pollution, which is horrific in China when they use coal plants. You see these people that are essentially walking, it looks like they're in the middle of a forest fire. They're walking down the street. And it's just dark everywhere. See, that's a different issue, you know. And I consider myself a conservationist in the respect that we basically need examples of un-pristy nature, because ultimately nature is the most powerful teacher. And we need examples, we need places where nature is just left alone to do its thing without interference of human beings. We need clean air. Nobody has the right to don't shit in the air that other people have to breathe. Nobody has the right to don't shit in the water that other people have to drink. To me, those are different questions and really where the more of our focus should be rather than these abstractions. I have found, of course, I've gotten some flack over the last few years by saying some of the things I've been saying here, you know, that I've had people stand up and accuse me, oh, you're just, you say we can just do anything we want. We can just destroy the earth, which of course is not the case. And not saying that at all. Not saying that at all. And when we begin to look at the bigger context of this thing, and we begin to understand that the extraordinary changes that this planet has been through. And even to some of the lesser things in recent years, Mount St. Helens, you remember when that erupted in 1980. Tens of thousands of acres were turned into a lunar landscape, right? Well, if you read the accounts of the scientists, the biologists, the zoologists, the ecologists that have been studying what happened to that decimated landscape in the aftermath, what you find out is their surprise and almost shock at how quickly nature recovered from that. And how quickly, you know, colonizer plants moved in and was followed by a whole, the whole succession ecological succession of reclaiming that land. If you look at the exon Valdez disaster up in Alaska in Alaska. And that was over the short term devastating to the local ecology. And yet what's interesting again, there have been several books written by some of the lead scientists involved in that talking about how remarkably quick nature began to reclaim and recover from that. And here's some irony where the government forced exon to go in and do its cleanup is actually suffered more than the areas that were just left alone for nature to reclaim. That's fascinating. So the chemicals that they used in order to break up. Yeah, that was the issue with the Gulf as well, right? Those dispersants that they were spraying over the area, they probably should have just left the Gulf alone. Because, you know, when you have submarine earthquakes, they can expel huge amounts of hydrocarbons into the ocean. Nature has been dealing with a massive expulsions of hydrocarbon into the oceans and into the marine ecologies for millions and millions of years. You know, it was bad. But I think, you know, what we'll see is that the recovery time has been considered faster than most people believed possible. You see, I think what's really going to turn out in the end looking at all this is that nature is robust. And when we begin to look at the number of times that nature has been disrupted by, we've been talking about asteroids and comets and here's a perspective for you. You know, at the peak of the Cold War when U.S. and the Soviet Union were eyeballed eyeball with our nuclear weapons on high alert. And we had, we had 10,000 weapons on our side. They had 10,000 weapons on their side. The total nuclear arsenal at the times had about 18,000 megatons of energy capable of being delivered. 18,000 megatons. Now, that means 18 million tons of TNT. The bomb that destroyed Hiroshima was about 10,000 tons of TNT. So 100 times, 100 Hiroshima bombs would be one megaton, right? Now, there was about say 15 to 18,000 megatons total in the arsenal of the superpowers during the height of the Cold War. Had we unleashed an all out nuclear war and fired every warhead that we had in our arsenals at each other. 15,000 warheads, you know, I mean, yeah, 20,000 warheads, 15,000 megatons, it would have been an environmental disaster unprecedented in history. You remember the scenarios about nuclear winter, right? Because of all of the fires and the soot in a particulate matter thrown into the atmosphere, it could literally bring on a mini ice age, right? And probably cause, without even the radiation cause major collapse of the human population, right? Get this number in your head, 15,000 megatons. Okay, now, even a small asteroid impact or let's say, let's say the asteroid impact that struck the eukatim. There's a simple formula that you can use. When you look at the crater size, you take the size of the crater and raise it expressed in kilometers, raise it to the power of 3.4 and multiply the result by 2.4. And what it's going to give you is the energy yield in megatons of that object striking. If I put in 180 kilometers into this calculator here, which is the diameter of the eukatim crater, and I raise it to the 3.4 power. And then I multiply that by the 2.4 power. I get the megaton yield, all right? That number comes up to be 3.111 million megatons. I divide that by 15,000 and basically what we have there is about equivalent to the entire nuclear arsenal of the superpowers 8,000 times over. 8,000 times over. Now, what kind of an environmental consequence would there be to that? Well, we saw that global firestorms, you know, the studies of the amount of soot at that boundary layer shows that the amount of biomass that went up in firestorms at the KT boundary was about equivalent to every plant on earth today going up in fire, right? You had tsunamis that were perhaps a thousand feet in height. You had global earthquakes probably measured 10 to 11 on the Richter scale. And you know how the Richter scale works. It's logarithmic so that an 8.0 earthquake is 10 times more powerful than a 7.0. 9.0 is 10 times more powerful than an 8.0. An 11.0 earthquake is going to be unimaginable. The whole framework of the globe would have shaken. You probably would have massive failures on every fault line on the planet. Now, the KT event was the middle of the five great extinction events, right? There was artificial solarian, there was the permeant triassic, there was a couple more, two of them were more extreme than that. Now, even much smaller than that, right? You know, when they talk about a tipping point, you know, are we talking about a tipping point that could trigger a climate change, a disastrous catastrophic climate change as being a few parts million more of CO2 or is a tipping point really a mile wide asteroid slamming into the earth at 100 times the speed of a rifle bullet. That could be a tipping point, my friend. And that has happened thousands of times and hundreds of times since we humans have been here, hundreds of times, hundreds of times. And when was the most recent one? That was the policy and crater? Well, probably. There's evidence emerging now that the collapse of the late Bronze Age civilizations around 4,200 years ago may have been precipitated by a series of impacts. There's evidence emerging that the climate downturn that occurred between 536 and 540 AD that talked about earlier may have been triggered by a series of multiple impacts. One that looks like it occurred off the coast of Norway and another one that looks like it occurred off the coast of New Zealand, like tandem impacts, right, around 536 AD. And we're basically faced with the idea now that literally impacts from things from space may be hundreds of times more likely than anybody was even imagining a generation ago. So we're essentially this civilization that is banking on the knowledge that we've accumulated over a very small amount of time. And as we're uncovering more and more evidence, more and more information, we're starting to realize our ignorance. We're starting to realize how little we know about our own history, the history of this particular species and how it's interacted in this crazy volatile environment of earth. And how many times have been hit by rocks? Yeah. And see, you know, 100 years ago, the assumption was what are these, these images of these craters or impacts? Oh, yeah, that's actually 10 years old. But it shows now all the identified impacts. And this is 10 years old. So since then, some new ones does, it does, and since then has been discovery of this nuclear glass that they've found all over Europe and all over Asia, I think, are you referring to the possibly the thing that Graham was talking about the the 13,000 year ago event? I think I think that's what it is. What I'm referring to is there was a mainstream report about all these, these pieces of this very similar material to what they find at nuclear blasts. Yes. And that it was all over the place at when they did the core samples around 12,000 years ago. Yes, then that's exactly what Graham's talking about. Yeah. And, and yes, the evidence is getting stronger and stronger each year that there may have been a multiple impact event, the terminated the Ice Age. And this is still a very controversial idea because the gradualists just don't want to go there. And this is probably what killed off mass extinction of the Willy Mammoth, mass extinction of the saber tooth tiger. Yes. And a series of animals that they really have not figured out why like there's there's been all sorts of theories about why the Willy Mammoth went extinct and some of them are ridiculous like that people did it. You know, I'm glad to hear you say that. That's ridiculous idea. Well, it's ridiculous when you think about what kind of people were around 12,000 years ago and what kind of weapons they had and what a fucking mammoth looks like like Jesus Christ. How many of them were? And the other thing that's ridiculous about, and obviously when I say ridiculous, I'm ridiculous. I shouldn't even be making that statement. I don't know. I've done very little research. But the research that I've read and the people that have questioned it have talked about the mass graves where they found these animals that have died instantly. But the research that I've read and the people that have questioned it have talked about the mass graves where they found these animals that have died instantaneously thousands of them and not consumed either. They don't show signs of predation or of butchering. They've died in full form, full body. Yes. And they've massive mass of graveyards and for centuries pristine mammoth tusks, ivory have been hauled out of the permafrost of Siberia in train load lots. And this has gone into the global ivory market literally for three or four hundred years. Some estimates are that there may have been as many as four to ten million woolly mammoths worldwide. Most people don't realize that right here in North America there were three species of proboscidion or three species of elephants during the ice age. Africa has one species, India has another species. We had three species here. During the time we go backly, Tapi was being built. Yes. Wow. During the time elephants in high elephant. And here's another perspective. Is that one that they found? What is that? This is the Berasov command that was found in 1901, quick frozen. Yeah. With flash, now at the time this photograph was taken, wolves had eaten the flash off of the skull. That's why it's bare. But what you see there immediately. Dirty wolves. Yeah. Eating some million year old meat. It's disgusting assholes. It's a big, probably 13,000 year old meat. So that's a little not quite as bad as a million year old meat. It's disgusting. But you can see the mammoths left for a limb just in front of his face there. You see how it's... And if Jamie toggles back and forth between this image and the next one, you'll be able to see... Yeah. This was how the woolly mammoth was found. And so they took photos of it when it was found like this and then they left it alone and the wolves came and got it. This is a reconstruction, I believe in the Leningrad Museum. So what they did was they took the remains of the woolly mammoth and then taxidermis came in and reconstructed. But this shows the position in which he was found sitting on his haunches like that. And at the time that the woolly mammoth met his demise, he was eating flowering plants. Right? Now it's important to keep that in mind. His stomach was full of about two dozen different varieties of plants and sedges and things that he had been munching on up in Siberia. At the time that he met his death. A number of interesting things, the contents of his stomach had not putrified. Right? Now that's mysterious. The fact that his flesh was still edible, at least by wolves. The story is about the scientists eating mammoth burgers as probably made up. But the wolves definitely were able to eat the flesh. It was described as still being marbled. Almost as if it had just been frozen a week ago. But since the time that the woolly mammoth died, it had its whole carcass. And this was a six ton woolly mammoth. So it had been frozen for how many thousands and thousands of years. And so thoroughly frozen that the contents of the stomach could not putrified. Now a woolly mammoth of six tons has a lot of internal heat. Right? Clarence Birdseye, the founder of Birdseye Foods and the inventor of the fast freezing of foods for preservation, got involved in examining and speculating about this woolly mammoth. His conclusion basically led to something like this. In order to prevent the contents of the stomach from putrefying, the entire carcass of the woolly mammoth would have had to have been frozen through and through in ten hours or less. Now bear in mind that this woolly mammoth was eating flowering plants, right? Now how cold would it have to be to freeze a six ton woolly mammoth in ten hours or less? His estimate was probably somewhere around 150 degrees below zero. So from flowering plants to 150 degrees below zero in ten hours. What causes something like that? Well, there's been some speculation. The speculation that I found most interesting was possibly volcanic gases that had been ejected up into the stratosphere, approached absolute zero and because of the cold fell back earth. I think you could get the same effect perhaps with gases released from a disintegrating comet nucleus. It's still a mystery. I mean anything that anybody says at this point is purely speculative. However, it's clear that whatever this mammoth underwent was disastrous in the extreme. You saw him sitting there on his haunches, right? Both of his hip bones were broken, which means that he was slammed back onto his haunches very violently. He was also found with an erect penis, which means that he died by suffocation, which meant that he was entombed virtually instantly by the material that later became the permafrost. We were talking about the little ice age earlier and I was talking about how the little ice age ended around 1850. Well, this guy was found about 1901 after the climate in Siberia had been warming somewhat. And what happened was a part of a cliff that had been next to the Berosovka river. The river had shifted its channel and eroded some of the cliff face back. And then one year, one warm spring, there was a collapse of the cliff face that exposed this mammoth to the atmosphere. And at that point is when the wolves came in and begin to devour the flesh on the skull. So clearly this moly mammoth is an example of indicative of some type of a catastrophe. Whether it was a global catastrophe or a local catastrophe nobody knows. But clearly it was catastrophic. But that wily mammoth is only one of dozens of examples of flash frozen, late place to see mammals that died under similar circumstances. And these large graveyards of mass extinctions, of thousands and thousands of animals. What are the best examples of them? Because I know that I've seen some of them online, but I can't pull them up like I'm sure you can. I've got some right here if I can get my laptop there. Jamie, pull up, look towards the bottom of the list. You'll see place to see the lost world of the place to see. Do you see that? No, it's a PowerPoint. It's in that list of the PowerPoint so that I gave you some photographs. You're freaking me out. I just want to tell you right now, you're freaking me out. Well, I get freaked out pretty easy, but that's freaking me out. Well, I actually frozen mammoth. I have to confess that one of my objectives in coming here was to try to freak you out. Well, you did it. Congratulations. You're successful. I've been terrified of Yellowstone for years now. I watched some late night documentary. It was a huge mistake. It was one of those things I was about to go to bed. And I was just flipping through the channels. And they were going over this thing about a caldera volcano in Yellowstone. I was like, what the fucks a caldera? And then they started talking about it. What was it? Something like 600 kilometers wide or something crazy like that, which is something like 300 miles. And they were saying that they didn't even discover it until they started doing satellite imagery of Earth. And then they realized that, oh, this was a giant volcano that was so violent in its eruption that it blew the mountain off of it. It became this massive crater and that it happens every six to eight hundred thousand years ago. And that the last time it happened was six, eight thousand years ago. So hopefully keeping our fingers crossed, we got another hundred thousand years. If we're lucky. Yeah. But see, that's another aspect of this component of the dynamic history of planet Earth is these gigantic volcanic eruptions. There's been some interesting work linking asteroid impacts with giant volcanic eruptions as well. It would make sense that the energy injected into the Earth by a major impact could trigger volcanic eruptions. We know that during the Great Meltdown event of 11 to 13,000 years ago that there were enormous massive volcanic eruptions. And Mount St. Helens, for example, was massively erupting at that time. I have photographed, I have some photographs right here. I don't know how much time we have to look at some of this, but where I have gone out and I've found thick layers of white volcanic ash from Mount St. Helens sandwiched in between these flood layers. And it shows that, and it undoubtedly had to have been a response to the fact that there's enormous mass transfer of weight that we were talking about earlier from the continents back to the ocean. And when we go through, and maybe it's time to go through a few of these images that I brought so you can begin to see some of the consequences of this melting. You begin to appreciate that, yeah, there were these just enormous mass transfers of weight. Unloading in certain areas, loading in other areas, this would clearly have a profound effect on the subterranean stability and could easily lead to major eruptions. And there was a spasm of major volcanic eruptions globally at the time of the transition out of the ice age, which would only have added to the havoc of that transition. And why, you know, half of the great species of megafauna disappeared? A megafauna is basically defined as any animal, in this case, mostly mammals, over 44 kilograms in body weight, which is about 100 pounds. So that would include us. And if you started thinking about all of the animals globally worldwide that are more than 100 pounds, depending on how you divide up the species, there might be 100 to 20, 130 different species. And I'm talking about the lions and tigers and bears and elephants and rhinos and hippos and moose and caribou and dot-dot-dot right down the line, right? Okay, let's go back to the ice age. The extinction to loss of species at the end of the last ice age was about equivalent in number. The loss of species of megamamels was about equivalent in number to the number of species of megamamels that still exist. So, in other words, these events that terminated the ice age basically decimated half of the species of megamamels on earth, half of the species disappeared. So, if you are going to try to affect an equivalent mass extinction of species today, you'd basically have to eliminate every animal on earth over 100 pounds in body weight in order to get the equivalent of that mass extinction episode of 12,000, 13,000 years ago. That's insane. It's insane, but it's absolutely the truth. What is the official or mainstream explanation for this? It doesn't exist. Okay, you brought up the idea of it's called overkill, which has been the dominant theory for decades, which is that human hunters exterminated the woolly mammoth. And in some vague way, the extermination of the woolly mammoth, being at the top of the food chain, somehow had a ripple effect down through the ranks of species and somehow perhaps in an unaddressed way resulted in the loss of all these other species. But they just don't address that. And the more you said that theory is ridiculous, and that's an understatement. I mean, you're talking about perhaps bands of few hundred or maybe even a thousand individuals, migrant bands, human hunters coming in and somehow able... See, you got to bear in mind that the estimates of human population during this time globally is less than the estimates of the population of woolly mammoths. Somehow our ancestors were able to wipe out 4 million to 10 million woolly mammoths so fast that they couldn't even reproduce. So there was only like 10 million people back then? That's... well, see, that's based upon more or less the conventional interpretation. Now, of course, what we've been talking about implies opens the door to their possibility of there being a lot more people. And the mass extinction also, including a massive amount of human beings as well. And there is some interesting evidence emerging now that there perhaps was a population collapse between what is called the Clovis culture and the Folsom culture. The Clovis culture appears in North America to be what is believed to have been the earliest culture. And there's a site in New Mexico that was the first discovery of the association of human artifacts, meaning spear points in arrowheads and things like that, along with extinct mammals. This is Clovis, New Mexico. It's a very interesting site. I visited there about six or seven years ago in order because I was looking for this so-called black mat layer, which has now been documented dozens of Clovis sites around North America. And the black mat layer is this unique layer that essentially separates the place to see it from the Holocene. And it's full of soot, it's full of iridium, nano diamonds, microspherels, and all of the signature things that are indicative of some kind of a cosmic event. Is this image indicative of that? Is that what this is? Yeah, that's kind of a blurry image, but right there you can see it up here too so you can face the microphone. Yeah, okay. Yeah, the white strip in the middle shows the black mat layer. That's exactly it. And what you see below it are the bones of extinct mammals. And what you see a couple of thousand years later is bones of extant mammals. And nowhere above that black mat layer do you find the bones of the extinct mammals? What is extant? That means dead. No, still exists. Still exists. Okay. Bears are extinct. I say. You know, that's- Mammoths are extinct. So there's a very distinct line that can be attributed to some sort of an event. Yes. Some sort of an event. Something before that, they're all alive, something after that, they're all dead. They're all dead. And a massive amount of the larger mammals gone. Wiped off the face of the planet. Wiped off the face of the planet. North America lost about 75% of its species of megamom. Holy shit. There we go. There's some of them. What is that thing below? That thing below, what is that fucking thing? Giant ground sloth. That fucking thing is the Megatherium Americana. It's the giant ground sloth. It was the size of an elephant. Oh my God. These are the Glyptidonts. These are all 10,000 years ago? Not this guy. These is a dinosaur, obviously. Dinaurus Maximus is the giant moa. This guy threw him in here for Ocus because he's just such an awesome creature. That's the terror bird. That's the terror bird. Yeah. Scroll back up. Stop scroning him. Look at that fucking bird. That's the seven foot tall up bigger than that. That was the eight, nine foot tall. Yeah. A bird that doesn't fly. So essentially a murderous ostrich. Yeah. And this was the top of the food chain during the Mayan scene. Really? Yeah. This was the baddest ass predator on the planet for a while. Really? More so than a saber-toot tiger. These guys existed before the saber-toot tiger. Wow. But they succumbed to one of these global events. You got to bear in mind that if you take a census of all the species that ever existed, compared to the species now, it's conservative to say that 99.99% of all species have become extinct. Wow. And the ones that, and of course most of those had went extinct without any help from humans at all. Stop scroning. What is that fucking thing? It's my theory, I'm a Siberian. I'm a Siberian. Jesus Christ. Yeah. I mean, you begin to appreciate. It's like a bull that fucked a rhino. Yeah. It's pretty. It's like that. Yeah. Wow. That's insane how big that is. Oh, it was huge. I mean, it was elephant size, basically. A woolly rhinoceros, the size of an elephant. Wow. And this is the C. Which is the classic woolly rhinoceros. And there have been quite a few species of these guys found that were flash-pros. And this is 12,000 years ago. This thing existed. Oh, woolly rhinoceros. Yes. And we're in North America. Jesus Christ. That's incredible. And what's the mainstream explanation for these things going away? Good luck on trying to find one. I have looked. There is nothing. There's nothing. So is this something that they just haven't formed any theories about or they don't try to or it's been ignored because it's not enough information. It's been ignored. And here's why. At the dawn of Earth Science, geological science, and early 19th century. To a man, every one of the founding fathers of geology, whether it was William Buckland or Kuvier or Sir James Hall or Rodney Murchison, Adam Sedgwick, you could go right down the line. All of these guys from 1820 up to about 1860, every one of them was a catastrophe. To a man, every one. Because these were guys basically who had not been indoctrinated into any particular interpretation of world history, they went out and they looked at evidence in the landscape. And their conclusion was, you know, something really catastrophic has happened. And then what happened was you had Charles Lyle, play fair and hot, James Hutton. And these three guys came along and basically established the doctrine of uniformitarianism as it's called. A mouthful. Right. And basically the idea of uniformitarianism was this. Is it we look at modern processes to explain ancient processes. So if we see a river eroding its bank, moving sediment, creating a sandbar with that. If we see like during the early 19th century, we were in the last phase of the Lyle stage. So glaciers were receding and these guys could essentially go up there and look on a year to year basis and see what was happening as the glaciers were receding. Right. So basically what they then did was extrapolated from modern processes to try to explain all the ancient processes. This is the doctrine of uniformitarianism. Okay. It's a very powerful model for understanding ancient change. However, it became ensconced as dogma. So that by the turn of the century as we come right up to the threshold of the 20th century, it was now considered unscientific to try to explain anything in the past that we couldn't see happening today. Right. So as we go into the 20th century, this gradualist dogma became ensconced in academia. And every geologist from about 1900, up to about 1980 was thoroughly indoctrinated into this idea of the gradualism that all of the earth changed that we see going on on the planet today has occurred. One grain of sand, one drop of water at a time. And it was considered to be very unscientific to begin to evoke things because initially some of the founding fathers of geology were a lot of them interesting were theologians who oftentimes a number of like Adam Sedgwick as a good example of somebody who was a traveling theologian, a traveling minister. Right. He was traveling around England and he was seeing things like the Tim's River Valley and he was seeing that the Tim's flowed in this gigantic channel that was completely outsized relative to the river that was flowing in it. And he says, that must have been from a huge flood. Well, he was a theologian, right. So he said, no, it's flood. Right. But as it turns out, there are enormous geomorphic effects of gigantic floods all over the planet. Right. We know that now. Right. In the 1800s, they assumed that if you saw effects of gigantic floods, it had to have been no as flood. Well, at the same time that you had geological gradualism on the ascent, geological gradualism came along in the form of Darwinism and the two sort of complemented each other and mutually supported each other. Well, if we've got infinite time, you know, millions and millions of years of gradual geological change, now that allows us millions and millions of years for gradual biological change. And these two paradigms were mutually reinforcing. So now we come to the 20th century and for the first three quarters of the 20th century, that was the dogma that was indoctrinated into the minds of every earth scientists. Right. And to vary from that was to be pseudoscientific and you're trying to revert back to biblical fundamentalism if you start talking about giant floods. Right. Well, what happened was, and it was left to people like Emmanuel Velikovsky who was not an earth scientist. He was a psychoanalyst and he wrote several books in the mid 1950s where he had gathered together in one place all of this anomalous evidence from the earth history that did not fit the uniformitarian paradigm. Now, his books were popular successes, but mainstream science just slammed him, slammed him and said this guy's a nutcase, right? Well, he did make some serious missteps in trying to explain this anomalous geological evidence for catastrophe. And it was those missteps that they were able to focus on to try to discredit him. However, the amassing of evidence for catastrophes in earth history has held the test of time. And what we see is, what 1980 was a pivotal year. That was a year that three separate teams published evidence showing that the Cretaceous tertiary boundary, the dinosaur boundary, was profoundly catastrophic. And that opened the door to begin a reconsideration of earth history. Now, at the same time with the advent of the space program, we are beginning to realize that near earth space is not a completely empty place. It's actually densely populated by all kinds of things. See, prior to the Apollo Moon program, it was believed that most of the craters on the Moon, if not all of the craters on the Moon were volcanic, right? Post Apollo, the realization was that no, they're not volcanic. They're impacts of things from space. See, now you look at the surface of the Moon, and I think the last image on the Joe Rogan image is there is going to be a picture of the Moon. And you'll see that it's littered, littered, thousands and thousands and thousands of craters. And because it doesn't have an atmosphere, because it doesn't have plants, we can actually see everything that's happened. And the point, Joe, is this. If we were able to strip away the biosphere, the thick layers of sedimentary rocks, the oceans, the earth would look like the Moon. God damn. It would look like a fucking Moon. So it's simply a matter of time and perspective that we really, well, thankfully, these people like you that are paying attention to us. But with the amount of time that people have been videotaping things and writing books, this tiny little window, that just hasn't been enough time to really get a real account of how often this takes place. Because that amount of time, although it's a grand amount of time compared to our lives, the life of an individual, for the life of the planet, it's nothing. It's a perspective issue. It's a perspective. Exactly. Exactly. Wow. And this is one reason why I'm an advocate for moving forward and essentially becoming a cosmic civilization. You see, I came of age during the heyday of the Mercury and Gemini and Apollo programs. And that was the one thing. When I looked back and I go, we know what, one of the last times that it was really proud of my country was when we put those men on the Moon. When we planted our American flag on the Moon. And I really believe back in 1969, 1970, that we were America's destiny was to move the human species into this grand or cosmic environment. And then of course, you know, the Vietnam War came along and other priorities and money got shifted and Nixon administration shifted huge amounts of money away from the space program. And at the time table it was set out that we were going to have a permanent lunar base by the end of the 70s. First man mission to Mars before the 80s was over. Perhaps independently self-supporting colonies in space by the year 2000. Merrze was a junior in high school when Kubrick's 2001 is space odyssey came out. Have you ever seen it? Sure. 1968, nobody had any, it was no stretch of the imagination, assumed it by 2001. Yeah, there were going to be orbiting hotels in space, right? That could have happened, but we lost our vision, we lost our will. And we just got sidetracked. You know, I remember in the 70s talking to people about the potential of colonizing space. And the fact that we were seeing the materials and resources found in space. And the knee jerk response I always got was, well, we've got too many problems here on earth. We got to solve those problems first. Well, my response to that was, well, good luck. Because you're basically talking about altering human nature, right? And it's going to take something more than just some policy to alter human nature. It's some serious consciousness excursions. Perhaps people going to space, you know, here we had these astronauts. I met Edgar Mitchell years ago. He's a Mason. He came to my lodge years ago, Edgar Mitchell, who was one of the astronauts. He was one of the many astronauts that went into space. Mason like is in Freemason. As in Freemasons. Everybody freaks out and he says Freemason. I know. Illuminati, black helicopter. More nonsense. And we should have a whole session just to deal with that ridiculous nonsense next time. You freaked me out about that. Okay. So Edgar Mitchell, when you met him, was he talking about aliens? No, no, no. No, he was talking about going into space and seeing God. It's crazy. The aliens. Yeah, crazier than aliens. Yeah. He's God made aliens. Perhaps. So he saw God in the sense that he got a sense. Without even saying God, he got a sense of the grandness of the universe. Yes. And the potential role of humans in that. Have you ever been to the Cacob Observatory in Hawaii? No, I haven't. The Cacob Observatory in Hawaii is a very unique place because it's on the big island of Hawaii. And it's very high up in an altitude. And when you get up there, you actually drive through the clouds. I took my family there several years ago. And we were bummed out. We were like, oh, it's so cloudy. We're not going to be able to see anything. But then you pop through the clouds as you continue to drive. And the view is magnificent. And it is to this day, one of the most intense experiences, consciousness expanding experiences I've ever had without drugs. I believe it. I mean, it was like a psychedelic experience. It really was. Because the amount of that's the Cacob Observatory. See how it's above the clouds. When you, that's a daytime shot. See Jamie, see if you could pull up a nighttime shot. Because they set the camera aperture to capture the, I didn't, I had a regular camera. I couldn't really capture the actual stars themselves. But you see the Milky Way, like not like that. It's way more intense than that. You see the Milky Way in its full form. You see all right there. And there's so many stars. It's so shocking. You're immediately forced to accept the reality that we're in space. Whereas it's so easy to deny when all you see is the moon and a couple little dots, like whatever man, I'm in Hollywood. I got to go to work when you drive and you get on the, that's what it's like. Yeah. And it's so, it's, that's just a photograph. And that's, you know, obviously there's some doctoring going on. Because I don't know what those lines are. But it's insane how intense it is. It's insane. And it's, it's right above you. Yeah. Right above us all the time. That's what I love about the high desert plateaus. You've got this dry atmosphere. And it's like literally you can almost reach out and touch the stars. You know what we're talking about? right above us all the time. That's what I love about the high desert plateaus. You've got this dry atmosphere and it's like, literally, you can almost reach out and touch the stars. You know, what you're talking about, you've never been to LA before. This is your first trip to LA because when you're in California, you just go to the Mojave and stare at space. Well, I stare at space and I stare at the rocks. Yeah. The rocks below my feet and the stars over my head. Yeah. How did you get involved in the exploration of all this stuff? Well, you know, I guess I better time to come out of the closet. I think I did a little too many drugs back in the 60s. I think he did the right amount. Yeah. I think you're being hard on yourself. Actually, actually, in 1969, of course, I was raised in rural Minnesota. And where we grew up, we lived on the shores of a puddle, a meltwater puddle left over from the receding of the glaciers. Yeah. To call it a puddle. I call it a puddle. It was three quarters of a mile long. It was just, you know, Minnesota, Wisconsin's got 25,000 lakes. And every one of them is left over meltwater puddles from the recession of the glacier. So I can still remember being like six or seven years old and my dad telling me, you know, once upon a time, this was thousands of feet under the ice. And that's how this we had land on the edge of this lake. And as a kid, I used to sit in my backyard and fish for, you know, sunfish and crappies and bowl heads. That's what I don't understand. The inner up your surface is one second. How the fuck does that happen? We're 10,000 years ago. It's a glacier. 10,000 years later. There's fish in there. Uh huh. Where the fuck are the fish coming from? I don't know, but they were there. But how where's the large mouth bass come from? What's the all this with the lake trout in the great lakes? Where the fuck do they come from? If 10,000 years ago that was frozen solid. Yes, frozen solid. Where the fuck do lake trout come from? I'll have to get to work on that, Joe, because I don't know the answer. I need to know, man. I'm freaking out. How about Northern Pike? I mean, Northern Pike, you go to Saskatchewan. Yeah, flying from all over the world to go fishing up there because they have this massive population of beautiful northern. Yeah. Like these big, that was frozen. Yes. So that's Gantmine was a mile of ice. What the fuck, man? I'm freaking out. That doesn't even make sense. Yeah, so you saw this. So you were a kid. I was a kid growing up with that landscape. So I got fascinated by it. But in 1969, I went to a rock, an outdoor rock concert that was at an airport called Eden Prairie that's in the just outside of the Twin Cities, many apless. And it's on a series of bluffs that overlooks the Minnesota River Valley. Right? And of course I'm stoned out of my gourd. And I was taking a break from the, the, the music and the ladies and everything. And I went over and was standing on this bluff. And, and Jamie, if you would pull up, I think it's near the, the end of the pictures I brought for Joe. I have a beautiful example of scale invariants. And this is going to be similar to what I saw. And, and when you see it, um, that's, that's like the 25 images that's labeled for Joe. Which picture though? It'll be towards the end. It's a picture of the snake river. Find it. Wow. The snake river. Wait till you see this, Joe. Now this is an example of scale invariants. Now what that means is that, you know, in a, yeah, here we go. Now look at this. What you see here, where can folks that are just listening to this, go and see these images? Is there, are they on your website? Uh, I think this one is on my website. Okay. Yeah, I think this one's on my, so the snake river. You see the snake river, scale invariants, meaning that the, the river at the bottom. Obviously you see the lines all around it where it indicates that there was a much, much larger body of water one point. Much bigger. This, the modern snake river is about 50,000 cubic feet per second. Right? At the end of the last ice age, the river here was about 30 to 40 million cubic feet per second. So was that because of the melting glaciers, the force of the river? This particular was not directly fed by the melting glaciers. It was the result of the catastrophic overflow of Lake Bonaville, which was the result of massive prolonged torrential rainfall that, that just drowned all the deserts of the, southern, of the western and southwestern United States. And there was an overflow, a spillway out of the Lake Bonaville basin in northern Utah. And it's spilled over into the snake river plain of Idaho. 30 to 40 million cubic feet per second. Cut this channel. Now you'll notice that the modern snake river occupies a small channel within the big channel. That's scale invariants. The big river would have been about equivalent to six to 700 of the modern snake rivers. And what you're seeing here is an example of scale invariants. See, the, the little is superimposed upon this big. See, now in 1969, I was standing on a bluff overlooking the Minnesota River Valley. Similar to this, right? Looking down at the little Minnesota, ribbon of the Minnesota River and seeing it in this huge channel. And I had an aha moment. I had an aha moment and I realized I saw then that this channel, that this bluff I was standing on, had once been the bank of a gigantic river, thousands of times bigger than the modern Minnesota River. But I, I didn't know it rationally in the sense that it took me another 10 or 15 years of study and research before I could go back and say, yeah, what my initial instinct looking out and seeing this matching set of bluffs for five miles on the other side and seeing this small version of it in the modern river that I was right that I remember one time in the 80s, I was giving a talk on that and I, there was a geologist in the audience and he got up and he goes, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, that big channel. That was millions of years, millions of years that took for that channel to form. And I said, no, I don't think so. And what happened was is by him challenging me, it really, you know, I said, okay, you know, like an M, you know, an MMA fighter getting challenged. I said, okay, I'm going to take you on, you know, I roasted the occasion and I spent literally years doing research on glacial geomorphology, on paleo-hydrology. And of course, at the end of the thing, I knew that I was, my instincts were absolutely correct. That yes, now there is solid scientific, documentable verifiable evidence that this whole channel of the Minnesota River valley was filled brim full with water at the end of the last day. So when he was saying it was millions of years, we're saying that same exact channel of water had never varied and that it had just cut through over millions of years very slowly. Yes. But does that sort of, that doesn't seem rational because of the width? No, it doesn't. You'd have to, it doesn't. It doesn't makes. So this goes along with what you were talking about earlier that the idea, the ideas of science with that everything had taken place, much like evolution on a very gradual pace. Exactly. Is this the Grand Canyon as well? No, I would, here's what I would say about the Grand Canyon. I think that the Grand Canyon is presently we can observe it, we can observe the Colorado River eroding the Grand Canyon. However, I think that the erosion of the Grand Canyon is not uniform. It's episodic, which means that the Grand Canyon has probably been there between two and five million years because for one thing, the Grand Canyon wouldn't start eroding until the Colorado plateau had lifted up. And 10 to 12 million years ago, the rimrock of Colorado plateau was limestone, which implies a shallow marine environment. Right? Now, when it's down at marine, at sea level, it's not going to road. It's not until the whole plateau lifts up between five and 10 million years ago that the downcutting can start. So my take on the Grand Canyon would be that what happens is we have, you have to understand us now. This is, this is I think now is the, is the, the merging emerging paradigm. There are two modes of change, the gradualist mode that we've seen dominating through, you know, the last few hundred years, at least since the advent of modern science. And then that if you want to call it the catastrophic mode, where as much change is compressed into a few years or months, or sometimes even days or weeks, as normally would take thousands and thousands of years. When I look at the Grand Canyon, when I'm seeing there is episodes of catastrophic erosion, probably stretching back over two and a half million years. Remember I said the place to seen was about two and a half million years. What characterizes the place to see from the previous plios scene is this alternating succession of glacial and interglacial ages, this swinging back and forth between these two extremes. Those episodes of transition appear to be profoundly catastrophic. And they are associated with things like massive storms, massive rainfalls, rising and falling of sea levels on an extreme basis. And I think it's that that has created the Grand Canyon predominantly. In fact, the inner channel, I don't know if you've ever seen Grand Canyon. Yeah. Okay. There's an inner gorge. I could guess that that inner gorge is probably less than a hundred thousand years old. And probably a lot of it was cut 13,000 years ago. And so that's when the place to see an end did somewhere around 10,000 years ago. Yeah. 10 to 13,000 years ago. Wow. Yeah. And that's a that's not a real picture. It's not simply an artist's rendition. Yeah. I have pictures somewhere in there where you still get a sense. Yeah. Now the accumulation of the sedimentary rocks, yeah, took hundreds of millions of years. But that's one process. The down cutting, the erosion of the canyon is a different process. So again, it comes to a matter of perspective that we're almost incapable of, but I think, you know, academically and you could sort of explain how all this takes place and explain what's happening. But in our minds, our perspective of living a hundred years, looking back, it's very difficult to go back 20 years ago. And oh, I remember when that happened, wow, barely. But this is that ain't shit compared to the earth. The earth is just constantly changing. Our knowledge of human history, we have this sort of static view. And occasionally we have that meteor that flew over Russia recently and blew up in the sky and everybody's like, whoa, what's what's that? And then it stops and then nothing go back to work. Right. Go back to work. Go back to sleep. Yeah. And that thing that blew up over Russia, that was that was a spec and there's nothing. And then there's Tunguska, which blew up in the early 1900s 1908, June 30th 1908, which just flattened thousands and thousands of acres. Oh, well, let's see. It was 800 square miles and there are 640 acres per square mile. So it flattened half a million acres. Oh my god. And that was the energy of that was about equivalent to a 15 megaton bomb. Pull up. Yeah, there's the image of Tunguska, which is all the trees completely flattened. Completely flattened. Look at that gangster tree just still standing there. How's that happen? I know. It's just like every now and then, just one bad motherfucker tree. That's how people stay alive, right? Yeah. Because just like everybody else died or most things died and most of the species died a few people figured out a way to make it. And then they decided to have babies. What a bunch of crazy fucked. Could you imagine giant asteroid hits kills everybody rotten people and willy mammoths all over the place and you're still horny? You're still horny and you make a baby like wow and you raise it and that baby makes more babies. What does it say in the book of Genesis? Be fruitful and multiply. Now get this. The word replenish the earth. Re-plenish the earth and subdue it. I think clearly that's a clear hint that saying this is not the primordial creation. It's a subsequent creation to something a previous order of things. Why use the word re-planish? Be fruitful and multiply. It would make sense if if the human population crashes in the wake of a global catastrophe and we're down hovering at the threshold of viability where we could become extinct if just anything else happens. And we want to preserve our species. Well the problem is the thing we need to be doing is having lots of sex. Does I'm talking about? Yeah. I know. I mean we need to do a lot of screwing. And we need to screw and make scientists to figure out how to get us off this rock. Yeah. Well see be fruitful and multiply and make species re-planish the earth and subdue it. What the hell is that? Does this say subdue it? Subdue it. That's in Genesis? Oh yeah. It's in Genesis. What the hell are they talking about there? Choke the earth. Well I see that's the way it's been interpreted. I think it's being interpreted to say look you guys are the only rational species down there. You've got these big brains. You know you got to be born before you you know it takes you years and years to actually get where you can survive on your own because you've got these big fucking brains. See. So we're kind of like nature's answer to all of this. You know only one species right now has the ability to intercede and prevent the next global catastrophe. And that's us. Do we rise to that challenge or do we say well we're going to let nature run its course and if 50% of the species disappear civilization is over. We go back to the stone age struggling for existence. Well so be it. That's what's in the cards. Or do we say you know what? We could but in one generation be harvesting the resources of asteroids which we could be. If we had the will in the vision. And the thing is is that the most dangerous asteroids that are out there is the closer they get to the earth the more accessible they are. And you see we already could be harvesting the resources of the asteroid. I mean asteroids are loaded with precious metals and oars and hydrocarbons. There's virtually nothing that we are now mining from the earth that we couldn't mine from asteroids. Wow. What does that suggest to you? Well and think about this. If I like to kind of imagine these scenarios. Suppose we had discovered. Remember Shoemaker-Levy 9? Yes. Okay. Discovered in March of 1996. Within about eight weeks of observations the astronomers were able to predict that these fragmenting pieces were going to orbit the sun and come back and be crossing the orbit of Jupiter. Exactly the time the Jupiter was there. Right. There was going to be a a T-bone collision. It was like two vehicles coming to the intersection at the same time. And they were able to predict that right down to the almost to the minute to the hemisphere. What if we discovered that there's an asteroid orbiting the sun out there that's got our number on it. It was going to strike the earth in three years or ten years or twenty years or whatever. What would be our response to it? What would we do? I think globally it would be there would have to be some sort of a collective effort. Yeah. The scientists from China and Russia and all these different various countries that have vast technological capabilities would probably get together and have some sort of an agreement. I would think that that would have to happen. And it would in fact it would probably make our petty human conflicts pale into insignificance. If we were faced with the demise of our civilization or even possibly our species. But suppose we discovered it and it's coming in a couple of years and there's no time to respond. What could we do? Well perhaps if we had a long enough lead time we could actually deflect. All we need to do is is is an asteroid that's on a collision course with the earth. All it has to do is be nudged a little bit and a direct hit can be a wide miss. See that's all we would have to do. It's just nudged a little and there's various potential technologies whereby we could do that. But what if we didn't have enough lead time and we knew that that it was going to slam into the earth and for a thousand years it's going to be havoc. What would we do? Well perhaps we could go build a base on the moon or build something in space that would allow humans to survive at least until the dust settled enough that we could return and begin to replenish the earth. You know what a bummer it would be if you had a base on the moon and everyone was living there and you watched the earth blow up. Total bummer. But it would be even bigger bummer if you didn't have it and you were sitting on the earth. No one that's it man. That's all she wrote. How many different times do you think that this has happened while human beings are alive and how the great speculation has always been when they see the peer mids or when they see any incredible structures that we really haven't totally explained how they built. What like bow back in Lebanon is what how advanced were they? How advanced were they before the shit hit the fan? Well it seems to me that in order you know you got to go why would primitive cultures move rocks that weighed 200 to 1000 tons apparently with impunity. They were doing it all over the planet. Why would somebody be motivated? I mean you know like again I'm a builder so I know how much work it takes to move even a you know without a crane without modern technology to move beam into place that weighs a ton. Well you know we've got stones in some of these ancient temples that weigh hundreds of tons and again all over the world it seems to me difficult to imagine that they didn't have some kind of a technology that we've forgotten what that technology is I couldn't say. But it would sure seem to me that there would be no motive for moving you know 500 tons stones unless you had some convenient way of doing it. Or if not a convenient way of doing it just explain how an inconvenient way they could have done it. When you get this something like the Acropolis or the Parthenon that's on the Acropolis right is there what is the part the Acropolis is the stone and the Parthenon is the problem is the hill with the whole complex on it. But the Acropolis is one of those in impulse. The Acropolis is a man-made construction that has massive massive stones that they just don't explain. Yeah I mean they're there in Cuzco in South America you know they're in Egypt. Yeah there it is. The ball-back one is actually probably even more impressive. Jamie see if you could pull that up. The stones of ball how do you spell it? B-double-a-l-b-e-k and there there's these stones are just unbelievably big. Yeah and no explanation for how they move them cut them, quarry them, got them into place and what year it was all done. Right. That's one vision of it or a picture of it but if you search for others you there's actually a close-up of the actual stones themselves and they show people standing next to the stone so you get a perspective of it. Much taller than a human being in fact like I think 10 or 11 feet tall in some places. Like there's one rock just like move that but some of the stones that's not a good one Jamie. There's some where you can see the massive amount of stone that was in each individual one. Some of literally building sized and it's just an individual stone and yeah there's one like what the fuck man what the fuck is that that is so big. Yeah they moved that they cut that quarry didn't move it. Yeah I mean I don't know how many people they had to do that but boy that doesn't seem like something that a society which is really concerned with feeding itself is gonna get done. Right. What so when you see like the constructions of the great pyramids which is one of the great wonders of the world and to this day they're always trying to come up with ways that they did it but the sheer size and to put it into perspective if you cut and I think the number is 10 stones a day. The 6,000,000,000 plus stones in the great pyramid of Giza and if you cut and place 10 a day it would take you 664 years. Yeah having seen the great pyramid and many of the temples in Egypt I'm convinced that they had to have some means that we've forgotten about for transporting these stones. You know they may have used fairly primitive methods to quarry the stones but when it comes to transporting the stones you know I mean we could imagine that they're putting them on rollers and dragging them over you know hill and Dale but again you got to go really all over the whole planet it just it's one of those things it's like the demise of the frozen Willie mammoths there's just no real explanation and we can invoke explanations that are basically designed to avoid the implications of admitting that there may have been advanced knowledge scientific knowledge in prehistory and that somehow or another that knowledge was lost whether it was because of the burning of the Library of Alexandria or whether it was just a cataclysmic event that wiped out a massive amount of the population and what was remaining was buildings like that. Yeah those things survived and then people tried to recreate them people eventually figured out some of the techniques and made similar structures but not over a period of a thousand years or two thousand years but maybe 20, 30 thousand years. That's always been the work of Graham Hancock the the ideas they bounced around and I remember there was that Charlton Heston narrated documentary on the Sphinx where they had gone into great detail about the erosion they brought on the geologist Robert Schacht from Boston University I know Robert yeah I want to get him on the podcast too he's a fascinating cat he is and he concluded that the temple the Sphinx the enclosure where it was cut out of shows thousands of years of erosion by rainfall which there wasn't rainfall in the Nile Valley before 9,000 years ago so it predates the pyramid construction the average or the the conventional dating of the pyramid there it is right there there's some his explanations it predates the what the conventional date of the pyramid is by more than five thousand years oh I'm convinced and I've had conversations with Robert where he will basically say he's got one number for public consumption but he's perfectly willing to admit that perhaps the Sphinx is much much older than that and I what's the dark number what's the crazy number oh I think the crazy number is tens of thousands of years if you pull up it's not that crazy though now it was kind of crazy when that Charlton Heston document documentary was around but now that they found go backly tapping and they know that 14,000 12,000 years ago whatever it was they were absolutely building these enormous immense structures that would be what 8,000 years 7,000 years earlier than the pyramids mm-hmm not that not that big a deal not that big of a deal they they the conventional dating of the Great Pyramids of Giza is 2,500 BC which may be correct but it still doesn't mean that the Sphinx wasn't way way older than that exactly and you know I'm convinced having seen it firsthand that that erosion is water-induced I've looked at a lot of erosion over the years and you know it's got the classic parabolic profile that you would expect if you started out with an initially square Jamie open up the PowerPoint show entitled Cataclysmos Global Super Flood Cataclysmos Global Super Flood that's my new band it's gonna be my new band go for me at Cataclysmos was the Greek term for the destruction of the world by water oh wow it's somewhere we get our term cataclysm whoa and their term see you know the Greeks believed that there were alternating destructions of the world by water and fire right Ek Perosis was the term Greek term for destruction of the world by fire and cataclysmos of water this stuff is so unbelievably fascinating because there's no way that you can attribute all of this stuff that mean these all of these ancient structures there's no way you can attribute it to what we know about their culture we don't know enough there's just not enough evidence there's not enough we don't know enough about ancient Egypt or you know or their construction methods are so much there's so much thinking you know like so much guesswork it's so much you know when you look at these giant structures and you wonder like what what were they doing how did they do this who were they like it's so fascinating I would just I would love to be able to go back in time as a giant bulletproof bubble I know just hover over ancient Egypt yeah what was going on back then I know what did you guys know Jamie go to you've got a global superflight what is this image go to slide 58 a slide 58 Hanger 18 slide 58 I there yes wow that's beautiful okay that's amazing now what you can see there is you got to get it in that the microphone get on the microphone there the valley temple look up there oh yeah okay the valley temple with stones quarried from the ditch around the Sphinx you got to remember what the Sphinx is that originally it was a yardang which is a limestone outcrop that sticks above the surrounding landscape the yardang was the head of the Sphinx everything else was below now go to the next slide Jamie okay there you can really see the ditch surrounding the Sphinx and the layers forming the Sphinx body correspond to the layers into surrounding ditch now wanted to meet you'll notice the scaffolding next to the Sphinx they're they're they're they're undertaking these campaigns of rests quote-unquote restoration it's gross but what they're actually doing is they're covering up the real message of the Sphinx yeah why are they doing that why are they bothering to try to rebuild the phoenix no it's so stupid like we you're not rebuilding it you're building new shit yeah you're just refacing it with with new stones so gross but at least nobody is messing with the quarry walls where you can see the water erosion so effectively displayed go to the next slide Jamie now what we see here is an abandoned quarry it's hard to tell the scale here because that opening is like 40 feet high but if you look at you do you see the striations in the rock wall mm-hmm okay this is where they quarried the blocks right and remove the blocks go to the next slide Jamie okay this kind of shows the methodology that they use they they would create these separation trenches they would usually go by the the natural bed bedding layers of the rock go to the next slide and you'll see here here's the presumed process where they're cutting a separation trench and there's a block about to be quarried there and then you can see there would have a stack of four blocks there and these blocks are enormous several tons oh yeah that that block there would be looks like it's probably about four by eight by probably ten so like 320 cubic feet at 160 per so or 180 so you're looking at Probably 10 so like 320 cubic feet at 160 per So or 180 so you're looking at about 57,000 pounds divided by 2,000 so yeah about two Yeah, about 30 tons. It's about 30 tons for that rock right there now go to the next slide 30 tons Okay, now the reason I'm showing you this is because this is the process They would have used to quarry the blocks away from the The surrounding the spanks and exposed a quarry wall Well at the time that quarry wall was exposed It would have been essentially a flat surface with this slightly stepped profile like we saw in the photograph, right? Now go to the next slide Right, so there's now it would be a cross section with all of the blocks removed Okay, go to the next slide And what we have here is stone pick marks in a limestone. Let's see go quarry From rammacied times about 1200 BC so about 3200 years ago. So here's a limestone Face of a quarry that's been exposed for 3200 years and seems like they used some sort of a chisel to get that out Exactly the pick marks are still visible go to the next slide Okay, here's stone pick marks in a quarry from the early new kingdom circa 15 so 3500 years ago you can actually Determine the type of tool that they used to Quarry the rocks the picks or the chisels go to the next one based on the marks They're on the marks. Yeah, and here you see that the chisel marks made or pick marks made by stone picks in an old kingdom limestone quarry 2000 years BC so here's a 4,000 year old quarry that's been sitting exposed to the desert elements and The pick marks are still visible on the face now go to the next slide Now here's the sphinx go to the next slide and Look at that quarry wall Yeah, that's crazy. It's crazy. Yeah now supposedly this quarry wall is only a few centuries older than that last picture We just saw where we could see the pick marks Does that make sense? Well the only way it would make sense is if there was a vastly different type of stone Well, it's not though. It's it's the same. It's it's a well-indurated limestone Robert can tell you all about the composition of that stone but the the composition does vary though Oh, yeah, yeah Some of it's more dense than others and that's you can see the Changes yeah, and you can see that that indented layer about halfway up is going to be a softer limestone Absolutely, it certainly looks to the layman and I'm clearly a layman But it certainly looks like like water fissures like oh fissures Even rainfall even to the train die it looks like water but some legit Egyptologist and even legit geologists have tried to attribute this to wind and sand Well, again, you know Robert has shown pictures of the comparison of wind erosion to sand Water erosion. They don't look the same so the only reason to attribute this to wind and sand It's not based on the scientific evidence of what it looks like when there's water erosion It's to confirm or to conform with the known or established timeline of construction Yes, and that's why I showed you those examples of other quar like that old kingdom quarry That's almost the same age as this so it's actually really not scientific to try to attribute it to wind and sand It's just your what you're doing is confirming to confirmation bias. You have an idea in your head and you're you're trying to to make this Really odd erosion fit into that that doesn't look like wind and sand Go to the next slide. You're in Lake Joey Jamie Oh, I'm jam band So there's the depth of the of the of the ditch It's about 22 feet and their shows each of the layers like if you look at layer 11 That's going to be a softer limestone. It's eroded deeper right Now go to the next slide and you'll see what I've done is superimposed What the original profile would have looked like And there's been an enormous amount of rock limestone rock removed and we know the profile would have looked like that because the stones that Were quarried are what make up the sphinx and valley temples right the nose have been eroded as well But unfortunately they've covered that up with this reconstruction Well most likely most likely and I think Robert would confirm this that the limestone blocks It formed those temples were sheathed in hard granite Whereas this quarry wall was not it was exposed when there's also the issue of the Sphinx head itself which seems to have been altered This this is a timeline thing that folks may or may not know But there's been the Egypt changed quite a bit Egypt ancient Egypt was around for thousands and thousands of years and at some point they were conquered by the new beings and The the more African what we think of as traditional African faith Obviously Egypt is part of Africa But the more traditional looking African faces is what you see in the current face in the temple the Sphinx So probably what had happened is a later date pharaoh said you know what fuck this line I want my face up there so they put The face of this Probably caffron and I think both John Anthony West and Robert Shock Would concur with that's why there's so little erosion on that face right because that faces only a few thousand years old And why it would be disproportionately small compared to the rest of the body Wow so fascinating I just I would give so much to know what they knew then At any point in time to go back in human history and just to be able to observe That would be the time that just a middle of Egypt I would love to see what it looked like before they raided it and Took off for folks. I don't know it was covered in smooth limestone And they they cut it all up to build Cairo. They raided it. Yeah, there was an earthquake The flattened Cairo and you know they had attempted to penetrate the Great Pyramid prior to that without success But apparently the earthquake which I think Happened I think it happened in the 12th century Loosen the few rocks From near the top of the pyramid that allowed them to get some levers in there and begin to pry them loose So I've read a bunch of fucking assholes talk about vandalism. Now get this Whether this is true or not we have no way of knowing but there are many many Arabic accounts and counts of Early travelers and pretty much the all unanimously Declare that the entire outside of the pyramid was inscribed What now think about that what in the hell was that have been telling? What kind of message was that that was being sent to the future Must have been amazing. Yeah, I get I get my My hair stands up on my legs just thinking about inscribed. Yeah. Hey listen There's rocks in space and occasionally they land and when they do you're fucked build one of these Get inside wait for further instruction It's amazing to this there. I mean if that thing existed if Robert shock is corrected nothing existed before the the Holocene events Those are the only types of structures that would still be here. Yeah Kind of fucked it people make it through there. I wonder what the number was well I'm gonna get you're out of an eave story. Here's my theory on it. You know all over the world we have traditions about Catastrophies and cataclysms and giant floods all over the world They've come down to us and there's a lot of deviation, but there's also a lot of similarity in them The idea that a small group had some kind of foreign knowledge. You know whether it was no end to Bible or Dukalian in the Greek myths or Utnapishdom in the Sumerian myths or zisothress or manu I mean the the the the culture heroes that survived these great cataclysmic floods are in the dozens and dozens, right? American Indians had prolific Traditions about giant floods when when George Caitlin the famous Indian artist spent decades of his life going around Living with various Indian tribes like 40 years painting and in writing about him very interesting quote in one of his books He says that they widely divergent with traditions and language and customs and so on but of 120 tribes that he visited they all had one thing in common That they were descended from survivors of some gigantic cataclysmic event That's American Indians you find it in North America. You find it in South America You find it into Polynesian islands. You find it in Australia Japan. I mean it's around the entire planet this idea and now modern sciences confirming what we assumed was merely some kind of superstitious nonsense of you know pre-scientific illiterate barbarians and we're realizing that those myths and those stories and epic tales that are Inhanded down for centuries and centuries actually contain hard scientific truth from surviving eyewitnesses Well, if these craters actually do exist and they do right? Oh, they do. They just seen craters undeniable the nuclear glass throughout Asia and Europe undeniable Human beings were alive then. Yes, and if human beings were alive then they got fucked up There's no doubt about it. Yeah They did they they they would have suffered enormously and just like you know If if you know if three quarters of the species of animals in North America when extinct Do you think that the 25% surviving came through completely unscathed? No, it simply means that there's a threshold above which a species is viable. It can survive there's there and and below which You know there may have been survivors But there were just weren't enough of them. They were too widely scattered Serious habitat loss which would have diminished food supply and they just died out But either directly or indirectly is a result of these catastrophic Environmental changes that accompanied the ending of the ice age humans had to have been affected by this and all of the myths and the stories would totally concur with that idea You know that that there were humans and they're all consistent with this one detail that there were some humans that had foreign Knowledge and so they built arcs to Kelly and built an arc just like Noah did ootanepish to built an arc This address built an arc manu built an arc Where are these stories coming from you know are they just completely conjured up independently of one another and that detail is just thrown in Or is there some kind of a reality behind this that there were people who had foreign knowledge well If there were people that had foreign knowledge that suggested suggest to me that there were two groups of survivors those are survived because they intentionally Plan to survive they had foreign knowledge they took steps to secure their survival in free masonry there's the account of of lomack or the account of e-noc there's variants of on it but e-noc the story of e-noc in Masonic tradition says that e-noc had you know he was in the in the the patriarchs Before Noah had this foreign knowledge that the world was going to be destroyed either by fire or flood So he created this underground vault it was deep underground and it was Preserved within nine layers of stone. It was nine layered vault and You only unless you had the key to accessing To how to access this vault which was now like a time capsule that preserved the science and the knowledge and the wisdom of the Pre-diluvian world a pre flood world He then set up two pillars Pillar of brass in the pillar of marble the pillar of brass designed to withstand the effects of the cataclysm The watery destruction the pillar of marble if I'm remembering it right was to withstand the the The destruction by fire so there were these two pillars that basically informed any survivors that there was this nine Chamber underground vault that contained the secrets of the previous world age that is what's coming to a pass And that's an intrinsic part of Masonic tradition in fact a whole Masonic symbolism is based around that idea and And it has parallels throughout other traditions as well Well what I'm getting at here is if if there was some people who had foreign knowledge of it and took steps to survive They were the ones who preserved the knowledge of the Pre the previous the the anti-diluvian world order The other survivors just survived by the luck of the draw like that tree standing there Right they just happened to be in the right place at the right time they survived But now they are going to be the ones who are going to be wholly preoccupied Simply with the task of surviving finding enough food to eat and shelter Because clearly the Planetary environment was going through all kinds of changes Whereas the other group had taken actual steps to survive and preserve knowledge Now when we look at the beginning of recorded history Four thousand to five thousand years ago We're basically halfway back through the Holocene, right? Okay Let's for purposes of conjecture assume that at the end of the Holocene human population crashed Right well if you want to build a pyramid or a great temple you've got to have a labor force right Well if you've got scattered bands of survivors You basically aren't going to be able to accomplish that Now let's assume that you've got two groups of humanity one that's sitting there with all of this knowledge After disposal just like imagine it if our modern society was wiped off the face of the earth But somebody somewhere in some deep cave underground was able to preserve our knowledge of physics and chemistry And and the various sciences well Obviously in order to run this computer that we're running here to do this broadcast requires an intact huge intact Infrastructure right, but we could know how to build a computer We could know how to do how to broadcast But if we don't have the infrastructure we'll just sit in on information right Well, let's assume that you have a group that survived right and they've got They're the custodians of this body of knowledge Right now it takes three thousand four thousand five thousand years For the human population to reconstitute itself and now you've got a labor force And let's suppose that there's going to be another cataclysm impending You know such as the one that perhaps cause the the Noah's flood which you know There's evidence now that around five thousand years ago. There was an asteroid impact into the Indian Ocean Right that plunged through two miles of ocean water and blasted a 12 mile wide hole on the floor of the Indian Ocean of what year was this this would have been about five thousand years ago Now how much of an impact with that have had? Oh, it would have created tsunamis well On the island of Madagascar and the southern island of Madagascar and it should be in this In this program that we've got open right here Jamie If you go to Slide number Yeah, go to slide number 111 It's so ironic that today our focus is closer and closer to the cloud closer and closer to chips To solid state hard drives all these different things that are just not going to last right no paper No, but no one's carbon anything in stone You know The noise that we have is like how much of what what everybody has is on hard drives I mean how much of what everybody has is in the cloud on a you know a server somewhere Yeah, and who the fuck is going to be able to figure out how to read that shit a thousand years from now Yeah, just like just like we're trying to figure out how to read Egyptian high enough Okay, look at look at slide number 111. Now Um, I should I had my pointer here Go to the next slide so you can see we okay right there You see you see those wiggly things like dragon scales. Yeah, what that is is it's water ocean water that washed on land and Washed up and you see it kind of comes to a point and then it washed back out this is this is a tsunami deposit and those Features that you're looking at they kind of look like this. There's called Chevron's right That's what happens when the water washes in makes deposits of Giant ripples and then washes back out. What kind of time frame are you talking about when this happens? This is to do that oh Hours so that all happened in hours in hours. Yeah, and you could still see it today. Oh, yeah, go to the next slide Jamie We're getting a closer look here now You see how see how they're shaped almost V like that's the Chevron like a sergeant stripe almost right? Okay? Go to the next slide Okay, here's a cross section of one of those V shaped hills at 600 feet in height Wow That's incredible now what's that what you're seeing in the back that up one more Jamie So those images right there what we're seeing There it looks like the effects of a river or water or something it is water Yeah, but then when you go back you see it from the ground it looks like hills Yeah, six hundred feet high so you're talking about a massive amount of water We're talking about a tsunami whose minimum run-up height is the height the thickness of these hills 600 feet minimum minimum minimum and that's of course Massive amount of weight and devastation and this is all five thousand years ago. Yeah, go to the next slide Jamie uh Keep yeah, there's Madagascar location of the Chevron's on the southern edge of Madagascar. Let's go to slides up and Over on the other side at the same age if we look at the southwestern coast of Australia I think the next slide will get a closer in view. There we go. You see that Sploge. Mm-hmm. That's that's the technical scientific term Is it really bluege? No, I just made that But you see the see the stuff that's been washed over you can see it. It's very clear there. Okay That's the other side of the ocean so the other side of the ocean Directly opposite of where this thing impacted. Yeah, go to the next massive Impact in the middle Yeah, ancient crash epic way. Let's go back to that slide where it from the where it says ancient crash epic wave Next slide keep going right there Can we read that? Yeah, the southern end of Madagascar live for enormous wedge shaped deposits called chevrons That are composed of material from the ocean floor each covers twice the area of Manhattan with sediment as deep as the Chrysler building is high On close inspection the Chevron deposits contained deep ocean Micro fossils that are fused with medley of metals Typically formed by cosmic impacts Wow Holy shit. Yeah. Yeah, holy shit And so that if that happened 4,800 years ago What kind of an impact would that have had on human civilization? Oh? Well, it pretty much would have wiped out anything adjacent to the Indian Ocean anything close to it But what about on the other side of the planet? I mean there would have to be some massive effects Oh, there would be most likely what we would see on the other side of the planet is extreme weather events Hurricanes torrential rainfalls things like that wins kill a huge amount of people worldwide could kill a huge amount of people worldwide Yes, and so that is probably the most recent one. That's probably the most recent God and no record of it because people really didn't have many records Well, I think the record of it is probably when we see these stories like Noah's flood and the rest So that's probably about this one, so it's not even about the Holocene one. It's about one 5,000 years after the halving one yes See that's what we're getting to realize now is that these Events have happened with a much greater degree of frequency than anybody hit a mansion Well congratulations you freak me the fuck out. I just want to say you know you had an objective and you pull it off Okay, five stars a plus freak out Wow, this is this has been an intense three hours. It just flew by three hours. Yeah, we just did three hours. Wow. It's over Yeah, that amazing. Yeah, we got to do this again. I bet you could talk for another 16 hours Yeah, I mean we barely scratched the surface here. Oh, please let's do it again Let's take a couple months off regroup and come back in again. Oh, I'd love to do some more. Please Thank you very much for doing this. I really really appreciate it is incredibly enjoyable Incredibly enlightening for me. I really really appreciate it. I knew it was gonna be like this Just the the brief conversation that we had a chance to have in Atlanta, you know many years ago I've been looking forward to talking to you again. Thank you very much for doing this. Oh, it's been awesome I really really have enjoyed if people want to research more of your work read more of your stuff Where can they go? What can they what can they find go to sacred geometry international? dot com and there are links there. I've got another website that Linked from there So I can sacred geometry international idea with a bunch of different stuff not directly connected necessarily with what we're talking about here But there will be links to another website that I've got where I'm really exploring like the catastrophic stuff I've got lots of images of things Yeah, because I've done lots and lots of field exploration And they have thousands of images of just awesome stuff does sacred geometry have anything to do with this stuff or is that a totally different Sacred geometry put it this way as we've inherited this corpus of ancient knowledge sacred geometry is one of the keys for deciphering these ancient traditions because all of these ancient temple structures which are the text books in stone if you will Have several components in in common astronomical and geometrical being the two predominant and if you understand the geometry you realize the geometry is like a universal code by where whereby you can preserve certain types of information because Geometry is universal doesn't matter what your spoken language is the principles of geometry are what they are You know the relationship of a of a radius to a circle is the same and it doesn't matter What culture you come from you see and so geometry is a critical means of deciphering the the knowledge that and I think that the Predominant way of preserving ancient knowledge is in the temple structures and they have to be looked at as textbooks in stone And once we begin to realize that then we can go it's like when you go to Egypt It's not just the hieroglyphs That's a part of it But it's also the geometry and the astronomy that's encoded there and we can see the same astronomy at work Whether we're looking in Egypt whether in geometry or whether we're looking at megolithic structures in ancient England or whether we're looking at Megamennial earthworks up in New Ohio Valley or we're looking at this the the mine you've been to teach in Eatsa Right, okay that whole complex there is laid out according to principles of sacred geometry and astronomy and it's Exactly the same Principles underlying that as we find in Egypt that would be our next conversation. I'll be a great conversation Can't wait. I can't wait. Thank you so much. Really appreciate it. Oh Randall Carlson ladies and gentlemen You could follow him on Twitter. It's sacred Geo I&T for sacred geometry International yeah, what it is so yeah, so sacred Geo I&T on on Twitter and sacred geometry international com is the website Thank you so much man really amazing and I can't wait to talk to you again I'm gonna start going over your material on your website and gear up to For our next conversation man just amazing amazing stuff Thanks to our sponsors. Thanks to on it calm go to o n n i t use the code word Rogan and save 10% off any and all supplements and thanks also to nature box The official snack provider of a Joe Rogan experience go to nature box calm forward slash Rogan to save 50% off your first box that's nature box calm forward slash Rogan we'll be back tomorrow with Dr. Ron the Patrick returns and Until then go fuck yourselves. How about that? I don't mean it. I don't mean it. I love you. They can't see you soon