Joe Roman reagan. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day. Thanks for being really appreciate it. It's my pleasure. And thank you to Brett Weinstein, Jordan Peterson, and Elon Musk for helping connect us. They are great friends. We are going to see Elon on Sunday. So he's been an incredible support for us. So I don't know how you want to play the. I'm totally in your hands. I'll follow your lead. But I mean, he's been helping us because Bretton's in bad shape. Yeah, and that's why you're here. And this is what we're talking about. We're talking about. We've done this is where it is. Crowdfunded this, which I'm very happy to talk to you about, which I just this title of that rape gang report. Yeah. The idea that there's rape. There's actual rape gangs in the UK in 2026. And is it being ignored? Is it being downplayed? Like how is it being received by the media and by the politicians over there? Well, the history of it is that basically, as you probably know, Britain after the war decided they were going to play a part in Europe, a bigger part in Europe, will are elite in the British elite. And to do that, they had to basically diminish the power of the nation state. And they had to head towards this European super state, which is the EU, the genesis which was obviously not. Why did they have to diminish the power of the nation to do that? Because I think Britain was a proud nation state. We were with the American help. We'd won the war. And we hadn't been invaded or conquered, which most of Europe had been. So you had mass dislocation in Europe. Huge numbers of people had been dislocated and pushed all over Europe. And I think the socialist, I was in the European Parliament, so I spent a brief time as an MEP, a member of the European Parliament, when we finally achieved a kind of Brexit. We can talk about that, but it wasn't a proper Brexit. So I think the genesis of the rape gangs going back to this was the fact that multi-culturalism was the order of the day. They wanted open borders. They wanted a multi-cultural society. They basically felt the nation state had been the cause of world wars, effectively, starting with Napoleon. Then obviously we had the Kaiser, then we had Hitler. And I think they saw it that way. The Monets, the Spinellys, and the people who constructed the European Union. So to the rape gang report, which was your question, ultimately, that the genesis of that is this multicultural invasion almost of Europe. Can I pause you for a second? So what you think is that the multicultural invasion, the way it was set up was on purpose, and it was on purpose to sort of diminish the idea of nationalism. Yes. I think that, well, I'm not. And so this was like a long plan. So this was something that they must have had to sit down. And like, who would be involved in this sort of a discussion where you would be willing to diminish patriotism, diminish this idea that Britain by itself is exceptional and the people are exceptional. It was a long deceitful plan. So I always implemented it. The European elites in league with our elite, who effectively, if you remember, in 1975, we joined what was called the European Economic Community. It wasn't effectively anything other than an economic union. But that very quickly changed, and effectively, they tried to politically integrate Europe that fail. And then in 1997, they tried to force it through with the introduction of the Euro. So having failed politically, they tried to do it financially. That was my first foray into standing as a member of Parliament to fight to save the British pound. Because once you lose your currency, effectively you lose your sovereignty and your national identity. And our gold reserves were going to be shipped out to Germany to Frankfurt. And we would have become a vassal state part of the European Union. It would have been irreversible. But in the event, we, thanks to Sir James Gersmuth, we secured enough votes. We forced the establishment to promise a referendum before they surrendered to the Euro. And we ended up saving the pound, which in the end resulted in the referendum in 2016, where the British people voted to take back their sovereignty. Which ultimately, I think, the establishment always knew that the core, the body of Britain or body of England in particular, wanted its own accountable parliament in Westminster. It didn't want to be part of an unaccountable European socialist protection super state. So the quote-unquote elites in Britain and the elites in the United States, it's coordinated with both of them. So you're... I think less so in America, Joe. I can't speak for America, although when you look at what the Democrats did with USAID and all the stuff that was going on on Joe Biden, you have to wonder whether they began with the World Economic Forum to play a part in this. But I think the post-war plan for Europe was founded on a socialist principle, whereas I think America has always been a very sound politically-based structure based on, obviously, the founding fathers and your constitution, which I always think returns power to the individual and has always understood that the dangers are status dangers, not individual dangers. So I'm very much in the camp, I like the individual and a minimal state. And I think that's much more in your DNA than it is in the European DNA, which tends to be more status. Right. So they did this on purpose and they brought in people from what country specifically? So initially you got in Britain, you got people from Africa, you got the wind rush generation, so you got a lot of Africans came, ostensibly to fill jobs that they always say the British people don't want to do. And it gathered momentum. It was relatively slow to start with. So you had an influx of people coming to the UK, you had open borders in Europe. And one of the absolute embedded rules they have is this freedom of movement concept. So they don't have effectively national borders. But we still, obviously, had the channel, but we embraced this and we started this immigration. What happened is it gradually happened, and I think these rape gangs have been going on, or we know they have for 30, 40, probably 50 years to a lesser extent. But when Tony Blair got in and he undermined a lot of constitutional sort of historical law, you got an acceleration of immigration from other parts of the world, not just from Europe, but also from other countries, South Asian countries in particular, who came to the UK. And the genesis of the rape gangs really is, I think, the cultural oil and water mix of these people coming from what I call, planished societies in South Asia and joined coming to very high-trust societies, such as the one we had and the one you have here, which have taken thousands of years to develop to the high-trust societies where, and you know, Lee Quain, you based Singapore on post-war Britain, where you had honesty boxes for newspapers in London. And you had a country that was completely at peace with itself. So one, the war, it respected peace, it respected freedom, and people were building, rebuilding their lives, having fought a second World War II to free Europe from sort of, in this case, Germany. Previously we'd done it at Waterloo when we relieved Europe of the French with Napoleon. So it really accelerated after 97 when a lot of the legislation that Tony Blair and his co-war was passed, such as the Human Rights Act, which embeds within it the E-C-H-R, he created the Supreme Court, they passed laws like the Equality Act, and they're a raft of other legal acts they passed, which effectively empowered a multicultural society, which in some ways, I think, damaged the interests of the British people. So... And you think this is on purpose. And this is my point is what is the benefit for them to be joined up with the rest of Europe? Is it just purely financial? Is it a power-based strategy where if you can diminish the quality of life for people and institute more laws and put more restrictions on them, you can control them easier, and it's less pushback for the politicians, less pushback for the people that are in charge? Basically, yes, I think it's the age-old battle between individualism and collectivism. So I think the EU is a collectivist construct, whereas I think, Britain as it was under our constitution, our Bill of Rights, which as you probably know, our Bill of Rights in 1689, a lot of that was lifted by your founding fathers who embedded it within the US constitution. So and that embeds freedom of speech, it embeds the individual embeds all of the rights that I think make the Anglo-Saxon world great. And so how did it deteriorate to the point where they're arresting 12,000 people a year for social media posts? It's Jared Shocking. And this is why I have got involved in politics. I've been involved in politics since I fought the Master at Treaty and then stood, as I said, in 97, I did a lot for business for sterling, a lot for vote, leave, the nice tip of the Brexit party now is elected there. So I've been fighting this march towards an unaccountable state, which effectively rewards collectivism and punishes individualism. To the extent that now I find myself at the age of 68 as an MP, running a particle restore Britain to try and reverse this tide to reempower the individual to return to our original constitution and to protect the interests above all else of the British people to who I think government should be accountable. Do they still have that kind of unchecked immigration? Is it currently ongoing? We still have illegal migrants arriving by vote. They can't be under the current laws and treaties that were part of. They are not being deported. The judges, thanks to the creation of the Supreme Court, they are now a Quango, a work Quango, I think a lot of our judiciary is corrupt. So the answer to your question is we still have illegal migration and we have people living in Britain illegally. We have a lot of foreign prisons in our prisons and we have people who come in under various waves of immigration, one of which is probably under Boris Johnson, who was actually a conservative prime minister who allowed thousands, hundreds of thousands of people to come into Britain. And basically they are now a burden to the British taxpayer. So the answer to your question is they are arriving illegally, still they are living here illegally or living in Britain illegally, still we have foreign criminals in our prisons and we have still got the legacy of this huge amount of immigration which took place. And are large percentage of these people receiving welfare for the British government? Yes, well, what percentage? Well most of the people who arrive at their all supported, I mean they are putting into the challenge. So I mean, is there any time to get there? In Parliament I see the contracts, thanks to my parliamentary questions. I am allowed to ask questions and scrutinize the contracts for instance the baby stock on was it was a boat which cost the British taxpayer one and a half billion pounds. It's actually now lying redundant and not being used. But I've seen the contracts for these illegal migrants in terms of the laundry services they get in terms of the food they require. I mean literally it is like staying in a very comfortable hotel and we've now got these people being settled all across our country. How many? Those? Well I don't think the government knows Joe, that's your question. I don't think they know how many people are living in Britain and the legally. Was this similar situation that America had over the last four years where on the low number they think it was 10 million people came in? Which is insane. It's the insane amount of people that come in in four years. We think there's enough work to do initially to detain and deport people who are arriving illegally. In my mind illegal means illegal. It's fairly straightforward to the people who are arriving illegally, people living here illegally, the foreign criminals. There's plenty of work to do to remove them from Britain and then I think we need to turn our attention and that's in our mass deportation document. I've given you a copy of that which effectively sets out the constitutional reasons why we have a problem. How we correct those constitutional issues and how we then practically detain and deport the people who aren't supposed to be here. Once we've done that we will then turn our attention to people who are living in Britain to your point who are on welfare, who are again across the taxpayer of fortune for the rest of their lives probably, who aren't working, who are culturally different to us, who have a different view of their religion to the Christian religion and are increasingly living in small groups of people who haven't integrated, who are living under Sharia law and who have their own courts and who have their own court, they have their own court, Sharia courts, yes. Parallel legal system. It's an unrecognized by the British government, parallel legal system that exists inside of English tolerated. It's tolerated. It's tolerated. They're aware of it. They're aware of the punishments that this court dishes out. It's rather like they're policing their own people under their own laws. And they're just allowing that. They're allowing that. Now I believe, I don't know about you, but I believe if you come to our country you should live under our laws. Well, yeah. The idea of, well the United States in particular is a melting pot and people come from all over the place and it's one of the cool things. It's all these different cultures. But there's certain cultures that if you allow them to come into your community and then they institute the laws of the country where they came from, you're going to have a real problem. They don't live the way you live. They don't have the same respect for women that you have. They don't treat them the same way. They don't allow dogs. There's a lot of ways. Stuff that a lot of people might not even be aware that come with that problem. It's like the idea is supposed to be that Western society is inclusive and progressive because we're intelligent and educated and we care. But you can care so much that you let in criminals and then you give those criminals all your money and then the criminals can take over your country slowly but surely. And this is the, no one thinks that's a possible thing. Have people look at the call of CEM, you look at ancient Greece and they think, wow, I wonder what happened to those guys. What do you think happened? Probably the same shit that's happening right now to England, the same shit that could have happened to America. It's civilizations fall apart for various reasons. And one great way to get them to fall apart is to bring in a bunch of people and they don't have to follow your laws and they bring the laws of, you know, wherever they're from, whatever, whatever fundamentalist religion country they're from, where they have a bunch of crazy laws that are kind of archaic. Well, this is Sharia law Islamic law as you probably know. I mean, again, to your point, I think the best example I can give people of what happens if you do that is when Lebanon got its independence in 1948, they were Christian country and they were very confident country. They were, you know, they had the best universities, they had a very open society. I never went to Beirut. I don't know if you went to Beirut, but Beirut in the 60s was meant to be the best place on earth to be. Great wine, freedom, very enlightened. It was a great lots of people with that. The minute that the Muslim population went over about 15%, you started to get a problem with a civil war. You've got the Druze and Maonite Christians in a civil war with the Muslims. And now Lebanon is a Muslim country and Hezbollah backed by Iran is effectively running the show. So, to your point, I couldn't agree more on the rape gang report, which we've written, was crowdfunded by 20,000 concerned English people who we raised. Not a huge amount of money. We raised about 600,000 pounds and varying quantities people gave. And we did it because the government will not have a stanchor inquiry. So our government, and particularly the Labour Party, have been presiding over this because it goes to the Muslim blog vote. So we have in the UK a system of postal voting. And in a lot of the inner cities and the places where these Islamic populations live, they are or have historically voted Labour. That's beginning to change. We're beginning to vote for Muslim independence now. And I sit with some of them at the back apartment. So effectively this inquiry we did, we set out with a completely unbiased view of what we would find. And we did it because we were pushing the government to have a stanchor inquiry. And a lot of the reason I got involved in it was I think it was Elon Musk who triggered, he talked about it. A lot of people in the UK, I don't think no the extent to which this has been happening and the length of time it's been happening for. This episode is brought to you by OnX Offroad. Everyone wonder how to reach these epic mountain legs, they're tucked away, dispersed campsites. With OnX Offroad, you'll find legal open trails around you and even better guided trails mapped by real off-roaders. Which one includes photos, terrain descriptions and difficulty ratings so you'll know if your vehicle is capable before you go. Unlike other apps, OnX gives you turn by turn directions on the trail and their new dispersed camping layer shows where you can legally set up camp. You'll also get private land boundaries, public land overlays and the ability to download maps for offline use so that you're never guessing even when you're off the grid. That's a powerful tool built for serious off-roaders. Try OnX Offroad for 50% off, go to onxmaps.com slash Joe Rogan. Why is that? Is that a failure of your media, is it a failure of the politicians? Why don't people know about that? Which a total failure, failure of the media because the media are supposed to be an independent body that holds to account failures of the state. It's basically because this block vote through the postal voting system which needs to be changed is effectively or has been keeping the Labour Party in power. So they've put power ahead of principle. And in the report we cover this, we've covered the reasons why it's so serious and to you're going to even cover it rightly, say the fact that dogs are not wiped by the Islamic faith, logic is hammered, like cats, dogs. And what we wanted to do was interview victims, which we did. We did it properly. It took us over a rape gang victim, Sammy Woodhouse who led it. She's got a child by her rapist. And we had a team of people and we literally produced the witness bundles and we listened to the witnesses and then we had a two-week hearing in London where people gave evidence and we had a proper barrister who effectively presided over it and then helped us write the report. It's effectively Graham Smiths that the barrister did a fantastic job. And we didn't start out with any preconceived ideas. It started because we read some court transcripts of some of the people who've been found guilty of this, which the government, by the way, has tried to keep quiet. Some of the historical court transcripts disappear. So we've been calling for these transcripts to be kept now. We've actually tried to make a noise about that. And the more we read this and the more we carried on with the rape gang inquiry, the more it became clear to us that obviously there's a link between this power and the abuse and grooming and if you like damage that was done to white working class English girls. And it does go and in the report we've looked at the reasons why, to your point, there is a cultural difference of opinion between an open high-trust Christian view of women in particular and the Islamic view of women, which is all in the report. So for instance, as you probably know, if a woman accuses somebody of rape and a lot of these Muslims come from Pakistan, Joe, that predominantly Pakistan and they're predominantly from one part of Pakistan called MIPU. There are some from Bangladesh, there are some from Somalia, there are some from Eritrea, there are other Muslim countries that perpetrate some of this. And of course there are white people who perpetrate rape as well, but nothing on the scale of this. This is quite horrific. And our reporters effectively uncovered this. I think we've played a part with this report in the government saying that they're going to have now a statutory inquiry because we didn't have any statutory powers to be able to force people to appear at our hearing. They all peer voluntarily. The government can actually force people legally to appear. They can actually make it a legal requirement that people attend. We couldn't do that. But there had been reports in the past. There was the J report in 2014 and there's been a casey report, all of which confirmed that this was happening and the state still continued to try and pretend it was just happening in a small number of siloed areas where you obviously had a high Islamic population. The state has equally failed to collect data on the crimes that are perpetrated, say the ethnicity of the people who are perpetrating the crimes. And from there you can extrapolate once you've got the data as to whether or not you've got an extraordinary problem in one particular section of society. And again, using my parliamentary questions, I've been forcing as much disclosure as I can get and this is how we've discovered that a lot of the data that should be being collected by the police, particularly, by the National Health Service, by social services. A lot of the data has not been properly collected. Possibly because the state does, I think, know that this is happening. But they don't want to admit that their multicultural experiment, which, as you probably know, famously, E. N. Orpau warned would fail with his speech, the rivers of blood speech, for which he was heavily criticized. So I think they do know, but they don't want to admit it. They don't want to be called racist. They don't want to, and this is permeated the whole of British society. Since Tony Blair, people are frightened to be accused of effectively being biased and white. And we're talking about things. People are, I don't know, you have it here, unconscious bias and all of the other sort of what I call work. Work, DEI, driven rubbish, which has permeated Britain in the same way. I think it may have originally come from you guys, but it's certainly had a huge effect on us. I think it had a great grip on us for a few years. It's lessened, it's hold. Well, thanks to the Donald. Yeah. That helped a lot. And I think a big part of it was Elon buying Twitter. Yeah. Well, you got legitimate free speech. And which is again, back to this 12,000 people getting arrested each year for social media posts recently. Look, that is, how is that tolerated? I just don't understand how people aren't, I was about to say up in arms. But that's also part of the problem is that no one's armed over there. We are, we, I have actually got some guns, Joe. Because I have a farm. So when you come to the UK, I hope you'll come and shoot some presents with me. Oh. So if you don't have a farm, well, if you don't have a farm, you'll find it very difficult to get a gun of any kind. And even if you have a farm, so reform tried to politically assassinate me in, in, in, in 25 early 25 and made full secuations about me threatening to hit one of the zia use of in a meeting. And somebody was saying I went around parliament and saying I was a very good shot and I was going to shoot zia use of him is if you believe that I'm, I've got a completely clean record, I employ lots of people, I have lots of businesses and I've never had an issue. But listen, four armed police turned up, took all my guns away. I mean, and I'm a member of parliament, I said to them, guys, you could just call me out from, we could have talked about it, but no, they turned up. Just from an accusation. 930 at night, left at quarter to 12. We got them on the cameras, took all my guns, all my ammo, and it took me five or six months to get them, get them all back. But look, so they don't want the public to have guns and they are doing their very best to damage the shooters who perfectly legitimately like to go and shoot clay pigeons, who like to go and shoot game, who like to go and hunt. Effectively, they're trying to make that very difficult through the licensing laws for guns. As you probably know, they banned handguns. In the late 90s, because there was a murder up in DUMBLAIN. One murder. One murder. So everybody, my father used to shoot pistols for Oxford University and he had his dead now blessing, but he had all his pistols taken away, the gun that pistols used to shoot with at Oxford University. I mean, we now have a society which needs radical change and we need to release the individual. And to your point on social media posts, there was a lovely lady Lucy Conley who was locked up for something for 32 months for just a very emotional social media post which she deleted after four hours about the Southport killings where this chap, Axel Ruddicabana, went and knifed three young girls and killed them. Despite the fact that the British state through prevent was aware of this, and we've had a similar case recently with Henry Novak where again, it was actually, I think, on this occasion's seag, stabbed him. And the police, despite the fact when they arrived at the scene, he told them he'd been stabbed. The police didn't believe him and they tried to handcuff him. And as a result of that, it's arguable that they opened up the wound, the stab wound, he drowned in his own blood. Meanwhile, his murderer was never handcuffed. So this is where the British state's gone completely wrong. So instead of one law for everybody and one policing for everybody, this sort of view that the white population is racist, which I don't personally believe them to be. I think Britain is a very tolerant country. Do you think that this perspective, that society sort of adopted in the UK about white people being bad? Do you think this was, there was architecture to it? This was by design? If this was done, or is this just a natural response to people being called racist? Because of course in the past, there was more racism than there is today. And people always want to point to that racism as, you know, evidence of colonialism, evidence of whatever it is that happened in days past. But why in England do you think that narrative took hold so well? Because I think, Joe, to your point, that this post-war plan for multiculturalism. Why in England do you think that narrative took hold so well? Because I think, Joe, to your point, that this post-war plan for multiculturalism, I think they realized that they could... So it was by design? They've got a problem. So part of it was probably infiltrating the universities and promoting these kind of ideas. It's almost as if, with the World Economic Forum, there's this view, that the Anglo-Saxon nations have commanded and dominated too much of the world's resources. And there's almost like this misguided, altruistic view that we should become more concerned with global welfare rather than the welfare of our own citizens, which I totally disagree with. Well, there's also the you will own nothing and you will be happy. This is your slash wall... Which is... ...howable, my mind... ...so someone would even say that out loud. I know. You own nothing and you will be happy. Is this a part of an Orwell book? Because this doesn't seem like a real person would say something like that. Because who the fuck is going to listen to that? Does it make any sense? What George Orwell has been rather accurate in terms of... He's dead on. He's actually pretty optimistic. His version of the world was a little bit more palatable than what we're dealing with right now. Interesting man, old Italian, fought in the Spanish Civil War. I mean, he was a very quirky Englishman who clearly had a hugely pressing foresight. And I think probably like certainly like me, he had a healthy disrespect for what I call collectivist stateism. And he was a very much an individual and a believer in the individual. It's really interesting because when I first read that book was in high school and I kept thinking like what a crazy... This had never happened. This is not even possible, but what a crazy world this guy's created in his imagination of things going completely haywire. And then you realize as time goes on, oh that's totally possible. It's totally possible that things can get that ridiculous. I mean when you're dealing with, you know, male biologically male athletes that compete against women because they identify as a women and use women's locker rooms. All the craziness that we deal with today, the open border situation, no one's illegal on stolen land, hey fuck off. Like what are we doing? What is this? Well it's almost as if we're subverting all the things that made us great. Yeah. And you know there's nothing wrong with immigration. But it's probably a good idea to make sure someone's on a fucking murder before you let them in. Like the idea that there should be no border at all is like if the world was perfect, that sounds wonderful. If the world was perfect, everybody paid their taxes and everybody followed the laws. Why have borders? Clearly it's not perfect. You know, go to Pakistan, go to Karachi, go hang out, go down the street as a woman in a miniscirt and see how that works out. Go to God's place. Again, this is your quiet right. This is, I mean Pakistan is I think the example of a rogue state basically. And I think their view of, as you say, women who dress in ways other than the ways of Sharia, I totally covered. Yes. And again it's all in various of the Hadith which we quote in a ragdag report. They are considered to be meat and this is something I've never understood. How do you square this circle of this sort of clanish backward looking culture which comes to a highly open, high trust society and then embeds itself within that society. And undermines everything that we've achieved over over a thousand years. And acknowledging that is somehow another racist. A acknowledging that some cultures are superior is somehow another racist. But just understanding human rights, understanding the rights of individuals to be free, they're not being subjected to other people's archaic laws. And this is look, these, a lot of cultures in this world live as people lived thousands of years ago. No one in the United States wants to live as people lived thousands of years ago. No one. And this is not a racist thing. Like you should be able to come over here and practice whatever religion you want. But if your religion has rules that violate the laws that we've all agree are just fair, then you're not integrating and if you take over a whole town and now that town is subject to these archaic laws, we've got a problem. And if you let that problem get bigger and bigger, they take over the country. And that's an actual possibility for certain countries. We have to recognize that civilization is not as sturdy as we like to think it is. It's kind of flimsy in a lot of ways. A few bad things can happen and things can go sideways quite quickly. Well, I think liberties very fragile, isn't it? Absolutely. If you don't protect liberty, you lose it. Right. It was Margaret Thatcher who was very strong on this. And you have to have laws. You have to have laws. You have to have laws. But what you also have to have is everyone should be equal under the law. Yes. And to your point, I couldn't agree more. I'm in Britain used to be a very tolerant society. So for instance, Europe was very anti-Semitic. And was never anti-Semitic. We used to welcome a lot of Jews and Protestants from Europe who were being persecuted, particularly in France with the Protestants. So we were a very tolerant society. But the people who came integrated and they contributed. And that is the essence, I think, of sensible immigration. So it should be limited targeted. And it should be only people who accept your religion and your culture. But what do you do though, if someone comes over here, and then they're not violating a law. They're not violating any laws. They achieve citizenship. But then they start bringing over more and more people and then start instituting Sharia law. What do you do? Do you deport them all? Like, how do you, like this idea of having all these people recognizing how many people got in illegally, deportting them, mass deportations, deporting criminals, it all sounds great until you talk about actually implementing it. Like, how do you do that? How are you doing that? Are you going to knock on people's doors and pull them out of their homes and ship them back to where they came from? Like, how do you do that? I think the first you do is you stop them coming across. Okay. How many are they coming? Anybody understand that? Because they're traveling across safe countries. So they shouldn't be coming. What's the estimate of the amount of illegal immigration that you have in Britain? It's almost impossible to say how many people are living there illegally or living with us illegally. I mean, we think it's sort of 1.8 to 2 million people probably. That's our estimate. But people are arriving. We know how many are arriving. There's a lot arriving every day, particularly when the sea is calm. How many are there every day? They're coming. We can vary. I mean, you can get 1,000 in a day. If the sea's rough, you get none because obviously they suffer. If they try and cross the end of overcrowding, dinghy is that they can't get across. But we're paying the French over half a billion pounds a year to try and stop it. That I think is not happening. And as a result of that, our board of patrol picks them up, gives them bottles of water, brings them in, and settles them in in hotels and pays them well, pays them welfare. They become, and then they apply for residency and they say they're asylum seekers. I argue most of them are economic migrants. But you know, our woke culture is not protecting the interests of the British people. And it's also a massive incentive. If you live in a terribly poor country and you can just get to England and then instantaneously you will get money and housing. That's right. Why would you not do that? Well, not any that. You go to the top of the waiting list for dental treatment, which British people don't get NHS. Why? Did they get access to dental treatment that the British people don't get? Correct. Why? Why did immigrants get access to it? Well, this show is the mystery of what our leaders, I don't know what they think they're doing. But they have this misguided view that these people are actually, they call them asylum seekers. They say they need to be looked after and protected. They're not. They're economic migrants. If they know there's welfare when they reach Britain, they'll travel across multiple safe countries to get to the welfare, the free housing. Of course. And all the other stuff. And then, unless you deal with issues like the rape gangs and you force them to adhere to UK law and respect our laws, our culture and our religion, they gradually set up their own cultures and with their own laws, as I said. And there are large tracts of the country now where we've got these Islamic settlements, which effectively operate almost as a sort of parallel society. I don't know whether it's quite the same here, whether you've got the similar thing with the Somalis in Minnesota. You do in Dearborn, Michigan. Dearborn, Michigan just had a gigantic Islamic parade where you just see tens of thousands of people holding flags and walking on the street. Yeah. It's kind of crazy. The end, Dave, also, but things that's funny about Dearborn is all the progressives. It's very liberal place to like, welcome, welcome, everyone's welcome for all cultures. And as soon as they got into power, they banned the pride flag. That was the first thing they did. Well, I'm afraid they have quite strong views on that sort of thing. Oh, yeah. That's why, yeah, queers for Palestine is always hilarious. And then you see the mean Palestine for queers and throwing people off roofs. It's like the champion runs our green party is a gay Jew. So I mean, again, he's going to have a problem if these guys get anywhere near power. But that doesn't seem to put the progressives off. They still seem to be. But this is what's crazy is that their society is completely, like Islamic society is completely patriarchal. The women are absolutely second-class citizens. They have completely different laws for how the women can dress. What happens to the woman if someone has sex with someone has, first of all, if they commit adultery, they can be killed. I just don't understand today. I just don't understand today. Yeah. And I want, you know, we're a father did it to his daughter. Yes, we do get these killing. Honor killing. Yeah. Yeah. Or brothers, the brother will kill the daughter of the daughter, shame the family. It's like, hey, guys. How are you progressive when you're supporting this? And it's because the concept of not being racist, not being called racist, the fear of that is so strong, they're willing to adopt all sorts of things that are the complete antithesis of everything they believe in. Well, in the UK, I don't know. You have it here, but the Me Too movement, it always it fascinates me that they never seem to say anything about these, what I call, clanish tribal cultures who have a completely different view of women. And to your point, you know, again, in our report, a woman, if she accuses in Pakistan a man of rape, she has to have four male witnesses who actually have to witness and swear that they've seen her being penetrated by the rapist. And you've actually got women in prison because if she can't prove that she's been raped under those rules, then she can be sent to prison and there are many women languishing in Pakistani prisons for that very reason. And this is the sort of extraordinary cultural oil and water which just doesn't mix just. So it's also the mental gymnastics that you have to have to accept that as a part of Britain. And because you're progressive is really crazy. It just shows how these ideologies, these cult-like ideologies can completely defy logic, completely defy common sense. And just you have a set of rules that you're supposed to adhere to. If you deviate from those rules, you're a racist. You don't want to be a racist, right? Then everyone's welcome. As you say, it's honor killings. It's tribal. Yeah. Your first loyalty is to your tribe and your family, not to your host country who's actually got their own laws. There are all sorts of hadith rulings which they can use to justify it. I mean, for instance, if they rape a white girl that doesn't count in their view of life as adultery. So they are effectively taught that a girl who doesn't dress as they would dress is meat to be abused. And they have these extraordinary sort of cultural views. You see the completely incompatible. In my view, with a society like ours where we are a matriarchal society which respects women. I think we have grown to respect women. Obviously they've now got an omnivotent position within our society, certainly in the UK. I'm sure it's true here too. Right? They play a part in our society. They're very, very important, a part of everything. But again, under the Islamic code, I think that the Muslims are frightened of female sexuality. It's all there. And as you know, you get FGM, female genital mutilation. So these cultures, I think, Joe, and to your point are just incompatible unless you have a very strong government which basically protects its electorate from any subversive behavior which is not compatible with our values. You keep using the term meat. Is that how they actually refer to it as? That's how they consider it. What do they say? Like how are they saying? It's in our report that there was actually, I think it was... Is it a translation of the...? I think Thomas Jefferson actually, it's in our report, asked the barbery pirates about the way in which they treated their slaves and their women. That was particularly... They just also, slavery is accepted within Islamic countries. So I think they have their own codes. They have their own terms of reference. And there is a quote in there. I'd have to look at the report to give it to you. And where one of them does liken white girls not dressing as Muslim girls dress and he does liken it to meat. Jesus. And that is an analogy he used. So I mean, yeah, I think that's what they think. This rape gang inquiry report that you have just released, the number... I want you to say it because it sounds so crazy if I say it, people... It's going to sound wrong. What the number of people that were victims, the estimate? Well, we've estimated that a minimum of a quarter of a million rapes have taken place. It's probably much, much more Joe. Because we published in here, I think it was a list of 147 parts of the UK where this is happening. Now the government tries to tell you it's happening in roshdale old and one or two, Bradford, one or two centres. And that's why they're stashed inquiry, the terms of reference of that have now been downgraded. So they make it look as if it's not a systemic problem, but just a little local problem, which it isn't. So we've listed here and they're all in here, the places where we know it's happening from our rape gang inquiry. But every time we publish this, Joe, I get people emailing us or sending us messages on social media to say, what about red-roothing corn? What about it's happening here? It's happening here. It's happening here. So I think it's incredibly widespread. And there's other people who've corroborated that call from a million figure. That's an incredibly conservative figure. You can't be exact because the state is not collecting the data, which it should be doing. And we've been lobbying in parliament to make sure that the state's collection of the data improves. And then we can actually see the extent of the problem, and you can actually pinpoint it in the same way that we've done it in this report. So this is, I think it's linked to organized crime. I think it's linked to the drug trade. I'm pretty sure it's linked to the drug trade. And obviously it's linked to prostitution. So as usual with an evil like this, and you've got girls who are transported around in the back of pickups and cages. And at our rape gang inquiry, we had examples of girls who were raped by dogs and filmed, either Ailey raped or of a jimely raped, and literally watched filmed. And a lot of it's about servitude and about, you know, there's other stories in here about women having to lick the feet of their rapists. It's about power. It's about servitude. And it's about the fact that Muslim men are taught to believe that they are superior, not only to women, but they're superior to people like yourself and myself who are considered to be, if you like, the infidels. And their job is to effectively spread Islam and effectively punish the infidel. And as you probably know, in the Crusades, if you lost a salad in and you were a night's templer, a crusader, you had two choices. You either converted to Islam. Or they killed you. And in the case of a lot of these girls, a lot of them were made pregnant. They were impregnated. And they then had to convert to Islam. Some of them were trafficked to Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, other parts of the world. So look, I mean, this is a massive national scandal. And I'm hoping now I'm an MP. We've written this report. And this should stimulate debate. We send a copy of this on a PDF to every MP. And we're going to send this printed copy to all of them as well. Because everybody in power should look at this and they should start to correct it immediately. You use the term, the terms use rape gang. Why are you saying gang? And this is an organized practice. Yes. Yes. It's not as simple as Islamic men, or raping poor white girls. That they go out at gangs, specific for this purpose. These are properly organized gangs who are grooming and abusing young girls as young as 10 or 11. And then literally trafficking them around the country. We know that from the test that we've had. So originally when I went into parliament, I was elected late. So I was elected in July 24. So at the tender age of 67. So I, we heard them being referred to as Asian grooming gangs, which I think is a misnomer because it's unfair, for instance, the Japanese or other Asian cultures who don't do this. So when we, thanks to Elon Musk, we actually did. And as you're quite right, thanks to him giving us a free speech platform and Facebook's thankfully followed as well. So he's led the charge through his purchase of what was Twitter. So when I got into, I gave a speech in parliament where I didn't, I said, they're not Asian grooming gangs. I'm going to call them what they are. They're Pakistani Muslim rate gangs. So I said this in parliament. So Jamie will be dragged up if he goes on to the, you know, because everything goes into hands-side. And I gave this speech and it called shock in the house of comments. Now, I'm, I'm not the smartest kid on the block, but what I do in parliament is I tell the truth. So, you know, I'm only interested in telling the truth and getting to the truth and changing where in which we govern. That's what I've gone into parliament for. You know, I haven't gone into this. I give my parliamentary salary to charity. You know, I'm a reasonably successful person who's lived his life. I've been chairman of a football club. I don't know if you're interested in Premier League football, but I was chairman of Southampton. So I built the stadium of Southampton. I used to play competitive hockey and I built up the youth academy at Southampton. I loved the best day of my life when we got to the Cup Final in 2003. We lost one nil to Arsenal, but it was the most amazing experience for everybody. So look, I'm not doing this because I want necessarily to be doing it. I'm doing it because somebody's got to do it. And if we're going to change Britain, we've got to get the public to buy into what we're doing. And as I say, I'm not a classic politician. I'm not saying you've got to vote for me. I'm saying that we've got to change Britain by 29, or I think the country from what I can see is internal decline. So I sit on the public accounts committee. I see the waste. I see the unaccountability. I see the way in which the civil service does not serve the people, which is supposed to serve. I see our debt rising to nearly 100% of GDP. I see massive misallocation procurement on our weapons. I see fraud in the judiciary. I see all the things that... Sounds like you're talking about America. Well, I'm talking about Britain. I'm a moment, Joe. But I think it's a widespread problem. Well, I actually think America under Joe Biden probably was as bad as that. And if you look at what Elon and the boys uncovered with USAID and... That's all that all the misallocation of taxpayer funds all over the world. A lot of it to England. Some of it came to work causes in England. So look, whoever the architects of this are, whether it's the World Economic Forum, whoever they are, whether it's the Bill the Burgers, whether it's the Council on Foreign Relations, whether it's whatever malign influence is trying to do this, we have to collectively try and reverse it. So I'm saying to people, if you want, I will do my dandest to reverse it. I've run multiple businesses. I was in the city of London for 20 years. So I know about finance and I will commit to doing whatever I can to reverse this for the British people. But they've got... They've got a bind to it, Joe. They've got a bind to it. Are there people that are in denial that this is happening, that this rape-craying problem is real? Oh, without a shadow, without labor. What do they say? Well, labor just tries to look the other way. But when confronted, when confronted by the numbers, what does there? Response? Well, we've been demanding a statue in Quarry, and in the end we crowdfunded this. Right. What is the response to that? Well, the response to this has been pretty muted to be frank. I mean, the BBC haven't covered it at all. Really? A National Monopolistic Broadcaster paid for by a compulsory fee, have not covered this as a matter of public interest. More of Skye, nor properly of the Daily Telegraph, GB News have covered a tiny Patrick Christopher covered it one evening of it. Now, this is a massive national scandal that deserves complete, a complete and utter airing. How does the BBC justify not discussing this? Well, the BBC is part of our problem, Joe. So to your point about the Democrats, the BBC is a deeply malign organisation. So it was set up to inform educated into ten, and it was set up by a man called Reth. And Reth was a highly principled man, and I think at the time it was set up in the 20s, it probably did have a role. But in the digital age, where most of the young people no longer watch their news on the BBC, they get their news from whatever their favourite news channel is. Whether it's bright bar to whoever they get it from, they get it from somewhere else. But if you want to watch sport, you want to basically have your TV, you have to pay the TV license. There's still a problem that I'm sure exists in England just as it exists in America. There's a certain subset of our society, a large percentage of our society, particularly older people, that things are not legitimate unless they're discussed in corporate media. And that if it's not in the New York Times, if it's on CNN, if it's not, you know, fill in the blank, then it can't be completely legitimate. It has to be a fringe thing, it has to be a conspiracy thing. They still need these sort of legacy establishments to give them the news because that has been the way they grew up. That has been how they were trained. And in their mind, they don't understand the internet completely, they don't go on Twitter. And so all that stuff to them is just too fringe. So that's always going to be a problem. And if someone like the BBC doesn't cover this stuff, for a lot of people that are woefully ignorant, they can still kind of claim that ignorance and dismiss it because the BBC isn't covering it. That's exactly right. I mean, that's a very good summary because the BBC historically was totally trusted and their news bulletins were designed, as I say, to be impartial completely. And being a public sector broadcaster, their job was to cover matters like this and create debate. But as we know, monopolies go bad. I mean, monopolies in my view are generally a bad thing, particularly in the digital age where, you know, thanks to Elon Musk and what he did with X. I think he has released free speech. I think he has returned some sort of semblance of people's ability to be able to force debate without being bullied by a monopoly like the BBC. So if I ever get near power, I will responsibly defund the BBC as one of the first things I do. I think the BBC is dripping poison into the veins of Britain every day. What other examples of what the BBC is doing do you think is dripping poison? Well, I think a lot of their coverage is not objective. It's woke. I mean, they're into all this DEI, they're into obviously the LGBTQ+. They're into all of the things which I think, as we said earlier, probably came from this Democrat period. But it's been happening for a long time. I think if you look at the Labour Party, again, I don't know if you've ever heard of the Fabian Society. So the Fabian Society was set up in the 1880s. And it was basically most of the Labour front bench and most of the Labour Party are members of the Fabian Society. So the Fabian Society, George Bernard Shaw was a member of the Fabian Society. You'll have heard George Bernard Shaw say, it's the most extraordinary organisation that their emblem is a wolf in sheep's clothing. As if that doesn't tell you what they're doing. That's their emblem. So can I see what that looks like? That's their emblem. I need some sheep's clothing. Fabian Society. The Fabian Society. I need to see that. You should have a look at that. I might have to get a few. Shall I tell you what else they would? I need a T-shirt. Shall I tell you what else they would? They were eugenicists originally. Well. Yes. Well. How far back? And that is damn crazy. Well everyone should look at the Fabian Sartre because that runs deep through the veins of the land. That is damn crazy. What do you think of that? That is damn crazy. So ladies and gentlemen, if you're just listening to this, this Fabian Society coat of arms is really a black wolf that has a sheep's body strapped on top of its back. And it's like covering its butt. This is insane. That's crazy. But what a complete disdain for anybody else's intelligence. Like they don't even try to hide it. They're all members of the front, they're all members of the Fabian Society. So that coat of arms is all. Yes, stommer is all surmembras. I didn't see sure, Jamie. Please order it. You want to hold anything. You want a Fabian Society? I teach you. Just for a good one. They're going to be hilarious. But no, so that runs through the Labor Party. So that's all part of it. So I think the agenda has been to your point. They're infiltrated our education system. And I'm proud of our history. I mean, Britain stopped the slave trade. It costs us a fortune. We did it. education system and you know I'm proud of our history. I mean Britain stopped the slave trade it costs us a fortune. We did it almost unilaterally and you know we I think on the whole of being a force for good in the world not bad. I'm proud to say that I've studied a lot of history. I think there are many other cultures probably the Belgians and the French who are far more brutal with their with their colonies. So I think we've tended to leave a legacy where we've tried to instill the rule of law, look at India, look at a lot of the other countries that we were involved with then our flourishing because of the I think the structures that we left in place and it's very sad to watch us almost turning in on ourselves and having left the legacy in other countries. We ourselves of lost sight of what of what we should be doing. It's just it's really extraordinary seeing the perspective of a lot of young people that are very impressionable that come out of universities and have an utter complete disdain for these successful societies and instead of looking at these successful societies and saying well yeah people were really terrible in the past but this is a pretty good example of how people should be treated equally today. No it's not perfect but it's progressing in a better direction than it was in the past right instead they look to the past and everything is built on this horrible history of outrageous atrocious acts and therefore it must be punished currently and all the people that benefited from it specifically white people need to be cast out they need to be silenced they multiculturalism is the only way to go complete open borders like though the way they look at things is like how do you think these countries got so good like what do you think is about America or about England about any of these countries that leads them to be where they are today. Well it's a long history of progress, a long history and along the way yeah like especially when you go back hundreds of years ago people were fucking terrible they were terrible everywhere you know humans are just getting better at being people like pretty recently but to throw it all out and abandon it and to think that socialism is going to fix you like do you guys read anything there's not a single example of that not turning and they're they're taking on it as always it hasn't been done correctly and that is so wild that people are still willing to swallow that and the only thing that makes sense is they've been indoctrinated through universities to think this way because nowhere in the real world do you think that a quality of outcome ever makes any sense because everybody realizes somewhere along the line when you get your first job when you're a kid when you go into school when you're playing there's not a quality of effort there's never a quality of effort and there's always some people that want to put in more effort and they're putting more thought and more focus and they get further and you know oh well they're fucking over all these other people up to are you sure that's everything because it seems like it's not and it seems like as soon as you remove any incentive to succeed then you don't have any of the amazing stuff that you have around you all the time the reason why you beautiful televisions and starlink and all the it's capitalism it's that you have to incentivize people to create these things yeah it doesn't mean the only way to do this to fuck other people over that's not correct it could be done correctly it could be done humanely it can be done wisely you could vote with your dollars you could you know boycott companies that do things that you don't think are ethical there's all sorts of wonderful ways that capitalism could be used and you can sort of influence things the right direction but to throw it all out and say we've got to go to socialism like oh boy I can't believe people are buying that I just I that to me is one of the real problems with not allowing conservative voices in universities and these universities especially in the United States are a lot of especially like in sociology psychology and overwhelmingly liberal like surely there's got to be some historians out there that are conservative and they would have a different perspective and it might be good to have diversity of opinion as well as diversity of national origin as well as diversity of gender as well as diversity of sexual orientation yeah all that's great but also diversity of opinion yeah like the only way to know whether or not this person's making sense is to have someone who'd completely disagrees it as a better point go up against them and you watch them duke it out and as soon as you silence all that because students don't feel safe or because you know this is promoting x y and z this person's a Nazi oh they're a Nazi we can't let them on there as soon as you do that you ruin the whole thing that a university is supposed to be doing supposed to be preparing young minds for discourse and for communicating and for figuring out the world on their own they're eventually going to be independent and dependent entirely on the their own actions and decisions and go out there in the world figure out your way arm them correctly and the way to do that is to expose them to all sorts of different competing ideas the idea that that was ever accepted to be shut down in this country especially in America is a massive failure of the education system just massive if you think that someone has bad points come up with better points and let them do get out and don't pull fire alarms and don't silence them don't scream and protest and throw things at them communicate this is what and anybody who doesn't do that should be shunned i agree if you if you're one of those people that says no you can't talk to Nazis like shun them shunned they are the enemy of thinking they are the enemy of progress they are the enemy of finding out what's right and what's wrong and the only way we find that out is we communicate free speech free speech well free speech and a degree of Darwinism you have to have a what we have in the UK now is i always say reverse Darwinian theory and again at schools now in my damn lucky we like to win to win was good to win fairly in a proper game of hockey or rugby or whatever was great but now in schools winning is considered to be bad so everybody needs to have an opportunity to be treated the same in sports often often in sport to win to be seen as a competitive winner you guys don't have wrestling we don't have wrestling i know you do you do it's a real problem cage fighting itself but i mean wrestling just wrestling as a sport just wrestling for high school and college just like wrestlers understand meritocracy as good as any human being alive because there's no way to make it unless you work hard but isn't this the battle jay the age old battle between individualism and collectivism yes because the collective likes to curb the individual i like to foster the individual and i think what what the state fears most is highly successful independent minded people who are capable of putting their point of view and discussing it with each other so what they try and do through the taxation in the UK what they're doing is they're taxing to your point people who contribute who work hard and there are still a lot of people who fight very hard to feed their families they're proud they don't want to be part of this welfareism you know they want to provide and they work hard but the state puts everything in their way all the regulations the rules the taxes everything is everything is the force is not with them and that's got to be wrong i mean what you what i think what you need is a lot of successful individual family businesses communities which are self sufficient communities that respect each other and and and effectively can have this debate with each other you get at the truth and i think as a result of that most of the best inventions have come from you know the UK the US from the Anglo-Saxon world where individualism when it's allowed to flourish does a lot of good for mankind right into your point i i think this is what's been undermined by these what i call central planners and a lot of these great inventions in america have come from people that immigrated legally from other countries because they appreciated what america stood for and they really wanted to make something happen and they couldn't do it wherever they were with extraordinary in the uk is we've got a lot of support from people who are immigrants into the uk they came to Britain because they respected our structures and what they want is they want structure they don't want to see the country yes legal in america of the same perspective legal immigrants in america are pretty overwhelmingly against the whole open-board of idea because it took it was so hard for them to become an american citizen it's a very proud moment for them to do it like a lot of young people yeah a lot of support from young people who are again i people are online see this is the thing like so young people are much more i want to say informed but at least aware of the issue they're much more aware of things than older people that are just again reading the newspaper and watching television but don't don't you think is it maybe the same here in Britain a lot of them wealth is tied up in what i call the baby boomers so i'm a sort of tail end boomers i'm sixty-eight but the sort of but bulk of them are probably seventy to ninety and a lot of the pension wealth is held there and a lot of the damage that's been done to our financial markets has come from a version to risk risk is a good thing in my opinion so people need to take risk risk you know the entrepreneur takes risk and he gets reward if he gets it right but if you tax him into oblivion he doesn't take the risk and what's happening Britain is the baby boomers a wealth all locked up there they want to see their retirement through safely and not enough money is cascading down to the young people to be able to build their lives in the same way that the boomers were given a chance to to make money in in this very uh when you see not enough money is cascading down like how so what's the bottle that the money is all locked up when with these old baby boomers and they're more concerned with their pensions and their retirement than they are with generating an ongoing wealth chain which gives an opportunity for the young to be involved so you mean they're not starting businesses no very much not they just holding on other money they're holding on to their money so that's just that's an England thing in England definitely i'm not i i think it's a big issue i don't know what it's an issue here is it an issue here well there's certainly an issue here with young people feeling like the system is completely rigged um cost of housing is through the roof uh rent is through the roof uh groceries or more expensive inflation here's a giant problem it's a giant problem for people that are struggling we were just looking at something the other day on on the internet where it was talking about a number uh a finite a number from was it like two thousand and seven or two thousand eight or something like that there was like two hundred and twenty five thousand dollars and it's four hundred and fifty thousand dollars in today like that's crazy yeah it's like twenty years ago like to to have something double in twenty years and you just think about how many people that are coming up that just feel like AI is going to take all their jobs so they don't know what to do and now they're in student debt because you guys have free education over there which is a wonderful thing i mean i completely support that idea but in america these kids get saddled down with debt that they can't escape well we don't have an England we don't have free education so in England in Scotland they do this Scotland has free education we did use to have it you're quite right when did it go away well now students have to take out loans and this is another shocking uh uh i thought you guys had free health care and free education we have well if you call it free health care assuming you can get a doctor now because you you know most people now having to source their own medical treatment because it takes you so long to get an operation or to get a doctor's appointment it's although the sort of health service was set up post water provide free health care when it becomes incredibly inefficient people have to seek their own care otherwise they don't get treated but i but i look i think with student debt now uh where did they change where university education it's it's changed so so now what year was this was being changed for a long time so so yeah yeah so our mildest son is 35 so he took out a student loan it was less than and then the fee shot up so my what's a like for oxford what's a typical what how much well they run up students will run up debt of in the UK now it's not uncommon to run up a debt of 60,000 pounds so it's very similar to what's going on in the 60,000 pounds and and they're charged the most eduous rate of interest on it it's really strong in terms of bankruptcy over there we do have bankruptcy laws yeah but do you have bankruptcy student debt you won't be bankrupt to do the student debt because because the student debt they just accrued the interest uh if you go and work in a foreign country uh often you don't have to pay the student debt back i think it's a 30 uh liability but once you start working then the student debt organization will take interest and principle out of your salary in america you they for if you go bankrupt they'll forgive credit card debt also it's over the debt but not student loan is the one loan that you cannot ever be forgiven from in fact people who have social security in america their social security gets docked because they owe student loans is that right it's crazy imagine you're at the end of your life you're living on social security and they're taking pieces of it for an education that clearly didn't help you out but i didn't about you but in england we've got these ridiculous courses in sort of humanities and sort of things that are completely obscure and these these kids go and do that these these what i call bullshit degrees and at the end of the day they come out of it with a load of debt and no real skills no skills and completely ideologically captured mind very much yeah it's um that's it's and there's not a lot of other alternatives it's like most universities are left leaning yeah and that's that's the issue that these kids have you're even if you're from a conservative family or you the kids grow up a certain way send them off to college and they're very impressionable and they're going to get talked down to by a professor who's a communist who's never had a real job in his life and he seems so smart and he's very smug and he insults you if you disagree with him and he is the ruler of the classroom and everybody like like little kids they just give in to this guy's ideas the next thing you know you're you're organizing on school grounds and you're doing all the same things the other communists are doing and you're you're part of the team hey we're a nice we're gonna fix the world and you don't realize how ridiculous it is until like maybe you're 35 and you have a job and then you have a family and you're like what the fuck are we doing like what is this it does change doesn't it oh 100% but also the worst I mean all should show me a young man who's that who quoted that who was that quote from show me a young man who's not a lip was it liberal or is it progressive or whatever it is some show me a young man is not a liberal and I'll show you a man without heart show me an old man is not conservative and I'll show you a man without a brain yeah no what I don't know who said that but I it's it's a common who said a comment saying what's fine I was at that it's it's a truism Churchill yeah Churchill there you go one of your people yeah yeah yeah brilliant and accurate and it doesn't being conservative doesn't mean you're not kind silly it's just recognition of human nature and you can't you can't reward people for not putting in effort because then they will find ways to not put in effort you can't reward people for being quote unquote victim and I'm not I don't mean a real victim of a crime I mean victimized by society victimized by circumstance victim you can't weaponize that because people will cling to it they're oh the people love excuses anybody does sports you play hockey people love excuses not today my back hurts today I don't feel up to it they I'm a little tired I can't do the final lap people love excuses and when you weaponize that and you give people incentives to be excuse you give excuses and then you put people on their heels like whoa I don't want to appear that I'm insensitive let's help you out and then all of a sudden you've got a whole swath of society that has a carte blanche of your tax dollars for nonsense well this is obviously what's happening in the UK when I was brought up again competition was a good thing you know if you if you if you felt a bit rough you just carried on you didn't win you didn't moan you expected to fight for things if you had a setback you didn't immediately go and cry into your beer you you basically got on with it well we need to teach people that that's it's character building like you're gonna have rough days and you should cherish those rough days because from them you will grow you will grow from your rough days the down times are the good because those down times really give you the motivation and the real firepower to get out of whatever situation you're in and improve your life and it's from from a verse he comes comes success yes I think comes character for sure and success yeah character for sure I mean it doesn't exist without some sort of adversity but I do think I think the young were also badly affected by the covid by the response to covid jenn i think you and I share something in Cohen I'm a pure blood I haven't I didn't have a lot of larys I didn't have those I didn't have those injections I wouldn't go anywhere near them how did you get away with that in the UK well I used to go to Australia a lot so so I because I have some businesses in Perth in Western Australia I love those old rocks in Western Australia you know the mining the sort of wild west and cow girly in places like that you know which you've got a huge historical connection to sort of gold prospecting and stuff so I stopped going I stopped traveling because it was very difficult to travel but I don't know about you I found the lockdown profoundly concerning I thought I thought things that I thought were nor the norm I was losing everything that made sense yeah and you know there were things happening that I didn't think could ever happen in Britain you know the state literally took over and it frightened people into submission and this and the young people suffered most because you know they didn't have the opportunity to socialize and to to your point discuss ideas and and and get at the truth they were literally locked up everything was online it wasn't it wasn't right the whole thing was completely wrong yeah imagine if you're in high school in America and you're in California you're entire senior year you're at home you graduate you can't even go to a graduation because it's too dangerous yeah the whole thing was madness we didn't go to right and as tenants we didn't he he was he was a great man very brave man and he got he got that right and boy there was a lot of pushback it was amazing how many people were willing to do the work of the government how many citizens were willing to enforce these ideas it was really shocking it was shocking to watch how many people became lemmings how many people just stepped in line we had people ratcheting on each other yeah oh we did it because people were warning people in Los Angeles yeah they're getting the financial rewards for telling on their neighbors that we're having parties that's what happened in England I have a tennis court in the middle of nowhere so I used to say come up and pay a tennis because if ridiculous to stop you playing tennis outside I mean absolutely mad anyway they used to come up and play tennis and nobody can see it see it if they played it in the village then people report each other yeah in California we had people report on us because this desk is not six feet wide seriously oh yeah yeah yeah and then they also said we were talking close to each other without masks because there was a bunch of people that saw people walk in to the studio and we shook their hands so they were ratting on us and so we had to put a sign up in the front door of the studio and we had to have a bag of masks a whole bag of masks do we have to have hand sanitizer too did we have that too I think so I think we had to have hand sanitizer for a while at least but we were getting ratted on because this desk is too close so it's not this desk is only five feet wide so it's no social distancing it was pathetic Jeremy it was not said it was it was so crazy the whole thing made no sense and it completely changed a lot of people's ideas about trusting experts and trusting authority so many people thought that the health experts in this country were literally just trying to make people healthy and didn't realize like oh no no no no they're trying to prop up the pharmaceutical drug cartel and they're trying to make as much money as humanly possible and the only way to do that is to force compliance and so they will do whatever they can they'll keep you from flying they'll keep you from driving they'll keep you from going to school you can't work if you have more than a hundred employees everyone has to get vaccinated they were doing crazy shit where you're like you guys are really going for it and it worked it worked for quite a while but boarded it ruin young people's perspective of authority completely they don't trust anybody anymore and with good reason well I think it damaged them most again it's another negative for them yeah and our national health service was forcing people to have the inject you had to work in the national health service you had to have the jabs yeah and it didn't work didn't work that's what she was she was an actually it didn't wait created major medical problems right and I don't personally think we've seen the end of it yet so I've got a lot of friends who fit they ended up having myocarditis yeah having strokes yeah having heart attacks and at the end of the day everybody know somebody that has a horrible reaction to it yeah everyone and to people that say they don't I've had conversations with people I don't know anybody out of side effect I'm like fuck you for lying there's no way that's possible unless you are the luckiest person in the world and you have an extremely small social circle and out of that social circle no one you had a bad reaction that which is very unlikely unless that's true like you're all you're just lying and you're lying because you probably were supportive of the vaccine initially and you don't want a scene like you were on the wrong side of things well I lost friends I don't know about you because I people said I hadn't been vaccinated and therefore I was a risk to their yeah mom or their dad or their their granny yeah I lost a bunch of people and I lost friends like that but um I mean it countries like India you you you know they didn't have the jab they had it they used I have a a mechton to a far far greater extent and that that was just as effective I think I used to treat my it's a warmer yeah I have a mechton I used to treat my cattle with I have a mechton but it worked it worked well and there were other there were other I think treatments which worked far much do you know what happened to me in America over I ever met in are you aware of that no no no CNN like for days was running this hit piece on me saying that I was taking horse dewormer for COVID it is it is it is it is it is it is also you know it's great for river blindness and yeah dengue fever and yeah I mean it's one to no bell prize for using human beings and they were they were claiming on CNN that I was taking veterinary medicine and they were not only that but they changed the color of my face so they took a video I was supposed to do a concert with Dave Chappelle that weekend in Nashville and I had to make a video saying I'm sorry but we have to cancel it because I got a covid so I said I had covid like two days ago I was sick but I'm fine now and I explained all the stuff that I my doctor through the kitchen sink at it we took all these different things and one of the things that I mentioned was Iver mechton and because of me mentioning that I also said monoclonal antibodies Z pack I talked about all the different IV vitamins I took a a bunch of different stuff and I got better quick and they took the video and changed the color of my face to make me look green on CNN no CNN's not a good not a good channel I did no I didn't know until I saw that I was like wow hey this is I was like do I have to sue CNN like this is crazy so is that Bill Hart's here when you're talking about with the eyes the worm in the eyes is that the bill hearts you get from the water in Africa um but river blindness I do not know what I think it's cool bill hearts I think I may be right you might be right um but I know they also it's used to treat yellow fever yeah and gay fever it's used to treat a bunch of different things but it you know it also has antiviral properties that have been demonstrated like there's papers on it and it's very cheap yes that but that's the problem the problem is anybody can make it and you get biophilic it's like a dollar a pill or something like that's nothing yeah and that was the real problem is that like if you want to have the emergency use authorization of a vaccine that hasn't gone through the safety protocols in America you you have to have no other medications that are available to contribute so the reason why they went after me on CNN was because clearly I was doing okay it was three days later and I said I never got vaccinated so here's all the stuff that I took and now I'm and they went crazy and it was this concerted campaign to try to destroy me Neil Young took his music off Spotify yeah he was he was unsound because it said that he said that I was promoting vaccine misinformation and he probably believed that he probably did believe that but he didn't know what the fuck he was talking about he's just he's another old boomer that just watches the news yes we I did use to like his music when I was school they didn't you I still love it still I still listen I don't care I mean I even told a story when I made the video about how when I was at a Neil Young concert while I was working at a Neil Young concert actually when I was 19 and that was the last day on the job because the ride broke out and I was like I'm a huge young fan like I don't care he just doesn't know he's someone told him this or he really thinks he's doing the right thing by removing his music like okay but what you're doing is you're supporting this machine that is lying to people and telling people the only way to get through this is to get vaccinated when in fact there's real like Udo Pradesh in India where that it was just very low instances of COVID fatality all of it was through Ivermectin yeah it's it's they had amazing success with just Ivermectin but again I think the state knows that it's caused damage I just don't think they can admit it at the moment no they're not going to admit they're never going to admit they just gloss over it and move on and some of the same people that were promoting that shit on the news they still deny it they still deny and they've lost debates like Chris Cuomo got destroyed by my buddy Dave Smith because of it like they're denial of like the things that they were actually saying yeah with like Florida, and water, and folic acid, and bread, and all this stuff all that shit it's all yeah it's got it I mean it's it's sort of man getting high on his own supplies never well it's also a business that's the real problem is that there's lobbies in this country that you know they they want to continue making money the same way they've been making money yeah and one of the ways they do it in America is they advertise on the networks so the pharmaceutical drug companies all advertise on all these networks they're an enormous part of the advertising budget I know in England that's not legal and it's only legal in America and in New Zealand there's the only two countries that allow pharmaceutical drug companies to advertise on television but what it effectively does is it stops all criticism of any side effects there's no stories on heart attacks there's no stories on strokes no stories on myocarditis now if they weren't advertising and then someone was making money off of something that was killing people that's the news yeah the news would be all over it but they have effectively ruined their own reputation by turning a blind eye on something that everybody knows but you think that turning a blind eye I think they know I think they know but they can't admit it both the people the individuals most certainly must know someone who got something from covid some from the covid shots someone you know someone who had a stroke you know someone who's got a neurological condition you know I know way too many people for you to not know anybody I know I have two people that I know that have pacemakers now like there's a lot of weird horrible side effects that happen from that if you don't know anybody that had one I don't believe you I know loads I mean my my sister in law myocarditis I've had a friend my best friend had a stroke literally a week after having having the jab people have had problems with heart a rhythmier yeah all sorts of stuff and and there's some been some issues with blood too yeah so look I I think them as usual money probably goes to the root of it Joe absolutely and we had something in the Britain called the nudge team which basically was I mean how the government all that was okay it's a bit like when I was in football people are hacking my phone until that was okay but with the nudge team it was some nudge people into accepting the lockdown and and it was effectively very clever manipulation of the population so look I mean I I you can't believe that the state thinks that's okay but they did they did they did yeah they did and they did in America for depending on which city you were in to very six times State thinks that's okay, but they did they did yeah, they did and they did it in America for The depending on which city you were in to very six cents Very in your expense the California was bad. It was real bad. I mean they closed down all the comedy clubs They closed they lost 70% of all the restaurants in Los Angeles. I mean it's crazy. Yeah Great place to live California though. I like what's that it's a great place to live California That's why people still tolerate it. I mean if if California had the weather of Seattle would be empty You know, I mean it's like the reason why people are still there as because God it's so amazing And there's so many cool people there and it's so nice and the weather is incredible and the views and yeah You could beat the ocean and then two hours later in the mountains. I mean it's an amazing place It's an amazing place. I went in dumb asses. Yeah, it was socialist Unfortunately, it's been permeating socialism that and grifters grifters pretending to be socialist They're essentially those people with the wolf with the the sheep wrapped around them. That's a large Yeah, that's a large portion of the government in Los Angeles and a large portion of the government in California in general And the way you know this is how wealthy those fucking people are and how it doesn't make sense how they're so wealthy You're making how much a year and you're worth how much crime. Yeah crime they're doing crime But you one of the things that happened very recently is they just announced that The governor of California one of the people on his staff had been wearing a wire for over a year Did you see that story, Jimmy? What's that? Well, no, no, I don't know what they got either but this lady had been what see if you can find it What says but she had been wearing a wire? She's working for the Gavin Newsom organization, and She was working for the administration and she was wearing a wire for the FBI because they had been investigating him For and this was during the Biden administration they started this so they started this in 2024 if they're investigating him It's supposed to be like they must know that something bad real shit is going down FBI infiltrated Gavin Newsom's inner circle by convincing governors allied to wear a wire Yeah Not good not good, but I think it's the same in Chicago Got some pretty bad spots San Francisco. I think it's not good It's a lot of people that are profiting off of this idea that you know The government should be taking care of everybody And you should be making all this money from taxes and then you know California spent $24 billion on the homeless and it just got worse It does like and so that now it's an industry So now you have this homeless taking care of the homeless is now an industry and there's people on the homeless Industry board that are making hundreds of thousands of dollars a year, and it's like what are we doing? It's the same a compliance it's the same with as you say D. I yeah, there's a whole industry and then Day to people making vast amounts of money on you know compliance D. I yeah, basically wealth creation Yes, which ultimately Strips personal responsibility and and tries to imbue everybody with a very sort of maligned philosophy Which which which is very damaging to the under the guise of being inclusive And also you're getting wealthy How many people from these non-profits are getting enormously wealthy like this is insane And that was one of the things that USA clearly uncovered I mean, I don't know if you've ever seen Mike Benz and some of his dicks on yep I mean shocking I couldn't believe it. There's so many hours of it. It's almost like there's too much information to digest You I could listen to like an hour of it I gotta stop because I just don't know when this ends. I'm not even absorbing this I'm just so Flabbergasted by the extent of the corruption and the amount of money that's been gone to fraud and possibly waste over the years is just staggering but but it also went all over the world and it was it was a philosophy Poor philosophy that was being exported To other countries and particularly the Britain. I mean we we have a presentacle Rory Stuart his wife was was being funded by Some of this stuff which goes shut down. Did they shut the whole thing down? They shut the USA. They leave a remnant of it. I don't know exactly how much they've left But essentially it's been shut down Of course if there was ever a Democrat that got elected president in 2028 it would probably start that bitch right back up open the borders right back up business as usual That would not be good. Yeah, no, it seems like there's there was a desire to move people into blue states and then eventually get them on Social assistance and then get them to become citizens and then you have guaranteed voters Because they you want to continue this right you want to continue living like this This is the way and then you would just completely take over the presidential elections and I think they were trying to do that This is Elon's perspective. I think he's right And you know he's obviously much more aware of the problem in terms of like the extent The USA was involved and these nonprofits and NGOs were involved It seems like there was a concerted effort to do this It's disturbing but again a lack of respect for tax fair tax fair funds Complete just what we have in the UK. I mean we need your help at the moment. You've got Beast you you're making a stab at returning to some form of normality For now, but if we don't fuck it. I mean we might have fucked it up by going over on I mean This war is not something anybody that's conservative wanted Most people don't want it except supporters of Israel. They're the only people that seem to be Thinking it's a good idea in this country. Most people are horrified by the idea because Trump was elected one of the pillars that he stood for apparently was that he doesn't want any more wars But he was I came out against it on the basis for us of rail polityke Which is it wasn't in the interest of the British nation right and I think again most of these Leaders should put the interests of their tax paying public first And there's only a reason to go to war if it's going to benefit you. Yeah, I it was difficult to see what the benefit was Although I think Iran is is a sort of malevolent state and it is spreading Very bad philosophy across obviously, you know, you've got his blood in in Lebanon And then we got Hamas causing a problem so I think I think there are a problem but the Certainly from our point of view. I mean you're you're the only country with a with the ability to do anything about it I mean we we we had one warship Which which which which didn't work properly when it was sent out to help so having goodness knows we you know We've spent all our money on welfare and not enough money on defense so No, we need we need help and and I think come To your point Elon Musk has been to to my mind incredibly helpful in restoring free speech because Starmer and and these fabians Fabian Pablo is told in society as I call them. They're sort of all they're all they've all got this maligned philosophy and and and I think what Giving us free speech has done is it stopped them Crushing the spirit of those people who do want to debate who do want to discuss who do want to get at the truth Wherever they've done so much to stop free speech with all these arrests It's extraordinary because they've also they've incentivized people to keep their mouth shut because no one wants to be in trouble Well, it's it's too tear policing You've got a deal point about you know that the Palestinian marches are tolerated. Whereas any form of Tommy Robinson March and Tommy Robinson in the UK He's deeply disliked by the establishment I give him credit for what he did again on the grooming gangs in 2003. He was warning About this in 2003 and Luton Not only that. I remember people dismissing that In 2003 or for wherever whenever it was when I first heard about it. They were talking about him as it's just horrible far right extremist I know and that he was making up these stories about these grooming gangs and rape gangs I remember hearing that and remember not knowing like what is it what's accurate here? What's going on? Well, I think the the accuracy is that he was right The establishment Didn't want to admit it because if we're right. Well, I am I think we are right about their multicultural post war experiment They realize it was failing because you can't justify The the the sort of abuse and grooming of the most vulnerable people in your society By people who've come into the country They should be treated equally under the law a rape is a rape. It doesn't matter whether it's perpetrated by somebody from is Muslim country or a Christian country rape is rape. I should be treated the same What would you do to stop this like imagine if you got into power right now? What would you do to put a stop to that? Well, we have to root it out and we have to stop it How do you have to lie the law That the law of our land to the people who are perpetrating it The problem is the police have institution it been been taught that they are racist We had Stephen Lawrence killing Which was which was didn't reflect well in the UK, but the response to it has created this fear of being being called a racist Which is the Stephen Lawrence killing? He was late nineties. He was he was stabbed by some sort of British miscreants And where was he died? He was it was in London Where was Stephen Lawrence from where he was he was a black a black So it's a racial hate crime. There's a racial hate crime. Okay, and this is a nice blown up and again You you find that the racial hate crime involving any white people is now blown up whereas the more the very often an increasingly common Acts against the indigenous white people are hushed up as much as they possibly can be that's a funny thing to say indigenous white people Yeah, and what I mean is real for England, but I mean nobody thinks about that in America You would never say like indigenous white people What we we we do have an identity There's a reason where it went so pay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We do we do we do have an identity But I think it is a digit as I say we've been very torrent of people who've needed help We've let them into the country and on the whole they have integrated and they have contributed right and I have no problem with that like you I'm absolutely in favor of that But the only problem is that people that aren't integrating if people don't want to come and live and integrate and contribute then They shouldn't come they should yes, you remain their own country It's also the idea of incentivizing people to illegally migrate to your country is just pure insanity Yeah, you're gonna run out of money and you're also putting a burden on these taxpayers for no reason whatsoever It's a bad use of their tax dollars, but in our immigration document we put forward, you know the case for a zip Basically a hostile environment. We don't want to be handing out welfare. We don't want to be encouraging people to come We want to create a hostile environment and encourage people to go unless they contribute and go back to their own country And live there particularly if they don't like our culture and our laws and they don't respect us and they think we're the infidel But do laws exist that would allow you to export those people? We you'd have to repeal so that's why That's why it's important we win an overall majority in Parliament by 29 because then we can repeal a lot of this legislation which will then empower the nation state again So this is the legislation that provides healthcare dental welfare housing This legislation largely passed by Tony Blair and his acolytes and this was all just to encourage mass migration I think it was to encourage this Mass immigration and make it very difficult to stop it practically Interestingly, he's quite crafted because he came out the other day trying to distance himself from a lot of the things that he he has actually created so he's he's quite a canial fox And he does look he looks a bit like Beelzebub these days. I mean he's got this white hair and these piercing sort of eyes I I I can't help look at him and think of evil, but but look so he ultimately I think him and his team realize What they realized what they were doing and he had he had it was all done Through the law you have to do in a in a country that believes in the rule of law The only way to change it is through Control of Parliament So you have to do it top down through the parliamentary system So you can repeal the laws and you can pass the laws you want to pass to an in power the nation state And at the same time which we're doing you need to start controlling local government as well because local governments gone badly wrong And a lot of the failures from the from the rape gang inquiry weren't just the national government you had failure at local government as well So is are the local government willfully ignorant? Are they denying its existence? Are they gaslighting people on it? Yeah in the case of labor that they've enabled it, you know that they they I say I can't see how anybody can ever vote labor again after they've read this report because labor has clearly enabled this both at national level by denying what's been going on and at local level where you've where you have local government turn it happens mainly in labor controlled areas You've got people denying completely that this has been happening What whereas We know it's happening. We have people like Sammy Woodhouse's a victim. I'll be do had a child by her by her rapist so so Ultimately local government has to be controlled from the bottom up and we started that process We won Nine out of nine county council seats in Norfolk So my constituency is on the coast in England. So it's a coastal constituency Been very bad to serve by the post-war elite So the fishermen in England have been sold down the river to to lodge it to the European fishermen as part of the membership of the EU So Norfolk is a is a county on the east coast. It's it's got rich farmland And farming is my passion. I love farming. I absolutely it's my hobby and I love it So I at the end of the day We have to control local government and change it bottom up and we have to then get control of National government and change it top down I would imagine if we can do that. I truly think if we can I truly think we can release The spirit of the British people and I think they want it but they've got to show they've got to show to the ballot box That's what they want. I'd imagine there's going to be an enormous amount of resistance to this kind of huge change from organized crime which I think we're now in the hands of from a corrupt judiciary From a police force that's that's gone wrong From local governments gone wrong the NHS has gone wrong again. It's it's it's a statement opley and it's original function I think has been subverted So so You've got you've got everything to your point the education system is wrong So there's a lot of change that needs to happen But I think fundamentally The electorate you saw them in 2016 vote to take back their sovereignty the government wrote a letter To all the households in the UK recommending they vote to remain in the European Union This is David Cameron But actually the British people didn't they voted to leave And they didn't do it. I think for financial reasons. They did it because they wanted their country back They wanted their sovereignty back. They wanted an accountable parliament and Westminster And some of our problems emanate from the fact that Tony Blair's reforms of undermined our parliament So our parliament is supposed to be omnipotent. It's supposed to be Completely contained the elected representatives of the people So so parliament is supposed to be Right at the top of the chain But what's happened has it's been undermined by these quangos that Tony Blair set up Which is effectively created at the life of the rent so the Supreme Court And literally there are hundreds of these quangos that now employ Unelected people Was that word quango? Well quango is a like a quasi national government organization So so they they are you know you've got All sorts of bodies you know The sort of bar standards board you've got loads of bodies which now prevail, you know you've got bodies or almost everything which which again have flourished since Tony Blair's legislation prior to that Power lay with parliament So that's why they've been able to control A lot of what goes on because the two party system the blues and the reds the tourism and labor basically have tried to out compete each other so the entire parliament Blair took it left Cameron emulated Blair and You didn't actually get proper conservative thought To change a lot of this stuff that was wrong so I think I think I think this is an opportunity and I think it's our last opportunity and I and all the help we can get from from you guys when we made a bad mistake in In letting you declare your independence which you're celebrating tomorrow and first place Had we had we played our cards better. I think you'd still be it should should still be part of part of I think it worked out You wrote a lot of not so well sorry. I think we're better off But I do want to see I do want to see I don't know. I think you're lost Well, I do want to see the angliss accent world support each other. I think there's not enough of that with two fragmented There's too much sort of Whether it's the world economic firms. I said whatever the reason there's too much fragmentation and too much undermining Of of this cohesive Anglo-Saxon where which lets face it Is the reason why we all have individual freedom because as we said earlier individual freedoms incredibly fragile We could we could lose it at any miniature I mean the society that What you know the way we look at America when in when people look at it the right way Or when people are proud of America. They look at it as a place where anybody can come and achieve your dreams and it's Doesn't mean only white people doesn't mean only black. It just means Americans were supposed to be a community a team You know and the fact that we're a melting pot that we're not like You know indigenous white people like England is part of the fun of it all that everyone's welcome just come over here and do your thing and Follow the rules, but the problem with this country is the problem with any country when you're being run by people that are completely Corrupt and you're being run by people that are influenced by enormous corporations That don't care about the people that only care about the bottom line how much money they're making and how do they How do they rig things and then you have politicians that are making a hundred and seventy thousand dollars a year But there's somehow worth four hundred million dollars and no one questions that no one's in jail the whole thing is bonkers And it's just you're always gonna have crooks and you got to hold them off You got to hold them off as much as possible when you recognize they're in you got to do a cleaning You got a clean house you got a clean house and get rid of them if you don't You're just gonna have the problem just gonna get worse because they're gonna figure out Okay, it's just like antibiotics when you don't take the full round and the the stuff doesn't really go out You know now you got medication resistant bacteria Congratulations your medication has made the bacteria worse So if you have fight off the corruption a little bit and then you stop they go oh well We got a we were close We almost figured it all out and got it all rigged But now we got to make sure that we lock people down and have even more laws and even more restrictions and We use you've summed up what we need to do in the UK very well I mean we are I think in the hands of organized crime I think a lot of the institutions that we had previously Have become rotten. I think it's the right way to recognize it to it is it's in the end and to your point You know, we do need to now punish people who've let us down. It's crime. It really is crime and To just pretend because it's been going on for so long and that it's business as usual that it's not a crime like no It's crime. It's crime. It's just somehow another crime that's tolerated well Letting down people who've elected you and given their trust to you Is is a massive crime? It's it's not just letting down betraying them. I mean we have the same as you but to a lesser extent because You've obviously got a former wealth and us, but like you see these officials Who end up becoming rich and you wonder how they do it? Yeah, and they're on salaries and they're taxed heavily and yet they always seem to flourish they never seem to be short of money So I I and I look at our judiciary, which is again now a quangay the judges are no longer appointed by parliament. They're appointed by this work quangay and I had an issue in parliament, you know, I was I challenged parliament because To the point where I've been saying we need to return power to parliament. They they have this body called the end I see G.S. Independent complained grievance scheme and in parliament we have this system called parliamentary privilege So I can speak on the floor of the house and I can't be sued for Lightwood you can say whatever you want. That's the essence of free speech in that in the chamber of the commons Now this this body has actually been expressly taken outside parliament And the case I had against them was they tried to say I couldn't I caught them doing something I thought was wrong and I wanted to take them to court They said you can't take us to court because we're parliamentary privileged even though it doesn't it's not the chamber It's not an MP speaking. It's got no MPs on this committee doesn't report to a parliamentary committee in yet The judges found they had parliamentary privilege didn't address the questions So this is how this is how the elected assembly has been undermined And this is what we have to we have to return power to the elected representatives of the people There's also another thing that the that Britain has done recently that's very disturbing which is eliminate jury trials Trying to do that Yeah, trying to do that. It's not it's not established yet. They haven't yet done it because there is there are still a few Decent labor MPs who fought against it. Oh, good But again, I think that's all a manifestation of organized crime because if you control the judges of course and And you and you can force more and more people through a judge system rather than a jury system and So for libel trials, I thought a libel trial when I was in football against the Times which is River Murdoch's paper and you know, I think I had my phones hacked and I fought a libel trial against them I newspaper hacked your phone. They happen when I was in football hacking my phone every day Wow, how are they doing it listening in through my voicemails? How'd they do it and then they can black a number from the voicemail and start listening So if you call me and left a message, they could black your number off my phone And they thought this is okay. These are national newspapers and again I want to You know, what because they in the old days you know people if people had a code to encrypt their phone and they didn't do it properly Zero zero zero zero. Oh, no, if you didn't change that they got into your phone They got into my phone. They got into lots of people's phones Wow, you never know quite how they did it So if you'd left me a message, they could black your number and then they'd start listening to your phone and everything else Now, I think you know that was that was that in this case murder, but Murdoch. I think has done a lot For the right wing cause I don't always agree with everything and I certainly didn't agree with him hacking phones but this all this all goes to the point of the establishment becoming corrupted and From corruption I think again you end up with oppression and And we need to sort that out. Yeah, and I'm hoping if I put myself up and the people agree They will change things and I think they are in a phi bra moods I'm hoping that they will take the opportunity and give us the power to do it I'm very brought that part up because we were not really aware in America of what the general mood of the country is like Where people are leaning in what direction as far as England goes. What is it like? Or is a large percentage of the population fed up? I mean what what's going on over there? Well, I think at to your point you've got this body of people who are profiting on the back of these Concepts which are you and I would agree completely flawed So they're obviously they're obviously in control of the moment But then you've got the body of people this this increasingly small percentage of what I call the private sector Which now accounts for a smaller and smaller proportion of GDP? So so your percentage of GDP Accountable by the state is much much smaller than ours. So are I mean directly and indirectly I I would estimate that are that are The share of government now in our economy is is over 50% if you take The effect of these quangos and everything else here you're much smaller than that now that's come You know pre-blair Thatcher we we were in a very very good economic state and the state accounted for Yeah, where it was 30 33% something like that It's now up to nearly 50% and rising and this is what the the Fabians want they want a dependency culture Right, a sort of centrally planned US SR style Fishing out of tax per fund so they diminish the private sector which they're taxing into oblivion Which is meant that a lot of our most able people have left the country so we've lost a lot of our rainmakers have gone So a lot of our best people Went to obviously Italy to buy to Abbot Dabi All over the world some of them would have come here. So the best brains have gone And and I think the non-doms have gone which again I think it's a huge era because they've now been taxed rather than being encouraged to to spend their time in the UK so so so we're being hollowed out by this socialist philosophy which is creating a Damage to the private sector and in empowering The public sector is there a large percentage of young people that are aware of this oh the young people have I've been incredibly impressed and a lot of them support us So they you know they can see that we're trying I think to at least Rebalance this and until we get this right it's going to be very difficult to to sort their situation out Now there's no overnight fix these days and I don't know I don't any of us know quite what effect ai is going to have on on the employment market on on opportunities for young people I mean in many ways if they've got a very good brain they've got a huge opportunity to do very well in enrich themselves but Increasingly, it's fewer and fewer people. It's not like the industrial revolution where the majority of people had an increasing standard of living It's going to be very interesting to see how we all cope with with this incredibly fast-moving Revolution which is what it is which is arguably going to create some incredibly rich people and Those people haven't got the brain power will end up struggling so it's I it's hard to see how that's going to end But that doesn't mean to say we want a state central planning everything we know historically that doesn't work and And from that comes a sort of shutdown of thought and and debate and free speech and all the things that That you and I I love I mean I I that to me that's that's a country I want to live in I don't want to live in a centrally planned mess so I We're in very uncertain times, but I'm I'm optimistic But if you release the ability the innate ability of of people In Britain in particular in this case. I think we can turn it round still Can't guarantee it, but I'm pretty sure we can still turn it round but we've got a ham now if it doesn't happen now It would have gone too far. Well, I certainly hope you can because for America When we see what's happening particularly with the social media post in the arrest It's so disturbing for us and then of course with your the rape gang inquiry report was Impossible to believe it's impossible. It's impossible. So You know we we hope you guys turn it around and when is your elections? We don't know Joe We've got this character Andy Burnham who Kia Stama has stepped down as you probably know Andy Burnham I call him the ghost buster He is just a more user-friendly version of of of Kia Stama he's been the mayor of Manchester He stood in a bi election recently where he was elected and He's apparently going to be anointed as prime minister By the 20th of July So this is a guy who up until recently wasn't even an elected politician. He's been a politician in the past He's been in the cabinet. Kia Stama can just step down and put another guy in his place and that guy takes over That's that's what's happening. That sounds crazy. I know what a stupid way to run. I think it's it's bonkers But so so the answer your question is so what is could run till 29? I know. What a stupid way to run. I think it's bonkers. So the answer to your question is, he could run till 29. 29. That's the backstop date. He could, and everybody says he might, have a snap election. I think that's highly unlikely. Labour have got the biggest post-war majority. Why would he have a snap election? He's got three years left with a huge majority. So why would he take a risk? In Manchester, he was mentioned to me. Oh. He's actually in the report in the rape handful. He's mentioned in the rape gang report, from not doing enough in Manchester, which is a centre of rape gangs. So he's involved in that. He's mentioned in our report. It's in there. So look, I think, in honestly the question, when's the election going to be? Some people would say he's going to have an election soon. I don't agree with that. I think he'd be mad, because I still think the public will judge Labour harshly. Because the economy's not going well. People aren't feeling richer. They're feeling poorer. Their businesses are struggling. Their taxes have gone up. Our taxes are at post-war highs now. So, and under waste is just off the scale. So when I'm in the public accounts committee, which I sit in, again, it's all on, you can watch it on people, watch it on screens. It's the public accounts committee. It's the most powerful committee in parliament. And we question these civil servants to try and hold them to account for the taxpayer. The waste is just off the scale. So you've got a wasteful, inefficient state, which is then taxing the private sector into oblivion, increasingly small private sector. And that's not a recipe that's going to encourage risk-taking investment. It's not, you know, they're taxing family farms, they're taxing family businesses for the first time. They're basically breaking the backbone of Britain to the Fabian point. They are enacting this Fabian agenda, which is designed to create a society that's reliant on the state. I don't want that. Nobody should want that. Well, listen, man, thank you very much for being here. I really appreciate it. I really appreciate you taking the time. I know it's difficult to get here for this day. And this is the only day we had opened. No, it's very kind of you to have me on, Joe. And I know it's some big celebrations tomorrow, so good luck to you. Yeah, we're going to win. We're going to win. I'm amazed at the support we've got. And I'm amazed that a number of people, even on the plane, come up to me and thank me for what I'm doing and say they're going to vote for us. And I think Britain's on the turn, and hopefully, if we put up shop, tell them what we're going to do, give them a chance to vote for us. If they vote for us, I should do my best to change things. If they don't vote for me, well, that's their prerogative. That's democracy. That's democracy. That's democracy. Thank you. Pleasure. Thank you.