Hello freak bitches. I would love to play you the dinosaurs are not real video Just do it. Oh god. See if he fl The thing is about these videos and this is the issue that I have with not just videos but also with blogs People you're writing things and you're not you're not being checked as you're going along So it's it's just you broadcasting an idea. It's not a conversation and because of that You can give off the illusion of expertise without being checked here goes dinosaurs never existed And by my god Eric Dubay, this is the flag. Yeah, the guy that does 200 proofs their earth is flat That everybody has debunked fucking Shills yeah, yeah, she'll answer your shows or listen to this guy Oh, and of the Royal Society don't you dare mention owns name the brass hole I'm not sure history department in 1842 or in other words the existence of dinosaurs was first Speculatively hypothesized by a knighted museum head Coincidentally in the mid 19th century during the heyday of evolutionism before a single dinosaur fossil had ever been found wrong They pause every time pause dinosaurs We we discovered marine reptiles and the first dinosaurs about a century before that So that right there Eric you're fucking wrong Whoops, it's like don't bring your flat earth bullshit into my profession now I'm pissed Yeah, keep keep this rolling mainstream press worldwide got to work hyping stories of these supposed long-lost animals and then lo and behold 12 years later in 1854 for an end Van de Vier Hayden during his exploration of the upper Missouri River found proof of Owens theory a few unidentified teeth he mailed to leading paleontologist Joseph Ledy who several years later declared them to be from an ancient extinct trackadon dinosaur which beyond ironic So that's because we can do things like look at modern analogs and see how teeth are fucking made We know if it's a predator or if it's prey We know if it's an herbivore or a carnivore. We know how teeth are fucking built Even back then even when they're doing naturalistic drawings like this It's like like the the the the the megalodon tooth on my arm It is a predator. It's obviously a serrated. Is it megalodon or megalodon? How do you say it? It's it depends your your infasses can be on a different syllable. It's it's both It's not like nuclear and nuclear no no because it doesn't have to use um But it's spelled it spelled the same but it's like Dimetridon or Dimetridon. It's the same thing the gallodon or megalodon Oh god, you're yeah, keep doing this. What is it? One in a minute? Firstly it should be needless to say that it is impossible to reconstruct an entire hypothetical ancient animal based on a few teeth But even more importantly it is dubious that a myriad of fun you tile bird and reptile mammal transitional forms necessary for the blossoming theory of evolution would be hypothesized and then conveniently discovered by teams of evolutionist archaeologists purposely outlooking to find such fossils and glad I brought a lot of your even more dubious that such fossils have supposedly existed for millions of years But we're never found by or known to any civilization in the history of humanity. Okay, evolution Okay, yeah, the reason why we didn't know about things beforehand because we weren't doing shit like whole sale Intellectual studies of science when people were building fucking pyramids and stuff like that. That's why we have different ages In throughout anthropological records. We have the Bronze Age and Iron Age and all that because we have to do things like Figure out the land around us and when we start finding really old bones like hey This looks like a really big chicken bone what the fuck or this looks like a huge human with a single eye What the fuck we start looking at stuff like that? saying just wholesale fucking bullshit like that goddamn But that's a that's what a YouTube video is if YouTube conspiracy theory video is one person getting to Spill there's nonsense and they're unchecked. Yes. I wanted to play this for you and um Response videos can be blocked by the original person. They can curate all comments They can only allow certain ones through they can moderate everything same with a blog same with all of that they control their own Criticism mm-hmm. There's a guy right now that allowed the paleo communities going after his name to David Peters He's a jackass Who's like doing stupid things like all reptiles or mammals and all of these Clade should be in this and just all this crap um He wholesale copied an article from a colleague of mine posted it Which is violation of copyright? Because he's attempting to supersede that work by importing his own ideas to it He will refuse any critical comments to be posted on his word press site. Mm. That's a really common though. Yeah, it's really common with people The the war of ideas in the comment section. That's where it's being fought. Yeah, it's because it's an echo chamber Yeah, it's like people don't look as why do people think the world is flat or why do people think dinosaurs don't exist? Their Google Boolean search is dinosaurs don't exist or creationism is true Evolution is false the earth is flat chemtrails exist They're creating their own echo chamber and preaching to their own fucking choir Yeah, and then they have a message board and they go on that message board massive confirmation bias Nobody anybody that doesn't follow that line gets booted out. Let's play more of this because it gets gets better Genisms masonic renaissance in the mid 19th century David wozney wrote why are there no discoveries by Native Americans in all the years previous when they roamed the American Continents because they weren't doing a fucking earth dinosaurs in the Native American religion or tradition because they were all dead Matter why would there no discoveries prior to the 19th century in any part of the world? There could have been you didn't know what it was. That's the world the book and it's like the same thing with mammoth cyclops We didn't know what the fuck it was we didn't know there's a massive you know a massive elephant species We thought it was a giant person. Yeah when the first animals were discovered in the Liberate Harpitz before 1913 they thought it was livestock that got trapped in there and died Then they realized holy fuck cows don't have nine inch long incisors that are You know perfectly evolved to slash open the throats of things and Then you started questioning so the Native Americans and all the people they were finding possibly Scatters of bone and didn't know what it was Did the did the northern? First people start licking bones and rocks no we we discovered that you know The science as it figures out going hey this is porous material if I lick porous material. It's gonna stick to my tongue holy fuck that's a fossil this this this kind of just he the problem with you Eric is you are starting From an improper position you are starting on a confirmation bias You are Stating from the beginning that dinosaurs don't exist and you were using Parodelia and apophania the ability for humans to find patterns in order to fit your bullshit and then only Cherry pick what belongs that's that's what that's what he does with fucking flat earth and the problem with this is like I was saying earlier because now The stupid minority has a voice All I don't know how many million people subscribe to this fucking channel every single flat earth dipshit is gonna go 61,000 people okay look at that 300,000 views and here's the thing check out the comments the comments He he curious the comments down are almost identical look 3486 to 3490 are you kidding me? Oh But I remember being forced to have the same dinosaur choices everyone mad. Yeah, that's because it's called consumerism Flat earth no dinosaur. What's the point in making these okay? See good good for you go in there Extremely great research love this very much. Thank you max haskins. Don't breed Don't ruin dinosaurs with facts fuck you And there's more my favorite animal here's another problem his voice is annoying as fuck. Oh my god Let's play more. Oh, thanks. I'm gonna open. I love you before the 1800s No one ever knew that dinosaurs existed during the late 1800s and early 1900s large deposits of dinosaur remains were discovered Why has man suddenly made all these discoveries? No tribes cultures or countries in the world ever discovered a dinosaur bone before the mid 1800s and then they were Suddenly found all over the world in North America South America Europe Asia Africa Argentina Belgium Mongolia Tanzania West Germany and many other places Apparently had larger deposits of dinosaur fossils never before seen That's because we find the first one and then we're like holy shit There must be more of these out there and then the bone wars started between Ogden and Marsh You had the Mantell collection with the first iguanodon that was found and they put it and they made these really stupid statues and put them in Crystal Palace in London and Mary Anning one of the first Beamed well V first female palant paleontologist and one of the first people actually find fossils She discovered the ichthyosaur Mary Anning was the girl from the rhyme She sells seashells on the seashore because that's what she did as a child and as she was looking for seashells She found a skeleton of an ichthyosaur Bear in a cliff. Oh, yeah, it's like a kid. I think she was 12 13. Oh holy shit I think paleontology Twitter is gonna rip me apart for not knowing the thing but come on. I'm hyped up now Trunkies hyped up. I'm not dude. That's one beer. All right. I've got I don't know Yeah, we got here none excited. I've got nine more in there. I'm gonna need them Yeah, it's just so Mary Anning discovered ichthyosores and once you discover something like that You want to go around the world and say hey where else is this stuff? Let's go somewhere that no one has been Hmm, which means North America South America Tanzania Belize all the things that Captain Jack asks just rattled off Captain fuckface. So calm. Captain Fucking fuckwooded shit given. I don't just something. Yeah, I stole that. I stole shit given from a Trump thing But given shit given one when I'm monkey yeah, I think they're technically apes Gibbons or apes. I think Gibbons are apes. Mm. They have tails No, aren't police all apes monkeys, but not all monkeys are apes No, apes and monkeys are prime, but a monkey is just it's not a technical term right It's not a scientific term there was an article that was written that is explaining that all apes are monkeys But not all monkeys are apes see if you can find that well, what's we'll go to that afterwards Yeah, probably because like when those beers and okay, let's let's keep this rolling Want to see how deep we can go with this Big character Whatever you got explored for thousands years before this time. Why no one ever found a dinosaur fossil before According to the book the dinosaur project paleontological journalist Wayne Grady claims the period following this from around 1870 to 1880 became a period in North America where some of the most Underhanded shenanigans in the history of science were conducted. That's because they're a paleontologist Going at it against each other going I can find the cooler thing No, I can find the cooler thing. I'm gonna find more shit than you was called the bone wars Ogden versus March You already talked about this right? Yeah, what was what was underhanded about it? They would they would uh Sabotage each other's digs they would try and yes steel fossils they were assholes But because of the competition It's it's like a fight when you have one dude that you know two dudes have been training all their lives and trying to do the whole thing The more amped up one gets the more amped up the other gate It's gonna be a fucking just throw down. This is what happened on an intellectual and fieldwork scale You had two guys trying to make a name for themselves in a burgeoning brand new field that just wanted to get in and roll And they had direct competition with each other so it's gonna be you know, fuck you I'm gonna find these bones first and It got nasty man. Wow. Yeah, it's like it think of it as Edison versus Tesla paleontology Right Said Tesla wasn't very aggressive. He sort of like let all that shit. Yeah true true Very true. Play it keep keep this going On is the great dinosaur rush or the bone wars Edward drinker coat of the Academy of National Science Coated Mars off Neil Marsh of the Peabody Museum of Natural History began a lifelong rivalry and passion for dinosaur Hunt yeah, I said I don't know my bad but became bitter enemies during a legendary feud involving double crossing slander bribery theft spying and destruction of bones by both parties Marsh is said to have discovered over 500 different ancient species including 80 dinosaurs Well, cope discovered 56 out of the 136 dinosaur species Supposedly discovered by the two men. How are you for saying supposedly 32 are presently considered valid as the rest of all proven to be falsifications and fabrications bull shit Bull shit not a falsification or fabrication turns out a lot of those dinosaurs were the same species that were previously discovered So oh look this sort of pod femur looks a lot like that sort of pod femur But I found this slightly in a different place so I'm going to name it a new species No turns out those are both branosaurus or a pattosaurus or triceratops or stegosaurus anything like that That that is just an outright fucking lie that he just said When things are discovered and it turns out that they're the same it becomes taxonomically what's called a junior synonym so For example Tyrannosaurus Rex had another name for a really long time. It's totally mega mega lot. No Regardless whatever the first name for it was was technically The first discovered name for it, but since Tyrannosaurus Rex became the more popular the more documented the more thing That became a junior synonym or or an That one actually became what we call gnome of scurum or the obscure name no longer uh No longer talked about but That's what happened. It wasn't an outright fabrication. It was two dudes finding bones of the same species or type of animal but not naming it the same thing so that's that's an absolute Bullshit arid debate outright lie Of them once claimed to find a complete skeleton either so all their work involved reconstructions in fact to this day No complete skeleton has ever been found bullshit and so all dinosaurs are reconstruction bullshit uh Sue in the field museum is not 100% complete 98% complete including formerly unknown elements from any other Tyrannosaurus um i believe a commercial Paleontology group just found like a 99% or almost a 100% complete dinosaur we have found Entireties or near-entireties of animals so he's right by a very small technicality of one or two percent exactly exactly but what he's implying is completely misleading He's implying that they're finding a shin bone and drawing a dinosaur around it exactly but no like we will find We can find 70% of a Tyrannosaurus Rex we know what they look like so yeah We will use 3d printing or casting of all that many and yeah i'm happily admitting this because Everyone knows or at least everyone should know Many dinosaurs in museums are what we call conglomerates It will be a triceratops The skull will be real maybe the front half of the animal some ribs maybe some tail vertebra or the pelvis Will be from one animal We will have to use casts of other Triceratops that we have throughout paleontology in other museums Many of the fossils you see on display are casts now cast doesn't mean Bullshit created on the spot it means very technically This is a cast it is a replica of an actual existing bone that was wrapped made a mold of and then filled with resin painted to the correct color It is the exact match of a bone that exists It is not something we are just making up That is bullshit And i hate that when they come in and go oh look that's like Plastic yeah, it's plants think it's not like well yeah, you know why fossils are fucking fragile It takes us weeks to get a single bone out And then it is covered in glue it is wrapped in tissue paper sometimes tin foil a shit ton of plaster and reinforcement is wrapped around it Then it has to be very carefully slid down a mountain on a car hood in one time or airlifted out in another And put in the back of trucks and then taken all the way to its museum and then cracked open and then prepared Everything has to get get leaved off it very carefully and we're adding more glue as we're going because if you sneeze wrong on some On some mineralized specimens it goes away It just goes boom So you have to work very carefully in a booth with like an error braider So you're just you're shooting extremely fine particles just to get the top millimeter of material off This is hard Detailed work on things that are 65 plus million years old That if we're not careful they fall apart We are not going to wrap something like that in fucking steel and put it up on a mount Especially somewhere. I don't know like Los Angeles where things like earthquakes happen It's statements like that that he makes are just Fucking irritating Wozni wrote discoveries and excavations seem not to be made by disinterested people such as farmers ranchers hikers Oh, sure. I record this bullshit building construction Bullshit So fucking lutely bullshit fuck you Eric. I'm a paleo monitor you asshole I am actually contracted to go out to fucking building sites and make sure fossils are Protected and dug up correctly in fact. You know what jackass I found a whale in downtown LA Fuck you Eric Dubay. You found a whale. I found a whale in downtown LA Oh, you talked about this the last podcast you were talking about how they had a shutdown construction exactly You know why because building construction finds fucking dinosaurs and mitt and whales and prehistoric animals you jackass Oh fuck fuck you farmers so Sue was found on a guy's farm there have been numerous dinosaurs numerous priests are Animals found on a guy's farm by the way. There's an entire private area up in bakersfield called sharks tooth hill Where they find Meg teeth McGowan on to you all the fucking time. It's in bakersfield. It's on private land farmers builders Recreational people yeah, hey guess what a couple people hiking in red rock canyon up near palmdale Found a trackway from an ancient camel Requi recreational people. Yeah, this happens all the fucking time The reason why it's happening more and more lately Because people know what they're looking for now They understand wow there could be shit out here Hey, if we're digging a road if we're widening the 99 freeway in Fresno Holy shit. We hit a mammoth Or holy shit. We found a whale in downtown LA Like within with in blocks of the 110 freeway in good Samaritan hospital. I won't tell you where I can't but yeah Swanna sacred yeah, it's just part of the part of the contracts That's that's the deal because if you find something if you find something there you can find more shit We found over 400 specimens of shark teeth whales or ribcage of a whale snails fossil coral all of this because downtown LA was underwater seven million years ago and Yeah, that's oh my god. It's fucking bullshit. Oh Keep your night blind trench diggers fuck you and mining industry personnel found all the time by people with a vested interest Such as paleontologist both scientists university professors and museum organization personnel who mean trained mother fucker dinosaur bones or who have studied dinosaurs previously Fines are often made during special dinosaur bone hunting trips and expeditions by these people to far away regions already inhabited and explored This seems highly implausible more believable is the case of the discovery of the first original Dead Sea Scrolls in 1947 which were unintentionally discovered by a child and which were all published by 1955 oh Okay, so it's perfectly fine to accidentally find ancient scrolls or silver danarii from the Roman period or a Never before known pyramid in South America. Oh, no, that's cool. You know why because humans fucking made those But it's completely out of the norm for some kid some nine-year-old kid to be walking around Montana and Find a mummified hadra sore Because yeah, I don't know why I made that distinction. That's a weird comparison. Yeah, it's more plausible to find a Dead Sea Scrolls in kumran than it is to find a megalodon tooth Bull shaker field. Yeah, doesn't make any sense. No, no, it doesn't make any sense He's he's anthropomorphizing this and he's using a very an absolutely invalid lot invalid argument in the logical fallacies Trying he's trying to it's absolute false equivocation He's trying to go. Oh, well, you know, you can't find this stuff because it's super super old But you can find this stuff because it's younger and it's humans and you know people live there so we'd expect stuff there Well guess what asshole? There's 65 million years of difference between Humans deciding to write shit down and go hey There's a day in a night that means something's ruling the day in the night gods religion and industry and all that and dinosaur is eating shit 65 million years You we were tree shrews and moles we didn't we weren't building shit. We weren't writing stuff down It's such a false fucking argument. God this guy said check some cases of a discovery of dinosaur bones by a disinterested Person it was suggested to them by some professional in the field. No, it wasn't also very interesting to note Our special areas set aside and designated as dinosaur parks because we found a bunch of shit there are required to first obtain a dinosaur hunting license Whatever destination these established Like finazorn national heart paleontologists set it seemed they found incredible numbers of fossils in tiny areas in one of the largest dinosaur excavation sites called the Ruth Mason Corey Over 2,000 fossils were allegedly discovered Stop saying from the alleged negative son of a bitch Subvolted from these bones are currently on display in over 60 museums worldwide. Yeah because it's a fantastic site Head of paleontology at La Plata Museum is amazingly responsible for 6,000 fossil species Supposedly discovered throughout his career all in Argentina Oh, oh, oh really really hey guess what Eric? I ran a lab that we had three and a half million specimens from the ice age that goes back 90,000 years So the Liberia tarpets the largest ice age mammal collection on the fucking planet And this stuff isn't mineralized. It's actually subsumed with asphalt Keeping the all of the calcium and everything intact. These are actual bones when we find a saber tooth cat tooth It's the physical tooth of the animal Which is kind of freaky to think about But but but saying that it's like yeah, we find a lot of shit in places the river of death in Alberta When they're digging the pipeline um, I don't know mammoth hot springs There are things called death traps and predator traps and sink holes and natural trap cades and I don't know entire sand dunes falling on things while they're fighting the dueling dinosaurs It's a protosaritops versus a velociraptor that was found in Mongolia Because a fucking sand dune fell on them while they were tussling around because the v-rafter wanted to eat the thing That that's a rad specimen by the way. You know what's interesting about this guy is that he knows so much Is that his his his knowledge of the history of Paleontology and of researching dinosaur bones. He knows so much I call bullshit on that what I'm thinking is that he's reading from a script that he cobbled together on fucking Wikipedia I challenge him to go toe to toe with somebody in the business. I don't know like me And go okay start throwing date start throwing specimens. I will fucking own you But be you know what I'm saying? I mean he's he's obviously he knows all these people He knows about the bone wars. He knows Who's in charge of all these different simple goo search of Large dinosaur thing found okay I'm going to write these three things down on this Manila in on this Manila fucking I understand that I'm not saying that it's it's impressive and that it's conclusive evidence I'm saying it's it's impressive that this guy has done this much research, but yet still has this ridiculous idea and He's using this. Yeah. He's using all this data. That's actually factual about how many different people found how many different things And he's decided this is proof and all the information allegedly in front of it. Yeah, it's like no Sorry over 6,000 specimens were found there. Let's keep going Hunter Earl Douglas sent 350 tons of excavated dinosaur bones to the Carnegie Museum of Natural History throughout his career All coming from the dinosaur national monument in Utah. Why do you think it's called the dinosaur national monument now? Dr. Lewis Chiape and dr. Lowell It's key off a actually thousands of dinosaur eggs at a site of only a few hundred square yards It was called the tiniest giant exhibition How such finds of huge quantities of fossils in one area by just a few highly invested Individuals goes against the laws of natural probability. What the fuck? Treatings to the likelihood of forgeries or concentrated planting efforts wrong if you find a Planting evidence. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What are the things that they planted? Oh, there's dinosaur bones that they planted that's that's that's that With a dinosaur bones may not like resins. So that is actually an argument with these jackasses It's like okay. So big paleo the big paleontologist people like me We paleo paleo big pharma. Yeah, big pharma and big they and you know, all that podcast Jamie death. There we go. We're big podcast we're an industry so they say They not in the black man, you know black helicopter. They but they as in the detractors state that paleontologists like me Will create a fossil whether it's like a cast or will just make one up and on these expeditions We go out and we actually Buried and uncover it and make the news and all that well if that was true Eric Why is it that when we find something? Say in I don't know 2008 It's not usually written about until say 2012 And that's just a symbol a single note in the 2008. It's not usually written about until, say, 2012. And that's just a single note in the journal of vertebrate paleontology, which I guarantee you've never read. Or it's done as a poster at the Society of vertebrate paleontology, which I will absolutely guarantee you've never been to. And then the fossil is still in prep at that point. We haven't done all the research on it. It's still undiscovered fossil found. If we are going out and investing all of this money, in order to make these fakes and bury them and pay all of these people to shut them up and huge excavations like that. We would kind of want to recoup that money as fast as possible and immediately dump it to the news and get paid for spokesman chips and all of that. But we don't. We suffer. Natural history museums are some of the lowest donated to institutions on the planet. Art museums are generally number one. There are people that get laid off all the time from museums. Museums close. If we were making all this money and making all this fame, why are there paleontologists out of a job? Why do I know a dozen monitors that don't have work right now? Why are there museums that have problem actually getting a budget to get an excavation going that they have to use private donors that they have to use their board of directors that they have to go from a county museum to a foundation, non-profit, non-profit. This is such a line of fucking bullshit that that that pisses me off because his simple statements are looping in thousands and tens of thousands of employees and museums and all of that worldwide. This would be one of the largest conspiracies ever other than I don't know moon hoaxes and NASA flatter if and shit like that one he does. Yeah, that is the biggest one. Keep going. It's getting more than that. Dinosaur bones sell for a lot of money at auctions. It is a profitable business. There is pressure for academics to publish papers. Museums are in the business of producing displays that are popular and appealing. What the non-profit businesses media need to produce material to sell to stay in business. The mainstream media loves to hype alleged dinosaur finds, much is to be gained by converting a bland non-dinosaur discovery of a bone of modern origin into an impressive dinosaur find and letting artists interpretations and imaginations take the spotlight. Okay, Eric. The basic boring real find. If that's true, the why do dinosaurs become pass a? Why does somebody like me who has been on, I don't know, 1314 different television shows talking about paleontology geology and all that. I have pitched dinosaur like live dig stuff to BBC and all of that. I'm consulting on a couple projects right now. Unfortunately, I can't name them. But dinosaurs become pass a very, very quickly because people are like, oh cool, new dinosaurs found. Yeah, big deal. Or oh well, bronze sources back. Yeah, whatever. But the mainstream media, as you said, is just they love a dinosaur story. But that's bullshit. That's absolute bullshit. When was the last dinosaur document? Yeah, there is a what was it called autopsy of a T-Rex with my friend Tori and that. Okay, that was a speculative science show. It was like what happens if we found a T-Rex and cut it open and doing autopsy. That was a hit and then paleontology TV died again. Two years ago, I had a two hour national geographic documentary about digging up woolly mammoths in that. It aired a night. There was a little bit of press. Fucking done the production company that did the thing with that geo is out of business now. Just done. It's like really we're pressured and to get this money. And why aren't we making fucking more? Why Eric? Am I a bartender in addition to a paleontologist in addition to somebody that's on TV? If I'm making all this big farm of sorry big paleo fucking money. If I'm such a shill. Okay. Yeah. Is that why I'm a month behind on my car payment right now? Is that why I'm trying to scrape together rent? Fuck you. Oh, I'm very aggressive. I'm a f**king guy. I'm a prestige fame and attention. There is the bandwagon effect and crowd behavior. And then there are people in the entertainment. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. Wait, wait. The bandwagon effect and the crowd behavior like flat earth bullshit. Okay. We're only seven minutes and 53 seconds into a 29 minute video. Fuck all. We don't have to keep going. I don't want you to get too mad. I think you kind of made your point. Yeah, you can pull the plug anytime you want. But now it's like one of those Twitter arguments. Man, now I'm getting invested. No, that's why I wanted to play. Yeah, I'm going to. You fucking troll me all the time. Because we follow each other. We DM each other. And all of a sudden in my thing, it's like, I have you on note because we're both verified. It pops up. And it's just like Joe Rogan is tweeting about flat earth. Like what? Fuck. And then just go for it. It's like you're. I mean, like, you know, the podcast and like flight commentary and UFC stuff and like with your with like triggered coming out and all that, that's one thing. When you you're just like, you're at the same level. Just actually you have like how many followers do you have like two million rights on Twitter. Uh, TDT take that Darwin like 10 maybe 15,000. I get the same level of riled from both of you. Fuck man. So we need to fly him out and have him on the show. This guy. No, no, no, no, no, no. Take that Darwin. Yeah. Yeah. You get fun. He would be red. No, you'd be fun. Fuck Eric Dubay. If he's ever on the show, I want to be outside waiting with a fucking baseball bat. Oh, how. No, you might be violent with him almost almost. That you want to talk to him. When you have. I mean, I think you could gain a lot from sitting down with a guy like this and just sort of picking him apart because he would realize what he was wrong about. And instead of him being able to just spout off on a YouTube video, he would be checked at every step of the way. So he said something incorrect. Yes, but the problem is the only reason why I would do that he will never change his mind. Well, he's probably crazy. Well, duh, he's absolutely crazy. But think about it right now. You have four million subscribers that now know this video exists that no Eric Dubay's name that know that paleontologists can get riled up by this guy. Now, I'm going to go look if any one of your listeners is on the fence about dinosaurs. Why would you be? But you could have some. Those are the people that I would have to try and convince. I will never convince him. I will mock the living shit out of him until he wants to put himself into a chipper shredder. But I will never convince him. And that's the thing. So all you psychom people out there. We don't do it to try and convince the big mouthpieces for these movements. We're trying to go for the people that aren't quite sure. If we embarrass the living fuck out of these people, those people will go, wow, those guys are idiots. Why did I even consider that the world is flat or that dinosaurs didn't exist or creationism exists or chemtrails or Nibiru fucking rogue planets and shit like that? Yeah.