Alright, this video is sponsored by Skillshare. Skillshare is an online learning community with over 25,000 classes in design, business, and more. Premium memberships give you unlimited access so you can join the classes and communities that are just right for you. Whether you want to feel your curiosity, creativity, or even your career, Skillshare is the perfect place to keep learning and thriving. Join more than 7 million creators learning with Skillshare. Join groups with like-minded learners, give and receive feedback on projects, and speak with others that have the same interests as you. I personally enjoy lesson on Skillshare called Working Not Working, which is geared towards educating freelancers, creative freelancers, and brand elevation, and earning more money. Skillshare is giving away a free two-month unlimited access trial to concrete subscribers who clicked the link in the description box below. After that, it's only $10 a month. Let's start it. You ready? Ready. Here we go. Matt Cox, number four, the fourth installment of the Matt Cox series. These tales are fucking riveting. These tales are just- you like my stickers? Take yourself- Yeah. You can have that whole stack if you want. Yeah. I'll put one on. We put them up everywhere. I mean, if I had a Ferrari, I wouldn't put it on. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Let's stick one on the halfway house. All of your stories are just so mind-blowing. I just finished a couple hours ago, Devil Exposed, which is the story we're going to talk about today on today's podcast. The crazy thing about all your stories is that they are all, they are all worthy of having screenplays. They're all worthy of being feature films, which is insane. Yeah. It's like you're turning over the stone. I mean, they're not stories that are making headlines. No one's looking for this kind of stuff. You were just there. And the fact that by chance you met, Rucini, the guy, the main guy who tells the story- Right. Yeah. Yeah. It's pretty incredible. Rucini, how did you meet this guy and how did he introduce this whole story to you? He does legal work and he works with Frank Alma Deo. Oh, really? Yeah. He bounces that they bounce ideas off each other. Really, Rucini would say I bounce ideas off a Frank because he's like, he's so smart. And Rucini's, he didn't really talk to almost anybody. I don't think he talked to anybody for months except for Frank. He's got a touch and even he'll admit this. He's got, he's, I have a little bit of an Asperger syndrome. Okay. And just a touch, you know, it's, he's a socially little awkward, awkward matter of fact, you know what I'll do? I have a clip of him at a wedding. It's like a where he gives a toast. Oh, really? Yeah. I think he's probably pretty shit-faced. But he does give a toast, but you can actually see like a 25 year old, you know, Rucini. Yeah. Rucini, Rucini or... Okay. Where can you see that? You have it like saved somewhere? Yeah. I have it, I have it on my computer. I can't see it. Yeah. Send it. Shoot. And my assistant can send it to you. Before we get too far into how you met him, can you give me the basic log line of the story Devil Exposed that Rucini told you? Or the story about Rucini, which is called Devil Exposed, which is the book that you wrote. Right. Right. So what is the basic synopsis or log line of that story? You know, Rucini is an admitted drug dealer. Or, you really, he's a manufacturer of drug or drug trafficker. So he manufactures drugs, super smart guy. Anyway, so he's a drug trafficker and he gets roped into a conspiracy that he was not involved in. He gets set up by essentially the FBI and an FBI informant. And he ends up, basically gets railrode, he ends up in federal prison. And the person that he got framed for murder. Right. Right. Yeah. He got framed for a murder that he didn't commit in order to save the ass and to save the the asses of a couple FBI agents that were dirty. Right. Okay. And Mueller was the US attorney at that time and San Francisco. And he, you know, like I said, he didn't start the conspiracy. He came in part way and discovered it was a conspiracy. But instead of untangling it and saying, you know, unraveling the whole thing and saying, whoa, whoa, this isn't right. We got to go after these guys and these guys. Instead, he just furthered the conspiracy and basically let these guys go in it. You know, let these guys are rotten prison. Mueller did that. Yeah. Okay. Mine to the guy is definitely murdered Rob. And we're talking about like the Robert Mueller, the guy that's all over CNN, the Mueller. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The guy special counsel investigating Trump. But you know, and this is the thing I think I mentioned to you before. It's like, you know, this is what's so fucked up. It's like, it would be an amazing story. It'd be a better story if Mueller had nothing to do with it. Because what happens is Mueller ends up overshadowing everything becomes Mueller, Mueller, Mueller. Well, it's, if his name was John Doe, it would, you'd be like, oh man, this guy got framed. Instead, everybody that reads it focuses in on Mueller and that's really both. He's kind of like a selling piece of the story. Right. Right. Well, and what happens is it become people become polarized when, when politics are involved. But to me, it's not about politics. I don't have a problem with Mueller. I don't care that it's Mueller. Right. I could give a shit. What I care about is that a US attorney helped further a conspiracy did not cut this guy loose and has continued to conspire to keep this guy, keep Rucinian prison. And you know, this guy, listen, the two guys that, that committed the murders. Well, they had things giving with their family. Yeah. Pete's eating a holiday meal in the fucking child hall, bro. He didn't kill it. He got 40 years. Pete, meaning Rucinian. Rucinian. Rucinian. Yeah. Hey, hey, hey, he referred to him as Pete, but we're talking about Rucinian. Right. Right. I'll try to stick with Rucinian. I just want, I just want to try to keep it very consistent. Right. It's, it's very, the story is like convoluted with names and there, it's hard to follow with, with all the names. Well, and that's why I'm thinking we just, here's, here's what I'm thinking because, you know, there's some stuff and I don't know if you noticed this. And you made it clear about why it's so confusing because, because Rucinian, the way he told you, he wanted to focus, he wanted to put a lot of focus on all the little details because they meant so much to him. Right. Because he's been locked up over 20 years and his life. It's his whole life. So if you're fighting your case for 20 years, every single thing is, is massive in your mind and you have to think you're world in prison is very small. So to me, you hear something you're like, I'm, I'm not going to mention that. It's no big deal. He's like, no, no, it's super important because someone so did such and such and that's why it's so and so. And then they, when I got arrested, they said that I did this and I didn't. That wasn't even my fault. Right. You're like, Jesus God, all my. Right. And there's a lot of little details like that. He tells that what happens is he doesn't realize because I told you he has a, it's a touch of Asperger syndrome. Super smart. Like makes me feel like I'm drooling. I mean, he really, he's just brilliant. And you can say, I can ask anything, you know, and say, yeah, I wonder what, you know, you don't have internet. I don't pick, I can't pick up and say, hey Siri, when did this happen? I'll say something and he'll say, Siri, oh, like, okay, feds are the Federalist. Right now, listen in live. So, but he immediately, he'll know it. He'll go, he'll say the date. Oh yeah, that happened. I was, I was 19, 18, that was October 19. I'm not sure if it was the 14th or 15th and then you're like, the fuck do you know that? And he goes, well, because it was, it was so and so's birthday and on her birthday, we went to go see this, this, you know, this, whatever, concert. And I remember it was two days later and that happened. So it had to be the 15th. Yeah, I don't know, you know, I did with definitely the 15th, you're like, fuck, like, fucking right man. Time line. And it's, and it's bizarre. It really is bizarre. And I could, what was, but what was great about it was I could turn around. I go, hey, when did this happen? Oh, that was, that was, that was October 13th. I remember because, and he, and he'll tell you why he remembers. You know, and as he gets to know you, he's, he loosens up a little bit, you know, funny guy. And at the time, works with Frank, I'm a day old. They both do legal work. And then was, you know, he's done a good portion of his own legal work. Yeah. Listen to this guy's sentence, but three, four times. Was it four times? He's been sentenced. No, but he was, I thought I was two 20 year senses. No, no, he, that, but that was at the same time. I'm saying he then appealed it. Oh, yeah. Got a portion knocked off and appealed it. Got a portion knocked off then appealed it. Got a portion knocked off. So he's been sentenced. Let's see. It's one, two, three, four times. Four times. Four times. Who the fuck it's, who wins three appeals? You've got to have something wrong with your case to win. He wins one appeal. You know how many 20, 50, five or that's a, a habeas action where you say that your lawyer is ineffective. Man, there's something like 3500 of them that are filed for every one that is actually approved. I'm sure the appeal ratios way lower. Right. So he, I mean, he's, there's, listen, when you see this, oh, you know what's so funny. Remember, I, so you just got done radiant. Remember when the guy after Mueller gives him that gives Pete the iron clad agreement that he's gonna, he'll send us will be reduced. Yeah. And then the new US attorney says, you're, you're on it. There's no agreement. We've never, we have never promised this man anything. So we're seeing it's like, what the hell, I'm happy over here. Yeah. I have a copy right here and he sends it in. So you have a copy of it. So I got to know I, I print out because it's 740 pages. Right. I printed. I had the agreement that him and Robert Mueller signed. Yeah. I mean, it's, I got to get, right. Right. We'll get to it. Oh, wait. That's crazy. We're here at all this stuff. Right there. I wrote down right here. See, I tagged some of the important ones because you cut me an hour short. So I got all my all frazzled and shit. So I was going to have everything tagged. I was all excited. Fuck me out. Yeah. Promise. Uh, this is a, uh, promise in this, uh, letter confirming agreement between you and the US Attorney's office in the Northern District of California. And this is, this is the actual promise where they actually say, and it's these two paragraphs right there. They say right after you cooperate, we will cut your, or we will reduce your sentence. They never say that. Never. This is the only one I've ever seen. If you told me about it, if I hadn't seen it, I wouldn't even believe it. Wow. Because I'd be like, they don't do it. No, just don't happen. And so, so let's start back from the beginning. So you meet Rucinian prison. Right. Do you approach him? Does he approach you? How does this whole thing get kicked off? Right. It was working on my case. Uh huh. And I kept sitting at the table. I was working on another guy's story named, um, uh, Donovan Davis. Mm hmm. And, uh, Thomas has a really good story too. It's about a con man. Mm hmm. What's so funny about his story is that the whole story is, it's, uh, Donovan's the mark. He just happened in up in prison. The con man is this guy, uh, um, uh, Blaine. And so I love Blaine. Yeah. And like Blaine's, he did what? Oh, that's great. And he's just like, you know, I hate this fucker, right? You know, we're in my life. I'm like, yeah, he's pretty cool. Yeah. You read this one. And he's like, and I would, and he was always like, you know, you fucking remind me of him, right? Yeah. I know. I'm sorry about that. So what happened with, yeah. Yeah. Anyway, uh, but Pete and Frank are working on Donovan's stuff. Okay. And I kept coming around and eventually Pete started talking to me. And then, you know, we would talk a little here and a little there. And then one day Donovan said, you know, have you talked to Pete about his case? And I went, you mean Frank? No, Donovan. Oh, Donovan, okay. Cause I was all working on Donovan's story. You were working on Donovan's story. I was working on Donovan's story. Frank and Pete were working on his legal case. Okay. And so Donovan one day said, you ought to talk to Pete about his story. Mm. That was wrapping up Donovan's story. And I was finishing it up. And it's on the website. It's called the gap. The gap. Okay. So I, you know, I said, oh, yeah. And he was, yeah, you ought to talk to him. So I mentioned it and Pete, you know, Donovan said, you have a really interesting story. And he said, Donovan was the one who kept saying, yeah, yeah, the, uh, um, his US attorney ended up being FBI director. He's like one of the longest running FBI directors. I was like, oh, okay. And it was like Robert Mueller. Okay. Yeah. Mueller to me was nobody. Nobody there was this about two, three years ago. Okay. Yeah, man. I would know the, I would say 17 to 17. Um, hold on. Boom. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. October 17, 2017. Okay. So, uh, so we started talking. We walked around the compound a few times. He told me some stuff. It did sound, you know what it sounded very breaking bad. Yeah. Oh, yeah. It's just straight breaking bad. Only these guys are cooking crystal meth in Hollywood in Hollywood. In Hollywood. Beverly, Beverly Hills and penthouse suites. Yeah. Not only that, but they hired a chemistry professor to cook all the crystal meth. Right. The guy that teaches recini how to do it. Right. They go to like, is it, it's not UCLA. It's, when they do go to UCLA, they go to, but that's not where he's from. That he was in the professor there, but that's where they go to use the chemistry. You know, there's no internet. So they're going there and studying and they're refining, you know, and they would break it down so that they didn't get any, any, um, any of the, uh, controlled substance, uh, controlled, uh, whatever products or that they're, so then they're breaking it down to the essentials and building everything up and coming up. It's amazing. Yeah. What he was doing is amazing. I mean, listen, I'll bet you Pete's got a hundred and sixty IQ at least. Yeah. I mean, just the guy is just brilliant. Couldn't tell you how much car cost. You know, he's, he's like, he's rain man. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. He's, he's just, but he's, he's brilliant. So, um, what happens is we start talking, we start walking around the compound and so I finish up Donovan's story and then I was doing somebody else's story and I basically heard, he told me this whole story. I was like, man, that's really good. You know, he kept focusing on his case and I was like, yeah, okay, but you know, basically I understand the dirty agents that and when he started talking about dirty FBI agents, dirty, and I was like, you know, it's like, okay, bro, let's be reasonable here. You know what I'm saying? Can you prove that? He's like, yeah, I can prove it. I got like, he had like 24, 25 bankers boxes filled with stuff. They've got a whole room with it stacked in there. Listen, the, the, the staff hate is guts. Yeah. I mean, they're like, you got a whole fucking room with all your boxes, but he's got a a court order, says you can't throw it away. So he, uh, anyway, so he's like, yeah, I can prove it. And he's like, I can prove he said, look, the agents retire, the, you know, this happened. They admit this, they admit that. So anyway, I'm like, okay, so I was skeptical, but then as you get to know him, you realize that, you know, he doesn't, he's not, he's not a liar. Yeah. He's not an exaggerator. He's not, he's not that guy. It's all about facts for him. He can't massage things. Mm hmm. Yeah, but if you say, you ought to just say it like this for now on. And he's like, yeah, but that wouldn't be, that wouldn't be accurate because we're technically it and you're like, yeah, Christ. Right, right, right. All right, Pete, you can say it like that. You know, if I say it's this, he's like, well, the, the actual legal term is, what the fuck with the legal term is, I'm trying to, I'm writing a story here. Yeah. I mean, it was a difference between that and that, you know. So, uh, this whole thing started basically when he was like in his early 20s, and they were, they're, they started manufacturing ecstasy, right? Sorry with ecstasy. Yeah. It wasn't even illegal yet. Okay. So then it becomes illegal and he, and he and this guy named John Ellen Berger, Ellen Berger brings him in because he's a super smart kid and Ellen Berger is a few years older than him and he asks around and he knows him through some other guys and he comes to him and he approaches him a few times. And Ellen Berger is at this point like mid 20s driving a Ferrari and he's running around LA just slinging Coke and ecstasy and banging models. Yeah. I mean, literally banging Playboy models. I mean, he's, you know, he's a rock star. He's, and he's partying with guys from axle, I mean, from guns and roses and, yeah. In the other, in the larger volume book, I've been, I talk about how Pete would come home and these guys from fucking guns and roses would be on the couch with his little brother playing the cars. That's crazy. He's like, you know, it wasn't a big deal looking back. I realized, yeah, that's not normal. Yeah. No, he's also, they're living in a two and a half million dollar house. He's like with no furniture. You know, he's like, I mean, it's, you know, your kids. He was, you're just stupid. Right. But yeah, they were moving. And so they set up, they end up, they end up, they're making a ton of money. Pete starts making a ton of money. And then what they do is this guy, Robliss comes along and he comes to them and they know, he know, they know the circle of drug dealers. They know these guys are manufacturing X. So Robliss comes in and says, look, can you manufacture this? And it's just crystal. And he goes, what is it? He goes, it's called ice. It's crystal meth. He goes, it's methamphetamine, but it's crystallized. He goes in and it's super pure form of it. Right. And he goes, well, yeah, give it to me. And I'll put in the mass spectrometer and fucking break it down, figure out what's in this shit. He's pre-internet. So they break it down. He talks to the professor and they go and they break it down. The professor says, okay, well, we got to do this and this. So they break it all down. It's breaking bad. Yeah, it is. They figure the, they figure the, they figure that for sure that, and they don't, but they're not making meth. They're making crystal meth, which I didn't know the difference. I wonder if breaking bad was based off this fucking story. I don't, you know, when you break your meth, first come out. There's a guy it's based off of. Is that? Yeah. I mean, this seems to, it seems to, there's a guy looks just like that guy in breaking bad. Yeah. And breaking bad was way after this too. You know, this is, break your bad. Was it like 10, 10, 15 years after that? Right. So actually the professor does get busted eventually. Right. I've read two articles on him getting busted. And how do they get this, how do they get this, this chemistry professor to manufacture the crystal meth? Well, he needed money. Money is always money. Yeah. I mean, listen, I got he didn't have cancer, did he? No, it's not. It's not in this book. Yeah. But in the, in the, the full book is, I mean, the professor is hilarious. I mean, like he's dating this, he's dating this tall black chick that piece like that. It may have been a man. Oh, I mean, Adam Zappel, he was like, we had some serious discussions. He was 25 years younger than him. He was, he's just head over heels. He said, I mean, it was, it was bizarre. Yeah. And he, and he, of course, he's smoking, do I mention that he's smoking free basing? Free basing smoking Coke, right. Yeah. Which, you know, back then was not like, you know, what in crack it was free basing. It was the same type of thing. I understand. His mind was different. Right. And my just, oh, yeah, it wasn't when you're doing it, of course, it's different. Yeah. I'm not smoking crack. Free basing. So he, there's a difference. God damn it. So they're doing the drugs and everything. He and, he and Ellen Berger end up, they get into a huge fight. They separate and then so Pete takes over when they, Pete takes over, they end up making, start making. So Pete starts cooking it. Yeah, cook, he's been doing it. Oh, I mean, he, so Pete learned from the chemist. He learned absolutely. It was, he was his right hand man. Okay. Cool. You know, he's, he's talking about the part where, you know, he's driving him around because he kept the professor keeps crashing cars and shapes. He's kind of like the handler. Right. He's babysitting him, but he's also has learned everything. So and Pete's super smart. So he picks up right away. So I've been, listen, I've been in Coleman before where actual chemist comments sit down and Pete starts talking to him. And he's like, what's the chemical combination? And they start talking and the guy will walk away and he'll have a chemistry ring. He's like, he's got a, he's got a, he's got a, he's got a high school diploma. And they say like, what? Like yeah. And there he's like, fucking, he knows this and this and this and I'm like, too, he's a sharp dude. Yeah. So, you know, it's only, it used to superpowers for good. Um, yeah. So, so what happens is they start making ice and they start making a ton of money with ice. And so at some point, this guy, there's a task force set up throughout California. There's many task force in most of them are the FBI's involved in or over in some way. And they'll, they will conscript people from the other, the state agencies. What they do is they, they deputize, deputize them as basically FBI agents, you know, they call, they'll call them a, he's an FBI, uh, he's a deputized federal officer working for the FBI task force. Well, so he's in, he, so all of the, so he's now enforcing all of the federal laws. He's an FBI agent is what he is. Right. And that comes up a few times. So whenever you hear me say FBI, FBI keeps being brought up, the government keeps trying to separate them. No, no, that was like Mueller's like, he was a state, he was a state. No, he wasn't state. He's in, and I'll specifically that this is the document that I was talking about where I explain that this is where, uh, the guy, Sean Barrera, who, now who was Sean Barrera is the, I mean, he says right here. He's a deputized special federal officer for the FBI. Okay. That's Sean Barrera. He works for the FBI task force, the drug task force. And it's right here. And it's, anyway, if this is on the website, it's like exhibit eight. Okay. So is the bid eight? So I, and I don't go through all these, if it is seven hundred and like 40 pages of exhibits, I've knocked it down to maybe this is maybe, maybe 200 pages. Okay. Uh, and I feel like I, I trimmed it down pretty good. Yeah. So if I would love to go over, but the fact of the matter is, you know, nobody's going to fucking watch a six hour podcast. Well, they might actually, if you're doing it, they'll watch it. Yeah. Okay. So anyway, so like this is going to, it's going to be a little issue because on the only reason I'm not even going to really don't want to focus on the book, because someone watching that, oh, man, I'm sorry. Sorry. I'm, see, I'm a hands guy. I'm not talking. Uh, you know, the problem is what we're talking about, people will watch him say, oh, that's bullshit. That's not true. Okay. Well, don't fucking try, don't listen to me, bro. I go on the, by the book, definitely by the book. Um, by the book, go on the website. I got a whole website with seven hundred and forty pages of documents. And they, they're, this thing is menacing. There's never been anything this supported with documentation. Right. So I'm saying, I'm just going to go, let's just go kind of go through the documents. I don't have to read them anything because I know we had taught that talk. It's boring. I'll just explain what each document is and we'll just kind of go through and that will tell the story. Right. So let's tell the story through the documents. So instead of the book, right. You know, I mean, there is a book. There is a book. That looks close. You can buy on Amazon. The link is below. Links below. So here is, okay. So Barrero is an FBI agent. He, his main asset is a guy named Mark Farshone. Right. Farshone is he rides with a hell's angel. Oh, he's, he was once a drug dealer. Now he's just a professional. He's a professional informant. So he gets, he weasels his way into groups. He gets them comfortable with them. He starts dealing drugs with them and they come in and crack them. Right. Yeah. This is common. The problem is there's a lot of money involved. And so what happens is these guys start ripping up periodically. They're in a situation where I've kind of infiltrated your group. You trust me. We set up a deal. You bring half a million dollars. I'm supposed to bring the drugs. I don't bring the drugs. I just bring my, my badge and my gun. And I say, give me the shit, FBI, or we can just bust you. Right. You've got a life sentence on you right now. You're going to get a life sentence or just give me, hand over the drugs or the money or whatever it is. Just stick some up for it. Now what could this guy do a shit? What could this guy possibly do with, for example, 10 pounds of ice? Oh, he just could take that and then parlay it into another drug deal. We're now he just sells the ice. Now you just sell it. Okay. Right. So if he's, if they end up getting the money, great, if they get ice, well, that's fine. Then they, they can then turn around and sell the ice. Right. They're not worried about getting busted. No matter what happens, we got to like a get out of jail free card, right? Well, think about it. Even if I walked in, I'm arranged something to go to sell it. And then boom, there's a raid. Right. I can always turn around. Call it your badge. Well, well, what are you guys doing? I'm FBI. Right. Under undercover. Right. And keep, oh, keep my, I said that about a thousand times last night. That's okay. I'm going to go understand. Okay. You have to understand. Okay. So take a shot every time he says keep it right. Yeah. Yeah, exactly. So you, so you have to understand Farsion actually gave, I'm sorry, Barrero gave Farsion a badge and a gun. So I mean, you don't give your informant a badge and a gun. Right. He's got a badge and a gun. He's flashing it. He's telling people he's FBI. He's, and what's even funnier. What's not even in the book is that at one point, first, you know, loses the, loses the badge. Pete's mom has it has it in her safety deposit box, has took pictures of it, sent it to Mueller saying come get this badge. I don't want to Pete told them about it during the interviews. He didn't even respond. He can't respond because a 302 would be generated. Uh, what's a 302? It's a, it's a, a report from the FBI. It's a chronological report so that any agent can grab it and start reading. And it tells everything the step by step, everything that's happened. Everybody we've talked to, everything we've done, every phone call we got, every interview, everything. So just doc, everything is recorded. Right. Right. He might have, I called up and said, hey, I found an FBI badge sitting outside within 30 minutes, there'd be two agents. Oh, yeah. Real quick. But he can't say anything because you have to hear the whole, you know, the whole story. Yeah. He can't, he can't. Buried about it, right? Right. He can't further this, this whole FBI thing because he's been denying it the whole time. Right. So, all right. So eventually what happens is, this is already taken two fucking long. All right. So eventually what happens is, first, you own, and Barreiro get John Ellen Berger to, they, they go to them and they say, look, we need to buy a bunch of like, I serve, I think I was, was it I? Yeah. They want to buy a bunch of ice. They do balance or something. Oh, right. Right. Of, was it I serve or Coke? I thought it was ice. Fuck. I don't know who cares. Ice Coke was the difference. My right. See, we're seeing a big difference. No. Yeah. Actually, there's a difference. So quite a big difference. Right. This is a drug deal. They set up a drug deal where they, they're supposed to show up and they're bringing product and money. And what happens is they show up and they pull out their badges. This is at their drug lab in the penthouse on such that, Sonset, Sonset Boulevard. In this high rise building where they've got a drug lab, they go, they, they go in, they get the money, they take the money, they're supposed to bring the drugs back. Instead, they pull their badges out and they say, hey, listen, man, we're taking your shit and we're taking all this ice. They take everything and they go, just be thankful you're not going to prison right now. Don't say a fucking thing and they walk off. So Pete's there. Think there's another guy there too. And so is John, um, Ellen Burger. Yeah. So Ellen Burger is like, holy shit. Keep my, Ellen Burger has been going around town vouching for this guy. He's been telling people, oh, he's good, he's good people. He's good for first. First, for she own for far, she own. For she own brother, they're good, they're good guys. Oh, bad. You know, not good guys. No, no, no, and not a good idea to be telling your drug dealing buddies who are serious drug dealers. They can trust him, but you can trust this guy. They've been dealing with them. So fuck, doesn't look good. Point is is that they take the fucking money and they leave. So here's, so what happens is that happens, he's pissed off about it. Everybody's upset with him. He's lost a chunk of money, chunk of money. How much money do you think that that bust was worth? Oh, I mean, that was in the millions. It was in the millions. I mean, it was like, I think you got away with cash of like, there's something like 300,000 I'd have to look at the exact, but all the, all the, all the ice was what? The ice was over two to three million. Oh, yeah. It's several million. Okay. Yes, at least several million. Okay. So what ends up happening is two weeks later, two three weeks later, two three weeks later, they're, they're doing another, they're cooking more ice. So they're cooking ice and everybody leaves for the day and recini's there and he's burning off some chemicals. Like he's like, you know, you can burn off like the water if you burn it off, you'll still have some there and you can use that. He's on burning it off. He ends up a, a lick of flame shoots up and hits the fire extinguisher or fire, whatever. And it goes off. Woo. I mean, fucking goes nuts. He's in a lab with, with tons of money and everything. These guys are driving porsches and Ferraris. I mean, and they're, they're, they're in their early twenties. So he grabs the money. He grabs the mice. He grabs the stuff. He goes running downstairs. He jumps in. These guys are driving porshers and Ferraris. I mean, and they're, they're, they're in their early 20s. So he grabs the money. He grabs the mice. He grabs the stuff. He goes running downstairs. He jumps in his Porsche. He takes off the fire department shows up. They go in. There's a fucking meth lab. So they call the, the police, the police show up. They check it out. They go, my God, this is insane. Well, there's a laptop there that's, that's Pete's. There's mail from Ellen Berger. Ellen Berger's like driver's like somebody's driver's licenses there. The electric and waters in different people's names. We're all going to prison. Yeah. You're all done. You got some explaining to do. I mean, he's like, you don't understand the amount of evidence that was in there is just devastating. So they all get together and they're terrified. Like the next day, they're all like freaking out. Pete's already gone and giving his lawyer $600,000 in cash because he's like, you got to bail me out and lawyers like, I can't bail you. I have a $600,000. That's crazy. It's like, we'll take the, I don't know what to do. I'm going to get arrested. So they go to the mall. They're talking and they're all flipping out and basically because it's Pete's fault. I'm sorry. God damn it. Cause it's recini's fault. Yeah. So because it's recini's fault, they say Pete is recini. Pete is recini. Yeah. Call far she own. We know he's dirty. Yeah. He's a dirty FBI agent. He's, I mean, I know he's actually a dirty, um, uh, he's actually an informant, but he's playing FBI. They think is FBI. J. So they're like, call him. Yeah. Call him and Borero. That's the guy that took the, the load from him. For call him. Why? Yeah. We know he's dirty. Yeah. So I can call and talk to him. Right. He kind of owes you one. So they calls him up. Guy, you know, they go payphone, makes a phone call, gets the fucking call back. It's a pager. You know, talk so many says, hey, we, and so he immediately goes, what the fuck are you guys doing? We gave you a pass. Yeah. We let you go. Why'd you stay in the fucking place? You know, it's going, because he didn't mind too. They had told the FBI. They were going to bust these guys instead. They ripped them off. And they told them when we got there, there was no lab. Oh, now there's a lab two weeks later. Yeah. It's like we've been in the office all day saying, I shit, you're not. They, they must have left. They must have come back. We didn't know. So instead of busting them, they just got the money from them. Yeah. It took them. My life was not right. Right. But they didn't. Right. So peace light. So they ended up talking and he says, they said, man, you guys are in a lot of trouble. And Pete said he I could, I could hear he was, he was, he was, he was really anxious. You mean he was scared. Yeah. Sorry. Receding was like, he was scared. So I saw an opportunity goes, any goes, man, you guys are in a lot of trouble. He was, yeah, well, that pales in the comparison. How much trouble you two fuckers are in. Is anything happens to me or anybody that I know he's, if we so much as get talked to about this shit, he goes, you guys are going down. He just ripped them off. Right. So he's like, all right, I'll take care of it. He said, call me on a couple of days. So calls him back a couple of days later. Nobody's ever spoken to. They don't ever call. They don't have to. And just to let you know, this is the, this is the actual lease from a guy by the name of Joey Escobosa. Joey Escobosa, his phone numbers on here, his address, his everything's on the lease for the apartment. For the apartment. And the exhibit 12 in the hills. I mean, in the condo, this is the lab. The meth lab. The meth lab. Right. Never even got talked to him. Not what matter. Fact. The guy on the lease and no one ever even talked to him. They quashed the whole thing. They went out. Boom, boom, boom. So he did he asked it all. You guys go away, drop the whole fucking case. It's older. So he's like, so peace, like fuck, I mean, we should have all been going to jail. Yeah. The prison. So this is, this one right here. This is, this happens later. This is a transcript from Mark Farshion. We're Farshion actually in the transcript. Exhibit this exhibit 10. In the transcript, he says he actually talks about how he's a, you know, playing a big coke dealer, how they had like a lab set up over there, over there in Beverly Hills, sunset, Boulevard, sunset, Boulevard, says it three times. I'm probably coaked up. Uh, he goes, he, and he says that he says basically that he, he switches a little bit. He says that. Ellenberger came to me because keep in mind the, the, the, the, uh, deputies and every, and the agents and everybody later, they are hearing what's going on. So when they come to talk to him, he admits, yeah, yeah, something happened like that, but that's not what happened. And he basically says, look, Ellenberger asked me to sell him some kilos of coke. He gave me a hundred thousand dollars and I ripped him off for the hundred thousand. I mean, he tells him I ripped him off for the hundred thousand dollars. Where's the one where he says, why would he admit it? Because he's being, they're, they're saying he was ripped off. He ripped off 300,000 and a whole bunch of ice. Okay. He's saying, no, no, that wasn't it. That wasn't it at all. He also talks about Aria. We're talking about Aria in a second. Trying to think of where he says, uh, shit. It's actually pretty good the way he says it to. Damn. Oh, here it is. He says, uh, uh, that's, that's I, I just told you. I, I told him it's better than getting busted. You know, uh, the, the lost money. It's basically, uh, I, you know, I, fuck, I took the money. I shouldn't have taken it, but I did. Fuck. That's for his words. I'm saying, he tells them because they're, you got, you have to read the whole thing like they're, they're like, they're badgering it. Right. Oh, you did this. You did, did you have a bad, I didn't have a bad, you didn't have a badge. You didn't tell people that you're like, no, no, what about the money? Well, we know you took the money. We didn't, he's filing. He's like, fuck it. He just fucking starts. Okay. I took the fucking money and he admits it. I shouldn't have, but I did. Right. But he downplays it to a hundred grams. He downs to plays it to a hundred and they even asked him. Did Berero know and he goes, yeah, I kind of, they go, so he knew. And they're, he's like, yeah, how'd you tell him that? And he's like, well, you know, I kind of eased it. And I don't know. Wow. The transcripts, the guys such a fucking clown. I mean, he comes off like, anyway. So this, I'm trying to think this is, I mean, this basically. So that's, that's him admitting he also talks about, well, there's other stuff he talks about. No, if I should put that aside, fuck it. I'm not worried about it. Um, it's on the, it's on the website. You got to read that. He should find. Yeah. So all these PDFs are on the website. Yeah. Okay. Everything's on the website. Uh, not my website on it. The website is a devil exposed exhibits dot com. Okay. You put a link to that as well. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. This is he told in here, he talks about how everybody thought he was law enforcement, but he never told them he was law enforcement. Of course, I've also got about six other statements where he showed people his badge and gun and his FBI badge and gun. So it's like, come on. We're right. Right. So what are these, are these transcripts? What are these taken from? Like, these transcripts, are these from phone calls or these from? No, no, these are, these are, these are when, when this whole thing falls apart eventually the homos, you know, there's homicides, homicide detectives come in, FBI agents come in, they start interviewing people. Yeah. These are from interviews. Right. Got it. They're definitely, they're all definitely interviews. So, uh, so do you remember? So it, so what happens is they, they made the phone call. They make the thing go away. A few months and months later, they end up, Ellen Berger bumps into Farshion and Barrero at the opening of the hard rock cafe in Vegas. Right. Cause Ellen Berger is a big gambler. Yeah. So he bumps into him and they have a conversation and, and Farshion's there was like some porn star. If you actually see the thing, I actually have the girl woman's name and I have a little thing. And I put porn star. So you can look her up. So, uh, and he and every time, one of these, every time he does, one of the, he makes sure to tell the, the, the agents, yeah, I was with so and so. She's a porn star. So he likes to throw that out there. Back. So. Yeah. So he meets them and he, they see him. They're a little nervous, but he goes up and he talks to him and he says, listen, he goes like, Oh, what's going on? He says, look, we're, we're actually working on trying to bust the sky, but we want to rob him. Can you give us some ice? So now he's asking him for ice and he goes, yeah. And Ellen Burgers, yeah, I can get you some, some, some fucking ice. So he gets some some ice because he's like, he thinks to himself, you know, doing a lot of shit. Good to have him on his side, right? To have a dirty age in your, in your pocket. Right. All day. Right. So that's what in this one he talks about, uh, yeah, he talks about meeting him in the, uh, at the hard rock cafe, you know, months and months later. So they end up. So he ends up, uh, he ends up starting, starts to kind of deal with him again. And what happens is everyone's periodically, I, I, you know, that's this in the book, somebody will get busted. So they gets busted or somebody's getting indicted and these guys will give that will come to them and say, look, we're dealing with this guy. Is he cool? And they'll, he'll call first show and first show and we'll call Barrera, Barrera will come back and say, now the guy got busted like three, three weeks ago. He's working with, he's, uh, he's working. Yeah. He's already talking to us. Yeah. So they stopped dealing with him. So at one point, Aria, which Aria was a drug dealer, he was, uh, supplying ecstasy. And I think, I don't know if he eventually starts doing, uh, dealing in ice or not. I can't recall, but he was definitely, I have a transcript where they say he's a drug dealer, several people say he's a drug dealer. dealer. And so what happens is I want to say it's his cousin gets busted with a, a bunch of ice. He gets just red handed busted. So he gets busted and they contact, they contact far shown and they explain, hey, look, this guy, he got busted. When can you, can you fix it? And although pizza like, I don't know what ultimately happened. I know that Aria was, they were trying to work it out with them where they were going to pay him. And so here he says, uh, did they call you about Reza and he says, yeah, called me about Reza. Uh, who called you, uh, Pierre, uh, recini, sorry, recini called me and asked me. A K a P. Yeah. Yeah. If I could do any therapy, recini, right. When, uh, when Reza got busted, uh, collect information, when Reza got busted and it goes on, he talks about how, um, if there was anybody he could pay off to get him out and he said he'd look into it and that sort of thing is, did you? He's like, you know, I looked into it. He never really says exactly what happened, but pizza, I don't know exactly what happened. He was, but I do know that about three or four weeks later, we're seeing you are, Reza walked out of jail and knew what's never charged or got dropped. So once again, he, you know, something happened, they just paid them. They get out, get off. And pizza, they're regularly giving them 30,000, 100,000. So when these guys start getting, so this is a, what is this one? Um, so at one point, you know, Pete has a buddy, recini has a buddy. Let's just stick to Pete. Yeah, I was just competing. Yeah, that's fine. Pete, recini. I can do it. I know what recini I can do it. I can do it. Whatever you want to do, everyone knows by now. Okay. So Pete recini, recini gets busted at one, not busted. It gets like a rest. He does, he's, he's, he's being indicted in a few different jurisdictions. He gets arrested one day. He gets thrown in jail. Uh, you know, the little sister in the rate where they tried to broaden the guy's house and they think they stole from Ellen Burger. They tried to, they stole a bunch of shift from Ellen Burger. And they go back and try to rob and they raise a thousand in time. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well Pete, yeah. Pete was always like, I, yeah. That whole thing was funny because I kept saying, okay, well, during this home invasion, he was like, stop calling the home invasion. Yeah. Just stop calling in a home invasion. I go, why I go, it was a home invasion. He goes, first of all, he said, I stayed in the car. Yeah. He was to get away driver. Yeah. He was, I wasn't involved in a home invasion. He said, this was Ellen Burger hired a bunch of guys that went in. It was a burglary and I go, Pete, they kicked in the front door and they tied some guys up and they went and they were looking for drugs. I go, that's a home invasion. He goes, there was no such thing as home invasion there. He said, please stop saying home invasion. He's really making me feel uncomfortable. He said, I wouldn't be involved in a home invasion. I said, yeah, but a strong guard burglary. And he goes, he was, I waited in the car. Still a part of it. That's like the guy that says, hey, I know these guys that are Robin Banks. How do you know? Well, because I'm the getaway driver. Yeah. Just to get away driver. So anyway, he ends up getting arrested. No, no, that one. He actually, that whole thing, he actually pleads it out and gets put on probation. Okay. This is later. Okay. Later, he's just being, he's just getting named in different conspiracies and he's getting indicted in a couple of different jurisdictions. They're looking for him. So at some point he gets arrested. You got to read the book for the exact dates and what happens. He gets arrested. So at one point he gets arrested. Well, we're seeing he has a friend who's a, he's a police officer. He calls it. So he's been arrested. He's thrown in jail. He calls the police officer. And he says, hey, listen, man, he said, can you call my buddy Mark, Farceon and tell him where I'm at and he needs to get me out of jail. So he calls Farceon, Farceon does something. Obviously, Farceon calls Pirero because farceon's a fucking informant. He can't call the local sheriff's department. It's a, that's why buddy let him out of jail. Barrero, Barrero probably calls somebody else like one of his superiors, one of his other buddies because Barrero is not even in, Farceon can't make anything happen. He can't get it. Right. So he, he makes a phone call. He calls back Pete walks right out of jail. They release him. This is, this is a declaration from this guy. Uh, is it Marcus, Marceus? I don't know. Anyway, that's his declaration where he explains that Pete called him from the jail. He made a phone call. He called Mark, Mark said he take care of it. Pete walked out of jail. And, and that back then Pete had all right, look at the free of first paragraph. Pete had already told him that he knew, uh, he knew an FBI agent, a dirty FBI agent. He'd already told him that. So keep in mind, once again, this has been going on. Dirty agents, I'm paying them off. Everything's going good. It's going smooth. I get arrested. I go to jail. No, they make a photo. They get me out. My buddy gets busted. They do a couple of things. He walks out. Yeah. I need to know who I'm dealing with. Is this guy a snitch? You know, I don't know. Can you check out this guy? Hey, here's his name. Sure. Yeah. You know what? Don't deal with him. Yeah. These guys have the hookup. Right. They're just time. Yeah. They're just, it's a bunch of enrolling. Yeah. They got it all. So and, and I'm the same time, Mark, for she own, and, uh, and it was either your guy's name, but Barrero. Those guys are raking in cash from these guys. They're robbing people left and right. They're, they're just extraordinary. He's drug dealers for so much money. It's ridiculous. Right. Right. So they're playing both sides. This is a guy named, Double Dippant. This guy named Meacham. Okay. Meacham when he ultimately gets interviewed a couple of years later, he talks about how he met Racini. He knew Racini in New Racini was dealing with a dirty, a corrupt, a corrupt police officer working. He was working with him. And it says Racini had once in form Meacham that if he was ever arrested, this police officer could, uh, could help him out, uh, but it would cost $100,000. And that's obviously his two FBI agents, right. But he's, and possibly another guy, which is this other guy, blom that we don't mention much, but he's also the only reason I think he's definitely involved is because there's different jurisdictions. So if you want to know what's going on this jurisdiction, you have to call over there. Well, mom's here. Well, I'm the one to open him here. And then when they all end up getting investigated, all of these guys take early stress disability with so does blom. Same time. Take it. Take it. Early stress disability. Stress disability. I'm stressed. And all three take the same exact thing. Absolutely. Well, not all three because far she owns just a fuck. Well, far, she's not. He doesn't work on the FBI. Yeah, he's just a, right. He's, oh, he's working. He's just a two bit biker. Right. Right. So this. Okay. Okay. Okay. So. All right. So let's stop now. So what happens is we, you read the book. So you know, um, Ellen Berger is he's, he's in desperate straits. Right. He's, he's had a couple of bad things happen. He's lost some money. He's gambling. That's right. Just fucking outrageous. He's been indicted in multiple jurisdictions. Feds are looking for him. Pete said, man, they were, they had him under so much. So I'm not high way to hell. Yeah. He's, he knew he's in a lot of, a lot of trouble. What happens is he ends up getting himself indicted out of Hawaii. So Berero and first shown tell him, hey, you've been indicted. Matter of fact, at one point, they go to ship some, some drugs like they have a drug courier and first shown calls the guy up and says, calls up. Ellen Berger said, don't, and, and Rucini and says, don't let the guy go. They're waiting for him. Like stops it. So they say, look, there's an indictment. Bunch people are indicted. He, he tells Ellen Berger, you know, give me X amount of dollars. If he at what it was, how much it was, but this much money, I'll give you the whole list. Okay. So he calls them up and he gives them the whole list. Berero actually admits that. So Berero, in Berero's, one of Berero's statements, he tells, yeah, I gave him I gave him the, the list of people that were in, in diet, or it had been indicted. And he didn't exchange for the money. Yeah. And they, he was one of them. So he, they go to him and they say, look, maybe you ought to consider cooperating. So he says, okay, I'll think about cooperating, definitely. Well, what happens in the meantime is he's dating this girl named Jenny Berero's. They end up breaking up. They break up because she finds out that Ellen Berger has been cheating on it. Yeah. And I mean, he's been cheating on her forever. It's just, it's just, it's just nothing stopping this guy. So she, she'd catch him sometimes. He'd lie his way out of it, you know, denied, denied, denied, denied. Well, anyway, according to Pete, what ends up happening there is they figure out somebody is telling Jenny what's happened that he's cheating. So they don't know who. There's, um, Ellen Berger has no clue, but she's not having it. She's done with him. Well, so one day Pete and Ellen Berger go over to, uh, go over to, uh, Aria's house. So they go to Aria's house and they say, and they stop because they're waiting for a call. Remember they paid, you have to page somebody's, no phones. No, there's not cell phones really. So they're, they page this. Well, they, there are cell phones, but they're these huge things. Right. You page somebody in Confirmable line. Guys got a page or so they page this, this guy who's going to supply him with some meth or something. I forget. We were in middle school. Yeah. So they page him and they're waiting at Aria's house for the phone call. They're sitting there, they're playing games and goofing off, playing a guitar or whatever you have back then. Playing snake. Right. So what happens is the phone rings, but they don't answer it. It's not their phone. They let it go to the boy to the answering machine. And a voice comes on and says, Oh, Aria, I had such a good time last night. You're so wonderful. The flowers are beautiful. Thank you so much. I love you so much. You're the best. And it's Jenny. And it's Jenny. It's Ellen Berger's ex-girlfriend. Yeah. And so he realizes Aria is the one who's been telling her that I've been fucking around. And so he's just devastated. So now Aria's hitting it. Yeah. Oh, yeah. They get married. She moves in with them. They get married the whole thing. So OK. He's just like, I mean, he's distraught. So he's driving around. He's found out. Does he call him out when he hears the message? No, you know what he does? He actually sets the machine so that they don't listen to it. They said it. So he doesn't or he doesn't even have a clue. So when when Birero and first, you know, I'm kind of come around and say, look, you've been indicted and you know, you have to cooperate. He says, I'll give you Aria. I'll give you Aria. Aria and this other big time drug dealer, neither of which he can probably really give him. Talking about STs. Uh, no, no, not STs. Uh, this other guy named Robeless. OK. OK. So I'm trying to limit the amount of names. Got it. So another big deal. OK. There's so many fucking names in the story. It's crazy. So he says, OK. So he's, I'll give you a Robeless and this guy. So he starts naming guys. And of course, Aria is the one he really. Maybe Aria he wants to give up. Aria he wants Aria bad. So well, somehow another Aria finds out. So what ends up happening is one day Pete's out. He's out. He's partying. Nason finds out that who's nascent? Nason is a guy that was basically. Ellen Berger's kind of do boy. He was a young kid. He wanted to be an actress like 22, 23 years old. Real good looking guy comes to LA wants to be an actor. He's going on auditions. And in the meantime, he's kind of. Ellen Berger's do boy like, hey, go watch my car. Hey, do this. And he's given a money. He gets free drugs and whatever. You know, he gets to travel with them and Aria pays for everything. But he's just kind of it is assistant. Yeah. So and so he finds out that he finds out he gets angry at our at Ellen Berger about something as convoluted as one of those things. It's like this and this and this. He gets pissed off at him. One he knows also that he's cooperating and he's going to cooperate against. He's got to cooperate against. He knows Ellen Berger's cooperating. Yeah. What I say? I'm just I'm just mad. I'm trying to make it there. Mason knows that Ellen Berger is going is cooperating or is planning on cooperating hasn't done anything yet. But he's planning on cooperating and he's going to give up. He's going to get up. Aria and several other people. Mason feels really pissed off about that. There's a lot of other stuff. You know, Ellen Berger's kind of at this point. He's just kind of a jerk to everybody. He's always been titled in issues. He's short man complex. The whole douche bag. Yeah. So he goes. So Mason ends up going to this club where Racine is dancing with his girl. He comes up. He's like, that motherfucker. I'm going to fucking beat his ass. He's like, I'm going to fucking kill this motherfucker. And he's like, bro, I'm with my girl. What are you doing? He's like, we'll talk about it later. We'll talk about it later. He's like, fuck this motherfucker. So he leaves somebody. I forget who Elanzo somebody comes up to him. Another one of the players comes up and says, hey, man, Mason, he's like, Mason left a while ago. He's like, said he was going back to the place. And so Racine is like, you know what? Fuck, I don't want these guys. They'd been in fights before. Yeah. Fist fight. So he's like, fuck. So he goes back, goes up, goes back to the condo, goes upstairs, goes and finds him and everything's fine. Mason's there playing game, are you shaving or whatever? Okay, fine. So he leaves hangs out with his girlfriend the next day. He comes back, walks inside. Where are you? I'm sorry. Okay. Ellen Berger, thank you. He goes back to the condo. Ellen Berger is there, everything's fine. Mason's there, Ellen Berger is there, everything's fine. So he says, okay, every time. No sort of confrontation. No confrontation. None. So he leaves. So the next day though, I spend the night with my girl, I come back the next day, I walk in. So he walks in. Ellen Berger's dead. He's laying in the middle of the bedroom, one of the bedrooms, dead. He says, neck was twisted in a way that he said as soon as I saw it, it was like he's on very unnatural the way. I was like, I'm immediately, I knew. Oh my God, he's dead. He's like, I ran. I tried to fucking wake him up. Are you okay? Yeah. He's like, but immediately I realize he's dead. Yeah. So he immediately makes, he immediately calls farceon. First thing. First thing calls farceon because he's got a dead body. His best friend is dead in his meth lab. I can't call the police. Right. I have a life sentence in meth. Yeah. Right here. Nothing mentioned the money and everything else. Can't call the police. That's not, that's not an option. No. So he ends up calling. So he calls, he calls farceon, farceon, apparently he said, he said, it sounded like he already knew what was going on. Coming to find out later, of course, nascent had had, he said, Nathan says they got into a fight. This is one of many versions. Mason has said, by the way, so they got into a fight. And he ended up breaking his neck. He said, but it was probably broken. He said, but he strangled him. Yeah, snap his neck. He's snapped his neck. He probably got me an eye. A lot snapped his neck, whatever it was. He killed him. So Pete doesn't know what to do. You know, Nathan's no fucking help. He's a kid. So, but the point is is that Nathan, if you look at all the phone records and you read the phone book, remark Pete calls him, Nathan calls back. He calls Arya. Arya calls Escoboser or someone or Alonzo, Alonzo calls John's, Ellenbergers' phone and lets it ring and ring and ring and ring because they're trying to figure out what's confusing to me. Well, yeah, because they're trying to figure out is he really dead. And Nathan just said he's dead, but we don't know if he's dead. Right. Arya doesn't want to call. So he gets this guy to call. Never answers. So, okay, fine. So in the aftermath, they end up Pete ends up calling this guy named Harrison. Right. Was Harrison's first name? I don't, I don't, I don't remember how Harrison got into the story. Yeah. Well, because he was a drug dealer. And he somebody knows somebody. So he calls Harrison. He said to be, he said to be, he said to be honest, he said, we call the bunch of people. He's like, we call, he said, nobody wanted to help us. Oh, is Harrison one of the guys who got disposed of his body? Yeah. He calls Harrison Harrison says, I'll come with a couple of guys. It's going to be this much money. I'll get rid of the body. Okay. So they come. They dump Ellenbergers body. Package up the body. They dump the body in a dumpster. And it ends up getting, they never find it. I thought they, no, the other guy gets dumped in a dumpster too. They're both in dumpsters. Yes, but one guy gets found one guy doesn't. Los Angeles dumpsters. Yeah. You never know. Kid at a mess when you're just exposing a body. You got a whole bunch of desert out there, but you know, they're easy. Strode in the dumpster. Right. Starting dumpster. You got a 50, 50 chance. Yeah. Right. They wrap them up and up and up and up and up and up and up. You know, be real quick. Wrap them up and up and asleep. Sleeping bags. Right. And what's so fucked up is that Pete, like whenever I would say, oh, shit, I was fucking hit the camera. Yeah. I don't think you should. What's messed up about it is that we would be in the library at Coleman. And Pete and I would be, I would be asking questions. And I'd say something like we're going to be arguing back and forth or joking around. And he'd say something, well, what are your code of financet about you? And I go, and I go, listen, all my code of financet are alive. And he'd look at me and he'd go, and he'd look at me and he'd go, fuck, he'd go, all I did was help move the body. And I was like, of course, you got all these other inmates around going, what the fuck did he just say? I was like, stop fucking saying that. You need to stop saying it. It doesn't help your case. No. You know, it doesn't, that's not the kind of thing that you come off. You can't say that and come off well. No, no, no, no. So he, so anyway, so yeah, we've got phone records of all of these guys calling each other back and forth, back and forth right after they found Ellenberg or dead. Right. We got Arias, page. You have the records of them calling, calling farceone, calling farceone, calling, Barrero, where Barrero calls. Do they have a direct line to Barrero? Oh yeah, you can call it. Pete's called directly called the, the task force. Oh God. And I'm going to talk to him for like five minutes, 10 minutes. So, so if Barrero's like, well, I've never spoken to that guy. I'll just five fucking times in the last two weeks. He didn't talk to you for 30 seconds. So we have phone records right after you found your best friend, fucking crystal meth dealer dead. You call it FBI agent right after that. Right. Yeah, records of that. Records of that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. This is, these are the records. Yeah. Ellenberg, Arias, page or farceones, page or Barrero's, page or, but if you keep going, Barrero's office at B&E right here, that's these right here. Okay. And they have the duration. This was 12 minutes, 22 minutes. Anyway, okay. So this goes on and on because the only reason, the reason this is important is that basically when the homicide started to get investigated and there's a link to the actual agents, these guys say, tell the homicide detective, oh, we haven't talked to him in months. Not it's been four or five months. We haven't talked to him since we saw him in Vegas or wherever. Yeah. Yeah. No, no, no, there's a shit. I got phone records. Well, there's a lot of phone records here that says, you know, so that's weird. Phone records. That's super weird. And it happens. But keep in mind too, back then, like you wouldn't, I wouldn't, you wouldn't see that stupid now. Would you because you know it immediately? You know, oh, fuck that, they'll grab my phone. They'll do this. They'll just go on the computer and figure it out. But back then, look at these phone records. That was a process to get those. Like, you know, dot matrix and shit, you know, they could purge it once it's gone. You know, here, nothing's got it. We're going to be dissap, right? We're going to disappear. So. Yeah, that was like, you know, you know, dot matrix and shit, you know, they could purge it once it's gone. You know, here, nothing's got, we're going to be dissaphere. So, okay. So once again, Aria. So, okay. So, let me put this aside too. So here's what happens is Sydney. Oh, yeah, this is the one. So after that happened, we're going, we're shuffling through documents here. Okay. I'm sorry. No, it's okay. I'm just trying to make the people who are listening and not watching the video. So they understand what's going on. Oh, yeah. Okay. So, you know, so it keep in mind too later, you're going to realize everybody blames recini. First, they all say he shot him. He shot Ellen Burger. Ellen Burger was never shot. Everybody, even when they eventually get the guy and they're all the documents say shot shot. All the guys were saying, you know, he shot them from the body. So how would they know? Well, because when Nathan, please guilty, yeah, he says, I choked on the death. Why would you say that? Nathan said he choked. Nathan says he personally choked on the death. Remember, we know he broke his neck, right? We know we choked on the death. So, ultimately, though, I mean, even though everybody points at recini went ultimately, Nathan finally says, yes, he, yes, I killed him. They say, okay, well, would you shoot him with? Where's the body? He goes, no, I didn't shoot him. I choked on the death. Same thing recini's been saying the whole time. He wasn't shot. He was choked to death. So who made up the whole shot? We're getting there. We're getting there. They're trying to make, but the murders look the same, like it's the same person. Got him. Got it. So this. So right afterwards, if if if recini shot him, and he's this cold blooded murderer, right, that he killed him because he knows he's cooperating. So he killed him. That's what everybody says. He's killed him. He killed him because he's cooperating. And recini was afraid he was going to cooperate against him. So he shoots him and gets rid of the body. Well, that's the case. This woman here when Pete goes to to see, um, to see Wayne Harrison, right, this is his girlfriend who says that Wayne tells her that Pete had just found his friend dead. And she says specifically that Pete looked very sad that he looked sad, confused. And, you know, he asked to talk to Wayne alone. And then Wayne came back and told her he just found his, he found his, his best friend dead. I gotta get rid of the body. So that's what. So if Pete says cold blood and murder, he walks in there practically in tears. Where they just found his best friend dead. Wow. So what happened? So after he found, finds him dead, how did, and he calls farceone, right? What plays out after that? Like what's, what comes after that? Everybody starts saying that he went to Mexico. I don't think I really mentioned that. They say the Allen burger went to Mexico. Whenever somebody asked, they're like, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, no, he's cool. He's down in, he's down in Mexico. He's in Mexico. Everybody's saying Mexico. Okay. Keep in mind too, his, you know, people start, your family starts looking for you. Right. Right. But there's no body. Right. And this is a guy who would take off to Brazil, which he'd done with Pete. I have pictures of them in Brazil. You know, he goes because Pete's, his, his, he's Brazilian. So they would go to Brazil and be there for two or three weeks. And, you know, these are not guys that are keeping in touch with anybody. You know, they're just doing whatever they want to live in. They got a ton of money there. Right. You know, they're risk way. Whenever they want. Right. So this is a guy that, that Pete says, this guy, Sydney, uh, Berman says that he knew Pete, he knew recini and recini had told him if he ever gotten trouble, he knew a dirty FBI agent. Mm hmm. I told him that he had ripped them off, uh, uh, go that took dope and money and let him go. He stated that, uh, recini said that the, the, uh, federal agent could get a list of informants, uh, that the agent was crooked and would do it for money. And this is a guy. Keep in mind, he's not, he's not in trouble. He's just, just young guy shooting the shit. Yeah. Man, I know a fucking different guy. I know an agent. He'll check that guy out for you. Give me the number. He makes a fucking phone call, boom, boom, boom, boom. Give me a couple grand. Yeah, he's good. You can deal with him. So I miss you. It's just, it's just dirty agents. Okay. You know, well, the only reason I keep harping on it is because later the government's like it's, it's all bullshit. No, no, they're not dirty agents. No, that's right. That's all bullshit. It's not true. Okay. There's a lot of paperwork that was otherwise. People were saying that there was a lot of guys walking out of jail, a lot of cases getting busted a lot of, you know, and wise Pete telling everybody this guy ripped me off and stole all my fucking money. Greg, or bank account. Right. So at some point, he starts dealing with another guy named Lance Estes. Okay. All right. And who is Lance Estes? He's a drug dealer out of San Francisco. Okay. So, you know, Estes is, uh, you know, it works out all the time. He's a big guy. Good looking. They're all fucking good looking guys. They're all driving portions and for our agent. It's ridiculous. The amount of money. I mean, they're superstars. They're all rock stars. They're all working out. It's like, what would you do if you were making a $100,000 a month that had nothing to do in tons of drugs and women, a maniac. Yeah. So these guys are maniac. Let alone you're in your early 20s. Right. So these guys are maniac. So he explains what what ends up happening is Lance Estes is dealing with recini and he ends up getting busted. He and his best friend get busted, you know, they get, they get, they get busted by the, uh, by the local, um, uh, task force. Well, when they get busted, they've heard about, you know, they've heard about, you know, they know recini, they've heard about this dirty agent. So they contact him and Pete says to him, look, he can get rid of your case for $100,000. So Lance is cocky and, you know, Estes is cocky and he's like, you know, I'll give you 50,000 up front. But I want to meet this motherfucker. You know, he's a fucking tough guy. So they go and they meet and he meets them and, and far she meets far she own and bur arrows across the street. It's never confirmed that bur arrows across the street, but we know from several different, uh, different reports that there was a guy, there was an FBI, there was an, there was an, there was someone across the street. We assume it's bur arrow. Yeah. So he ends up telling him, uh, he ends up pulling a gun on Estes because Estes kind of gets in his face and he pulls out his badge and sticks a gun in his face. He goes, motherfucker, he says, I'll put, he goes, I'll put a bullet and you right now and I'll put this piece on you. He's, you see my partner over there. He'll say he saw the whole thing. You pulled it on me and I fucking killed you. He's not back. You're fucking ass up. So he's like, oh, oh, oh, oh. So he realized, okay, he's definitely an agent got this guy over here. He's got this. He's got the badge. He's, I'm done. Right. He's like, this guy's for real. So they set up a time they give him 50, they meet at a hotel or a motel, they meet at a motel, give him $50,000. They, he gets a room here. He gets a room here. They meet here. They come down. They give the thing. It's a whole fucking spy thing. Right. So, so they, they give him 50 grand. And these are reports of the guys talking about how Lance told Lance or Estee's told him that he had given $50,000 in cash to recini and that the money was a down payment and was going to blah, blah. So this is him telling him one of his buddies. I gave recini, gave the money to down payment to get my case quashed. Okay. So we're good. I just pay 50 grand down. We're going to get it taken care of. What he doesn't realize is that the guy he's telling, which is his best friend, is already gone to the authorities and said, I know we're supposed to be working with you, but my buddies still selling drugs and he's now dealing with that dirty FBI agent. So he's now double crossed him. So now the authorities are like, whoa, you double crossed his butcher in bed with an FBI or some FBI agent. You just gave 50 grand to. So that helps. So, so did he get his case squashed. Did he end up paying him the full hundred grand and getting that whole thing taken care of? He does give him him a hundred grand, but what ends up happening is I mentioned that Lance with this. Yeah, yeah. This is this is his girlfriend by the way. So this is Lance, this is Lance Estee's girlfriend, which is Monica trail. Okay. And she tells a grand jury later, you mentioned that Lance had met with this supposed FBI agent or whatever to get him off. And he was convinced by credentials. And she says by credentials, did he get a bat? Did he see a badge? And she says, yeah, he saw a badge. Okay. Boom. Gave him the money, got the money. There's a dispute with Estee's. I'll try and start wrapping up trying to get really start cutting through it. Yeah. There's a dispute with Estee's okay between Farsion and Estee's. Estee's basically tries to back out. I want my money back. You're out of your fucking mind. Yeah. So they go back and forth back and forth. What happens is Estee's ends up going to the police or ends up basically saying that he's considering he finds out because his the other guy told the agents that he's working with the dirty FBI agent. It filters down to Barrero and Farsion that Estee's has told somebody and they know he's dealing with it. He just gave somebody 50 grand for a dirty agent. So fuck. So they say the deals off. They get a huge argument. Racine puts it back together. He says, okay. Now it's another $100,000. So give him 50. He's like, okay. So I think he gives him another 50. And then he's he's going to give him the last 50. He's so there's a huge dispute where they have a meeting and recedes at the meeting. Harrison's at the meeting. Farsion shows up. Farsion said Harrison's saying, let's just kill this guy. Farsion says, talk talking about who? Let's just kill him. Talking about Estee's. He's saying, let's just kill him because he's now talking about testifying against Farsion and Barrero. So he basically says, let's just kill him. And Pete's, a Racine is trying to talk him out of it. He goes to Farsion. Farsion says, okay, kill him. If he doesn't bring the money, kill him. But don't kill him in San Francisco. Because he lives in San Francisco. Kill him here because Harrison's talking about going to San Francisco, going to his house, killing him and killing his girlfriend if she's seen he's saying, because Racine's like, what if his girlfriend's there? He's, well, she helps his eye too. He's like, on, and Farsion goes, no, no, bring him up, bring him up here. If he doesn't have the money, kill him. Because if he doesn't bring the cash, kill him. Okay, fine. No problem. So he flies up, he shows up. He flies from down from San Francisco to LA. Yeah, from San Francisco to LA. They're all going to meet. He's supposed to bring the money. He says he's got the money. Pete thinks he's got the money. Racine thinks he's got the money. Racine's saying, he's got the money. Everything's going to be okay. He's going to give him the money. It's good. He gets there. They pick him up. Wayne picks him up. They walk inside. Everything seems like it's going to be okay. He walks into the kitchen. Wayne pulls a pistol out, shoots him in the back of the head. Boom. S.D. is dead. S.D. is dead. Now right before they killed him, wasn't there something about 86 code code word 86? They send a code back. So they, they page like the guys in the house get pages saying 86 86 on their pages, which you know, 86 to kill. Get rid. So, so the one guy goes and starts up the motorcycle, starts rev in the motorcycle. So nobody's going to hear the. So when they were, why did they send the 86? They realized he didn't have the $50,000 in cash. He's got a cashier check. He brings a fucking cashier. But they didn't see cash. So they figured he doesn't have the money. So let's kill him. No, they see a cashier check. But they need cash. But they didn't find the cashier check. After he was dead, right? He tells him in the car. Oh, he does. Okay. Right. I was only after he was done. No, right. Then he knows of Harrison knows. Okay. Well, he's got to die. Yeah. Well, we got to kill him. So if that's when he pages these guys 86, I'm coming and we're going to kill him. Well, Pete actually goes in the garage. I actually have a report from one guy who says after they got the 86's that Pete went and hid in the garage, you know, so he's kind of like making fun of them. So anyway, he ends up shooting him in the head and the back of the head or back of the head. It's been an over to like, I don't know, a kid. So there's something that the refrigerator or something. And I think Pete said he shot him in the back of the head. So they wrap him up in the sleeping bag. Keep in mind, they first you know and said, don't let him find the body. Don't let him find the body. Get the 50 grand. Don't let it in. If they kill him, you know, if if he doesn't have it, then kill him and don't don't kill him in San Francisco and don't let him anybody find the body because it works out pretty good if they don't find the body. Then he could just be anybody could be anybody taking off. Right. We don't know. So so yeah, they wrap him up. They throw him in a dumpster and a homeless guy finds him like the next day or something. And so now the detectives come in and you know, there's a huge difference between a regular cop and a detective. So a homicide detective is the elite. You know, they're they're methodical. You know, you might want you're trying to solve the murder. There's something and nothing else matters. Right. So they don't care who it is. I don't care if you're credit card count. I'm not going to fucking bust you for any of that. That means nothing. Right. You get everybody gets a pass when it comes to murder. Just help me. So they come in. This is the estimate murder. Okay. Lance Estes was arrested. He, so this is remember Lance was arrested. He agreed to cooperate. Okay. When we talked about that. So remember Lance, this is his being arrested and then the government saying Estes, as he's saying he was arrested, he got arrested and he was going to cooperate. This is Michael Estes who talks about how, uh, uh, um, that's his brother. This is his brother. Okay. Who's talks, who also talks about him being arrested and him, he was dealing with the guy. He was dealing with someone named Blum. He was dealing with an agent who was dealing with Blum. Blum is the other guy told you he's a good boy. Right. He's another guy like Barrero in a different jurisdiction. Okay. So another FBI agent who's giving information supposedly, right? Like I mean, based on all this stuff. So he ends up getting killed. He's bodies disposed of. It's, it's, uh, it's over. He's gone. So what do we got here? I got a bunch of documents. They're just kind of random. I'll just go through them real quick. So eventually Pete ends up getting busted. He gets arrested for something stupid. And before they can get them out of jail, before farceo and emberir can get them out of jail, he gets ID and agent, Alapa flies in from Hawaii and tries to interview him. And so she tries to interview him. And he said, Rocini said states, you know, to the agent Alapa that he had nothing to say to her. Uh, he wasn't going to speak to the government. You know, he wanted, uh, he was certain that farceo was going to take care of it. He was 100% sure. Keep in mind, they show up first, if you're smart and you're guilty and you're looking at a lot of time, you better cooperate. You're not beaten this in trial. Not with this, these kind of numbers, not with these kinds of people, not with this amount of people. Everybody around is getting busted. Yeah. He's been indicted in multiple jurisdictions. You're just done. You better expect to fuck an either die in prison or come out when you're in your sixties. So or you cooperate, he tells him, he tells her basically, kiss my ass. I'm good. Cause he knows, he's got to get me out. They always do 100 ran. I'm sitting on millions. I'm good. I'm good. So a lot of time goes by kick rocks, lady. Yeah. Some time goes by. And he's getting phone calls from Reza. He's getting calls from a Aria. He's talking to guys on the phone. I don't know if it's Aria. He was talking to it was at Reza. He's talking to people on the phone. The people are answering his phone calls and everybody tell him, hang tight. They're working on it. They're working on it. Well, eventually he comes to the conclusion after a few months. Yeah, nobody's working on it. Nobody's working on it. Yeah. His, he gets a new attorney comes in. He tells the attorney, he tells the attorney what's going on. But so he's like, just hold it off. I'm going to get this whole thing quash. The new attorneys like, are you fucking crazy? Yeah. What do you mean? You got dirty agents? He's like, let me go tell the US attorney's like, no, no, no, they're going to get this whole thing quash. I mean, they've got me knocked out of jail. They've had me released a couple of times now. I'm good. They have my buddy, like, oh, I'm good. They're like, you're fucking crazy. Well, weeks and weeks and weeks and months go by. Fuck. And he starts to realize, oh, fuck, I'm done. Yeah. So he says, so finally he comes to the conclusion, okay, I got a real problem here. Nobody is answering his phone anymore, by the way. They, they stop answering his phone. So when everybody stops answering your phone, he gets a little desperate. Yeah. So he gets a little flipped out. And he's like, fuck, he realizes he's done. Right. People, other guys are getting busted. Guys are coming in the prison in there. So he says, okay, fuck it. And he contacts his attorney. He says, okay, I'll cooperate. Yeah. I'll, I can cooperate against some dirty FBI agents. Well, they come in and they say, um, no, we're not, we're not, we're not in, she could plead to a life sentence. And that's it. He said, and then we'll, we'll talk about it. He's like, oh, you're, you're crazy. What happens is it filters down through all the US attorneys and everything to Barreiro and Farshan and Farshan finds out Barreiro find out that he's talking about cooperating against dirty law enforcement. So Farshan calls everybody together. He calls, you know, the guys that I'm trying not to use too many of you, it calls everybody. Everybody. Me, Joe, me calls this guy. He calls that guy. So whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, he calls everybody together and they all meet Harrison. They all meet everybody involved. Mason, even Mason, who killed, Ellen Burger, killed, Ellen Burger, Harrison, killed, Estes, Mason, killed, Ellen, Burger calls everybody together. The whole crew, family powwow. Right. All right. This is John Alonso talking about how, well, wait, you know what, it's it better? It's better like this because because this is the one, okay, he meets it as girlfriend's house, right? His girlfriend's name is Odalis Melendez. So everybody meets there. She's in her bedroom while these guys are all meeting, there's several meetings, but there's one meeting particular she talks about where she talks about how everybody got together. She also, she knows everybody except for this one guy named John something, another friend of Rocini's in LA. She says he's from, he's from Beverly Hills. Well, Pete says that's got to be Arya. So the only guy he knew that was a friend that lived in that area, that so he's like, he probably came in and just said his name is John. He's, but he's assuming that's Arya. So, LA near Beverly Hills. All right. So, and this is Alonso. So she's got, she names all these guys and she can hear them discussing Rocini. She hears them talking about Rocini. So they're talking about, like, well, how do you think Rocini killed these guys? Keep in mind the two guys. Actually, that's actually killed them in the room. So she's not quite hearing. She's hearing bits and pieces. Well, when they leave there, by the way, one of the people that shows up, I told you this is far shown. Far shown shows up. He has this little meeting. And in the meeting, this is exhibit 50. By the end of that meeting, everybody has agreed that that Rocini committed the murders. He killed both guys. So far shown goes in and says, there are homicide detectives investigating. They're wanting to talk to people. They're going to be talking to you guys. They're going to find you. They're going to talk to you. When they do, you just need to tell them Rocini. You don't tell them that you've necessarily saw it, but Rocini or you heard or whatever. We need to point to Rocini. He's right now trying to get us fucked up. We get fucked up by guarantee you, you guys are all getting life sentences. Yeah. Keep in mind, they still think he's an FBI agent. So we're telling you right now, Rocini shot him. That's what happened. He shot him. He helped dispose of the body. He shot him. Dispose the body. That's what you're going to go with. They said, okay, cool. Everybody says, okay. So immediately when these guys get interviewed, they immediately all start saying that, keep my feet didn't have a gun. He said, I'm not happy. He goes, he's I had a gun one time. He's like, he was like, you know, he's like, he's not a gun guy. He is at that level dealing with those guys. You don't really bring guns. When you show it with 50 kilos of ice or something, you don't bring a gun because you just in that much more trouble. You're probably already dead. It's in usually dealing with people that you need to bring gun. Right. So anyway, this guy talks about how he heard, he heard rumors that Pete killed him, that Pete, the guy owed him money. So Pete killed him. What kind of gun did Pete had to Pete have a gun? Yeah, yeah, Pete had a gun. Pete had a nine millimeter blah, blah, blah, blah. Okay. So he talks about that. This is this is this is one guy. This is a Alonzo says that. Let's see, this is this is so then eventually, and I'm going to fast forward this because, oh yeah. So this guy, Odessa Melinda, she says again that Harrison said that he had he had dealt with a cleanup of the body. She admits that he cleaned up and that, but he says, recini killed him. Like, why? And at what point did they go to law enforcement and say that he killed these people? They didn't go. They're, they know the law enforcement showing up at some point. Thomas, how much time them? Homicide detectives are leaving cards on your, then you come home one day, they're sitting outside your house. They start getting picked up. They get mainly about STs. Right about STs, but the Ellen burgers, you know, no one, no one knew how an Alon burger. Well, they kind of know, but they don't know. No, but rumors. They found the body of STs. So that's, so this guy here says, he says that Ellen burger, they called Ellen burger beetle, by the way. So he says, you know, beetle, and beetles room. He says that he after that after, you know, Pete killed him, he saw the blood stains. There was no blood stains. He was had his neck broken. Right. So there was a huge pool of blood from the gunshot wound that didn't actually happen. So, okay, so all these guys start losing, start failing polygraphs, by the way. Yeah, so stories fall in a part. Right. Harrison, Harrison, who shot STs, says that, that, you know, that Pete did it. Pete did it, gunshot wound, you know, in the head, this is a footnote. Is that 70, 87 and 70 talk about it? So I mean, see, the thing is, is that I like I could go fucking on and on and on. Anyway, so eventually what happens is, Nathan, did I mention to, so we're not talking to you, Nathan gives several stories. Yeah. And this is where potentially Aria shows up, because what happens is, Nathan says that Aria gave him $30,000 and Nathan like leaves town. Hmm. He gets caught in Florida somewhere. That was getting caught in Florida. So, so, so place it go. So I left Florida. So, so he, he, he says that Aria gave him $30,000. This is like the day after he killed, Elmer. So he gets 30 grand. Well, one of the things he also, he also does is when he takes off, he starts telling, he meets a bunch of girls, several girls. There's three of them. I only printed out two of these. He tells the girls, they're like, oh, so what do you do for a living? He tells them, I'm a hit man. I kill people. Well, you kill people? Keep on these. It's like 2022 years old. He's just this fucking idiot. So he's bragging about being a hit man. These are, this is these girls saying that someone gave him 30 that Nathan told her he killed someone for $30,000. This one here, she doesn't say, I don't think she says how much that he got. But did say when she said, what are you doing for a living? He joked about being a hit man. How are you making money? He said, I'm killing people. So, fucking douchebag. So yeah, she says here too, he was, he was paid to commit a murder. So he's telling people he's killing people. Now, he later says, he also told, but Pete said, what he, the only thing he ever told me, Pete says is that they got into an argument and he choked him out and he ended up breaking his neck. Pete had no clues, paid to do it. Yeah, Pete's piece like, I didn't find out later till stuff starts coming out, that people are saying he's telling him he killed the guy. He's, I didn't know that Aria gave him 30,000. I didn't know he told these girls that he got paid 30,000 to kill him. He was, I didn't know any of that. He's, I found that out later just as people are filing motions and things. Here's the thing also keep my pizza in prison now thinking I'm really in a bad spot. Yeah. Government doesn't want to work with me. Everybody's, nobody's bailing them out. Nobody's answering my phone calls. Guys that I know are getting arrested and showing up here in the jail with me. They're on the conspiracies with me. We're all staring at each other who's going to cooperate. Everybody's saying the same thing. Oh, fuck that. I'm staying strong, bro. Fuck them. Everybody's saying that you see your lawyer a lot. Yeah. You know, for guys, you keep going and leaving for your, to see your lawyer. So, uh, so eventually what, what ends up happening is this ultimately, Nathan ends up filing some paperwork and in the paperwork, Pete, Pete gets the paperwork. If to understand when you, you know, the cases are long, so you learn things slowly, people aren't talking to each other. But as you can, if I can read your paperwork, it helps give insight into what happened in my case. So, Nathan eventually files paperwork where he explains, he explains about getting paid $30,000 from Aria. He says for a drug transaction. Pete says that's not possible because we were the ones who were supplying all the drugs. I don't know if he was selling drugs, but whatever. The other thing is, he says that he was called to a meeting at Wayne Harris's girlfriend's house named Odalis Melendez and that there was a whole bunch of people there and that any, any names on all of you, John Alonso, this guy, Dean Zurich or something, George Merzick, Mark Farshion was there, Wayne Harris and a bunch of guys were there and that he says specifically, Farshion said that Rucini was cooperating. He was an ungrateful bastard, I think, somewhere they say this and that they, they need to put the murders off on him. And Nathan came there with, like his two, with three of his cousins. He shows up with his three cousins. So they're all there while this discussion's going on and Mark Farshion tells them that they have to put everything off on Rucini, Rucini killed them, Rucini shot them in the head, blah, blah, blah, blah, tells them all the same thing that Melendez says, same thing other guys say there was multiple meetings and Nathan gets so upset about it. He doesn't like the idea of frame. Remember, he didn't like the cooperation thing either. He didn't like, Ellen Burger was cooperating. He doesn't like the fact that now these guys are saying we're going to put it off on Rucini when he knows Rucini didn't do it. But they're saying, look, you too, though, that gets you off. It's guys too honest. He's the opposite of a shrinker. He's the kind of guy that ends up doing 25 years for being so honest. So John Ellen Burger, FBI, first young grand jury, blah. So in this is when he talked in his 2055, he talks about how he was brought in and told this and he didn't like the idea of it at all. And so he takes his $30,000 and he takes off when he takes off, that's, you know, he takes off. He eventually gets caught. Well, so this is him saying, so we've got multiple people. There's also several other people say these meetings occurred that all these guys got together and they all decided Rucini did it. He shot him. So that goes on and on. This is a copy of history cousins who were there. Scott Scott and Armada. And they all give affidavit, which says the same thing that they were at the meeting. Who's three cousins? Nathan's three cousins. Okay. And they say they were at the meeting with all of this group of guys and they were discussing their legal strategies and what was happening and that they and about some guy who basically killed somebody and that he had shot them all. So, you know, they don't really quite know what's going on. Just we were there. This is what happened. The FBI agent was there. By the way, this is when Robert Mueller comes into picture. Okay. So Mueller, the, there was something called, there was a supreme chirpong. There was this guy that ends up. There's a, there's a whole thing about dirty agents in this office. So Mueller comes in to kind of clean up the office. They, the department of justice says, look, Mueller, we're going to send you over there to clean it up. So Mueller comes in and he fires a bunch of people. I mean, well, there's, yeah, there's, there's multiple cases like this going on where there's dirty agents. Mueller, we're going to send you over there to clean it up. So Mueller comes in and fires a bunch of people. I mean, well, there's, yeah, there's, there's multiple cases like this going on where there's dirty agents throughout the whole United States. But even in this area in his jurisdiction, but there's in there in New York, there in Whitey Bulger is happening at this time. Okay. Whitey Bulger is thriving in FBI agent. I think, uh, agent Connolly or something like that. Uh, so, you know, there's all, this is, this is happening in multiple jurisdictions in the Department of Justice. And this is during Mueller's reign. The whole Whitey Bulger thing is during his, that's also during that was all investigated by, by Mueller. Uh, Mueller was the, uh, one of the assistant US attorneys or one of the, he was, he was in charge of the task force, one of the task force that was investigating, um, bulger. So he was involved in that, but, you know, he's way up here. It just happened to be one of the many guys in the chain. I don't think he necessarily had anything. Okay. Super to do with it. There were allegations, but, you know, they're, who knows, right? Listen, I, I can only solve one thing at a time. So what, what ends up happening is deep dis elephant once, one spoon at a time, one spoon full of time. So this guy, okay. So this is a document where Mueller comes in and they start asking for evidence. So now they've arrested, they've arrested Harrison. Um, uh, they've arrested, um, Wayne Harrison, the guy who killed Estes and they've arrested, uh, Frank Nason. So Nason's been arrested. Harrison's been arrested. They're kind of joining forces and they're saying, look, they're going with what's called a, uh, it's called a, um, public authority defense. Wherein they say, we thought we had authority to do what we were doing. And initially, give mine at this point, they failed their polygraph exams. Yeah. Everybody's failed. Some of these guys failed like three of them. Okay. If you go on the website, you'll see that got one after another. The story keeps changing. Change. What? So they're like, no, uh, so and so Pete killed them. Okay. Then it's okay. No, Pete didn't kill him. Harrison killed him. I saw the blood. No, I didn't see the blood. No, he killed them. No, this not just they keep changing change. Every time they fail, eventually they come clean and basically as clean as they can. Yeah. Harrison killed them. And, but it was Rousini who ordered it. Can't say the FBI. We can't say the FBI ordered it because that would be a major fucking problem. I've already been told. So it's somebody you can, you know, why would you say anybody ordered it? Well, you have to say somebody because if if I'm Harrison and I say, I kill them, why'd you kill him? Right. I can't really tell me to tell me to kill him. Yeah. It's better for me to say that Danny told me to do it because then I get to cooperate against Danny. So you don't really want me because I wouldn't have killed them on my own. Danny did it. You got a card to play. Right. So that's what happens is they all start pointing at Rousini. So this is this is the document where they start they go over farci own's role. They go over a barreros role. They go they start explaining. So if you read this, you start to realize very, very quickly that they're focusing in on law and dirty law enforcement. And this is what this is what within weeks. And it's this exact time is when Mueller shows up. There's there's a huge article. There's a new sheriff in town. Mueller's a new breed. And yeah, he can mind these young. He's younger than he's not young, young, but he's probably in his late 30s, early 40s probably. So he's coming in. He's going to clean up the office. None of them know more of this fucking blame shifting and dirty agents. And he comes in and he reads this and it's another case about dirty agents on a task force that we're over fuck. So he comes in. He looks at it. And then he is putting together a case. So he goes to recini, keep in mind at this point, they've now focused in on recini. We've got all these people saying recini did it. They're all willing to testify. We got like eight guys ready to say recini did it in some form or fashion. We're talking about this guy saw blood. This guy did this. This guy did that. This guy's got a gun. Everybody's saying he did it. Pete knows you screwed. They so bad it becomes a capital case. They actually have a small like a little trial kind of thing. They go to Washington. Pete's attorney's go to Washington. They have a little trial to decide in front of, I think, Janet Reno to try and fight or try and figure out can we kill Pete if we find him guilty? Can we execute him? Right. And they say, so they, they Pete's lawyers lose that and they say, yeah, yeah, if you can prove all this and he gets found guilty, he's going to be executed. So now you're on death row. You're one of the first people on death row. The other people that were on death row at that time, other than recini, it's recini. It's the unibomber and it's Timothy McVeigh, the Oklahoma City bomber, Ted Kuzinski. Yep. Timothy McVeigh Pete recini. I can do it. Didn't even deal with that. That's fun. Wow. So what, uh, what ends up happening is, and keep my, he was all the evidence they explain is that Pete killed him. He shot him with a gun. No, you shouldn't even have a gun. But he different if you can't win and said, I, he was a conspiracy. You're saying you're telling these people I shot him. Yeah. And he loses. He's going to get executed. So, okay. So he comes back, uh, number of circumstances. Okay. So what happens is, molar at this point, Pete, Pete's guilty. They go to Pete and they say, listen, he's trying to get him to plead like to a life sentence, you know, first. and then they come back and finally they go back and forth. The lawyers go back and forth from molar back and forth. And what happens is, molar says, look, here's what we'll do. Now Pete knows all these motherfuckers are test ready to testify against me. I didn't do this. Yeah. So I'm pissed. So that whole code thing, I'm ready to tell everybody throat. Yeah. Right. So molar says, listen, here's what I want to do. Molar knows this dirty FBI agents involved, but he comes in and says, look, here's what we'll do. We have Pete, we have Ruseini, plead guilty to 40 years. And I'll allow him to cooperate against these other guys and we'll get his sentence cut significantly. Molar says, molar says that to Pete's attorney. It takes a lot of convincing, but Pete's like, I don't have a, I don't have a prayer. My parents come in. They're like, look, what are you going to do? The guy, you know, what you come on, these guys are guilty or not, you're going to be found guilty. Yeah. No doubt in anybody's own view. Yeah. So Pete says, OK, goes to trial, he pleads guilty to two counts of conspiracy to commit murder and the furtherance of a drug conspiracy. So this is like a reco case. Well, he wanted it to be Rico. OK. But molar was insisting he had to plead guilty to the murders. You have to say you murdered. Specific murder. I can't be conspiracy has to be straight up murdered. No, he's no conspiracy. No, seriously, commit murder. Oh, OK, you have to say you were, it was conspiracy. You conspired to commit murder. OK, got it. He says, so finally he says, OK, he wants to say Rico, but that no molar saying it has to be for the specific for murder. Keep in mind, he knows if you say it's murder, now it's on your record. It's going to be hard for you to get that off. Yeah. So he goes in and plus his lawyers are saying, definitely, you want to do two counts because the maximum they can give you 20 years of peace. Right. So if they stack them, it's exactly 40 years. You don't want to say Rico because it could be even higher than that. You know, so they're like, fuck. So he goes in and Pete says, OK, yeah, did you? Yes, I was paying off an informant. Yes, I was paying off this guy was doing this. Did you? Yes, yes. And what are you charged with this and what do you plead guilty to conspiracy to commit murder? OK, boom, bam, 40 years. He goes 11 worth. Goes 11 worth a few months later. Molar shows up with this guy burrows, Bruce Burrows, right? So he shows up with it, which is the FBI. He's over like the FBI. It's like the top one of the top dogs of the FBI. He's over the whole task force. These guys are all working for him. He knows them. They come in. They meet with recini. Molar says, OK, these two guys are going to trial. I need you to tell you to testify. And he goes, OK, OK, yeah, I'll testify. I'll testify. He goes, OK, well, let's talk about this. So he said, Annie, he says, OK, so when did you, uh, did you shoot? She said, I didn't shoot him. I didn't shoot him. She didn't shoot him. He's like, OK, but you told him to shoot him. That right? I didn't tell him to shoot him. We mean, he goes, you just pled guilty to conspiracy to commit. He's like, I'm pled guilty because you had like six or eight guys that were going to say I pled guilty. Yeah, right. It's like, you don't think I'm going to testify to that. He's like, well, what happened? So he explains what happened. Well, there was this dirty FBI agent. Molar's been hearing this. Yeah. You've seen how many people are saying it. Right. There's dirty FBI agent. There's this guy Ferrara, you know, first, you know, now Pete now knows. The guy is not. He's at this point Pete knows, OK, well, first, he own is not an FBI agent. He's actually an informant, professional informant. So he says, OK, I'm going to take this out. That's hurting me. So he says, OK, no problem. So he goes, OK, he talks to him and he says, OK, so what happened? He said, I was paying him this, paying him that. He's like, what? They're both taking notes. Molars taking notes, burrows is taking notes. OK, so what happened? OK, this, this. He's like, well, when did you do this? When did you do this? So everything he's telling him Pete's unraveling his entire case as Pete thinks he's helping to cooperate and tell Mueller what really happened. He's actually destroying Mueller's case. Yeah. Because Mueller had a very simple case. Right now, it's all fucked up. These guys were informants. Pete didn't like that. He was afraid they were going to form on him. He told these guys to kill them. They both killed them. They got rid of the bodies. It's a pretty simple case. Yeah. Nothing to do with FBI agents. Right. Mueller didn't want it to have anything to do with FBI agents. This guy's on the short list to become attorney general. Yeah. OK. And keep so he's so he doesn't need this. He doesn't need this shit storm that this would stir up. This is another whitey bulger. This is another. Um, um, shit, why don't forget the other guy's name. Anyway, there's like a supreme chip wrong. This is another. This is another preacher prong. Right. This is another huge dirty agents. The whole thing blows up and his name is attached to it. He don't want that. I'm here to clean this place up. Yeah. So he says, OK. So they he goes through the whole thing. He starts explaining the whole thing. This meeting takes place over three days. Mueller actually leaves goes back comes back for two more days with burrows. They take notes. Everything. OK. He's telling about dirty FBI agents. Tell him about the murder. Tell him about how it was ordered. Telling them that Mark Farshion is the one who said to do it. Not to do it in San Francisco. Do it here. Don't let him find the body. Got the $50,000. Tell them everything. So devastated Mueller's case. He then says to Mueller or Mueller then at the end of it. Mueller says according to Pete, he shows him Mueller at one. Pete gives him. He's like, yeah, but these guys haven't talked to you in this long. Whatever. What do you mean? They say that haven't talked to pulls out the fucking records and says, really? Because I talked to him here. I talked to him. Pete has all the fucking phone record more phone records of all these phone calls between these guys. Burrows, pager, Farshion's pager. This day this day. Right. Mueller's pager really murders right after the murders way past the murders where these guys say they haven't talked to him forever. So goes through the whole thing and then. Really unraveled everything. I unravels everything at some point. Mueller asked shows him a picture of Arya and asked him about Arya. And he's like, that's Arya. And he's like, yeah. So he realizes at that point that because now by now he's heard a lot of this. He's now realizing he thinks that Mueller thinks that Arya killed. L.M. had L.M. burger killed. And Pete thinks is now now thinks he killed. He had him killed because he finds out that L.M. burgers now living with. All right. With our of our Arya is now living with L.M. burgers X girlfriend, Jenny. So that's an issue. So he's now so Mueller essentially. Mueller now knows that the FBI informant. Probably burrow also. Asked Harrison to kill. To kill Estes and that Arya. May very well have killed. Now keep in mind I say that because it's less it's less it's kind of convoluted because you've got nascent saying multiple things. And Pete saying I never believed that Arya would have done that. But you got the documents $30,000. I don't know. It doesn't look good. You know, I I'm for hard time saying, you know, you, you killed something. You know, I don't know. I know that the documents doesn't look good. So, you know, but Mueller Pete said he definitely Mueller was like, look, we've had our suspicions for a while. We show them the phone records, the phone calls from Arya. All these, why is Arya involved in this whole thing? Right. So that's what happens. So Mueller says, look, I'm bringing you back. I'm going to have you testify in front of the grand jury. We're going to indict these these dirty FBI agents. Going to get your sentence reduced. And he signs an agreement with Pete. Well, he he gives Pete an agreement and iron clad agreement that says he will reduce his sentence. Which never happens. Never happens to know specific amount just says he's going to reduce it. Just says you're going to, you know, you can't tell what the judge is going to like, I can't tell you the judge is I can. I could tell you I'm going to put in the motion. I'm going to put in front of the judge, but I can still judge his decision to do six months. He could do six years. Right. We don't know. So he's like, I will put it in for sure. They don't do that because what if you get in front of what if you get in front of a jury? The first thing I'm going to say, will you promise anything? Now he's got to say, yeah, it's promised. I was promised he would reduce. We haven't put in a motion to have my sentence reduced. Right. Does that don't look good? Yeah. Well, you're just saying it just yet to reduce. Right. Typically what they say is we will consider it substantial assistance. And they say, well, I'm hoping this, but they they said that they weren't promising me anything. No, no, he's got a promise. Yeah. So OK. So with that said, Mueller goes back with all the notes and they prepare a document called an FBI 302. OK, then this becomes important. You've read the book, you know why because basically they take all these notes and they created a 302, which is the official document, the official record for the FBI, which is supposed to be a clarification and condensed version of an interview. What's important? I just told you about dirty, deaf FBI agents. Told you about payoffs told you I did not order the murder of anybody or conspired to murder anybody. Yeah. They craft the 302. Then say a fucking thing about payoffs. Doesn't say anything about dirty to FBI agents. Does anything about him denying anything? So with you and you read the 302, it basically talks about drug transactions and talks about a murder and it makes it sound almost like Pete might have been involved. Doesn't say he's like he ordered it, but it's close. It makes it sound like he's part of it. So what happens is Mueller prepares a document, goes into C. Nason and Harrison and he convinces them and you know, I'm not going to go to the whole thing, but it's a whole thing where he comes, he basically goes in and says, look, I got a 302 here and gives him the 302 and tells them all he's going to fucking testify against you. He's going to say that he did order the murders. These guys know he didn't order the murders. Yeah. So now he's flipping it on you. You go to there and start talking about dirty FBI agents ordering murders. Rucin is going to say he ordered the murder. How is that going to look like you're lying? Yeah. And that's, you know, so that's what happens. So these guys end up taking a plea. They take a plea for 25 years of peace. Knowing that that's that because they're terrified that Rucin is because who that's Harrison and all those Harrison and Harrison and Nason take a plea for 25 years for each murder, they both get 25 years because Mueller's telling them that Rucin is going to testify against you and he is going to say, which is a straight up lie straight up lie. And some mothers just playing them. Yeah. You're not a lie. And you're and he's prepared a document that basically support right. It's exactly almost the opposite of what Pete said. Yeah. So Pete, when these guys plead guilty to what? Oh, to the murder. They please go to the committee. Keep in mind too, when Nason comes in, Nason says in his thing that that Mueller that he, he was told he had to plead guilty to the murder. And he says, of course, that oh, and both of them say they put, they plead guilty and they plead guilty that member of a conspiracy and that they'd been ordered to commit the murder by Rucin. So now you've pled guilty. So how does that look make Rucinny look? We're seeing now it. Now these guys are now saying you did order the murder. Right. He's never said he ordered the murders. Yeah. Mollard just planted those seeds. Yeah. Now it points back at you. Now you're done. What are you going to do? Oh, I didn't really because these guys just pled guilty saying that you did order them and they played guilty doing that 25 years apiece. They did that because you said that you were going to cooperate and you were going to say it truth is none of it. It's a whole circle jerk. And they walk into the whole thing. And so they're done. This all comes out later when they just like played a puppet show. Yeah. Right. Exactly. Damn. That's nasty. So so that is a nascent later files. You know, he files his 2055 where he said he specifically says that, you know, well, this is his plea where he says he choked him to death. Who remember so that this is when Mollard realizes to Rucinny is the only one who's saying choked to death, choked to death. Yeah. He's saying everybody else is shot, shot, shot, shot. When he finally gets him to plead guilty and he talks to nays and nays and says, I choked him to death. Why is he decided to say that all the sudden? Well, because he's pleading guilty anyway. He's like, I didn't shoot. Well, how did you kill him? Why am I killed him? How'd you kill him? I choked him to death. Oh, shit. Just line up with fucking what we're saying. So now Mollard really knows we're seeing everything. This guy said that he was the truth. These FBI agents are dirty. Right. Everything is in order to murder. Right. So, but they they plead guilty. They get their 25 years based on Mollard's lie. Based on that. Yeah. So I got the document here where he says where we're senior or sorry, where nays and actually says at the direction of Rucinny, you know, that he killed him. Yeah. Rucinny's direction. So this is. So he prepares a document where Mollard ends up preparing a document for these other guys to try and he's remember he's trying to convince them while he's trying to convince them, he prepares a document that he provides them where he specifically says that a number of circumstances corroborate what Rucinny told me. There's a lot of things that are exactly what he said is true. So he's admitting in paperwork says Robert Mueller right on it. Robert S. Mueller the third. So he's got that. Okay. Where did you get those documents from? Uh, Pete has all these. He just had them all. And you copied all of them? Yeah. Okay. Yeah. I had a guy in unicorn. Um, it would be expensive to copy these since you don't make any money in prison. So what you do is you get somebody in unicorn, somebody who works in the factory and you give him commissary and then he sneaks the documents in his shirt every day. He'll bring in like 50 at a time. Keep my wife's 750 fucking doctor. Yeah. So he goes in with two hundred documents strapped to him like he's a fucking drug girl. He goes in makes the copies and puts them in the back. Then he brings them back. And then you give him like a, like a bag of three dollar bag of coffee. Some ramen it is. Yeah. So for like, so that's how you got for like a hundred dollar worth of that. That's amazing. I end up getting for like 10 bucks. That's amazing. It takes some, it takes some time. Yeah. You have to be creative. Nobody's helping you. Yeah. No help. You're a magician man. Yeah. The story in itself really. Yeah. These guys are, you know, this is another thing. The guy who did it. It's the guy, another guy wrote a fucking story. No. He was the clerk in unicorn. It's fucking great story. He's a fucking young kid. He was like a drug courier and money is fucking move. It's a, it's a great story. You could probably interview him or see, or land. Does he really? Yeah. Yeah. Let's get him in here. Smart, good looking kid, smart, young. He was young as hell when he was doing it. I mean, he moved to a, he's an American. He, well, he's Mexican, but he looks like an Anglo. But does he have a degree in fine arts? There's no fine arts. Doesn't mean that he's, yeah. He actually moved to a Capoco. I mean, what am I, was you moved to a Capoco and deal drugs? I'm going to move to a Capoco and arrange fucking shipment to drugs and all, I mean, this balls. Yeah. Yeah. Ball. I mean, that she takes a lot. Well, thanks for it. Thanks to him. We have all these, all this fucking evidence. Yes. Appreciate it, buddy. Thank you. Okay. So, okay. So, Nathan wants a, a amendment motion to vacate judgment. So he's trying to, you know, here's where Nathan says, like when I said how he kind of bamboozled them into pleading guilty, here's where he says some of him claims the government, that was smaller because the smaller was the government at that time. He was the US. The government tricked Nathan into pleading guilty to the intentionally killing, killing of John Ellenberg as a result. Nathan played guilty of what it goes on here to say where he says could a tenant, a recini would testify. He talks about how he says he was going to testify. Turns out he, Mason then goes there and says turns out that was exactly not what he was going to say that recini was not going to testify that he had ordered them or. Wow. Okay. So this is a, oh, yeah. Yeah. San Francisco does and about faces is an article about San Francisco office does about face under tough US attorney. That's Mueller. What is it about face? It means turnaround. They did a turn right. He, he turned them around because they were members all corrupted fucked up. Yeah. Yeah. So Mueller turned them around. Okay. And then guess what we office of clean the office up. He got these guys to plead guilty, got that fucking guy, a recini he's never kicked out. These two guys got 24, 25 years. He completely suppressed anything about dirty FBI agents. Although there wasn't an investigation in the state into the agents. And guess what? Both of all, uh, um, Barrero and Blum, the guys who were giving probably blah, like I said, don't know for sure, but for sure. Barrero, the guys that are giving all the, all the information out, they both took early stress retirement. So they both retired. The retire, the career and plum, both, yeah, plum, both of them retire. And the reason they take stress disability retirement is that as an agent, if you retire, you can be called to testify and you can't say, I'm not going to testify. You have to testify. As if you take a stress disability retirement, you then can plead the fifth and say, I'm, I'm not going to retire. You're going to show. So if you do get me into a jam, I'm sort of not retire. I'm not going to answer. You can then say, I'm not going to answer. As you go, stress disability retirement, I can't, I'm under stress. I'm fucked up because that's the weakest link right there. Right. Those guys can plead the fifth and they're, yeah, you can't talk. Don't you can't force me to talk about this. Yeah. So, okay. Mueller doesn't he get smaller smart. Mueller doesn't end up getting, he doesn't become, uh, um, he doesn't become the, um, attorney general. Like he was hoping, right, Bush wins the election. Mueller, uh, Ashcroft gets named attorney general. He gets like the supporting role to attorney general and then very within a few months or something like that. He, Mueller gets appointed to or nominated to be the FBI director. And I only bring this up because I, I believe that Mueller shifted the blame from the FBI to recini, right? I believe he shifted that blame. I believe he covered up. I think he didn't start the conspiracy, right? Mueller didn't start the conspiracy. The FBI, um, Bora, blum, Bora and far shown started the conspiracy. They got the guy murdered. They ended up, um, they ended up starting up getting everybody together to frame recini. They did that. But Mueller ran with the ball. Yeah. It didn't turn around and do what he said. He was going to he didn't indict these guys. He just kept it going because it was in his best. Why do you think he really did that? Do you think it was somebody above him that was pressuring him? Or do you think that was all? I think it was him. I think he's just personal career. Yeah. When to look good, right? Good. And so how bad is it going to look? How, look, I'm going about my job. The moment I start saying dirty FBI agents, it's a people lose their job left and right. These guys are retiring left and right. All these guys that were involved in and bulger's case and and so let me and all of these cases, it doesn't look like these guys are immediately. So it's going to be a domino effect. Right. Yeah. Okay. I'm not being involved in that. I'm about to be named attorney general. Turns out he wrapped up in it and have to say anything. I got a wrap it up. These guys got 25 years. They did commit the murder. They got 25 years. This guy, Rossini, they're going to reduce his sentence. Who knows by how, you know, so he's cut. I'm sure he justified it. Very justified it. Yeah. These are bad guys. Yeah. They're drug dealers. Fuck them. They're not a US attorney. Right. This is the top shelf guy. So here's what he does at his nomination, the nomination of Robert Mueller. I just love this quote. I just have to read this quote. Yeah. Read it. Read it for us. This is a quote. One of the senators says, do you believe there is a cultural, a culture problem within the bureau, the federal bureau. He says, I think it is, and that, so they're talking about all of these problems that bureau has. So Mueller's answer is, I think it is absolutely unacceptable to try to cover up and not disclose something that needs to be disclosed. And more importantly, or as it's unacceptable to try to shift blame to someone else. Wow. Which is exactly what he just did. You just fucking did. Right. And when he, when he puts his kind of like their his resume, like all the things I've done, his last case, this is when I was only homicide cases he's ever worked on. And a death penalty case, probably the only death penalty case he worked on. He uses Rossini's case, he says, I handled with others the prosecution of three individuals for the killing of two persons whom they believe were cooperating with the federal narcotics investigation. So he actually uses Pete's case as part of his resume, part of his resume. Where is this resume? It's one of the things you submit to the committee. I could listen to this, there's like 150 pages of his, okay, he was taught. You know, he was, he was nominated, unanimous. Everybody loves Mueller. Yeah. He's a little piece out of the hands. No, I'm sure it's not a big thing. He's pretty pissed off. He's upset. You know, and in general, honestly, the only thing that bothers me, because if you look at Mueller's resume, look, these guys all have problems. He's been involved in a couple of skirmishes before. There's some, some he's gotten mud on his face. There's a BCCI investigation. There was this big bank that went under. He never really did the investigation because he knew that the CIA was laundering money and that he knew some stuff has gone to see never really follows it through. That's a bad thing. There's a couple little things, but he, he's always willing to take a hit for the government. Yeah. Even mind, this guy, they love that. Yeah. That's what gets you because that's how you become FBI director. So one of the things he did, you know, first of all, and started young, this guy, that he did, he, he, he volunteered for, for Vietnam. Fucking thousands of kids every month are coming home in body bags. This guy graduates high school and volunteers and he knew. Push on the Marine Corps. Right. He was, he was a, what's the Marine? When I read on Wikipedia, it said that he was like an officer in the Marine Corps. He was in the Marines. Um, so look, I'm saying, I'm not volunteering. Yeah, right. Fuck. I'm the, he had one of his good friends. Fucking came home in a body bag. You know, look, look, I think he fucked up. I think he's ambitious. I think he justified it. I think he made some mistakes. I think everybody makes mistakes. I don't have a problem. Fucking up. I fuck up all the time. I deal with fuck ups all the time. I love guys that fuck up. I love complete idiots who fuck up. But what bothers me is when you can't fucking own up to it. The first thing you do when I get caught doing something, I do stupid shit all the time. Don't keep denying it. Just go fuck. All right. I fucked up. Here's what I did. Boom, boom, boom. Sorry. My bad. I apologize. I can make it right. I can fix it. Let's fix this. But don't keep denying. That's what irritates me. And that's what he does. He just keeps covering it up. Why wouldn't you cut this fucking guy loose? Right. You've got your fucking director of the FBI. You could stroke a pin and they cut him loose. Right. But wouldn't that just unravel a whole slew of other shit? Got him coming out and saying a bunch of shit. Maybe. But you have to see that. But look, let me keep going. If he let him out, like there's, I feel like Mueller has so much to lose. What? And keep in mind. That's a shit. Maybe, but you have to see that, but look, let me keep going. If he lets him out, like there's, I feel like Mueller has so much to lose. Well, and keep in mind too, with Pete being in prison, give him on. I can't, you can't necessarily talk to a reporter. Like I had carte blanche to do what I wanted in there because I wasn't doing it. I was, I was writing I stories and everybody thought it was cute and funny. Yeah. Look at little Cox running around. Yeah. Little Mackock. He's writing his little stories. They don't, you know, they're harmless. He's not bothering, but I wasn't out there trying to solve murders and stuff. Felt on my lap. Yeah. But it wasn't like I was causing any trouble. And I was keeping everybody entertained and they're all happy. You know, but if Pete said I want to talk to 2020 and 2020 showed up, they have to go through the, the public information officer. People get notified. So you can keep an eye on this guy while he's in prison. You can shut him down while he's in prison. You have to allow him to do anything while he's in prison. You're not just there's no internet. You're going everything's being filtered in and out in and out. You're not getting away with shit. So he's got him, he's got him in a box. You know, so it's a nice place to have somebody who's got some dirt on you. I'm going to promise it. Okay. This is one of the things I love. So after Mueller disappears right, they assign a new guy. They see him this guy, David Hall. So David Hall. So, receiving puts in a motion immediately saying, Hey, it's been fucking months and months and months. Mueller's a guy. Damn. He's just turned FBI. Nobody's talking to me. What's going on? He puts in a motion to compel them to reduce the sentence. Why I'm done. So he says, so they, they respond by saying, so Hall's response to receiving his, Hey, I have an agreement with these guys. Of course, there's nothing in the file. And what he's saying is I have a guaranteed agreement. So Hall looked at that and said, we don't give guaranteed agreements. Right. So he's lying. He even puts at no time was the defendant promised any deal or reduct, reduced sentence, by the government officials interviewing him. Oh, he's got to be so pissed off when he reads. But he's got proof he's has his copyright agreement. Pete fucking's like, what the fuck? Oh, that's all hell, no. So he doesn't, he doesn't even file it. Nothing. He mails it straight to the judge. But he mails it straight to the judge. The judge who just read that gets this from Mueller stating that, uh, uh, the government is just after you agreed to cooperate, you know, uh, the government in turn agrees to file a motion under rule 35 for a federal rule of, uh, criminal procedure setting forth the extent of significance of your cooperation, such a motion will be filed at the conclusion of your cooperation. He's done. He's done. Um, you understand that the government's motion will set forth extended. So it goes on. It's a guarantee. He doesn't say something to, you know, well, consider, no, no. So he sends this to the judge and the judge is like, oh, hell, no, bring him back. So he had bring him back. Pete goes in front of the judge. Everybody goes in front of the, the Mr. Hall gets up. So it says, uh, it gets in front of the judge and they say, and the judge says, um, yeah, I said I wouldn't read all this stuff. So she says, are you denying? Cause it's exhibit B. That's what this movie, yeah. She says, are you denying that this, that there's, uh, that there's an agreement. He says, uh, no, you're not, you know, not at this time. I'm not, I'm not denying it now, you know. Yeah. But then he says, but he says he doesn't deserve anything because he played guilty to conspiring to commit murder. But then when he went in front of Mueller, he denied it. So he's saying he denied it to Mueller. So we don't have to agree because he denied it. Blood guilty to doing it. And now he's, he's so he's lying. One of those two things he's lying. So he's admitting that Rossini told Mueller, he didn't commit the murders. Okay. So, uh, this is a, uh, now they immediately turn around and they start saying, Rossini starts requesting documents like I want all the fucking notes. I want the 302. I want everything. So they come back and Wilson Leon, which is another one. Keep my, these guys got five attorneys working on his shit. Yeah. He's got like him. Yeah. Like maybe his parents like leverage their house and get him one attorney. So how are you, how are you doing that? How are you fighting that? Okay. So I'm at this. I'm a day of helping him at all or no. No. I'm at it. Is it around then? Okay. This is this way in 2000 and like this is 2010. Okay. So he ends up, they come back and they say, they come back and they say, yeah, we don't have any file. We don't have any records. We don't have any notes. All the notes were purged. And this is, that's what it says here. It says, uh, uh, basically this guy is, it's a declaration saying that, uh, had no other documents or records related to the case that they have everything. That's it. This is, this is a declaration. This is, this is them telling the government of the court, hey, nothing else to give them. Fuck them. Sit. Okay. Fine. So then there's a, then they go. So then Bruce Burroughs, remember Burroughs went and took the note. The guy who actually was taking the notes, right. Burroughs comes and so they investigate have Burroughs come back. So he comes back. And this is just to clarify these, these notes are, are when burrows and Mueller went to the penitentiary for three days to meet with Rucini. Yes. Right. Right. Now, Mueller's notes, we never find they're gone. Mueller's pretty sharp. Sure. I mean, we don't think around evidence that can be. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, so this, so keep in mind, so, um, they talk to Burroughs. This is, this is his transcript, right? So Burroughs, uh, Bruce Burroughs gets on a thing. They say, uh, records be clear. This is a reference to the three, uh, the three meetings with Mr. Mueller, blah, blah, blah. Uh, he would, uh, then they asked, basically, was he in the, did, did corruption at all come up with Rucini? He says no. Did he ever mention anything about corruption? Yeah. I'm going to say it about corruption. No corruption? No corruption. Did he ever, did he ever display, uh, this claim any, uh, expressly, disclaim any involvement in Ellen Berger's murder? No. Did he ever expressly, uh, disclaim involvement in, um, you know, in Estee's murder? No. Okay. So did he ever in any way, disclaim, there was a concocted conspiracy to frame him? No. Never who's saying this. This is Burroughs is saying he took all these notes and you're saying, he never mentioned to conspiracy. No. Pete's like the fuck. Yeah. What the fuck? Um, were you able to confirm allegations of corruption? No. You know why? Because they never looked into it. Yeah. So if I say this guy's corrupt and I got five people that will say they were there when he brought them, the money, you got to go talk to them. You can check the records from the hotel. You can check everything. If you're Mueller, you don't follow that up. Right. You don't want to. And there's paper trail. I got my murderers. I, I, everything, I'm not following. Case closed. Following leads that point to the FBI come in being involved. I can't follow that. Oh, no. We don't even look into that. Right. Um, so they start talking about the, so this is Pete's lawyer starts talking about the 302 that was created and how it's not quite accurate. And is it exact? And well, how did you create it? Because, you know, I'm not sure my client says it's not accurate. And he says, yeah, did you take notes? He goes, yeah, I took notes. I said, oh, do you have, you know where the notes are? Did Mueller take notes? I don't know if Mueller took notes. Okay. So you did take, yeah, yeah, I believe, believe I did. Okay. Do you have the notes? I do not. Uh, where are they now? They should be in the file, which file? The FBI file. Your Honor, if there are notes, so this guy, Vermolin, which is Pete, uh, recini's lawyer says, whoa, your Honor, if there's notes in the file, we need to see those notes. Yeah. We've asked for the notes. Oh, okay. So guess what? They go. And they look in the FBI file. And they're the fucking. They find the notes. Jesus. That they've already heard or were not there. Yeah. Not there. Been purged. There's no records. There's no, bam, here's your fucking notes. This is, this is, sorry, this is funny. This is the US attorney saying this is after they find the notes. Pete said when he brought the notes in and laid them down and they started going over the notes. And I was like, well, what do you say? He goes, Pete goes, you know what's funny about that? I write this in the book where he says, he says, you know, the funny thing is he goes, he'd done everything he was supposed to do. Like he filed the right motions. He'd set all the right things. He'd done all the right things. He was, but when he saw the notes, it was the first time I could tell he believed me. Yeah. He's used a good attorney. He was, but he was going to the motion. This when he looked at the notes, he was like, fuck. Yeah. He couldn't believe it. Yeah. Right. Because you know, you assume that the guys lying to you. Right. So anyway, this is one of the US attorneys telling the judge, uh, our files, our internal files were purged years ago. There's nothing else. So that's why they can't find the, so the three or two is not synonymous with the notes. It's a, it's vastly different. Right. And he says, uh, so they left out all the corruption and they leave out every thing. So what ends up happening is she says, okay, we're going to let you talk to Mueller. We're going to bring Mueller back. So he was okay. Sorry, they were going to let you talk to Mueller. They said it to receive. No, no, yeah, they say it to his lawyer and receive. They say we're going to let you, we're going to let you basically interview Mueller as a witness. Wow. So you can go over this. Yeah. But we're limiting it to two hours. Okay. Remember the hotel? This is called the Monterey or Monterey Montreal hotel right here. So it talks about the Montreal hotel. That's where they deliver the first 50,000, which is it talks about how Frank, uh, some, some of it was a, they stayed in Rocini's room. So he deposited 50,000, he gave 50,000 dollars down and that he still owed another another 50,000 dollars right here. Right. So this is how they talk about, he talks about just them going up to the room and there's 50,000 and 50,000. And it's Mark Farshone. So where does he say he says, uh, make sure they don't find the body and here it says that they said, says not to kill him in San Francisco. Okay. So what is that from? This is from the notes. This is Burrow's notes. Okay. This is Burrow's notes when they're talking to Pete's talking to him. Right. Now keep my, he's got a bunch of notes, but these are the ones that he leaves out all these things. He leaves instead of a 302, the 302, right. He never mentions anything about corruption, 50,000 dollar pay off or anything, the hotel, nothing. Keep 92 multiple people are there. All he's got to do is go talk to these people. People were there. Mueller don't go. No, not sure. He's talking to them. Can't have, we can't be generating. Can't be. These notes are here. These notes are here. So it's done. They got them. They got them dead to rights pretty much. Well, do they? Because you would think you would think declaration of defendant, recini submits. So Rossini here explains what he told Mueller in this whole thing, explains all this about what he told Mueller and what the notes say and everything and they send it. So why did they, did they ask him why they left these notes out of the 302? Did they ask him that? Did they ask that to Mueller? Well, or to Burrow's. Oh, let me surely. Yeah. Well, they do say. Oh, yeah. Well, they're going to end. Burrow's had already been interviewed. Yeah. So now it's Mueller. Now they come with the notes. Then they go straight for Mueller. Okay. So Mueller, they asked. So Mueller gets on the, when Mueller takes a stand, keep mine to this is on a video thing. He's in quality. No conference. You're watching 10 years. I don't know. So he ends up taking and he's on a screen, everything they talk to him. He's only only got two hours. So they go through the whole thing. And you can read this. This is all on the on the website. And this is like right after 9 11, right? Uh, it's no, it's a while out. This is a while later. Like this happens in about 10 years. It's a 2011. Now it's time to get my stand. Okay. Keep my Mueller's been constantly putting this off. Yeah. You know, I've meetings with the right house or so finally they say we'll do a conference. We'll they do a conference. It's only going to be two hours. So okay, they ask basically. Yeah, let's let's try to summarize that. Okay. Summarize the whole thing is that they start asking him questions. Did they talk about this? Did they talk about this? So this is the one that I love. So he's expecting him to say, you know, he's like, he's like, he's like, I'm expecting him to say that I just what happened? Yeah. Just say what you talk about. I come clean. He has no choice. Did Mr. Racini ever flat out deny he was involved in the murder of Ellen Berger or ex or or um, Estes? Did he ever deny it? No, to the contrary, he implicated himself substantially in both of those murders. What about the notes? Oh, oh, I'm similar. Do you not know? Mueller doesn't know they found the note. Oh, okay. That's what I'm saying right here. Because they ask him, did you review this? No, did you review this? No, we sent you this. Did you know? No, no, did you he's like, all I looked at was the 302 because he knows because he helped probably helped craft the three of the course. Yeah. So then they start going through and you if you read it on the thing and I, you know, in the book, if you read it on the website, which I mean, I know we're trying to wrap up. So he ends up saying, um, he says, Oh, we're see downplayed his role substantially. He did this. He did that. He then they start saying, so he it starts to become obvious as they're asking a question about corruption or where you involved in this, where you're looking at this, we're looking at this. He starts to realize something's this, you know, you start to realize something's up. Yeah. It's got to know something. So it's like, then he starts immediately saying, well, they start asking about corruption law enforcement, investigation. Did you look into this? Did you, did you know who this person was? Did you know who this person was? So they start asking about Harrison and Nathan, right? And recini, preparing to test, preparing him to testify. They start asking about all these different things. And one of the things they start asking is about the, uh, about these like, they're like, why would you co see him? Well, we wanted to make sure that we were going to prosecute the right person. Right. You, you did. Right. So, so what he told you was completely contradictory to that. So he says, uh, did you review all the, all of the notes? He's like, no, how about the law enforcement reports? Uh, did you review those law enforcement reports? I reviewed the 302. Uh, did you talk to Agent Burrows or anyone under this? And he says, not that I recall. No, I say, I'm going to talk to anybody. Right. He's in Washington. These guys aren't called. You can't call the FBI director it doesn't matter who the fuck you are. Yeah. That's either president. The, and nobody thinks he's anything's wrong. A lot of these guys are just going about their normal day. Right. Right. They don't realize this guy's going to get on the stand and say all this fucked up shit. So, when you went to talk to recini, uh, you know, do you recall, you know, Farsion, Barrera or Blum and, uh, and about the investigation. He says, uh, I'm not certain. See him saying now he's done. I'm not certain. It's been too long. I can't remember. Can't recall. He starts doing all that shit. I can't recall. I can't recall. Uh, what about Farsion? What about this? The case, not that I'm, I'm not saying, you know, so he starts fumbling and fumbling and fumbling. My favorite part is when he starts to kind of get him into a jam. He says, I don't recall. Like, yeah, oh, he says, I don't recall at this present time. I do not recall what I was thinking or in my mind at the time. He's like, do you remember reading this where they were saying it was about corruption? They were talking about it. They were focusing in on corruption. And this and this, he says, they said, uh, do you recall at this point having read that or nice that I don't recall, but I can tell you I adamantly agree disagree. Mollerkite basically, you know, snaps, you know, a police officer did not pull the trigger or kill. And he cuts him off. He's like, I'm not, I'm not saying he did. He pulls out the handwritten notes. And they start going over the handwritten notes. Who starts pulling the lawyer? The lawyer. Yeah. Rucini's lawyer. Rucini's lawyer. And he starts to show him the note shows him the Mueller. And then he just fucking turns into listen, I don't remember nothing. I don't remember. He feels so. I'll plead the fifth. Did you discuss this, you know, on two, three, four, call. I could have, then it becomes I could have. I don't have, I don't recall today. If it's in Bruce's 302, we did. Right. He keeps going back to the three. Oh, does that look good? Because you know, as you, of course, you can see for there. Yeah, they crash it. And we know, we know, we have to say it's perfect. Right. That's all I read. Yep. So he starts talking about testimony. He's that, you, if you read the whole thing, everything that was seen, he said was correct. And he's, he's really, really trying to back out of the whole thing. And so it just becomes a whole bunch of, I don't recall. I don't know. Well, what about this note? What about this? He's like, I don't know what was in Bruce's mind when he wrote that. I don't recall. What did you do after Rossini told you all this? Did you launch any investigation at all? You went to Leavenworth and the guy just told you that the FBI officer is the one that basically, you know, officer or, you know, agent, whatever. Yeah, they conspired to help commit this mortar or that they leaked the information. They could, did you look into that at all? And he's like, well, we may have, it's possible we could have him because he knows it doesn't look good if I didn't follow that up. Yeah. Well, we already know, Burrow said in his transcript, we didn't look into any of that. Because he's saying that didn't even happen. He's saying now we know it happened. Did you look into it? Hmm. He's like, well, we could have maybe possibly with there may have been a separate investigation. No, no, we're talking about this investigation. I don't recall. I don't know. It's probably very probable. It occurred. So they go on and on. I mean, it just, bro, it just, it goes on and on it in the end. He just, it reverts to him just saying, I don't recall. I don't recall. I don't recall. Right. No, I don't recall. I don't recall. And if you read the whole thing and I know we can't read the whole thing, I know it's ridiculous. It's, it's, you know, it ain't good. Yeah. And this is, this is a condensed version. Keep in mind, this is 136 pages, almost all Mueller saying, I don't recall. I don't recall. I don't recall. Unless you say something bad about an FBI agent, then he says that is absolutely untrue. Yeah. You know, meanwhile, there's notes from his meeting with Pete that basically say basically contradict everything that he's saying. Everything he's saying we've got, they've got notes that say, yeah, exactly there were, there were, there were payoffs, there was murders. Far soon saying we're not the murder. I'm here and make sure they don't find the body. Everybody didn't even look at your hand here. That didn't even look at there. This is where, so after the two hours is up, then what happened? Like what happens after, after they, after this proceeding is over, they run out of time to get, they got, they gave two hours with Mueller, Mueller basically wasted two hours saying, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. Right. So where do they go from there? Well, he ends up getting resentence. Basically they go to Pete and they go through the whole thing. Okay. They end up saying, they end up, he gets resentenced. The judge knocks it down to like, he goes from like 40 years to like 36, the 35 years. So it's like, 75 off. Like five off? So he, Pete appeals it. He gets again, again, he appeals it. They say the appellate court says, we're going to let you talk to this guy. We're going to let you bring Mueller back untamed. That's one of the things they went like, you can't limit them. Yeah. So his attorney basically, there's a new attorney's like, look, they, they calls up, they call up the Wilson Leon. What is this like a third attorney? Yeah. Yeah. So they call, they call up the use attorney and they say, look, we're bringing Mueller back. He is, and we're on the keep them on the fucking stand a couple days now. Really dig in hard to the guys like, all right, listen, calm down. Let's, let's work this out. Let's work this out. So they end up, they end up eventually, they end up realizing that this is it we're done. We, they're going to bring Mueller back. They've got the notes. So the US attorney comes back and Pete said he was really irritated because he's like, I really wanted Mueller to get back on the stand. But they, they basically they file a stipulation. The government concedes that what Mueller said was inaccurate. And you know, they don't say lie. Yeah. He materially misrepresented the facts of the, you know, that kind of bullshit. So basically that what he said was, was inconsistent with the notes, inconsistent with what actually happened. And it talks about, so they concede a whole bunch of stuff and they agree that everything that Pete said that he denied, he denied it. He denied that he had done all the, that he conspired to do anything to kill anybody that he talked about. They, they basically concede to everything that actually happened. They bring Pete back again and put him him in front of the court again. They once again, the US attorneys come in. They basically mis, they basically misrepresent what actually happened and they could try and confuse the issues and they say it's all Pete's fault because he was a leader organizer. Blah, blah, blah, blah. It's all him. It's all him. And he gets sentenced again. I think this time it drops to 34 years. They're not a year off. I think they give him 34 years. I think he finally ends up with 34 years. They've resents him like three. So currently at this date, he's at 34 years. So what is roost seen these? Like what is his state of mind right now? Like what is after all this, all these years have gone through all this bullshit? Like where is he at if you were to talk to him right now? What's his position on it? Like right now? How does he feel about it? How does he feel? You know what he feels like? He's, you know what he's most upset about is that at one point, at one point, when he was being resentenced, the government brings back not the last, I don't think it was the the last recent, it's the same thing. No, I do. I think it was the last resiliency. They bring in all of the family members like the, okay, yeah, yeah, yeah. They bring them all in and they, they let them know. Yeah, Alenberger, yeah, Alenberger's family and, uh, SD's family come in, his sister comes in, his brother, everybody comes in, they all get to be in there. And what just prior to being resentenced, the US attorney actually said that pizza attorney, hey, by the way, it was either the Alenberger family or the SD's family, the family's basically wanted to talk to your client. I told him that you wouldn't agree to it. And it's just his lawyer says, no, absolutely not. No, you don't want to talk to them. And that's it. So then he tells, oh, yeah, by the way, you can I believe this? He tells Pete, by the way, is can you believe that they wanted to talk to you? You know, the SD's or whoever wanted to talk to you. Pete's right, like you know, and Pete goes, yeah, I want to talk to him. And he's like, what? What do you mean? He goes, I want to talk to him. He's like, why he said, because I want to explain to him what happened. Yeah. You know, I'm saying, it's like, right, he's like, I want to explain that, you know, like he, he loved John. Right. There's a bad friends. Yeah, they were best friends. I mean, the guy was a fuck up. But you know, but he's like, but we'd been friends forever. Yeah. He's like, and you know, he's like, I just stay over at his, you know, house all the time. I would eat. Well, I knew his family. I knew he was just stay at our place all the time. My mom would cook them fucking spaghetti. He's like, I mean, we were friends. Yeah. And now he's like his, his family thinks I fucking killed him. I would like them to look me in the face so I could tell them that I didn't do this. So then his attorney goes back and talks to the US attorney and tries to get the US attorney to contact them. And he's like, no, no, forget it. Don't worry about it. I talked to him. They don't want to stay. I talked to him. They don't want to talk to you anymore. I told him that he didn't want to. So now that they're done. And so Pete's like, he's like, I would love to tell them that I didn't do this. That this didn't happen. He's like, I mean, you know, it's, I don't want to do the next five or six years. You know, that he's got at this point. It's like, I don't want to do that. But at this point, you've been locked up so fucking long. Yeah. Right. My little ride it out now. Yeah. Well, you know, and you don't, you want, you would, the last five, six, seven years is nearly as fucking hard as the first part. Once you hit, hit that, once you get over that, that hill, you know, once you over the hump, it's, it's a huge weight off of you. And he's coming down just at the end. He's practically walking around thinking he's like, you know, I'm, I'm getting out soon. Five years. You got five years left. Yeah. And you're thinking that's, that's how you feel. Like, yeah. Fuck. I'm getting out of here soon. So it's five years. Most people get five years, they want to kill themselves. Five years is nothing after 20. It's not. Oh, right. So, have you talked to him recently? Um, I was talking to him up into the point when my probation officer told me I couldn't talk to him anymore. Okay. So not allowed to talk to you. Yeah. You know, I didn't think it was an issue because we were working on a book together. Yeah. Doing the true crime thing. And, and you know, but she's, uh, I don't know if she's, uh, she's opposed to it. So she's your biggest fan. No, no. And she doesn't like the books. Tell me she's rooting for me. But I haven't seen it. Uh, so yeah. So no, I haven't, I haven't, uh, well, if she's watching this, I'm sure she's a very, she's a very nice lady. Yeah. She is, he's very polite. She's very nice. She's very, I think I'm just, she's just, no. She can see that you're trying to, uh, you know, she's concerned about me. I stole 11 and a half million the last time I was on it. Yeah. Right. They tend to get upset about that. Um, so yeah. So, uh, but you know, here, here's the thing is that it's like this guy, this guy's in prison for something that he looked like I said, I mean, I don't know if I said this. I don't think we're on camera or not, but, but, you know, the two guys that committed the murders, eight thanksgiving with their families. Yeah. Right. Pete had a holiday meal in the fucking child hall. Right. Right. His mother came to see him. You know what I mean? I mean, your mother drives an hour and a half, two hours to come see you. It's bullshit. Um, and then all of them guys know it. Right. Right. And here's the thing. And, and so the people that actually, the FBI agents and the informant and the people that actually, that actually, you know, committed the whole story of the whole murder and the frame up. These guys are, these guys are at home with their families. Yeah. That this doesn't, it doesn't make sense. And, you know, and Mueller getting on the stand and saying some bullshit. You know, if you read the book, I, you know, it clarified really well where he's just complete. It's just bullshit. He didn't know the notes existed. He's rated a fucking barrier with senior. He could have cut him fucking loose. He could have said this man did an amazing job. You need to cut it. He could have right then said he, you've got to cut his sentence. It's a great. He really helped us. He did this. He did that. And he could have pushed it. Instead he did the opposite. Keep him in fucking prison. He didn't kill anybody. Jesus. Even if he did what you said he did, you gave him 40 years. Yeah. The guys like, the killers are already out. Yeah. So, you know, as far as Arya is concerned, there's some evidence there that definitely that points to Arya or maybe nascent just accidentally, like he said at one point, he accidentally did. Was he a hit man? Did he accidentally? I don't know. Now, where's nascent and Harrison? They're both, they're out. They got out like last year or year before. Both of them. So, I just, you know, and what's so fucked up is that is that like, like I told you, I sent this all over the place. Like Fox News looked at it. The investigator for Fox News really looked at it for about a month or so. I mean, I'm sorry for a week or so. And then he contacted me on the phone. And then we talked on the phone and I was trying to explain it. And he, I could tell he didn't understand. He wasn't asking the right questions. Okay. And his issue in the end was, he was asking questions that were like, okay, well, you know, Wall, yeah, but we can't prove the phone numbers or this. Yes, we can. I have the directory that says it was this. I have the, I have the homicide detectives wrote down the phone number for Barreiro. Right. And first, young, he got those are the right numbers. I assure you I have, you know, well, and then he switched to something else. And then he switched to something else. Well, well, well, I'm not sure that this really, Mueller's really committed a crime. I don't, didn't say, I don't know that he's committed a crime. I don't not sure what you would call framing someone or allowing it to continue. But you know what I do know? I know that it's ethically am morally wrong is that at the very least, I think that people should know that this is what really happened and that he should have done the right thing. He still could do the right thing. You know, that he could have fixed it. He didn't. He's continuing to allow this to, to move forward and have this guy serve out a sentence that he never should have been involved in. Keep in mind, the guys that are involved in his drug conspiracy, these guys got a year yeah. They got five years. One guy who just got not a federal prison like four or five years earlier, who'd been in federal prison a couple of times and the state massive amount of drugs because he was willing to cooperate. He got like eight, like like eight or nine years ended up getting out in like seven years, six years. Yeah. I mean, all of these guys got minor minor sentences that Pete should have ended up getting. Yeah. Even if they went right 40 years. Let's keep them in jail. Why? You can see that it's. inner minor sentences that Pete should have ended up getting. Yeah, even if they won't right 40 years. Let's keep them in jail. Why? You can see that it's it that it was it was a complete frame job. Everybody's admitting that right. So you know, my problem is one Pete's in prison too. Nobody gives a fuck. I sent it to your Fox News. They looked in it and in the end what Fox News is I think what it boiled down to was that Basically the guy said look the problem is he said. I don't know about all these documents He said some of them are a lot of them are sealed. Mm-hmm. Pete's got them I have them, but the fact of the matter is he doesn't like the idea that I was involved so You personally me personally right because you got a pass into record exactly secondly he said we cannot He goes I I we cannot move forward with something like this. He goes because it's such it's such a big allegation It's such a bombshell that we can't get it wrong. So What you did was you read the book you looked through some documents and that's all he did He called I think he called Vermelon which was a Vermollon which was the lawyer to ask Vermollon Vermollon wouldn't wouldn't respond to him You know, I mean, you're not gonna talk about your client's case Um nor do I think that keep my he probably doesn't want to talk to him anyway because if it has anything to do with them all Or now what? This stuff getting out like say Fox News did run this or a big network like seen in or whatever ran a story like this What would happen? What would happen to them? Nothing would happen to him right? What what what it was show is that look he didn't Follow up the leads What you what you do if you lay out if you will lay out a whole bunch of information And you just stick with what's your what further is your agenda? You're gonna come up with a file full of Of facts and documents that prove whatever you want proven you can you ignore the other ones So you can easily shape any investigation Yeah, and that's what he did was he he shipped his blame He shaped the investigation. He stuck it on this guy to avoid any Any involvement of the FBI Yeah took to further his agenda And that's what it boils down to and so this guy so Pete really receding has to sit in prison The problem is this is one example of shit that happens probably every day FBI and then the US Pre-owned system like there's so many people he's just one one guy at a million. Yeah. I mean I hate I hate to say that because it's like look Listen if you're in prison there's a how to nine point nine nine percent chance you were supposed to be in prison I've met very few people that were in his he's not innocent peace not innocent peace a drug dealer He should have got 40 years. He should have got 10 years and he helped he helped 20 he helped Throw the body away and dump it right he disposed of the sposive of the body and that's a horrible thing Real prison time definitely prison time, but it's a fine given 20 years cut the fucking guy loose Right, you know, here's the problem is is that the pie gas like people will watch this and they'll try and pull their Very polarized or Democrats or Republican. Yeah, it's not a Democrat. It's not a Republican What is his he a Republican? He's actually a Republican But Democrats and Republicans just love him everybody loves him. Okay, so what I? Do you know why no idea why I think it's just because he's all around a government guy. Yeah, he's got great credentials Yeah, it's got the good resume. Hey, excuse Marine Corps Marine Corps officer How you can't say for not I? Run it on the patriot. Yeah, I can say bad things like that because you smearing my I remember it's funny I actually called a guy a reporter and told him about this you let me take the conversation real quick conversation was I told him the whole thing and all the evidence that I had but I never used Mueller's name I just said the US attorney did this and the US attorney said this and this and the notes and this and this and he goes Oh my god, can you prove this? Can you prove that? Yeah, yeah, yeah, and I'm going he was all excited man. This is great. Matt. Can you see me? That's that's great. That's right. Yeah, there's only one problem is what's what's the problem? And I go well the promise you as the attorney was Robert Mueller and he goes why would Mueller do that? I go well what well because I just told you was like it was a politically motivated I think I don't know exactly yeah, but I mean Matt. He's that he's got a seller reputation Why would he do that? I mean doesn't even make sense suddenly everything that I said that he was excited about? Turn what that's crazy It's he didn't ask me for anything to send him anything after that And I knew right then and he even sent me an email where he said look you might want to send that to Breitbart or Fox News or one of those guys But I mean if you really he's mad if you really expect to be you know to try and become a journalist at some point He said I mean you need to really think about who you're you know Basically who you're getting in bed with like Nothing to do with fucking with because all the news stations are politically owned But I was like I can't believe that you're gonna ignore Anyway, my point is is that look what I would love to see happen free Pete. I would love free Pete baby. Yeah I would love to see I would love to see People obviously buy the book. Yeah, look at the look at the exhibits. Yeah, fact check it But send it but but to share this Share the people and ask them to share it with ten people and ask them to share it with ten people because look I don't care if it's going to conservatives or Or liberals or whoever it is, but if you if you got the message out there and Could maybe somehow another there there are avenues to cut him loose Is what I'm saying is that right? Yeah, right? First of all, he's got it He still has the ability to qualify 55. Yeah, he can file a 2055 because he's got a super strong argument that one He pled guilty to this and Mueller had him in entering into an agreement with saying something completely opposite Which basically held up right? So well what ends up happening is he has the ability to get his sentence basically quashed or reduced It's a simple motion from the government fuck Trump could fucking pardon him. Mm-hmm You know, I mean, I'm just saying it'd be great if this got forwarded to as many people as possible I think you watch as any podcast But I mean it would be great if it got forwarded to as many people as possible until something happened Yeah, you know for for Pete because he's really think of the you know in the back of the book I Say I want to say I say he's being released in its October. I think it's October 2025 Okay, not 24 might be 24 Out the check okay, maybe 24 so yeah, October 2024 man And he's already done 20 something years. Yeah, that damn someone. That's right That's that's fucked. You know his mom comes to see him like every two weeks just like my mom used to come who used to see each other Oh, this is Pete Pete's a pizza 50 it's 15. It's exactly my age. Wow Uh So yeah, so I mean that's it's definitely you know And here's the whole thing don't even believe me just look at the evidence read the book look at the evidence You don't have to believe me. I'm just some scumbag. I mean I have no problem with you said. Oh, I don't fucking believe it Okay, great don't believe me. Yeah read the book the fact you're there. It's not even a big book Yeah, it's an abridgment of a larger book. It's like it's like 110 pages. It's a joke. There's footnotes They all correlate with the exhibits So that's that's that's that's where my end keep in mind things could go bad for me I could get violated may for all I know they may come after me. We were talking about getting killed So yeah, so anyway don't come after us, please. Yeah, don't kill the messenger. Yeah, you could always they could always come up with some some reason Right, yeah The body Not hard. Yeah, yeah, we decided you got to go back for so we don't like what you're doing right well Well, thank you for coming in here and telling the story It was a bombshell. I hope a lot of people can share it and learn more about this and and we need to fucking free-peat He's such a good guy He only moved the body. Yeah, he only moved the body It's a great it's an amazing story and I said you know everyone like they go down there They can get order the book soon. You're gonna have an audio version of it available. We're gonna help you record some audio stuff Yeah, for Matt YouTube channel subscribe to Matt's YouTube channel because he's gonna have some some audio book You're gonna put some audio recordings on there soon. Yeah, I'm gonna take some of the actual stuff That's all my website inside true crime I'm actually gonna do an audio version and put those the hell yeah that you can you know Somebody reads right no one ever wants to listen to the story they want to drive and listen yeah Is that a podcast or is that yeah? Audio book audio podcast. Yeah. It's not really a book though. They're just synops Just a story story. Yeah, sure stories well stories described as YouTube channel by the book devil exposed on Amazon check out his website inside true crime and With the exhibits website. Oh Devil exposed exhibits calm calm. Oh be a link back check them yourself. Yep. That's right All right, man. Thanks again, Matt. Hopefully we can tell another story again here in the future. Yeah Sorry, I had to rush through this. That's completely nanny's fault. Yeah, all right. Good night everyone. Thank you