The Joe Rogan experience I'm happy to be here once tell everybody what you do well for work Yeah, I I teach at Emory University so I'm a professor I've been I've been there for about 25 years and I I also write right some some books and Teach a variety of classes, but you study like What I read of your study is Some of it is on death and some of it is on drugs. That is correct. Those are two very heavy subjects That may be the heaviest Well, the other course I teach is religion and sexuality. So I mean that that's not really everyone Yeah, you look like a guy who would study both death and drugs So this is the pandemic here I mean really I'm usually I'm much much more you know, well, I'm not really Doing this just doing the full as one of my students told me I should do yeah before I came in here I'm telling you man once you once you do it. It's so freeing not having to go to a barbershop or a hairdresser Well, what's weird is I feel really free with all this hair. Yeah, well, I can't the hair fits the subjects How did you get involved in what when you talk about drugs like you? You studied all sorts of psychedelic drugs, but also Common drugs like like caffeine like we were talking about before I was telling you before that I make some ridiculous French press coffee with far too much coffee And it's become a bit of a problem lately. Well But it's probably keeping you healthy and keeping you going. I don't know if it is I don't know at the end of the day. I'm really tired and I'm not usually really tired And I think it's because of been on speed all day It could tire you out. That's for sure. Yeah But yeah, I mean my interest in in and studying the connection between religion and drugs I'm in a department of religion at Emory Really spans the spectrum so I'm interested. Yeah for sure in psychedelics But also as you're saying in the more ordinary psychoactive drugs that bring order to our lives and You know allow us to tap into our true identity maintain some semblance of stability in our lives You know things that you know religion often can do it's a the subject of religion and drugs is It's really fascinating to me, but it's something that I never even really considered until you know 10 15 years ago and and I was introduced to Jack Hare and he was Do you know he is the cannabis advocate? Recently deceased not not so recently anymore Great guy, but wrote was writing a book about the connection between psychedelics particularly silicide and and religion and Christianity and he had some amazing collection of artwork that connected like ancient Christian artwork With a lot of these dancing naked figures that look like they were in ecstasy Shrouded by this translucent mushroom Yeah, though that's not uncommon. There are a lot of theories out there that connect Early Christianity especially to different kinds of You know loosen a genics like a psychedelic drugs of some form But I think the the connections are much more widespread People have been using psychoactive substances for religious ritual for religious experience for forms of transcendence and Journey in all kinds of different cultural settings and through history. What got you into the subject? well I've been interested in the topic of drugs for a while but I think what really you know led me to see this would be quite a Fruitful topic to pursue in terms of research was I wrote a short little essay on LSD and religion talked about my own experience as a young man tripping and Talking about the ways in which when I had that experience in the late 70s and people more and more were you know enjoying psychedelics Coming out of the decade of the 60s I started to to see that they Were to often use words like spiritual or mystical to describe their experiences and to talk about how their religious views are being reoriented And I saw that in my own experience and wrote about that as a way to talk about what is probably the most significant shift in religion in America and that's the rise of the nuns Those who don't affiliate with any religion and who many who claim to be spiritual but not religious and I want to tie that back to People's experiences with psychedelics There's a lot of people that are in the nuns that don't have any experience with psychedelic They just psychedelics. They just seem to want to have like a A deeper meaning to life, you know, and they'll they'll say I'm not religious, but I'm spiritual Right and a lot of people get really annoyed when people talk like that. Yeah. Well, it can be annoying and Also, you know, I think as you say is very much becoming quite common People to identify in that way and that's also about a very strong kind of negative Understanding of traditional religion institutional religion and so on. Yeah, I feel like for a lot of these people that don't have psychedelic experiences That are spiritual that sort of dismiss religion I Never want to tell people to do psychedelics But I feel like if they did it they would relax a little With this idea that they really have an understanding of what happens when you die. I think they would really let that go Most people would right you'd go well. I didn't know this was real And this is around and this has been around for thousands of years psychedelics and then you have these experiences that are so profound And you're like, okay, maybe I'm just full of shit and I've been posing this whole time right. Yeah, right Well, I think again, that's um, it's not just you who have these views what we're seeing is a lot of Medical research around psychedelics also we're pointing to the same thing Decrease and fear of death people's Sense of compassion and love, you know, really can blossom People's lives are transformed in a lot of these more controlled medical studies, you know with people who are taking psilocybin or MDMA But but the main focus of all that of course is is the therapeutic benefits But you know as we're saying it's all it's all about spirituality and those therapeutic benefits can't be separated out from a kind of spiritual sense of that experience It gives me a little bit of hope that in this time of of great strife and struggle and especially In terms of the way human beings are dealing with each other, you know that this is This is a time where people are also Rediscovering psychedelics and record numbers and they're looking for some sort of a way to make sense of this life because You know, we're obviously in some strange transitional moment in history where our Confidence and systems and government and and even education and certainly news and media is eroding at an unprecedented rate But it's also at the same time All drugs are now legal and Oregon, right? You know like these things are happening where people go you know what come on Colorado's like mushrooms go ahead do mushrooms right and You know god bless Texas. They fucking need all that shit right here And Georgia too. Yeah, all these places every the whole world needs it Well, they need the option right, you know because the idea that human beings are somehow another preventing other human beings from Having non-lethal experiences that have proven to be incredibly transcendent and change people's lives for the better Just unmasked like if you see the john hopkin studies of the people that one Silaside been experienced The majority of them listed is the most profound experience of their life, right? And non-addictive yes, I mean and not lethal. I mean Only 50 is like what you have to eat like two pounds of their summer Right right and and we know that the stories of the diction and a lot of the dangers are so overblown yeah, but I think again, this is just A moment as you're saying yeah, that's why I feel I'm I'm onto something I think with this book that I'm writing Which is you know gonna Make the argument the drugs are gonna are really the sort of source of spiritual life in in America That's that's the future as well as the past. Yeah again, you know the Influence of psychoactive substances in the Americas You know pre Columbus and was pervasive and just a part of everyday life and as you say we've For whatever historical reasons and changes that have happened in our society have lost us touch with Those resources of spiritual meaning yeah and religious life and as you're saying I And I believe it too we are in a moment when things are really transforming and drugs will be I think quite important in terms of How we come out on the other side. I hate the word drugs. It's just a blanket word It's so unfortunate that you know like heroin and Opiates and math is lumped in with still a sigh of an all under one blanket. Well Yeah, you're not alone. I mean I'm I'm intentional with drugs. I like to be provocative and Try to confuse a lot of the categories that we use and thinking about some of these things that are so central in our lives and so potent especially in terms of our religious lives so Yeah, there's in the oceans like a deluxe and you know obviously all different kinds of Other kinds of against substances that we use that Have an effect and and for me that in some cases in many cases have religious meanings and connections. Have you ever experimented with Halotropic breathing or any of the non psychedelic methods of achieving these certain states of consciousness? No I mean no, but I think they're important as well. Yeah, people is achieving a mystical state through non psychedelic means So this is another Avenue and thinking about the importance of those mystical states and how people get there But also I would say as you said it's what are the results? What kind of Transformations are are made in people's lives and I think what we're seeing is whether it's a psychedelic-induced Experience or or non psychedelic. It's There are lots of similarities. Yeah, I mean a lot of people get it get there through near death experience There's a lot of people well this is another thing where the mind is capable of producing psychedelic compounds and in near-death experiences Although it's very difficult to measure Right because you'd actually have to open up someone's brain while they're in the middle of a near-death experience Which is probably not the healthiest thing for someone who almost died But that's as far as we know that's the best way to measure it now, but these people who experience These near-death moments have these incredible profound visions And many people think that what's happening is some sort of endogenous dump of psychedelic chemicals We know the brain is capable of making the most potent one psychedelics in terms of like you know what happens and how they do it it's still a bit of a mystery they're trying to solve but Yeah, that connection's fascinating. Yeah, and and as I mentioned or you may know I teach a death and dying course as well and so near-death experiences are pretty much an important part of that class and the kinds of research and findings that are beginning to appear in terms of looking at those connections are fascinating and tie into this question of What is our relationship to death? How do we understand? You know the reality of death in our lives and you know what What are our thoughts about the afterlife or if there is one that gets tied into a lot? You know how people respond to this research, you know how they Are engaged with it and how they're compelled by it? There's a lot of folks that apparently can reach like some pretty intense States of consciousness through yoga Through different styles of yoga and different styles of breathing But it's what there's a really funny quote by Terrence McKenna where the Buddha met this monk Who who said I practice the city of levitation for the last 20 years and I've achieved the ability to walk on water and The Buddha says he had the fairies only a nickel Yeah, right You can really meditate alone in darkness forever or you can just Take mushrooms you get there an hour right. Well, yeah, I think for many of us We take the the quicker out But again, there are Like with the the monk or people who meditate, you know all kinds of important Well set and setting um thinking about you know what is the context in which This is taking place and and that's critical. Do you ever get push back about the The connection between Psychedelics and religion has anybody ever like challenged you on this or debated you on it. Oh, I mean I teach I mean my students don't Sometimes they challenge but no, I mean I Not directly and I don't really give a shit, you know, I mean I'm at that stage of my career I'm I'm Convinced about the again this sort of great research possibilities and thinking across the board On about the connection between drugs and religion Now when you're teaching these classes And I'm assuming that for a lot of these kids is the first time you're exposing them to these ideas Absolutely because yeah, they many of them don't know what the study of religion is right and And well we have a pretty nice diverse mix of of students in terms of their background But most don't have a religion course other than something they've done and they were in catholic school or if they studied You know the Bible in some form, but No, they never seen anything like me It's funny because that's I mean that's a heavy responsibility I would imagine too because you're introducing to these kids this these ideas that have Really The potential for a very profound impact on the rest of their life Yeah, and that's Been something I've worried about my entire career, you know, I actually care quite a bit about how these ideas are transmitted and received and As we said a lot of them are quite Sensitive the topics that I'm trying to teach but it's an essential part I think of of being a young adult and learning how to not just think for yourself but to sort of reimagine the world and try to understand some of the forces that are at work and in your life and what's going to be coming in terms of your future career And I try to make religion relevant, you know in those terms But I also as I like to say to them, you know, I mean my I wouldn't say this before I Had tenure but you know my My goal I tell them to straight out is to confuse the hell out of them You know what they think is religion is not the only game in town and so I'm very upfront about this sort of being an intellectual exercise, you know You know why are students taking my death and dying class? Well, I don't want to know I don't want it just to be purely academic for them to encounter different understandings of death at different death rituals different cultures and and shake them up But not necessarily, you know kind of term them away from what they've been taught The end result may kind of reinforce their own sort of cultural background and outlook but but I'm I'm for myself I very gratified and the work that I do if you could call it work and You know I get a great response from students and and I'm just You know Really pleased that I'm able to be a part of that educational process Because not to go on that yeah I mean because my classes are often not like there are other classes which are you know political science or economics Or biology and and you know I just want them to be able to reflect and think about some of these deep things that sooner or later You know are gonna Bite them in the butt Yeah, I like how you describe it too that it's not the only game in town The way I tried to describe it to people is like I'm not not a religious person But I'm not opposed to it and I probably was when I was younger But I think I was just arrogant and I think that the best way to look at religion is it's not the whole thing You should but you shouldn't throw it out. I think it's a piece. Yeah, I think it's a piece of something that's a giant puzzle and The idea of throwing it out. I don't think that's the way to do it. I think I think those people in the problem obviously is during Translations translations a giant issue when you're taking something from ancient Hebrew and you're translating it to Latin And to Greek and Aramaic and all these different languages. It's like A lot is probably lost in terms of the way they express like if you have a red Russian to English a lot of like Russian People that follow on Twitter and I get a huge kick out or excuse me on Instagram and I get a huge kick out of pressing the translate button Oh, yeah, like to try to break down the way they communicate Now when you're dealing with like super ancient languages that we don't even use anymore like ancient Hebrew who knows how Accurate and what if the the intent is Clearly expressed through an English translation right probably not well a lock gets lost Yeah, a lot gets invented also just These ideas have been passed down through thousands and thousands of years and I feel like If you could just not be too literal with it and just listen to what these people are saying what they were trying to get across Obviously, there's some awful shit in the Bible in particular and many religions in terms of Condoning slavery treating women in second-class citizens. There's a lot that's probably just Some cultural artifact of the time where they've embedded their own Believe somehow human being should act with each other and then and then attributed that to God Right, but if you can get past that and just not take it You know, no pun intended as gospel right and and just These people are trying to lay down Their experiences and The the lessons that they've learned and some sort of a way to live your life book right right and and yeah, I mean I agree with you from my point of view um Too much a literalism, you know, it was really a counter productive if not destructive Yeah, as societies change over time so um, you know the act of interpretation is very much obviously a part of The study of religion and looking at how religions change and transform um For me, I'll just I'll say I'm so not interested in Christianity or Judaism or Buddhism or Islam You know the conventional containers of what we think are the world's religions or you know very problematic to say the least but my my interested my interest is more in Sort of intersections of religion and culture where people might not recognize they're being religious Even though I would try to make the argument that they are so well, I mean I've written a book called sacred matters that looks at these different um kind of arenas where where religious life can be found in cultural forms of activity so um like celebrity worship I would call a religious culture that has systems of meaning different kinds of rituals possibilities for Discovering your true self all kind of value system that can be tied up. That's interesting So, liberty worship as a form of religion I've always thought of as just hijacking the human reward system because if we lived in a tribe of people small tribe and there was one Great leader you know the battle scarred leader who's seen it all and can give us the information and he was the one talking we would listen that that would be a Person of great importance and we all gather on and listen but when you see Brad Pitt in a movie screen and his face is 30 feet high and this music playing when he talks and a team of writers have carefully constructed all of his words and this perfect sentence and you know it's just like it's so moving and inspiring and then we see him in real life oh my god it's really you but meanwhile he hasn't really done anything other than pretend right you know I mean he's been a pretend well I mean a great entertainer but I'm giving you give it us some wonderful distractions but it's not that he's led us through battle it's not that he's he's figured out how to find the food in the water you know this is not what it is but in our our high-jacked human reward system we treat him as though he is the great leader yeah or or even someone like Oprah I mean it was more clearly you know in that sort of strange middle ground to be just a celebrity and spiritual leader of some kind so you know obviously it's going to vary depending on what celebrity you're talking about but you know just in terms of projections are imagination where we invest you know our energies you know celebrity spec but again I'm I'd like to talk about other things you know as well that with our politics or consumer culture or things around medicine that there are religious qualities that don't have to do with the Bible or with Muhammad or something right there's religious qualities in that there's these very rigid ideologies that are treated like religions they have to follow and there's also signs that people will hold up that they're complying and they're along with this ideology one of them that I talk about a lot of people taking photos with masks on on Twitter for their their profile picture right like I know what you're doing right right we all know what we're doing yeah well I mean you know that's again messaging and thinking about you know what bizarre use you know yeah it's it's bizarre when you see these patterns sort of repeated over and over again right well in social media too will be the future of religion and in terms of how it transforms and sure moves forward is an important kind of site for religious activity and investments and you know where we're really going to see the action what's happening on Instagram Twitter and so on yeah so when you say religion that these things fall into sort of religious behaviors or religious ideas you're not meaning like as handed down from a higher power you're meaning as in people fall in with the same sort of compliant behavior and patterns and not necessarily I mean it's not it's not all just sort of compliance and compliance one aspect right or conformity or something it's it's just meaning-making it's how we try to live our lives in ways that can carry us on when we have to confront suffering and death and and as well as you know issues around health and what are the sources that are available to people and you know as I've said in my class many times I think popular culture is much more of an important kind of teacher about religious ideas and values than you know the local preacher how so because people paid more attention to it absolutely yeah and because they're more swayed by it you know because it has more of an impact and resonance but it's so it's so it's a dangerous way to sway things coming from someone who's involved in distributing popular culture because there's so little thought put into the actual impact of what it is and so much thought putting into just what pops yeah like what gets people to pay attention right well and money talks and money is sacred you know what's more you know sacred in our society than making some money yeah and that's a dry you know again so there too we can talk about other religious qualities to capitalism well you know there have been a number of scholars who've written on that topic and made those connections so again you know the action isn't taking place in the church it's taken place in you know music festivals burning man yeah you know this is where again I'm not trying to kind of over generalize but I think very much for especially younger people but baby boomers as well you know where where where that you know where does where do I get my spiritual juices you know there are churches now that are incorporating still aside but into their rituals I think one particular in Oregon see we can find that there's a church in Oregon that is doing what am I Oregon spokesperson today well it's a big you know that's big news and big changes for sure yeah we're all gonna be watching that well the idea is that that's what it used to be all about you know if you go back to it's a very controversial book but John Mark Oleg grows the sacred mushroom in the cross here is all about consumption of psychedelic mushrooms and that he believes that that was really what the Bible was about was about hiding these stories from the Romans when they were captured yeah lots of theories that even with Judaism too we Moses you know there's just all kinds of ways people have tried to make the connection oh yeah they're legally offering psilocybin mushroom therapy through ceremony oh look but look there's men that's what is the name of this place sacredheartmedicine dot us is that the name of the church no yeah Oregon state nonprofit domestic gottagal non-profit if you want to sell mushrooms and not get locked up well right that's donate it all charity kids well and there are weed churches too that are starting to crush sure so yeah cannabis and religion also beyond again just the psychedelics yeah and and and and that's just sort of the surface my senses there's a big underground and I know there's one here in Austin mm-hmm Alex. And that's just sort of the surface. My sense is there's a big underground. And I know there's one here in Austin, because I did some research here. But I do my research out. I've made before the pandemic, I was able to get out and do some research around and talk to people who are, you know, running these kinds of, you know, psychedelic religious communities or, you know, sacred plants, different communities that are cropping up Washington DC, right? They just also decriminalize. So the cyber. And there too, I was a thriving underground. So these are, I think we're going to see that underground these subcultures really begin to surface. And I think so too. And with the war on drugs now basically, almost over, how are we going to think about drugs? How are we going to respond to them? The war on drugs almost over. What a crazy war and drugs one? Well, yeah, I mean, I've been saying this a lot lately, but like my whole life has been lived under the war on drugs. Yeah, I mean, how old is 58? Yeah, 53. Yeah. So it's I missed out. It's like all the sudden, changing and like, what is this society going to be like to be around late 50s or early 60s before everything was illegal when people were just freaking out when, you know, after Hoffman had synthesized LSD. And when, you know, basically all of the schedule and compounds were free and legal, I mean, free to consume, you got to wonder, the only thing that was illegal was marijuana. Yeah, right. Kind of hilarious. Yeah, it boggles the mind. Yeah, it's full of hypocrisy. But yeah, that was a crazy time. I don't know if you saw that great documentary wormwood by Errol Morris. I've heard of it though. Yeah, it's crazy about, again, the sort of 50s and psychedelics and LSD and the CIA and all that. Yeah. So that's a very rich part of the history that pre Timothy Leary that, you know, Rachatson was on the psychiatrist's couch taking LSD and experimenting with that. And you know, what was that doing? Again, the notion was miracle drug medicine is going to help people with their depression and, you know, all of that. And, and again, what we don't know, although we're beginning to see this more and more in some of this research is what are the religious implications in a person's life after they trip. Yeah. There's a great book that I've mentioned many times in this podcast because I have the guest on the author on rather, Tom O'Neill wrote a book called Chaos. And it's about the Manson family. And he was writing a book on the Manson family. Excuse me, he was writing an article 20 years ago on the Manson family. Just supposed to be a real quick article writing it. And then in the middle of his research writing writing the book, he started finding all these problems and word and consistency and weird connections. 20 years later he finishes this book. And it's all about the CIA and LSD and that the Manson family, Charles Manson in particular, was involved with CIA experiments. They did with LSD on on LSD with prisoners. And that they were most likely dosing him up when he was in jail and then giving him access to LSD and these psychological techniques that he used on the family when he was released. And then also all this evidence that every time they would arrest him, even though he was on parole, they would let him go because the CIA was encouraging his use of LSD, his promoting it to the family and then they're committing crimes. And the whole idea was to discredit the anti war movement and to disrupt the civil rights movement. There was a lot of shit involved with the CIA and LSD and they were running a they were running a clinic, a free clinic in hate ashbury until for 50 years until three months after this book is released. And then mysteriously our work is done. Yeah, that's over. They closed it down. Right. But there's amazing connections that Tom will Neil makes in this book to jolly west who is in the CIA who was a part of their LSD program to jack ruby. For some of this. Oh my god. It's it's amazing. He's Tom is great and his book is I can't recommend it or not. I'll check it out. It's a mind blower. Yeah. Because as you get into the book, you're like, what the fuck? Because meticulously researched over 20 years. I mean, it was this man's life. And they succeeded. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Or the lot of people kind of mark that as being sure. Yeah. And they think of LSD as something that makes you go crazy and want to murder people and kill people. And they change the idea of what a hippie was, right? Right. Because of this psychological techniques that he learned when he was in jail and all the mind control experiments that he learned and the way they did it, like he would pretend to take acid and he would give acid to the family. And then he would mind fuck them and then have them go out and commit murder and tell them that they were freeing people. And yeah. Well, wild shit. No, no doubt. I mean, wild times. Yeah, absolutely. And there was a lot of interest for sure. And among the CIA for, you know, what the potential would be for LSD. Yeah, he also went over the Operation Midnight climax, which was a part of MK Ultra. Do you know about that? Operation Midnight climax, they ran horror houses. They ran brothels in San Francisco and I think a couple other cities and they would have two way mirrors and they would have the prostitutes dose up these John's with LSD and their drinks and they had no idea. And then they would have sex and they would watch them and observe them and swim on for years. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Where they're just giving people LSD like American citizens is there? Right. Right. Right. This is a law enforcement agency. Yeah. I mean, really, no. But are. Well, you know, I mean, what don't we know? Yeah, exactly. What don't we know? All right. Well, we only found this out sort of accidentally through research into these files that had been left behind and some freedom of information acts. Right. Right. Right. Right. Well, that's how people are being able to get access to some of that information. But the problem is for so long, people have had this idea as LSD equals lose your mind and go crazy, jump off buildings. Right. You know, well, and then that also gets transferred over to cannabis and other drugs as the war on gas really picks up with Nixon and and it does help to demonize certain groups of people. Well, the real sad thing too is in putting these things in schedule one, we've really missed out on research that would be very helpful for people that do have adverse reactions. There's a lot of people with the verse reactions to so sigh in to cannabis to LSD. And we don't know why. Right. Right. Particularly people that have schizophrenia breaks. Well, on cannabis, it's very common. Right. Not very common, but it might be like, you know, one out of a hundred or something crazy like right. Right. Right. Right. It's not huge, but it's enough that we really should be concerned and we don't know what the fuck's going on because they've kept people from doing research. Right. Right. Well, who knows if that is going to change? Yeah. It's already starting to change quite dramatically. And with the results that are coming out of some of these experiments and research studies that are going on, I think, you know, it's convincing. Yeah. And when you're helping, you know, war veterans, PTSD, you know, I mean, I mean, come on. MDMA seems to be particularly helpful for that. Right. Well, that's right. And then I know that doing some some of those studies at Emory, but a lot of places. Again, this is what is being referred to as the mainstreaming of psychedelics. It's just, you know, they're going to be more and more a part of our resources. Yeah. In terms of where to go. Yeah, a mild dose of MDMA for the whole world might fix everything. Yeah. Well, just a real mild dose. Everybody together, three, two, one go. We'd all just like, I'm sorry. Man, let's love you. What are we doing here? It would be amazing. Yeah. I've only done it once, but it was incredibly profound. And but the next day I couldn't read, you're pretty fogged out or something. Oh, so dumb. And then I had to go on stage. I was terrible. I did stand up the next night. And I just couldn't get it together. My brain was so worn out. Right. I was going to ask you, I think I saw that your tour was called Sacred Clown. Yeah. So, you know, Sacred is my, I like to kind of go after that. But as I like that title. And so I was curious how you came up with that. It's a Lakota term, Hayoka is a Sacred Clown. Okay. The Lakota's had a term for a very important part of their culture, which was someone who mocks all the things that are deemed sacred and important. Right. And sort of finds holes in all of these dogmatic ideas. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's, I mean, again, that's what religion can do. Yeah, I would have called it a steak, no students of the sacred can really, you know, help you to see what's really going on in the world. I would have called it Hayoka, but it seems like that would have caused more problems than well, first of all, people are like, what the fuck does that mean? And then second of all, people are like, your culture, appropriating, which is careful. Do you really? I'm not sure you do. Well, I'm not sure. I like it better. I mean, certainly in terms of, it's more avoiding. Yeah. Yeah. But I got you. Yeah. So that's what I'm going to call it once I could tour again. Right. I'm sorry. And it'll be even more important now. After the pandemic, you really need to make fun of shit. Absolutely. Because people are more on edge. And then also, unfortunately, or fortunately, people have embedded themselves so deeply in the social media that they believe that this really bizarre way of communicating, which forms these echo chambers and these really non-empathetic ways of expressing your disdain or anger or hate or disagreement with people, that this is common standard. Right. It's the most non-psychodelic thing. Right. The way people communicate on Twitter is like a bunch of mental patients throwing shit at each other. Yeah. Understand. Yeah. And you've gotten off of Twitter. Up social media. Well, I'm on Twitter, but I don't use it. Right. Right. Right. I'll read other people's stuff sometimes just to go what is going on. But if someone's trying to get my attention, good luck, good luck. Right. I don't read anything about me. Yeah. But I don't read anything about me in general. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Because Instagram is basically just a just giant distraction for me. Right. I just find a fun to stay in. A lot of good images and things. Yeah. But I agree. You know, I think the social media is one of the more powerful forces and the changes that we are seeing. Yeah. And the political divisions clearly are kind of one of the consequences of how embedded, you know, these platforms have become in our lives. And it's almost like, like, it's all them. I mean, it hasn't all been planned out. But it's almost like it has been in order to really deteriorate our confidence and all these structures and systems. If you thought about what would be the perfect way to deteriorate it. Well, you have a guy who's clearly unqualified for the job, who is famous for just kind of being an asshole on television, firing people and being like a bombastic sort of, you know, bragadocious rich guy with his name on giant buildings and you're fired, fuck you and grab him by the pussy. And then you have that guy be the president. Yeah. Right. And then have everybody like, we got to get him out of here. He's the problem. He's the problem. And then I think they're going to realize once he is out, no, no, no, he's not the problem. He's just a problem. Right. The problem is human beings. Right. And the problem is the political system is just deeply embedded with corruption. And you're going to realize that with this next guy, who's supposed to be your savior, it's not going to work out. Well, to bring it back to your earlier point, I think we all could use some MDM. Yeah. Everybody, everybody's micro dose on mushrooms for sure. Okay. Well, we're going. We're heading in that direction. I think you are too. I believe in the young people. Yeah, I do too. Well, that's why this podcast works. You know, because I think you can't have the systems that are in place that are bullshitting people and then they're out on the streets talking to their friends and communicating in a totally different way than they're seeing in the media. And they're like, well, what this doesn't represent me. Right. This is not how I think it feel. And my experience is with life and with particularly if they've had any psychedelic experiences, there's these aren't represented. Right. Why aren't they represented when I know they're so common? And I know they're so profound. I know they've met so much to me and my friends. Why, why don't I see this? Right. So then they find things like this on the internet and they go, okay, this, I'm not crazy. Right. There's other people out there. So right. And then the other side of that would be the notion that we really have lost any sense of powerful authority structures. You know, sort of cultural authorities that really can unite people or kind of help people understand the importance of common cause of some kind. And you know, that's, again, partly to bring it back to religion has to do with the conflicts around the church and Christianity, especially in American politics. That is being diminished. I like to write about sort of decrystionization, you know, as the dominant sort of religious structure begins to erode and you begin to see, again, spiritual but not religious and other kinds of challenges that are coming from different communities or different kinds of spiritual experiences to, you know, the authority structures that are in society. You know, that is a part of the context of all of this. Yeah. We are a lot of these battles are going on and people don't know where to turn or, you know, wondering where am I represented in all this? And it's not coming from religion or the church and political leaders, Republicans or Democrats. So it all becomes self-focused, you know, we're all just about self-promotion and self, you know, identity becomes the main, you know, force in our lives, I think for too many people. Yeah. And hence the celebrity and then the chasing celebrity, right, this becomes the ultimate, you know, level of this stupid game we're all playing. Right. Well, again, for me, as someone who studies this, I try not to be judgmental, but I see, again, it's a religious system, there's a religious culture out there and it's, you know, it's just as interesting and legitimate in my mind as Christianity. I don't, I wish there was a structure that was in place that mimicked the positive aspects of church that didn't contain the dogmatic religious ideas that a lot of people find problematic. You know, like I think there's something great about the whole community aspect of church. You know, my friends that do go to church, I have a lot of friends that are Christian, they're really good people, they're really good people, like admirable people. And I think one of the things that's very admirable about their pursuit of Christianity is this community reinforcing aspect of it. Right. You know, they get there together with the members of the community, everybody's real friendly. They know that they're going to sit there and they're going to submit to this experience. And they're going to, you know, read the passages and they're going to hear the sermon and they're going to, they're all going to be together. They're going to dress nice, they're going to behave well. And they're going to feel good about the people that they live near and they're surrounded by. And I think we're missing that. There's so many people that I'm friends with that live in cities that don't know the person who lives in the apartment next door to them. They've been there for 10 years and they don't know anybody in their bill. I have a buddy money who's telling me he lives in a building with a thousand people. He doesn't know any of them. That's crazy. Well, it's such a weird way for humans to live. And I think people feel particularly lost when they don't have a real sense of community. And I could say as a standup comedian, one of the things that we all have in common, particularly folks that we're working out of the comedy store was that there was a family aspect to it. There was a real community there. And we were very supportive of each other and embracing it physically embracing it. Like people see people that they gave with everybody hugs. And so for a lot of these comics who are single, who live alone, maybe don't know their neighbors, like that was the place where they could go to that was church. Yeah. Right. That's what I mean, I think that's beautiful. I'm going to write on because you could see in that community of comedians, something sacred, something religious that's meaningful and that is profound in some ways. And as we said, the community aspect but also helping people in terms of their own understanding, self-understanding. And that's people turn to different kinds of communities. You know, and that's part of the modern world too, that that community feeling, sort of collective togetherness can be found in a number of different settings. And certainly the church and the congregation is one, but rock concerts or, you know, the comedy clubs. Grateful Dead. Grateful Dead. I mean, the Grateful Dead whole thing was acid, right? Well, it was music. And acid, we're going to turn to that next week. Oh, are you? Oh, yeah, we end the course with psychedelics and creativity. Oh, fish too, right? Yeah. That's their deal too, right? It's a lot of people drop acid and listen to that sort of jam music. And well, my friend knew, have done. Yes. And certainly. Yeah. My friends who have gone to a lot of dead shows say you don't even really know the dead until you listen to them on acid. Right. Right. Right. It's music designed for acid. Yeah. Well, that's, that's something you can find in other musical acts as well. Well, that connection. I mean, that's the thing about dimethyl-triptamine and the echeros. Have you ever listened to South American echeros? Those, when you hear those songs on psychedelics, the images dance to those songs like they're, they're, they work together like a hand and a glove perfectly. It's amazing. Yeah. Well, I like, I like that connection between music and drugs and religion. So you can also, you know, look at the peyote church and listen to some of the music that comes from those ceremonies. Yeah. Very much a central part of the experience and how people absorb, receive it and make sense of it. I think we're way too comfortable with music. We think of it as like no big deal. Exactly. Yeah. And that's what I, that's what I do in my, all my classes I bring in music. So in the death class, at the beginning of the semester, I tell students, I want you to be listening, you know, just in terms of the music that you listen to day to day, if you can identify the theme of death. And of course, they, when they hear that at first, they think of nuts and way, you know, out of my mind and they soon realize it's everywhere. And so, you know, I mean, I know that aspect of my classes can really be powerful because again, we don't, we take music for granted, but it's so central to our lives. And again, I think, you know, can have more of an impact than just always in this fun to listen to. Yeah. Shape our consciousness and our communities. And so, so I do that in the sex sexuality class and doing it in the drugs class. And it's great for students to be able to see that as data. What do you open up with? What song do you open up with when you for which one for death? Blue oyster called, yeah, fear the reaper. They were the same. They love it. Even though they never heard of it. They never heard of Blue oyster called these fucking kids. Yeah, the kids today. How do you not hear of that song? I mean, again, their parents may have listened to it. Sometimes I get that. But oh man, there's just a lot of things that can play be played across different genres. There's a few recordings that are still available of the Lakota is doing the ghost dance. Yeah. Yeah. And I teach American religious history. And then there too. Music is the main thread where we learn about religious communities. That is one of the saddest songs in the history of the world because that's these people that really are at the end. I mean, there's very few genocides. There's, I mean, there's a few, right? But there's very few where there's almost nothing left of people that existed in thriving numbers 300 years ago. But in Native American communities, it's common. It's like the most common. They're all gone. Right. In terms of like what the way they used to live versus now. And that ghost dance was them trying to conjure up the spirit of the past and reignite their culture and bring back the old ways and get rid of the white settlers and get rid of the armies and get rid of all the people that had destroyed their way of life and disease and all the things that had happened to them. Literally over the course of their life from, you know, there's people that were born in 1850 that were 50 years old at the turn of the 20th century that were like, what the fuck happened? When they were born, they lived on the plains and life was, as it had been for hundreds, if not thousands of years. And then all sudden it was gone. And so this ghost dance was this attempt at reigniting their old culture. It's so eerie and sad and it's so rare to have an actual recording of something that was an attempt to stop genocide. Right. Right. And from that period too is really valuable to have. Again, that's beyond data. It's not, you know, this is about our memory. And as you said, it's very evocative when people listen to it. And it does become an important remnant of that movement and that experience. But yeah, the music and those ceremonies are incredible. Do you play that for your classes? Yeah. Yeah. No one there. The book I use there's a whole chapter on the ghost dance. Oh, all right. You know, James Mooney and really trying to dig into, yeah, some of the historical forces that led to this as a potential revitalization form of religious revival. Then it's tragically, you know, as you say, as you say, it's something that disconnects people from their past in ways that are difficult to maintain and to people. And people are still suffering from the momentum of that disconnection today. In 2020, there's massive amounts of strife and huge problems in Native American reservations because of that. It's still today. Oh, it's crazy. And still, you know, as has been the case in Native American history, incredible signs of resilience, of innovation, of, you know, new forms of community that have really been back at us with the casinos. Well, I've heard that before. It's not us. I should say clearly. I'm with child of immigrants. Well, I mean, you know, this is a, we're development that that's, you know, kind of ironic in some ways. Hey, no, it is. It is. It's bizarre that they're getting wealthy off of this weird vice. Well, another addiction. Yeah, another addiction. Ampling. Is it? Do you think? Oh, you know, we had a great class on addiction. Have you ever been around gambling, Alex? No, no, I mean, I've been around a bunch of, well, it's a drug. It's a drug. That's what I'm wondering. You know, my God, I just going on in the brain too, that's going to be, you know, where you're going to be seeing some, some kinds of activities that, you know, we'll lead people to continue on in the behavior. Yeah, it's for sure a pattern that people fall into like my grandmother was addicted to playing the numbers. I remember she was always losing and she was always like, could say, Oh, I was supposed to bet this one and I bet that one like that was the whole deal. My grandmother, Italian grandmother in New Jersey, you know, and then the numbers were obviously this mob run weird lottery thing for the neighborhood. But wasn't it tells in my 20s that I started playing pool that I was around real hardcore gambling addicts that would bet on raindrops running down a window. They would bet on anything and everything and their life revolved on getting like on getting bets and winning and losing. It was, it was their whole, there was their juice for their life. Right. Was all gambling. Oh, right. The life source or something, but also destructive in its way. It was sort of overbearing. But it's hard to say it was destructive. Well, it was definitely destructive in terms of their financial stability. They were always broke. But boy, they were, they were engaged and they would call it action. That's what they would call it like trying to get some action. Like it was all about this thrill of possibly winning and possibly losing. And you could say that people are doing that when they're playing the stock market. They're just doing a nice slow version of it. Or if you're gambling on sports, you're certainly participating in it. Right. Right. And a lot of different kinds of addictions that people have. I mean, sure. Talking about religion, I mean about drugs. Well, I think religion may be an addiction too in some ways. But I think so. Yeah. And so I do it for some people. Yeah. You just again, life force, life juice is what you got to keep giving yourself if you're going to make it. But yeah, I mean, I'm curious to think about what are the addictions in our society. Right. You know, too much shopping or too much sex or drugs are the obvious one. But we really stretch out that term to mean, you know, and apply to all kinds of different or social media. Well, I think that's a brand new addiction. Right. That's, and that was in that Netflix documentary. Yes. Yeah. Tristan Harris was actually here a couple of weeks ago and we talked about it. And it's, I mean, it's I'm hoping that people recognize that that is not much different than all those other ones. Yeah. Whether it's gambling or masturbation or whatever it is that you're addicted to, it's the same kind of patterns. Right. It's just this one is particularly compelling because it's with you all the time. Right. You know, it's like gambling, you have to have someone to gamble with. Right. Sometimes you have to go to the casino or there has to be some way that you could like that goddamn phone is with you 24 seven. No doubt. Yeah. Well, it becomes all consuming as you say. Yeah. And then yeah, that can lead to all kinds of, you know, ruin. We're finding a pattern in all this, right? It's, it's in humans. Like humans have weird sort of pitfalls that we slip into. We have weird, weird behavior patterns. That we can fall prey to. Absolutely. I mean, I think that's probably part of just the makeup of what it means to be human. Yeah. As we can get sidetracked and get so consumed by something that you lose sight of the rest of reality in some way. And yeah, I mean, I see that in the things that I study for sure. People obsessed about death or sexuality or drugs or anything or anything at all. Yeah. But, but how, you know, we think about. people obsessed about death or sexuality or drugs or anything or anything at all. But how we think about gambling and how that connects to larger social issues and psychological mental issues is important to make sure you're not just compartmentalizing the behavior. Yeah. It's part of a larger context and pattern that are worth studying, worth looking at. How much of a benefit is there in explaining to people the way we fall into these patterns as much as there is exploring the patterns themselves? Like we have these weird sort of vulnerabilities that are built into our system because there's benefits to getting obsessed with certain things because those certain things can lead you to success as a hunter or gatherer, as a fisherman. It's going to help feed your family if your brain can completely lock on to in this this tenacious way of succeeding at something. If you're a hunter gatherer and your feet hurt and you're like, well I can't do this. Obviously hunting is not for me. You're going to start with death. Your children are going to cry. It's going to be horrible. So there's this built-in thing but that could be hijacked by roulette. Right. Well, it's just so weird. That thing of come on, I got to get this. I got to win. I got to go. That could be hijacked by games. That could be hijacked by many things that we find ourselves obsessed. Hijacked or also motivated by other kinds of interdynamics as well. I mean, whether you want to talk about Freud or some other primal instincts that are at work that depending on the individual and the particular social setting, their in family background can lead to all or nothing pursuits. But psychedelics sort of illuminates that for you. psychedelics are one of the only things that I've ever found that goes, hey, stupid. Look at what you're doing. Look what that is. Look what the cause of this is. You're like, oh yeah. I'm like, what did I notice that? Why didn't I see that? Well, you don't see it until the psychedelics sort of turn the light on for you. Yeah, right. And when it does, it's often the case that you don't need to go back. Right. It's like, or at least a red that people, you know, it's not addictive. But also, you know, once twice, you know, you get, you get it. You certainly don't need to do it every day. Right. I mean, if you want to have like, I think people feel like a little refresher course every year or so. It's not a bad thing to just sort of get like, oh yeah, well, yeah. That's right. I almost forgot. Right. Recalibration kind of resetting the system. The way I've described really profound psychedelics experiences is like pressing control alt delete for your brain. And for people don't know what that means. If you don't use a Mac, that's how you reboot a Windows computer when it crashes. Control alt delete your computer reboots. And you have a fresh desktop with one folder. And that folder is just labeled my old bullshit. Yeah. And then you have a choice. The choice is do I open up my old bullshit start going through, try to figure out life again through my old memories or do I try to form a new view and resist my old bullshit, resist opening it up. And that's where it gets tricky. Sure. Cause your ego will try to convince you like, listen, man, have one cigarette. It's not bad. You know, if I didn't relax, buddy, you know, let's, let's, let's go play some bets. Yes. Nothing wrong with that. Come on, man. Let's go do this. Let's go do that. Next, you know, you fall right back into the traps that you're avoiding. Right. Well, that you go can be tricky in that way. Leading you astray or making you think it's real or making you feel comfortable with these old patterns. Right. Really familiar with even if those old patterns are failure, right. Like a lot of people like fall off diets, fall off the wagon with drinking. They do it because they're comfortable with the feeling of failure and this, the uncertainty of the unknown of the future with these new patterns that you're trying to establish is very confusing. It's very scary. No doubt. And it's religious. Yeah. Ziya, you would describe it. Yeah. In a way. Yeah. The relaxed experience. Yeah. And what it does, you know, in just that whole metaphor is like being born again or something like that and the shamanic journey, you know, you're not the same. Yeah. Come back. And you've got something to teach. You know, and it's not just, I would say not necessarily just for the consumer. Yeah. Just like an alcoholic or whatever the substance is, but it's also, you know, about connections. I think and sharing the knowledge. Yeah. Getting it out there. What, what are you teaching in your sexuality classes that's different than what people would normally expect? Well, one thing I try to do is be as a cross-cultural as I can be. So we look at sexuality and Hinduism in terms of Chinese religions, terms of African religions. So I try to really, for these students, expand their mind as much as possible to see the varieties of ways in which people understand their sexuality. And so, no, that's where I start the class. How long you've been teaching this for? This class? Yeah. It's another one that's post tenure, but it's probably been about seven or eight years. How much this is a really important question? As a professor, what is it like pre tenure and post tenure? Because it seems to be a night and day difference in terms of freedom. Right. I overplay that a bit, but everyone does not. Not you. Everyone. I guess. Yeah, it's a strange organization, you know, and logic, the higher education. I'm post tenure. I think it's bullshit. Yeah. Do you think it protects intellectual freedom in any way? I mean, I think there was a time in which we might make that argument. You know, I don't know. Well, it's has tenure. One other profession's. That's a good question. It's insane. Yeah. It's like not the real world. You think it's in some ways not good because then the almost like the intellectual version of being born wealthy. Like you have no worries. And so you almost become spoiled. Well, absolutely. No, well, absolutely. Absolutely. I mean, there are arguments that after some faculty get tenure, they shut down or they really aren't doing as much research anymore and there isn't that drive. Right. It's a whole tiered system. So you move, you get tenure when you move from assistant to associate professor. And then what you want to get to is full professor. Right. So again, that's just a different place in hierarchy. Yeah. But again, it's all the papers you write, books you publish. I mean, yeah, my new manatees, it's getting a couple books out there. But yeah, I mean, I can't deny that I felt much freer after I got tenure to explore topics that I would be more hesitant to explore. Like which topics in particular? Drugs. For sure. Drugs. Again, as a research area, full force, you know, going to go into it. Again, because there's a legitimate purpose to a scholarly study of the connections between religion and drugs. It's luckily I'm not the only one who was pursuing this. But it's I believe there are a lot of interesting connections that haven't been made, especially in contemporary American society. The other drug that I'm particularly interested in and seems to get a lot of response is I also include pharmaceuticals and prescription psychoactive drugs as a part of the drugs and religion connection. So looking at the pharmaceutical industry and pills is sort of religious objects and structures and cultures. Really? How so? Well, like anti-anxiety medication. Yeah, I mean, that is just a kind, you know, it's ritualized. So you've got to make sure you take it and take it when you're supposed to take it. But faith in this little magic pill that is effective and can bring you to a better place. It has importance in terms of community and who you are connected with and how the drug allows you to have certain kinds of community. So a lot of this is obviously kind of a message. Do you see the messages in pharmaceutical commercials, which are for me dripping with kind of religious sentiments and sensibilities? You can be saved. You know, where are you saved? Well, you're saved with a pill. So this is a subject in particular that like pre-tenure would be you'd have to be walking on eggshells. Again, drugs more generally. I would, yeah, I would not be necessarily going there. But, you know, I mean, I'm not sure. So other professors share your perspective on tenure that's kind of nonsense? Or bullshit, I should say. I would say, yeah, there are some. But most must enjoy it, though. I think most people would like to keep it and think it serves some function in terms of as you're saying sort of sort of legitimacy of academic freedom. Some people are internally motivated. Some people are motivated just by whatever drives them, whatever intellectual curiosity their goals, whatever it is, it has nothing to do with financial stability or job stability. But not most. Most people, if you give them 100% job security, they're going to get fat. Yeah. I'm afraid I would agree. Absolutely. It's weird. And you're right. Some people are just motivated. They want to succeed and pursue their interests, sort of no matter what. And there are certainly a number of scholars who are like that. Sure. They make their way to the top. The path is what interests them. The destination is not real. Right. Exactly. I think that's exactly right. But as I sort of joked earlier, I joke that this is called a work and I don't feel I really work. Right. I have a great, great job. I just love what I do. Well, you nailed it. Right. You figured out what actually interests you. And for some people that what you do would be work, but not for you. No. Right. Exactly. I'm very fortunate, especially being at Emory. So it's a different kind of professional life than I've been really fortunate. It wasn't planned. I was a fuckup. And as I write about in this new book, don't think about death, which is a memoir on mortality. I was directionless and just fucking around at high school and getting high and taking all kinds of drugs. Oh, dare you. Yeah. Can you believe that? In the San Fernando Valley. That's weird. You were doing that in San Fernando Valley? No one does that dare you. No. You must go to rebel. I'm going to rebel. Yeah, right. Talk about conformity. Oh, my God. Well, part of the valley, did you live in? Vanneis. Oh, okay. Our old studio was in Woodland Hills. Right. And one of your guys grew up in the valleys. Sure. I'm sure. Yeah. That's fun. I used to work out in Vanneis. It's where Benny the Jets Jets Center was. Oh, right. Right. You know what that was? Funny. Well, famous kick parts in the gym. Oh, yeah. And we had to go to the Jets Center. Because you would heard about it. Oh, my God. It was legendary. Benny Arquita is like a legendary kickboxer in the early days of kickboxing. And he came out of Los Angeles. Yeah. It's so funny how many people have come out of San Fernando Valley or connected. I mean, but I guess not that funny. Well, a lot of people out there. Yeah. Well, but in any case, I was on a different path and luckily came around. Yeah. For sure. That led you out of the fog of adolescent craziness and fuck-up-ary. Oh, woman. Ah, a beautiful story. Yeah. No, my current wife. Yeah. That has really helped to bring me into another direction, although not, I wouldn't say only her. But it was just all of a sudden I started really liking to learn. Really? You know, I went and dropped out of college a couple of times and you're meeting her settling down all of a sudden thinking more critically and more deeply and taking classes more seriously. So I moved from usually, I was sitting in the back of the room to the front as I became a junior and senior in college. So it was essentially just a natural course of progression. She became naturally more interested in things, naturally more curious, naturally more dedicated to learning. Absolutely. But for some strange reason, I was back then very interested in death. So that was the subject as I was doing my undergraduate work. Why death? Well, that's the memoir. I have no idea. But I'll say the memoir starts with me as a young kid, maybe eight or nine. And waking up in the middle of the night with all this commotion in our house, the small San Fernando Valley house, three bedrooms and one bath. And then looking down the hallway and seeing what seemed to be like 50 firemen, but there couldn't have been 50 firemen. So I'm sure there were only a few who were rushing into our bathroom where my grandfather was. And when he was going into the bath, he had a heart attack and died. And I kind of witnessed that. And they took him out of the bathroom and that was that. But what really, what's really vivid as a memory associated with this was after the death, the family rabbi came to our house. And I just remember very vividly being in the backyard with him. And he asked me, do you know what the meaning of death is? It's like an eight or nine. Like I have no idea. And he must have said some things, but the thing that really stood out and is the title of the book is him saying, don't think about death. Just think about the living and trying to help your father cope with his grief. And you know, I mean, when people ask, you know, when did you start, how did you get onto the topic of death? This early memory seems to stand out and I utterly failed in the rabbi's advice. And I think at that point really started thinking a lot about death. Well, I don't know if the rabbi's advice is so good. Well, I don't think anybody should ever tell you don't think about anything. Absolutely. I mean, don't think about why elephant in the room. Don't think about the elephant. I just don't think it's ever good advice. Well, I've come around. Yeah, I mean, again, I had a lovely rabbi, you know, and I love my experience in the temple, even though after my bar mitzvah, I never looked back. How old were you when you were a grandfather died? I was about eight or not. Yeah, well, that's something you would say to an eight year old. But again, it's just it's not how people how people's brains were. Well, and it's not, you know, being fair to the reality where we're all going to have to face. Right. For sure. My death is just integrated in a part of life and I think thinking about it and trying to figure it out is valuable. I think ultimately we've been given a bunch of crude tools to deal with an insanely complex issue. This finite life form that we find ourselves inhabiting. Our consciousness is trapped in this finite thing. And we've been given these very crude tools for navigating and for coping and for just this the way we interact with each other about these very complex subjects. We get very simplistic, very just empty phrases that don't provide any real comfort. Right. And that right. And that are in some sense traditions that if they're handed down sort of as part of the lore on how you're supposed to deal with death. But for me, and what was clear as I was studying more and more in terms of what you were saying is that that is what religion is all about. I think religion is very much a response to death. And religious life is sort of required if you're going to be human to deal with death. Now what are the sources that give you the right tools? Again, traditional religion has been the primary resource for people. And that's fading. And now people have all kinds of ideas about death. And what happens after death? And again, don't necessarily follow the so-called or traditional authorities who want to teach us about death. I had Richard Dawkins in the podcast once. It was a real weird moment where we were talking about death. And he was saying that he thinks that when it's over, there's nothing. And then he sort of like semi-incrastibly said, like, you don't think that? Yeah. Like, what do you think? I'm like, I don't know. I'm like, I don't know. But I know that I've tripped balls and you haven't. You're the one who's scared of doing acid. You've already had strokes and stuff, buddy. Like, when are you going to dive into the pool? Right. He's brilliant. And I've loved a lot of his takes on religion. And I think in many ways he's been aggressive because of the pushback of his perspective as an atheist. But I think that I think people that have had profound psychedelic experiences are not that confident because you didn't know that that could exist until you had it. And then once you've had it, you're like, I don't know. What this is all about. I think anybody who says I know what this is all about. When you die, it's blank, it's dark, and that's it. You shut off and it's over. I'm like, maybe or maybe you come with me and I'll take you to a place and we're going to do some stuff and you're going to meet all kinds of gods. Right. And it doesn't last that long. Like, you got a couple hours? Yeah. Like, we could change everything for you in a couple hours. Yeah. It'll completely disrupt and challenge all of your assumptions that you also evaporate them. Yeah. Well, I think that's what gets me in trouble more than anything. Why is it in trouble? Well, I mean, when we talk about atheism because I take this approach again much more to be provocative that there are no atheists. We're all religious. Really? If you're willing to entertain my very broad understanding of religion and religious life, then I would say, yeah. Okay. So that's a very broad because we're not talking about what when you're talking about religion in terms of like taking Xanax, you're not talking about a higher power. Really. You're not talking about faith in a grand creator that has had some master plan for every single living thing and that they're all interconnected and the entire universe is all part of his master project. That's well, I don't think you need the creator to be religious. Right. Or some divine power. I mean, you need some access to transcendence. You need some way of understanding your own self and identity. You need to have a system of values that will guide you through your life. I'm a way of being. You need to have community in some form. So I'm more anthropological than theological. This is one way you might put it. So if you're talking about religion and Native American cultures where, you know, no doubt no, there's no word for religion and any of those languages. So when you think about, well, what's religion pre-Columbian, you know, native cultures? Well, it's what they do with the crops. You know, it's, you know, how they set up their sort of ritual ceremonies. It is their relationship to the weather. It's all kinds of things and where it's not necessarily a higher power. But, you know, it is about seeing that there's more than just materialism. Yeah. Or something like that. The problem, the word, because the word religion, like we have like a very narrow definition for it fits into our society and our culture like religion. Oh, yeah, I know what that is. That's your Buddhist, your Muslim, your Christian, your, yeah, that's religion. Dude, you got to take my class. Oh, maybe you should come in. I want to zoom. Can I zoom in? Can I zoom in? Can I zoom in for a gas lecture? That would be so. What am I going to say? I'll come in on a psychedelics. We'll do it this week. But yeah, no, I mean, I mean, again, like just, I think that the word sucks. You know, the religion, as I like to say, is an invention. It's a word that we have invented to label a lot of different kinds of behaviors. It's a very clunky word in a lot of ways. Absolutely. It's just like you say, oh, he's religious, like, oh, got it, you know. Right. All of a sudden, you think, you know, nothing. There was a guy that we've made fun of, a bunch on the show who was a pastor to a lot of famous people. He was like the hip, young pastor. We just got busted. Yeah, just got busted. Bang it some chick. Yeah. And we made fun of him because I'm like, look, these guys, there's no way this guy's religious. This is what I was saying. Because he was wearing these shorts that showed what I called his dick root. Like you were as he shorts that go way low, which you just don't wear these shorts like that. And you want someone to think about your penis. That's why you wear your shorts like that. Or maybe in the 70s, it would be. But I don't mean that there's no reason to do. Okay. Guys who wear their shorts that low, they're being overtly sexual to people that they don't even necessarily know. You're trying to, and you want everyone to look at your chisel body. You know, like this is, none of the, there's a reason why monks dress in these like very modest clothes that cover everything. They don't even want to think about their body. And that is a part of the religion of both celebrity and social media. This guy has got these traditional Christian ideas fused in with the religion of celebrity in with the religion of social media. And then you're seeing that it doesn't really work. Because you know, like what's the reward for those, those behaviors? The reward is he wants to fuck. Like that guy wants people to, that's that guy wants people to lust after them. And it wound up sabotaging him. Absolutely. Absolutely. I think yeah, it's an alim morality story of some kind of real sale. Yes. You know, this is a kind of celebrity fame kind of pursuing the trip to long. It's a trap. Because if you achieve what, what, if you're, you're lusting after this, this attention and this sexual praise and you want people to lust after you. You also want them to think of you as being someone who is more enlightened than everyone else, which is why you're willing to stand in front of them and give these emotional, profound sermons in the first place that resonates with all these lost young people. Right. And historically there's a lot of overlap between sort of celebrity and religious preaching. People like Billy's Sunday or sure. You know, others that, you know, that the religious leader becomes a celebrity and those lines get blurred and also it all becomes entertainment. Which, yeah. For celebrities, there's a need for that because they feel very lost and disconnected because they've achieved the thing that they've always desired and they still feel lost. But everyone looks at certain celebrities and go, oh my God, you've made it. Your life must be heaven and they're depressed and all fucked up and we don't have any sympathy for them. There's no one's going to be sympathetic to Justin Bieber with, you know, fucking $300 million in the bank and having sex with anybody who wants to like fuck you for being depressed. You're a little piece of shit. Been famous your whole life. But for him, it's probably very confusing because first of all, particularly like the really young people who became famous while they were young, like I had Miley Cyrus on who I think is incredibly talented, brilliant, brilliantly talented. Her voice is fantastic. I mean, it's so soulful, but she got famous when she was 12. I have a 12 year old man. I can't even imagine. I can't imagine being in the boss and filling arenas when you're 12. It's madness. And no one survives it. They don't, I mean, maybe a few have gotten through it and they're saying, but most of them don't. And that's where celebrity preachers come in or someone can harness your celebrity and it boosts them up and they can also provide you maybe even a, maybe if it's disingenuous, but some sort of a structure that makes you feel like there's more that you can, you can cling to something that's going to make sense of this all and that something is Jesus or Muhammad or whatever it is, whatever it is that you, you cling to, whatever structure that you cling to, Buddha, whatever it is. Right. And that can be exploited. Yeah. Especially in those situations, I think because of what you're saying. Yeah. The gap or absence. Oh, God, I got here. And you know, is this all there is? Well, I think with the children in particular because there's not, oh God, I got there. It's I've never been normal. Yeah. Well, that's especially it's like having cement, but you've never added water like it's never, there's something missing. Yeah. Well, you didn't grow up. Right. And many of them don't, they don't survive. And then obviously drugs can be one way to, it's the most common way to deal. Yeah. You know, try to try to deal. Yeah. I'm, I'm well aware of a lot of people in the whole Hollywood show business world that grew up famous and almost none of them survive. Yeah. Yeah. Rob Lowe did though. Rob Lowe got famous really young. He's super normal. Right. He might be like one of the only ones I've ever met and I've hung out with him. And I've hung out also more importantly with him and his son who's also really normal, really well adjusted. But he also got clean and sober, right, early on. Right, right, right. Yeah. So yeah, I mean, he made it. He made it. But he saw very few. He's also very beautiful. Yeah. It's probably easy to be Rob Lowe. Right. And he's got to be what? He's 40, 30. No, he's older than that. He's a bleached old of me. I'm 53, I believe Rob's 45. Oh, okay. Yeah. Anyway, there you go. He's one of the few that got famous very young and has navigated it through with grace. believe Rob's, he's five. Yeah. Okay. Well, anyway, there you go. He's one of the few that got famous very young and has navigated it through with grace. But I think the ones that are children that grow up child stars, the, you know, the ones I'm making mouth show and I kind of share. Good luck. No, I mean, that's so they find these celebrity preachers. This is often what happens. They find gurus. They find celebrity preachers. Right. Right. Yeah. Someone tries to make sense of things. Who do we look for to put our faith in? You know, and that's that they're there too, is it pretty common universal aspect of human life is in the product? I have something to believe in. Those poor gurus, they fall into the trap too, because now they can leach off the success of these famous people and become famous themselves. Right. And maybe they haven't really immunized themselves and inoculated themselves to the power of celebrity. Sure. It's a very intoxicating drug. Like you got to understand how to, how to avoid it. Right. And avoid the pitfalls of it. It's not easy. Yeah. Well, again, that's, that's the life that everyone wants. I mean, that's, that's part of the pressure. I assume for a lot of people is, you know, the American public, the global audience is going to be transfixed on, on, on you. And also, you know, what one you have. But I think we could really learn from those, those preachers, those preachers that only go after the like really like not not only go after, but attract celebrities. Like there's something to that weird sort of parasitic genre of, you know, of preacher. Right. No, I agree. I think it's right for study. Yeah. There's been any kinds of, they should. Well, I'm certainly, I mean, let me show you what we've seen. Well, I'm sticking with drugs. And for now, I'm going to go, celebrities are drug intoxication. Yeah. This is, yeah. Sort of what we're after. It's on form. Celebrity, I think there's a drug and so there's several drugs that are mixed together in sort of a concoction. There's a drug of celebrity, which, you know, for sure as a drug. And then there's also a drug being the person who has the answers. Definitely. And there's something that people do when they convince other people that they have the answers that it elevates their mood and their perspective. There's like some weird guru drug. Yeah. So there's the guru drug. And then there's a celebrity drug. We're not identifying a whole nexus of drugs. And with that guy, it was the sex drug. He's a beautiful man. He's a handsome tall, ripped, shredded preacher guy. Right. Right. Right. Right. A lot of drugs going on there. Well, and I wonder how extensive it always for him. Well, in terms of his, you know, whatever kinds of activities he was engaged in, the got him in the struggle. And I think with people like them, this is where it's, I'm going to give a simplistic perspective. I think he could have benefited from real drugs. So I think a person who's involved in those three weird drugs could have been, they've really, really good have benefited from psychedelics. Yeah. Because psychedelics would have let you say, hey, hey, do you see what you're doing? Because I see what you're doing. Right. psychedelics would have said, I know what you're doing. You're pretending, you're pretending to be profound. You're pretending to be pious. You're pretending to be enlightened. You're pretending to be above it all, but you're not. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You just want to us. Right. And that can be pretty destabilizing, you know, for someone like that, but also transformative. That's where the, there's real benefit in those destabilizing. I think so too. Well, I tell people I like getting paranoid from pot. It's one of my favorite parts. Because when it's over, I feel good. It's like a near death experience that you always survive. It didn't happen. You're okay. But also there's a lesson in it that fear comes with a lesson and that that insecurity comes with a lesson. And I think part of the lesson is appreciate the moment of life, appreciate life, appreciate this. You know, and when you're all fucked up on on pot and you're like, oh, everything's crazy. Like when it's over, you can you relax and you can appreciate things in a different way. Right. Well, and that's um, having that new awareness is, you know, is, is can be rejuvenating. It's also a hyper sensitivity. Right. Yeah. You mean of the, an appreciation or, you know, how things are or, you know, the sense of security of some kind. The paranoia itself is a hyper sensitivity of the reality of your finite existence. That's back to death. Yeah. Because that's, that's really, we, we were living life like it, I mean, this is right. There's another religion, right? The religion and materialism. Yes. It's the most ridiculous one. And this is like the Bible telling you not to worship false idols. Like part of that is this worship of a thing, of an object of, of things that you're trying to acquire. They're difficult to acquire. But then once you get them, you just want to acquire the next right. Well, that's the, there's no on consumerism. Right. There's no object. Well, you like, if I just get this one purse, I'm going to be all settled in. It's going to be, I'm going to feel so good. I'm going to become a normal. Right. Nope. Need more. Yeah. Well, yeah. I'm, uh, you know, there too, it was as a scholar not judgmental, you know, materialism is a religion. And it's, you know, it's got some heft and validity in terms of how people orient themselves in the world. But again, isn't it sort of hijacking the same sort of human reward systems in that it's difficult to acquire? Like, uh, say if you want a Mercedes, like a numerous Mercedes coupe, but they're hard to get. Like, you got to have a lot of money to get one of them AMG Mercedes those are beautiful engineer and they come from Germany and they sound great and God, you have to have a lot of money to get that. So you got to, it's hard. You see when drive down the street, oh, that guy got one. Where do you get it? Right. Right. How did he get that? I want to be like, I want to be that guy. I want to make my life. It's going to make my life. That's going to go watch too. I'm not going to watch. Are we striving? Yeah. These things. I mean, that's where you can get philosophical and that's highlighted by social media as well, right? Because people will pose and front of their beautiful Mercedes with their gold watch. Like, look at me, right? Look at me. Ball and out of control over here. That's, yeah. Don't you wish you were like me. Yeah. You know, they help. Yeah. Projection. Yeah. It's all image. And it's really responsible for a lot of depression too. Exactly. Yeah. No, absolutely. That's what that's what they're finding, you know, in terms of how people more engaged and immersed in their social media, lose themselves. Especially, I think they find them. They think they're going to be able to find themselves or at least, you know, kind of attempt to project a certain image of the self that they would like to be. Right. And that's, you know, that's just living by that, I think is debilitating in terms of person's sense of ego, confidence who they are, you know, and in real life. Do you think that there's a religion or not not a religion, but a framework or a structure that maybe someone could develop in order to successfully like classes in the pitfalls of all of these things we're talking about, materialism, social media, that there's maybe a religion that can be developed to deal with the modern time, the modern times pitfalls of the problems and trials and tribulations that we're dealing with today. They're not worse than famine. I mean, I'm in the middle of, how do you say his name? Noah Yuval Haradi. How do you say his name? You know, the guy who wrote Sapiens. You've all Noah Harari Harari, homo deus is a book that I'm in the middle of now. And it's stunning. He starts the book off with all of these examples of famine, plague and famine, where the vast majority of cultures have experienced one of those two things, plague or famine or both plague and famine throughout history. And it's talking about it. How many decades they went on where people starved to death and how many times in history people lost 30% of the population, 20% of the population to starvation. I mean, it's madness. The things that people had to deal with today. So in terms of like what we have to our trials and tribulations are biology survives far easier today. But maybe our consciousness is just as vulnerable now as it's ever been before, if not more. But the problems aren't as big, but we think they are because of the only problems we know. Right. Right. Yeah. And consciousness is just trying to, you know, understand it's surrounding and surrounding. And the surroundings are pretty complex. You know, it's not just a matter of food for survival or something or a shelter. They're weird problems. Yeah. It's the yeah, it's you know, what we think are real problems, but are inconveniences or some difficulties. So in some obviously lots of serious problems. But I mean, I think, you know, we don't have the tools, the intellectual religious spiritual mental tools in terms of dealing with all of these so-called problems that surround us. Yeah. Well, I was just thinking, but yeah, when the middle of this pandemic and whatever will get them close to 300,000 dead. And that has the feel, I mean, you know, of some kind of mass death event as well. How that will affect our consciousness as deaths continue will be interesting. Have more people died from cigarettes during this pandemic than have died from COVID? That I don't know. Well, don't like half million people die every year from cigarettes. And aren't we at about eight months in? We're about eight months in. Yeah. So wouldn't that mean we're probably neck and neck with cigarettes? Well, I mean, there are a lot of different causes of death. Sure. You can point to this. This seems to be again above a different kind of order. For certainly because it's non voluntary, right? Right. It's not of your own decision to smoke something that has been clearly labeled a carcinogen. Right. And it's mysterious. Yeah. And we're not sure what the virus is. Right. But again, I'm, you know, in terms of going off what you were saying, I'm just sort of wondering how consciousness, how our collective consciousness is going to be, you know, dealing with our ideas about death. And sort of questions around social you know, social responses in the face of this kind of event. Yeah. Well, we this is a an issue that we haven't overcome before. It's a new thing. It's novel. One of the weird things about people is it doesn't help to tell people that well, compared to other times and other generations, we have it easy because as hard as you have it today, the worst that happens to you today is still the worst that happens to you. And that's all that we understand. Right. We don't really understand. Like I'm telling people about famine. Like when I was explaining the Harari book, no one, that's not going, no one is going, oh my God, now I get it. Now I'm going to not think about social media. And I'm going to be happy that I could just go to in and out and get a burger. They're not going to think that way. No one. That's not that has worked on zero people. From me saying that to these people hearing it, no one has had a light bulb go off like, of course, there's no famine now. I feel much better. Thank you. It doesn't work that way. It doesn't work. People only understand what's the worst thing to happen to them. Right. It's why spoiled people scream and yell over nothing. Like, oh my God, you're so spoiled. But we're looking at the wrong way. That's just the worst thing that's ever happened to them. Right. And that's what the only thing they know. And how do you break people out of that very insular understanding of the difficulties of life in the 20th century? Yeah. You know what it's like when kids are young and they think it's the end of the world. Like one of my daughters is 10, the other ones 12, the 12 year old, eight, a couple of pieces of the 10 year old's Halloween candy. And oh my God, was there chaos in my house yesterday? Yeah. chaos and screaming. My 10 year old, she doesn't take any bullshit. She gets mad and she starts screaming. I'm like, Jesus Christ, it's candy. It's just this is not you and it takes a while. And I don't think they really ever understand how good they have it. It's hard for people. If that's the worst thing that's happening, they think it's the worst thing. They think it's like a real bad thing. Right. The perspective is so difficult to achieve, like to achieve like and like to lift above and look at it from above. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. And a parent isn't necessarily going to help barely. I mean, bear maybe in the long run that can turn out. But yeah, you talk to them and then let them blow off steam. But that's, no. Look, that's kids. Yeah. And as I was saying, you know, when they start transitioning into adulthood, you know, that's when things really come to the fore and show our thinking about who they are and how they are. Yeah. And, you know, the difficulties get greater and weirder. And and then with time, those seem minuscule. Like I remember when I was 18, my girlfriend broke up with me. I thought it was the end of the world. I couldn't believe it. Oh my God, it had never been so sad, so depressed. Right. You know, and then like a couple years later, I'm like, thank God. She's so crazy. Like what was I thinking? Like, I was in the middle of this terrible relationship and I didn't even understand it. Right. Well, and it sort of goes back to something you said earlier about, you know, how we don't know how to deal with our own struggles or difficulties. Yes. You know, we just don't know how to come home to the other side. Right. And even then, you know, it's where do you turn for community or for sort of buffering of support? And and that's I think hard for, I think especially a lot of younger people are people coming of age into adulthood. Well, that's why I try to preach the religion of physical struggle because I think the one thing that's helped me through all sorts of things is to make my physical workouts so much more difficult than anything else I'll have to deal with in my life. Okay. So it's so hard to do and so fucking exhausting and and I don't want to do it. And then when it's over, other things are just like whatever. Yeah. Because I make my own bullshit is basically what I do to in order to not get spoiled by life. And I think there's some there's a real, there's a real lesson to learn in there and I've learned it from other people. It's not like something I figured out on my own, but I've pieced it together in a way that works for me. And I think that whether it's yoga or even mental things, whether it's playing chess or meditation or something, it's more difficult than regular difficulties. Right. Right. I was going to follow up. You said, you know, talk about the, you know, the religion of the exercise I can working out. And for me, I would say my religion is learning, you know, and knowledge and just trying, you know, to intellectually kind of absorb as much as I can. And that's, that's not like working out. But it's more on the mental stuff that you're talking about where it's even a darkest of times. You know, I've got to sort of go back to the books and try to, try to learn as much as I can on on whatever topic we're talking about. But again, it's, it's you're doing something difficult. And I think like there's, there was a study they did on chess players. And they were trying to figure out why chess players lose so much weight during these big tournaments. And they realized that they're burning thousands and thousands of calories a day playing chess at a very high level. Right. And like these guys would lose tremendous amount of weight. Yeah. I think I wonder how that works. Yeah. A crazy number of calories. I forget what the exact number was. Maybe Jamie could find the study, but they were trying to figure out what was happening to these chess players. And then they realized like, Oh, when they're playing at this incredible, high level world championship caliber, their, their brains are flying here. 6000 calories. Robert Sapolsky who's brilliant. So you're just sitting there, but you're not your brain is firing up at a million fucking RPMs. Robert Sapolsky who I love, who studies stress and primates at Stanford says a chess player can burn up to 6000 calories a day while playing an eternity three times with an average person consumes in a day. That's amazing. That's amazing. That's amazing. Yeah. But it makes sense. Right. When the brain is going, oh my God, when you're thinking when, yeah, when you're so focused, well, they're playing at a multiple levels. They're playing several different games, right? Because they're not just playing what's in front of them. They're playing right. If I do this, he does that. So, but if I do this, he does this. If I do that, this happens, then that happens, then this happens. Or that happens, if that happens, this happens. And there, so their, their brain is gone. Yeah. And then they bought. Yeah. And there are calories in, yeah. And how the body is functioning. Well, that's a weird thing about doing podcasts is like sometimes at the end of the day, I'm fucking exhausted. I'm like, I haven't done anything. I just was sitting talking. So God damn easy. Look, what's wrong with me? It's coal miners out there, bust their ass working really hard. That's, that's what I was reminding myself too. Sitting teaching or reading a book and working. But I think the intellectual pursuits, yeah, I think there's more struggled than we think. Yeah. I mean, I'm not going to argue has to be. Otherwise, everybody would do it. I think there are lots of factors in terms of why people go on into graduate school and continue in a life of learning. Yeah. But it's, it's a weird feeling like that I've joked, but also been serious. That's my religion. We don't say, what would it, what would we learn you? Well, learning, you know, that's where I get my, my religious meaning is it feels like teaching sexuality over the last 10 years would have gotten increasingly more mind-field like definitely definitely. And a lot of topics have, I would say, over the last 10 years, sexuality for sure. But I do. I mean, I get off getting into the topic and especially in this kind of, with this kind of purpose, you know, how can I, how can I blow students minds around the topic? And, and, you know, you have to be fully aware of the various sensitivities that might be out there with students. And I'm, I mean, it's just, you know, I'm going to be covering some very touchy topics. And if you aren't able to deal with that, you shouldn't be in the class. Like what seems to be the most touchy? Or what's an example of a particularly touchy subject? Well, in the depth, for sure, the death class would be suicide, you know, that's just one that I've, I've really tiptoed around until recently. Tiptoed also. Tipto, because I want to talk about suicide. It's, yeah, it's kind of weird, but I've had this version to having that really be a topic in my class until, until recently. And that's, I think that had a lot to, you know, to do with a feeling of, I'm not fully prepared or trained to deal with students who were really struggling with suicide. And I would feel that would open that up. So I've changed in the last couple years. It's like, you know, there are too many suicides in the numbers have gone up. And, you know, I mean, I'm, I think it's an important topic. That's one thing that's ramped up in a huge way during this pandemic. I just read that as terrifying. Yeah. And it's an underreported. So I have a buddy that was talking to a sheriff in LA and he was saying that they used to get, you know, one suicide a week and now they're often dealing with five a day. That's crazy. That's crazy. Yeah. And it's not something that people point to as being a side effect of the pandemic. I mean, they maybe give it a cursory. Sort of, they talk about it very, very rarely. But it's, I think it's a huge issue. Right. Right. To spare. And also this feeling that a lot of people have, there's no way out of this. I think that's getting, you know, financially, losing their businesses, losing their homes, losing their, you know, their ability to feed themselves. Yeah. No. I mean, this is unprecedented for so many people. Yeah. Where they find the strength, you know, to carry on and deal with it is not so easy. So how did you prepare differently for a subject that you've had such a difficulty in describing and teaching before with suicide? What do you mean? Did you do? Oh, when you decided to start talking about it, how much time did you spend sitting down by yourself thinking, okay, how do I do this? Um, quite a bit of time, I think, with that topic and really trying to, again, I want to position myself. So I'm not the school counselor. And I'm not the rabbi or the preacher and I'm not the parent. So, you know, it's carving out this intellectual space of, you know, what is the history of suicide? What are the, you know, kind of motivating factors and forces and patterns of suicide and so on. And then I really try to bring in popular culture, you know, songs that are expressed ideas about suicide or thinking about suicides of celebrities. So, you know, I try to find a way to put those pieces together and a good way that's intellectually stimulating that doesn't just kind of work on the psychological level. If you can think about that as a distinction. The psychological level, there's so many different reasons. Right. Yeah. I mean, I silly as it sounds. I mean, my goal is to sort of depersonalize. I try to keep personal experiences and feelings out of the class. That doesn't sound silly at all. No, it's hard to do obviously. And they do creep in and find expression, but still it's with these topics. That's the game plan. Yeah. Um, how long have you been doing the suicide discussions? Well, it's really past few years. As I've seen these, and as I've heard from students who I mean, this is really a key reason. It's just the number of students who came into my office telling me about someone they knew who committed suicide. I mean, it was just again like three or four years ago when I would have more and more students. And we're just talking about it. And again, the death class opens up that space where I get, you know, they can feel they can come in and and want to talk about it. Will you worried about not doing it justice? Will you worry about pushback or what what what was the fear of not discussing this previously? That there were students who might be suicidal. And then you might somehow or another trigger it. Wow. Well, I mean, again, it may be an overblown fear, but it's a responsible fear. It's a thing to be very responsible thinking that way. It's just, you know, for so long, I just I knew it was a topic. I intentionally would like it all on the kind of go there. But as I said, it's changed just because the dynamics have changed with, I think young people in suicide. Yeah. How has that evolved over the few years that you've been teaching it? I think I've grown more comfortable with it. Mostly as a important element of the class. And I can see students being willing to engage in the topic, I think in ways that I imagine would not have been a similar earlier. I just I like to go after the taboo topics where I know kind of students are already considering and reflecting on them, even though they don't have an outlet for really intellectual kind of consideration, really removing themselves from whatever they personally think about suicide or almost sexuality or whatever and allow them to kind of learn history, learn about different cultures. And then, you know, I try to provoke them as much as I can to get them to really think outside the box, but also to sort of dig into their own abilities to figure some things out. When you're teaching a subject like the first day, when you've been thinking about doing it for so long, but not wanting to trigger people, the first day you did it that had to be a very unique kind of class for you. Well, it was. I mean, I think just the hesitancy from before and then bringing it up, this class has two to three hundred students. So it's not like me and 12 people. It's a very part of that setting forces me to kind of think about what I'm saying. It's amazing. The forces me to think about delivery, because it's not going to be so interactive. And so that when I really went into the class with that topic, I felt like I was able to really convey the points I wanted to get across and get them to, which is the most important thing, even in a class that size is to feel like they could chill and kind of relax and talk about the topic without feeling, you know, pressures from anyone or feeling anything's taboo and can't be said. Do you get questions from students during, during your lectures on this? Well, generally. Yeah. I mean, you opened it up to absolutely. What's a common question that they have when it comes to suicide? I don't, there aren't, you know, a lot of common questions. I think, you know, students have asked a variety of different things that often have to do with what does Christianity say about suicide? What does, you know, what do the religions say about suicide? I guess what I'm getting at is, do they turn to you for help? No. What can I do? What should someone do if someone knows a friend who's suicidal? I give them the resources where people who are trained can really help them with those kinds of more practical, intimate concerns. I, you know, I play the role lot of, you know, professor who doesn't want to get personal. Does one hear about personal experience, whether it's about drugs or grieving or, you know, sexual experiences? Yeah, the sexually experienced one, you were saying also that you have to be very sensitive to the feelings of the people in your class, your students. Like, how do you like, what, what are the particular, um, difficult subjects to explore when it comes to, well, like sexuality and popular culture and music, where, you know, all kinds of graphic languages used like that, W.A.P. song. Yeah. Did you see that? No, I haven't seen that. Well, maybe I'm teaching this class on the fall. I'm playing that song and teach it. Hey, I go, I try to go there, but again, it's some Did you see that? No, I haven't seen that. Well, maybe I'm teaching this class on the fall. I'm playing that song and teach it. Hey, I try to go there, but again, some students are like, you know, going to be best insulting or this is terrible. Or, you know, I mean, again, I, I did state it's data. It's, it's right. But it's data. Yeah. You know, if you want to take the study of religion seriously, you're going to be encountering things that make you uncomfortable. Yes. And if you're going to discuss sexuality, if you're particularly prudish, or you have a very difficult time discussing the way various people go about it. Right. Yeah. Or the varieties of whether we're talking about polygamy or whatever. Yeah. You know, it's out there and, um, you know, all kinds of things. Well, there's other than religion that's probably the most, uh, charged subject that you could discuss with people today. I mean, people have some really, uh, steadfast ideas about what's right and what's wrong. And when it comes to sexuality, it's, it seems like at least one place where we're gaining or we're, we're, we're showing some evolution or showing progress is with the acceptance of homosexuality. Homosexuality seems to be way less taboo now than any other time in my life. Like people are becoming much more comfortable with it. There's, any, like universally in this country, at least there's, uh, very little resistance to gay marriage, very little resistance to gay unions or gay rights. That's all changed. Yeah. It's all changed. Yeah. When I was a kid, it was, I mean, you were a kid the same time. I was a kid, but when we were young, I remember I lived in San Francisco from the time I was seven till I was 11. Yeah. So I was around a lot of gay people and my next door neighbors, my aunt used to get naked. They would smoke pot and they would play the bongos with this gay couple that lived, uh, next door of hilarious. I was just around it. It was normal. Yeah. And then we moved from there to Gainesville, Florida, which is really like the universe, throw me a curveball. And, uh, I had this friend and his dad was really mad. The gay people were getting married. And, uh, he threw the newspaper down on the tables. I can't fucking believe this. And I was like, what is, like, what is he so upset about? I don't understand it. He was mad that gay people were going to be allowed to get married. Yeah. And I remember thinking, wow, what a dummy. And I was 11. I was like, this is grown man. 30 years old freaking out about some stupid shit. Right. Like what? Well, I didn't understand it didn't make sense to me. Like it was normal to me. But I think those people are really rare now. People like him, they're, they're much more rare than they were when I was a little. Absolutely. Yeah. No, there's been a big huge sea change in attitudes. Yeah. Um, and that's, you know, led to a lot of conflict and, and, uh, sure, aspects of the culture wars, but still I would agree, you know, absolutely. Most people have come around on that. Do you discuss that kind of stuff? Like this, the, the, the evolution of our ideas about sexuality. Yeah. Definitely. I mean, I, I try to as a part of it. But for me, sexuality is, you know, it's not just sex. It's gender and religionally in reproduction. Yeah. And religion. So it's, it's a broad gender. It's a broad category. Um, absolutely. But in America, especially when you start, when you move outside of, um, you know, the traditional man and woman having sex in the missionary position, you go to death or reproduction. So you go to the help of your going to hell. No, straight to hell. Right. So, uh, so, you know, that is the dominant, um, uh, ideal is, you know, as, as gone by the wayside. I mean, it is certainly the ideal for many, but sexuality in America today is fast and furious. Right. But if you think that that's the ideal, then you're a freak all of a sudden. Right. Well, right. Well, I mean, surely that's part of, yeah, these shifts and attitudes. That's what's interesting to me. Who's the authority to, to tell us. Yeah. What is right? A wrong for sure. And then also the hypocrites, like you, there's so many people that we have looked at as these religiously, there's, it turns out, oh, these guys are freaks. The perverted. Yeah. Oh, yeah. And where I've read, I don't know where the study is, but, you know, viewing pornography is kind of the highest in the Bible. Oh, yeah. So again, it's like, makes sense. Well, what's, you know, again, that, that discrepancies, like, well, what's really sacred to you? Yeah. You know, Jesus and on Sunday or, you know, what you're doing or gang, gang down, right. I mean, whatever, yeah, job you're going to. Yeah. So, you know, people like to project and say who they are and they have other interests. Yeah. They like to project. Yeah. That's a good way of putting it that you like to project. They like to pretend. Right. Make, believe. Um, do you discuss the type of pornography that people view and how that has sort of changed? Um, well, I mean, I write about pornography in that book, Sacred Matters. I have a chapter on sexuality. And I write about deep throat. Um, and you just wallow. Yeah. Sound effects. I'm not really going to say that to keep throughout. Oh, yeah. I live in a loveless. Yeah. And I hear he reams in their story is again, a morality tale. We want to talk about sexuality. Um, we're going to talk about religion. Didn't Harry reams become a politician afterwards? Um, well, as I remember, it was, it became a real actor. He might have, right. That's right. That's right. That's right. But, but became very successful as a realtor, right? Yeah. I'm Los Angeles, right. Yeah. Well, um, you know, so, uh, I mean, I, studio, obviously want to, uh, include, you have to include that. You know, well, non reproductive forms of pleasure and sexual activity. Um, uh, it's not, uh, disconnected from religious pursuits. Deep throat was a movie that played in movie theaters for people that don't know. And people went to see that movie. And they waited in the line like couples would go dressed normal, not wearing raincoats, like regular people. In fact, Johnny Carson was in line, uh, waiting to see deep throat. And they interviewed him and talked to him about it because it was, it was a movie that was a movie. It was, it wasn't, wasn't just a stag film. And the whole idea was that back then, pornography in terms of like, that's what they would call them stag films. That'd be these films. They would play because people didn't have access to a, a movie projector for the most part. It was a very rare thing to have in your home. So for people to play those things, they'd have to get together with a bunch of guys at a party. Like when the guy was about to get married, look at this. That's what you're going to do. We're going to watch people fuck. Right. And those films, if you've ever seen them, they're really weird. Like very well from the beginning of the 20th century. Yeah. Very strange. No, the history pornography is fascinating. And there's a, I remember watching this thing on deep throat. And then I was just remember very clearly Johnny Carson getting interviewed, talking about, I remember that. Yeah. Do you know what I'm talking about, James? I typed in Johnny Carson. And I found an article that says, Ed McMahon, his sidekick was such a fan of the movie. He showed up with six friends in a case of beer. That's not fake dudes. That's a real new sign. I'm sure that's true. I'm sure that's you. Thanks. And not sure was one of the early audience members. No, all of the vice president, spiro Agnew, Warren, Beatty, Truman, Capote, Shirley McLean, Nora, F. R. I don't know who that is. Bob Woodward, wow, Woodward, and Bernstein and Sammy Davis, Jr., who grew so enamored of Linda Lovelace that within the year, he and his wife would be having group sex with her and her husband. Holy shit, Sammy. I did, man. Sammy got crazy. It was very wow. It was the, was the longest 62 minutes that millions of people would ever sit through in retrospect. The most inspired decision. Domiano, I guess the person who made it, made was to rename the movie deep throat. Nothing else could possibly explain its success. Wow. What was the original name for it? Lovelace is interviewed by Johnny Carson on the tonight show. Wow. Further stoking the interest of socialites, students, swingers, and the curious. See, that's what's interesting. It's like people didn't think of pornography as being something that was awful that you should hide. Right. It seems to me that it's discussed far less now that it's much more accessible. It's like people almost don't want to talk about it in terms of like average day to day conversation. Yeah. Right. Because it's so. Perfect. Is everywhere. Yeah. It's well, it's not just pervasive. It's also it's too accessible. Yes. You don't. It's still. You just. Yeah. Yeah. That's not taboo. Like it wants. Right. It's weird. It's it's and I've done research. And one of the things I've noticed is there's a lot of stepmother porn lately. That's basically all you get. What is that? What is that? I don't know, man. But if you go to your porn, like a lot of its stepmom stuff. Okay. It's like my hot stepmom, you know, dads out of town, that kind of stuff. Weird. Well, I will say, I hope my colleague doesn't mind me calling around, but at university, don't say her name. Okay. University of California, Santa Barbara in the film studies department, they have a class on pornography or they did about step moms. Well, not that. I don't know if that topic made it in, but it's as genre of film, you know, you can teach about it. Yeah. Well, it's listen, it should be a genre of study because it is a part of human life. It's a weird part of human life. Yeah. It is not very discussed. Right. Right. And why not? Yeah. Super nervous. Well, and people love it. I mean, billions of dollars. Right. And, you know, not really anymore. I don't think they make much money. I will. Well, that I don't know. Weird. I don't know the economics. But in terms of the impact, though, or in terms of the prevalence of it, it's incredibly prevalent. I think there's something bananas like 20 plus percent of all internet traffic is pornography, which is insanity. It's an insanely, insanely high number, right. Yet the amount it's discussed in polite company is like less than 1%. Right. It's very, very rarely discussed. If not dismissed as a joke, right. Right. And there's something that in itself speaks volumes. Yeah. That's the weird part about it. Here it goes. 35% of all internet downloads are related to pornography. How can I mean that is amazing? Is that the highest percentage of any topic? I wonder. I don't know. Must be. I would. I must be. Listen, this is what's hilarious. About 200,000 Americans are classified as porn addicts. There we go. There's probably another 100 million that are full of shit. That's right. 200,000 get the fuck out of here. That's such a low number. This is a very low number also. 37 pornographic videos are created in the every day, every month or hour. That's probably that. They've never been to the San Fernando Valley. Were you grew up? Yeah. That was the center of it all. Well, they passed some sort of wacky rule a few years back where they had to wear condoms in the porn in California. Yeah. And then people were like, well, we're moving out of California. And they started doing another places. Nobody wants to watch people being safe. I want you to have sex with your step-mom. I want to do anything safe. I want the dad to be pulling into the driveway when you climb. Yeah. That's that's what everybody wants. They want naughtiness. Yes. That's a weird that when it's so prevalent, it's also so rarely discussed. And just as a topic of a class, like that would be a very interesting thing to discuss just in terms of human nature and psychology. Sure. And history. Yeah. Thinking about that. Yeah. Yeah. The other thing I'm really going to be talking about this, the other under study topic that's starting to get more study is the orgasm, right? And thinking about mystical experiences or sure, certain kinds of ego dissolving aspects of human life. It's in there. And I teach about that as well, you know, and both the death class and the sexuality class, right? Do you discuss tantric? Well, some, you know, my my training is an American religious history. But in these courses, I do try to very superficially, you know, talk about a different religious cultures and certainly tantric. Yeah. That's a weird woman who comes to the orgasm, right? Because they're like trying to internally orgasm. Yes. Is that real? Well, I don't know. I have no idea. Seems like, but some guru shit to me. Yeah. Well, and even in American history, there have been interesting attempts at different kinds of sexual cultures, you know, the United community. Oh, yeah. Have free noise, you know, on it. Didn't want anyone to orgasm, you know, that was, you want to hold it in, but you have sex with that's whatever you want. No marriage. That never lasts. Well, how about this? If you did fall apart, this sex called the next, how do you say it? Next, yeah. Yes. I have no following. I have an either and there. I haven't either, but I keep making a mental note to eventually, there's a documentary apparently, is a documentary series or something on it, a hula thing or something, but it's apparently pretty fascinating. Yeah. Cause it was involved like legitimate celebrities, right? Like people on television shows and stuff, getting branded. That's something that you were right. It's like a documentary show on stars or five episodes. Yeah. That's a weird one, right? Right. Well, I mean, most sex calls are, or that kind of focus on sex as a part of religious trust and religious. What is the law against that? Like how are they arresting people? Like what did the people do that there? Do you know, Jamie? Like people are going to jail for this sex cult, right? I don't, I've only, the thing that sticks out in my head is that no people are getting branded. Right. I know that was like the next, the next thing. There's also another show called the Val that has some, it's, I think it's the same topic. That's an HBO. Oh, I don't know if that's direct documentary or like a, I'd like to find out what they're drawn with jail for. I'll look, I'll look at it. Cause people are going to jail. Yeah. Well, that's right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Wonder what they did where they said, all right, this is, this is where you cross the line. Right. You can't just, what? Did you see while while country, that is at the documentary. That's a documentary that people that lived in Oregon is going back to Oregon. Not right. Fucking crazy Oregon. We're all going to Oregon. For sure. Can Spircy conspiracy to commit forced labor? Forced labor. Who knows what? Yeah. You know, it sounds like they didn't have good enough release forms. Yeah. Well, I'll see about putting it on the syllabus. Yeah, I'm interested. Some things. Yeah. You don't need to go. The while while country. Whoops, whoops, almost felt. Yeah. No, yes. Got it. Bottle. This bottle does not want to stay up. While while country is the documentary on a oh show, that the guru, that the Indian guy that had the cult up in, right, with the girl, sheelow, poison, a bunch of people. Right. That is an amazing Netflix documentary. Yeah. Yeah. I've seen some of it. Oh my God. Yeah. But it's one that I always hear about. And, you know, again, it's really well done, but also revealing what is now or seeing a fairly common story. It's so funny because my friend Todd saw the first episode. And he's like, it looks like so much fun. I get to be hey, it looks so great. And he's right in the beginning. It did look so great. But it combined both these things we're talking about, combined sexuality and religion. It's like this, their religion was of love and of peacefulness and sex and harmony and it all went terribly wrong. What they always do. I like they often do. Right. Always. What what called has nailed it? What called has never gone wrong, figured out all the traps and pitfalls and made it to the finish line. Yeah. None. Zero. Well, that's I think that I would agree with that statement as a general statement. Yeah. It seems weird though that they can't someone can't do it right. Yeah. Well, I think that's maybe built into religion. You know, it's just not way to perfect it. Well, at least religion has figured out a way to achieve tax exempt status and along a lustrous history of success. Right. Yeah. Well, that's the beauty of the country. Yeah. Freedom of religion. Yeah. Supposedly. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But once you get to a point where you're doing the wild, wild country type stuff, right, it's not. Yeah. It's no longer. Yeah. So do you discuss those kind of things? You classes? But it's called some, you know, that are a part of the longer history. So was more minism, you know, as an early cult, you know, kind of marginalized community had a very different understanding of sexuality and marriage. Well, started by a wacky 14 year old. That's I was completely full of shit. I won't exactly characterize them. Well, I do that way. These little con men. Anyway, so yeah, I try to cover a lot of bases on the varieties of ways that sexuality gets, you know, bound up in religious life. Yeah. A Mormonism is particularly unusual, right? And that their, uh, their interest in polygamy led them to leave the country at the time. Yeah. They were head and west. Well, they're still there. Well, no in Mexico. Oh, that. Yeah. Well, yeah. The continuing that. Yes. Right. That's, you know, that whole Mitt Romney's family story. Yeah. Yeah. They're all down there. So like that. Yeah. Mitt Romney's dad was actually born in Mexico. That's why he couldn't be president of the United States. Mitt Romney's dad could not be president of the United States. He was born in Mexico. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. They lived in this compound. This is the compound, the same kind of compound that was originally in the news because they had been attacked by the cartel and women and children had been murdered. Okay. Yes. Yeah. Remember that. We're, I mean, they're not really expats because they've been there so many generations that they're now Mexican citizens, but they're living in these compounds. These fortified compounds in Mexico and they originally went there so they could practice polygamy. They're gonna be out. Yeah. Right. When it was out. I mean, out lot here, of course. Well, not only that when there was no difference really between living in the United States and Mexico, you know, 1812, the difference between the United States and Mexico was not that big a deal. Right. Right. Take your horse. You go over there. Right. You bring your eight wives. Right. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Right. There's a way out. And a way in. We'll talk about a subject that's filled with pitfalls like that. Subjects probably particularly the subject of polygamy is a particularly touchy one. And almost always is a lot of wives. Right. Very rarely is one woman who gets the pleasure of 10 husbands. Right. Right. Right. There are some, you know, I think examples of that. But yeah, the polygamy. Well, I mean, polygamy is for, you know, husbands with multiple lives. Right. The other way around there. Well, no, I mean, not in polygamy, but they're believed there's another term. I bet there's a few gals that could pull that off. I'm Jennifer Lopez. Yeah. Where I imagine. But yeah, I mean, so it's it's it's it's part of the story. And it is a little. It is. Polyandry form of polygamy, which a woman takes two or more husbands at the same time. For example, for eternal polyandry is practiced among the Tibetans in Nepal, parts of China and parts of Northern India, which two or more brothers are married to the same wife with the wife having equal sexual access to them. Trust. So five places for women have more than one husband. All right. There you go. Oh, I mean, yeah. Look at the photo, though. Go to that photo. Look, the woman's looking straight ahead. And both guys looking off the silo. Shit. I can't believe they're taking my picture here, but she's got her hand on both of their knees. Like, I own these two motherfuckers. But they're all looking off in the distance. Like, OK, she's one lady with four husbands. Hey, hey, hey, hey, who you at? At least balling out of control. Where is she? She's dead. That's an old ass picture. That's a picture from the 1800s. Look at that picture. That was like one of them. Where was that? Stand still. No. I wish those pictures look at that. Whoa. What is that? That's like from some normal rock well shit. Yes, they're ladies. OK. Yeah. Yeah. No pun intended. Yeah. Google goes deep. Uh-oh. Well, anyway, listen, man, I've really enjoyed talking to you. So fascinating series of subjects we brought up here. London. So you're in the middle of writing a book right now. Yes. What is the book? It's on religion and drugs. Do you have our title? Oh, yeah. No. I'm playing around with some things. But if people want to read your past work, what can they read? Well, they can read any of the books. Then go to my website, GaryLatterman.com. You see the books. One I mentioned a couple times called Sacred Matters. And then this new book is on death. And it's called, as I said, Don't Think About Death. A memoir on mortality. They can look me up. There'll be other things that I've written that are on the web. But do you have social media? Yeah. What do you have? Well, I'm playing around on Facebook and Twitter. And do you have an Instagram? Instagram, yeah. Okay. What is it? I had GaryLatterman. And Sam is Twitter. GaryLatterman. Yes. Twitter as well. Okay. All right. Facebook and, yeah. I'm around. Well, thank you, Gary. I really, I really enjoyed talking to you, man. Thank you so much, Joe. It was really fun. Yeah. I had a great time. All right. Awesome. Awesome. Beautiful. All right. Thanks. Bye, everybody.