Joe Roman Feynch. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. Then, so excited to talk to you, man. I have been so looking forward to this. Since I saw your video on the labyrinth in Egypt, spoiler alert, there appears to be a 40 meter long metallic tic-tac-shaped object. How deep into the ground? It's in the central atrium, which we'll get into. That is, but somewhere in the realm of 60, 70 meters. So man, what's that in feet? Like 200 feet, 150 to 180 feet down. Something like that. So for anybody who's interested, what is the name of that video that you put out? I think it's the ancient structure. Like it's said to be greater than the pyramid. I try to tease it a little bit. Yeah. It's on that. It's on my channel. Well, it's a good tease. You got me. Thank you. I dove right in. And I remember I was in the gym while I was watching it. And I literally stopped working out. And I was like, OK, I got to pause this. This is not something that I can consume while I'm working on. I need to really pay attention to this, because it's so wild. Yeah. And I honestly, that I'm grateful for that video. I took off. Like for me, it took off. The way bigger than ones that I've done in the past, I talked about the labyrinth in the past. And it's a much longer video. And I was really glad to get the chance to dive into these details, because I've been wanting to revisit the labyrinth for a long time. However, there's been recently a bunch of new data that came up about things that happened a decade or two ago or inside the last decade that really changed that picture. And that was things like the Melbourne Barrow scans that correlated other scans and also reported on, yeah, there seems to be a metallic object down there. And this isn't crazy emerging science. This is a legitimate company that is using technology that's been well established in defense. And in the UK defense, it came out of the UK military as a technology that's been more or less proven. So and the guy that Tim Acres rest in peace, unfortunately, his sense passed. But he, you know, what he said about this object, like he is a credible guy to say this. He doesn't draw conclusions about what it might be, but it's definitely, it's not wood, it's not stone, it's metal, it's not unlike other metal that he's seen, although he couldn't classify what exact type of metal it is. But he said, yeah, there is a, in this central atrium, because the labyrinth has multiple levels. And it's almost like you're imagining yourself standing in a shopping mall. And you have that central atrium where you can see all these levels. And it's like this big central chamber that connects to these multiple levels that's open. It's at least 40 meters long. It's really tall. And in the center of it is what's more than 40 because it contains this single sort of 40 piece, 40 meter long object that's sitting in there. So how did you find out about the labyrinth? Like this is something that has been talked about for a long time. Thousands of years. Yeah, but no one, it's not in any like traditional archaeology books, it's not. It is. Yeah, yeah, yeah, it is. So the labyrinth is kind of, this is the other part that drew me to it, is that it isn't something that's coming out of left field, right? It's not like this. Oh, no one ever heard of this before. It's literally a structure that was written about extensively over hundreds of years in antiquity by authors like Herodotus, Theodore, Ciculus, Pliny, the Elder, Stravo, Polonius, Mela. Like there's all of these writers of antiquity and you're talking about time for instance, like 500 BC up to the first century AD had visited it. And they'd written about it and talked about it. And they gave it this legend. You know, guys like Herodotus said that it surpasses the pyramids in grandeur. And then you have, yes, this is from Herodotus's histories in the fifth century BC. And he says, for this I saw myself and I found that greater than words can say, for if one should put together and reckon up all the buildings and all of the great works produced by the Halines, the Greeks, they would prove to be inferior in labor and expense to this labyrinth. So he's saying that all of the temples of the Greeks of ancient Greece, you've been there, you've seen the Cropolis. And just if you added them all up, the labor to produce them would be inferior in what it would take to just make this one thing in Egypt, the labyrinth. That is underground. That's underground. All right. How do conventional archaeologists approach this? Do they discuss this at all? Yeah, so they do. It's been, base, what happened was so you had, they always kind of knew where it was. So you have the classical authors of antiquity, which coincides with what you might call the Tollumac period of ancient Egypt. It's the transition from like dynastic Egypt into becoming essentially a Roman province, like an imperial province of Rome. And that runs you up to about 4,500 AD. And then civilization, we have the dark ages, sort of have Roman Empire collapses. And it's not until again, you get to the Renaissance and you have artists and other authors are looking at these historical accounts and they're talking about it, they're drawing it, some of the depictions you see from the labyrinth are in that. And then again, not until the emergence of what I would call modern archaeology in the 18th century. So guys like Carl Leppsius, in the 1700s, started to look at these accounts and go and survey the place where they said it was. So Herodotus and these authors, I selected the quotes here to just, there's a lot more that they say about it. But one of the things they talk about is they kind of give descriptions of where it is. They say it's near what was called Lake Moirus. And it's near what a city that's, was the temple of the crocodiles, crocodile opolis, or ancient arsenos, the other name for it. And we know where that is. And Lake Moirus sort of somewhat still exists, it's much smaller now, but it's in this region called the phoyum of Egypt. So if you ever look at Egypt on a map, you can imagine this desert, and you have from North to South, you have this green line of the Nile, traces it down. But on the left side, you look at this, this leaf-shaped depression that's all green, it's called the phoyum, it's a depression which used to flood with the Nile. Today they use it for agriculture. And it's right at that neck of the phoyum where it connects up to the Nile Valley. And he also described it, they also described the pyramid that's at the site, because there is a pyramid to Ammonem, the third on that site. So they give us all these descriptors, and everyone kind of agreed, yeah, so it's at this place called Hawara. Where I've been to several times, there's still a pyramid there, and there's this great fields of sand, and like open their libraries with chunks of stone. And what happened was a Carl Leppsius went there, and he said, well, I've discovered the ruins of like a Roman town that's built on the surface is nothing crazy about it. Flinders Petri was the guy who kind of got the closest. Now Petri went there in the late 1800s and early 1900s. And he was excavating, he dug down, seven or eight, he got down and he found this massive stone slab of Betten or plaster that was huge, like a thousand feet long. Like it was sort of traced the edges of it. And he's like, I'm standing on the foundation of the labyrinth. So what he said, he's like, it's all gone. Like it's basically Petri said, it's been quarried, his place has been a source of stone for literally millennia. So it's gone. So pretty much everyone since then in archaeology, Egyptology is like, and if you look on Wikipedia, that's how you, it's gone. It was destroyed, it was quarried away. Petri says, I'm standing on the foundation of it, the bottom layer, and that's it, it's nothing here. And so that's always been kind of the position of orthodox Egyptology looking at textbooks. That's where it is, but that's all changed because there's been a whole bunch of different now scientific expeditions there. This is where it gets into some intrigue because the Madahire expedition, the Kari University expedition, I mean these happened, the results have come out since but they were covered up at the time. That was suppressed. So the first guy to read. Where was this? 2008 was the Madahire expedition. They were covered up. Yes. This episode is brought to you by Zipper Cruder. The hiring process can be absurdly time consuming. Like when you're looking for a new doctor, you spend hours searching when you finally feel like you found the right one. It turns out they're not accepting new patients. The same thing happens when you're hiring. You scan through hundreds of resumes. You find when you like only discover they aren't actively looking for a job. Well, good news for all you hiring managers out there. Your search looks a little less frustrating now thanks to Zipper Cruder. And bonus, you can try it for free at zippercruder.com slash Rogan. Zipper Cruder has added new tools and features to help speed up the hiring process and save you valuable time. They can easily connect you with qualified candidates in minutes. They also have a wide pool of talent to choose from and it's continuously growing. Over 320,000 resumes are added monthly. So you can reach more potential hires. Use Zipper Cruder and save time hiring. Four out of five employers who post on Zipper Cruder get a quality candidate within the first day. And if you go to zippercruder.com slash Rogan, right now you can try it for free. Again, that zippercruder.com slash Rogan. Zippercruder, the smartest way to hire. Yeah, so what is our boy, Zoe? Yeah, Zoe, it is. Zoe, sorry. It was. And again, no more words. This is the words of Louis Decorio, who is a Belgian artist and entrepreneur, who funded and drove the Madahire expedition. He did it in conjunction with the Supreme Council and ticouties, which at the time was helmed by Zahi, who was. Also with the NRIG, which is the national research Institute for like, like basically subsurface studies. So that's those guys dragging that box around. So they used a whole bunch of different techniques to look at these areas around that pyramid at the side of who are things like grand penetrating radar, GM magnetism, very low frequency, like seismic tomography, electrical resistivity, tomography. There's a bunch of different techniques that are well established. No in science, this isn't like the Cuffress Gantz, I wish you can debate the merits of the technology. This is established technology. And they found the labyrinth. So, and what he found was, is that, yes, so what Leppsia said about the ruins of a Roman or Greek or Persian town with mud bricks and stuff, that's there in the first few meters. You go down, then you hit the water table, so that there's the other issue on this side is the water table. So the water is at like five meters below the surface. And under that is the slab that Petri found. So like six, seven meters is that, that huge slab that Petri found that he thought was the foundation. And then below that, Petri didn't dig deep enough. Below that, we can find essentially a labyrinthy in structure of granite and very dense rocks and walls and like a maze-like structure that has walls that are meters thick. There's another great slide in there that's the green and it's actually the left front. That's it there. So, yeah, so this is at eight meters with the left sounding. So you can see like this labyrinthy in structure of these walls and all of these lines and walls. So these are like granite. And the scale of this, it's 100 meters vertically by 150 meters. 100 meters tall. Well, no, so if vertically. No, no, so the Y axis, I guess, of this. So we're looking down in the ground here. But you gotta look at the scale, like across the top, that's 150 meters, right? So, I mean, what, 450 feet? So these are big walls. So it's big chambers and big walls. For people that almost like a football field. Yeah, it's a football field. Well, it's more, I mean, 100 meters. And Australia, it's my 100 meters, it's the football field of thing. I don't know how big. Yeah, it's 150 yards. What is the difference? Your 100 yards and 100 meters. It's 100 yards is a little less, a little less. So 150, and this is only a section of the labyrinth. They scan two sections. The labyrinth itself is said to be much, much larger than this. So they found much larger than that. Oh, the huge, yeah, no, it's, it's more than things. Overall structure, like a thousand feet at least. Wow. Like three to three, four, five times that size. I mean, you have to go back to the, we have some better indication with the more modern space-based scans now. But when they did those, the geophysical, like the ground penetrating radar scan. So they scanned two areas. That was the bigger one. Like in front of the pyramid, then they did another one on the other side of the canal that runs through the site today. And they found, they found it on both sides. So that's the difference between like what we say about the lab, like what the textbooks will tell you about the labyrinth that not being there. And it being destroyed too. No, we've actually now there's been the Madhara expedition confirmed it was there. And they said, what happened, this was interesting. And I have, I have, I think reasoning for why this happened. But it was covered up. And these are the words like Lewis Decorier. He eventually got sick of waiting, because what happens in Egypt, anything you do, whether it's your an academic institution or your an individual or a group that's funding some sort of expedition, you work with the council of antiquities today. It's the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities. But they essentially, you know, you got to take years to get access. And then once you do, though, they control release of information. So that's always part of the deal, right? It's that Egypt gets to do the announcing. And if and when they choose. and they have dismissed things in the past that they then accepted later. Yeah, a great example is the, honestly, the scan pyramid project. So when, so they got ahead of themselves a little bit. This is the, the muon detection, the cosmic ray detection stuff that been running that experiment for years at geyser in the Great Pyramid. They put the, and every time I go in there, there's always different sets of equipment at different places on it. But these muon detectors, they have them under the ground and in the ground gallery. And it just takes years to collect data. Occasionally these cosmic particles, they'll pick one up. And it's, you're able to detect voids. Or they have it, they can somehow tell the difference between it traveling through solid matter versus a void. Takes years to build up a, a resolute picture. But once they did, they said, oh, okay. So we've discovered that big void in the pyramid. But they'd also discovered the small void at the, at the main entrance. If you, if you look up at it today, there's those chevron blocks like above, you go in down here at the alma moon tunnel, but at the top where the descending passage actually exits the pyramid, the original entrance. There's these big chevron blocks in behind. That's that chamber. So you remember a few years ago, they made it big fuss. But as an example, like when the, when the scan pyramid guys on their own initiative announced that we've made these discoveries, I mean, they, they basically came out and said, this is bullshit, this doesn't exist. There's nothing there. And if there is something there, we knew about it already. You know? And you go on a couple of years. And when now it's time to do the pressure releases and to roll out, you know, the footage, he's, who's standing at the podium, making the announcement and showing the footage. Zahi's doing it, like this. Yes, too. Yeah. Yeah. A fascinating situation over there with him. Yes. I did a video, I just released a few days ago that got into some even more intrigue about stuff that's happened at Giza in the, in the Giza Plateau in the 1990s, which we can get into that too. But so yeah, what happened with the Madahur expedition and the labyrinth was that 2008 and nine, they finished their, their onsite work. They're ready to release the data. They, they put on a very small public lecture at Ghent University in Belgium. No one really attended it. And then they got told to start, and again, in the words of Louis Decordier, because he waited like two or three years and then he put this out there. He said that he was told to cease any and all discussion or release of information from the Madahur project and him and his team members were threatened with national security sanctions from Egypt, which means that, you know, I think at the low low, like if you come to Egypt will arrest you and if not when maybe we'll come and get you, I don't know, it's this is national security sanctions. Isn't there a way to sort of massage that situation and to talk to Zayi and say, listen, you can be the guy who found this. Oh, that would have been the case. I think that was a given if it had been released. I actually think in the case, so it's funny, I kind of don't really blame him. So I think this was a political decision, not a, not to end the interview people say, oh, it's hiding the truth and whatever, yeah, okay, that's happening. There's new data, there's amazing, amazing find that could change the world. In my opinion, honestly, the labyrinth is the biggest archaeological discovery of the millennium. When we get into what that structure is and how big it is in the way it's reported in antiquity, there's nothing bigger than that. Herodotus says it surpasses the pyramid. It's like finding more giz, like a gizapletos somewhere, like then do the ground. Like you can't, I just think it would be the biggest discovery of the millennium, which is part of the problem. Because unfortunately in Egypt, and this is just my intuition and my sort of read of the situation, what's happened is that the reality is the groundwater level is rising, right? So it's kind of attacking that part of the site, at least the higher levels of the labyrinth, for sure are suffering in this salted groundwater, right? It is going to slowly erode because that groundwater's come way up. We know it's come way up because Flint is petri back in the late 18th, early 19th century actually got in to under the pyramid. And you can't, today if you go to that pyramid, there is a passage you can go down a few steps and just throw a pebble, it's just water and debris and mud. So this water table has risen slowly over, no, since the 1960s since they built the dam. So it's the high dam. So what happened, this is the problem, right? So you've got all these factors. It's where it is. So it's, how are the neck to the foam now? Egypt, I love Egypt. I go to Egypt a couple times a year every year. And fantastic place, but they are one of, like their food poor in terms of like their the net biggest import of wheat. They need all the agriculture, they can get the foam is a huge agricultural area. There's a huge irrigation canal called the bar wabi canal that's been cut in there in like the 1840s same guy built the sues canal made it, cuts it in there. So you've got this situation of like, all right, we've got all this agriculture happening, we've got farmers, water rights messing with this. And it's, and it's happens to be running through this ancient site that could be the biggest discovery of our time. And it's happening because we built a dam on the Nile. And what happened with the high dam in the 60s? Like there's a low dam, the British built in like 1901, 1902, then they actually partnered with the Soviet Union to build this high, that's actually still a monument to Egyptian Soviet Union friendship at the dam is pretty cool. But when they built that high dam, it essentially stops that yearly cycle of inundation of the knots. Everyone, you know, we always talk about the knots flooding right every year that rains in Africa in the South, you get this huge flood that comes up the Nile and it floods out and you get this deposit of, of, you know, black mud and real fertile ground and they would use that to farm. And they built the dam, you get rid of that yearly cycle, right? And what happens people, it seems counterintuitive because people are like, well, it's less water in the Nile. No, what the dam did was eliminate the nine month dry season. So you had the three month wet season, but then you don't have that nine month dry season now. So you have essentially more water for more time in the Nile, which is having this effect of rising the water table. So you combine that with the size of Hawara and the project, the scope of the project, to try and remediate and save or excavate, start working at the labyrinth. I mean, you're talking like millions and millions. It's not an easy problem to solve on an area that size to try and get the water out, divert the farmers' water, deal with all of those problems. You know, and then, so what I think the options are, you might have been left with here is like, well, it's either going to cost us an absolute bomb to try and do this for like, we don't know what sort of gain. It would probably be a decade before that place is suitable for tourism. It's not much to see there even now. Or we basically say we've discovered it, but we're not going to do anything about it, because it's too expensive. And you're going to face a lot of international criticism for that. So I think that the decision was likely made, in my opinion, complete speculation that it's just easy to brush us under the table. This never happened. We never discovered this. This doesn't exist. Let's just go on selling tickets on the Giza Plateau and pumping water out to the fine for agriculture. God. How short-sighted. Now, when you're seeing millions, we're just going to say, dollars? Or are we going to say gallons of water? Not a dollar. I think the remediation project at Hwara would not be a, it's not a simple thing. In fact, they did do. There was another expedition after the Madahire expedition in like this was 2009. Cara University, along with a Polish university, went out there to try and figure out what is the deal with the groundwater? Where's it coming from? Like with the erection, they were doing geological test pits and all these boreholes to figure out the water situation. According to them, that information was also covered up because they also did ground penetrating radar surveys, also confirmed the labyrinth. The guy who was in charge of that in Cara University was actually put in jail by day. Again, this is on there report when the information finally came out in 2017. He lost his job, obviously, as part of it. So they covered that up too. But they had tried to- What a jail for a word. I guess for working on the site. Like, I don't know. I don't know the reason it's on their report though. That's what they say is that he was jailed. Because allegedly halted the project and then put the guy in jail. This is what they say on the report from that expeditional that work which came out like a decade after they'd done it. And I dig it up on the internet. I'm like, well, this is interesting because their results are interesting. But even after their work, their conclusion was, well, the water's a very complicated problem. It's coming from a couple of different directions. Northeast is the shallow, it's coming in from this way. But it's also coming from another direction. They'd have to dig a lot more test holes in a wider area to really figure it out. And I think you'd have to start digging like remediation wells, put in pumps and just try and pump that down. If not canal and trench that whole thing out, like a massive site. And then you can start to worry about, all right, we're going to get some dirt out and start to excavate. Could it be done without interrupting the farmers? Probably. Yeah, I mean, I think we could do it. I think that you can divert and move the bar lobby canal out of the way if you had to. I just think it's like holler at Jeff Bezos. He'll be on the horizon. So yeah, someone with some deep pockets. Yeah, don't you want to know? And you want to know? I don't know. Yeah. Well, the crazy thing is, too, is that according to that, because the story doesn't end there. Like when you get into the modern space-based scans, Melonbarrows and the GS scan stuff. And I know that also I've met the guys from the Cuffery Project. They are going to scan that site. We talked to them about it recently in the Cosmic Summit. And then I think what they're saying so far is that the lower levels, because this thing goes down, like I said, to nearly 100 meters, there's a report of levels down to 300 feet under the ground. And it seems like they might be free of water. So it's just shallow groundwater. And once you get into the bedrock, and it's like it's not a porous stone, or whatever's underneath just the top level sediment, it seems like it can hit. And the team aches said it looks like it's free of water. So the very bottom layers seem to be free of it. So the actual labyrinth, very bottom layers. The labyrinth is multiple levels, at least. So we know that they could somehow or another from the side dig a tunnel below everything. If you could below the water. Yeah, you'd have to dig a deep tunnel. I mean, that's also an option, is to try. If you actually believe, and you go with these scans, you know where that atrium is, we could probably try and get down there and just line a tunnel somehow and get down there would be epic if we did that in our lifetime. I would love to see it. Like, we incredible. It seems like a terrible travesty if they don't. I agree, which is the reason I made that video in the first place. I wanted to draw attention to the labyrinth because it's just, I think it is the biggest opportunity for us. In terms of massive discoveries in the ancient world, I can't think of anything that's bigger than that. I know the coverage scan stuff is super interesting that the claims have wild. And it's, but this is like known about. Like this has been talked about. And then it's been confirmed with multiple scans. You had, you had Madhara expedition, you had Kara University. I think it was like, what roclaw, butchering that Polish university or then you had geoscand team, which was Klaus Donor, a friend of his, he ran as German geoscand space-based satellite. I think it's like a mathematical statistical approach. I kind of use it to determine the elemental composition of stars is the best explanation I have. However, they have a track record of being able to find things like water and oil and gold under the ground. So they've been using that as a company for like people to go, basically surveying then go dig and they've done three or four of these and that. Okay, this is where you said it was. They scanned the labyrinth. They were the first space-based scan to come out and talk about it. Then you had Melon Barrows, which is this X-UK military technology that's very similar in technique to the cuff race scan guys. Like so they use synthetic aperture radar and top of tomography. These guys are using like high frequency orbital imaging with seismic data. So it's very similar in the way they're in. You're essentially, the description I was told is it's like imagine dropping pebbles into a container of water. And if you could instantly freeze that container and lift it out and shine a light from underneath it when you look at it on the top, you can see those ripples in three dimensions but you're looking at it on a 2D scan kind of thing. And you can interpret them to show you the topography of whatever's in that three dimensional space. It's something similar to that. So technology is something awesome. It is. It's so awesome. It's wild. It's so awesome that they just have the ability to do that and look at that. But beyond the calf race stuff, which I don't want to get disappointed. So I look at that like, hmm, like it's too great. It's too amazing. It's too spectacular. It's a huge claim. Yeah. And if it's true, all boy does that change everything about everything? I mean, I'm in the camp of want to believe, trust me. Oh, I mean, I'm sure you are. But I'm not. But I mean, I was skeptical. And initially when it came out, I've talked, I've since certainly come around on the promise of the technology. My skepticism probably still exists in the layer between the scans as I've seen them and then the interpretations of the results. The 3D exact. Yeah. And what their interpretations of it, it's a little weird. It's because you don't really have a crystal clear view of what this thing is. And it's like, yeah, you're making it look like it's some sort of a Tesla coil or whatever it is. Like giant cubes with these full tunnels. Yeah, I look at, we'll see. And I want to get into the SARS shaft, because that's another thing that I've just recently put a video at about these other scans that have happened in the 90s confirming that have since kind of been confirmed by the Cuffra scan team work. But yeah, at the labyrinth at least, the interesting thing to me that happened with these two wildly different techniques, right? So you have, you have the geoscand, which is this statistical mathematical approach space-based still, but then you have an melonboros, which is a similar technique to the Cuffra scan group. And it was used, I mean, just so this is what to make is it would tell you it was used to detect submarines. They would look at like surface patterns on the water and they were using it to basically track submarines under the water. It's origins, at least in the military as far as I know. It's like the nonclassified part of it is what he said. At least reported to have said, I should say. Are there ancient artistic depictions? Yeah, I mean, not ancient, but certainly Renaissance peers. And it's, I think some of it symbolic, but we do get a lot of descriptions from those authors. So for example, Herodotus talks about it being, 1500 rooms on one level. He said there's two levels. He saw one level. He wasn't allowed to go to the lower level. He said that it's 3,000 rooms in total. And not just rooms, but also courts, massive open courts. These are like, Herodotus didn't have access? Not to the bottom level according to him. Interesting. But dear Dorisickulus did, like these guys talk about, no, Siculus said that you needed a guy, you would get lost down there for days if you didn't have a guy who knew his way around. And then you have the same similar accounts from Pliny, the Elder, and again, once you get accounts coming from multiple people over the span of centuries that have from different civilizations by the Roman and Greek and they're correlating. It's like this is a pretty reliable data at this point. And certainly in history or in archaeology, that's what that's your measure for like, all right, there's a grain of truth in this given that we've got the same thing coming from these different accounts that are essentially different civilizations that visited the same place. And what they say is astonishing. By all of them talk about there being 100, if not thousands of rooms and twisting chambers and then also giant open courts that might have 40 columns to a side. And all of it being done with just spectacular craftsmanship. Yeah, this is this a dear Dorisickulus first century BC. Talking about that, you know, in respect of carving and other works of craftsmanship, they left no room for their successes to surpass them. He's saying that there is this is phenomenal work. And in this sacred enclosure, one found a temple surrounded by columns 40 to each side. And this roof had a, is building had a roof made of a single stone carved with panels and richly adorned with excellent paintings. So 42 a side that's 80. And how was this even lit? What, that's always a good question. That's a core question when you get into any of these subterranean. 42 aside, that's 80. And how was this even lit? Well, that's always a good question. That's a core question when you get into any of these subterranean spaces, like the Sarah Punements. It's always there's no sort. Right. We don't know how the answers are done. It wasn't with flame. I don't think it was with flame. And then you had go back to Strobbo's depictions. In addition to these things, there is the edifice of the Labradath, which is a building quite equal to the pyramids. A great palace made of many palaces for such as the number of, has it worked with a pair of style courts, which lie contiguous with one another. Before the entrances, they're lie what might be called hidden chambers, which are long and many in number and have paths running through one another, which twist and turn so that no one can enter or leave any court without a guide. Yeah. So he, you had sickleous as a count of one of those courts, being 80 columns, like 42 aside, and there was 12 of them, at least 12 of them in there. Wow. Yeah, it's absolutely great. So you have 3000 rooms, 12 gigantic courts. Deodorist talks about the roof being made of a single stone. I very much doubt that, but what I think he's describing is the craftsmanship that you see in those real megolithic buildings in Egypt, where you can't see the joints. And here, plenty of the elder who lived between 23 and 79 CE, which is current time. So he's saying 3,600 years ago, this was constructed according to tradition. Isn't that interesting? Yeah, so that predates the pyramids. Yeah, by a long way. Yeah, he's allegedly allegedly. Right. Well, if you go with the Orthodox data, the pyramid, sure. Right. He says that, you know, so essentially 3,600 BC, that it was built according to the tradition at the time 3,600 years. So with the conventional dating of the pyramids, that's more than a thousand years earlier. About a thousand years, yeah, a little less maybe. And the conventional dating is like, it's questionable. I mean, we even the carbon dating on the pyramids doesn't quite match the conventional dating. It's a little earlier than that. So what is the carbon dating from pieces? So they got some exactly, yes, some mortar in the carbon dating. And what is that? With the date? Yeah. So I believe it's like a wide range, but it's like several hundred years, like 200 years, prior to what they would say is the time of Kufu, of chops, the ruler and the fourth dynasty. Certainly on the Great Pyramid at least. And what is the room for error when they do the red carbon dating? Well, it depends on the samples. And there's a lot of specifics, but it could be plus minus 20, 50, 100, it depends. I think the margin of error, they did multiple samples. I believe it's less than that. So they're pretty firm that the date is earlier. So it gets, it's kind of a critic. I mean, I think there's a bunch of people that have talked about the fact that the archaeologist don't really reference that date because it kind of messes up their timeline a little bit. Of course. We use not thousands of years. It's hundreds of years. So the explanation tends to be, well, it was old wood. It's like the ash that gets mixed into the mortar is the source for the carbon. And they say, well, maybe they just burnt really old trees. That's very convenient. Right. It becomes convenient. Yeah. Well, all that's convenient, which gets really weird, because we know that they did some enhancements to the pyramid. Like they refurbished some things. Exactly. And so that's the problem. It was like, would you refurbish what? And how long was it there before you refurbished it? Indeed. I look, I think I don't discount the carbon dating. I think what you can say from the carbon dating, firmly is that it shows that these pyramids were being worked on. If you can't, I don't think you can make the jump to say this is when they were built. You have to infer and say that I think this is when they were certainly being worked on in that period. So I think it's possible that denastings, Egyptians could have finished the pyramids. They may not have been entirely pyramids originally. I think there's a strong chance that there were multiple phases of construction over a long time to them to end up being what they are in our time. I think those are all possibilities here, because this is the whole, when you take a step back and look at the whole picture of ancient Egypt. I mean, you cannot attribute everything that we see in ancient Egypt to our current understanding of those dynastic Egyptians, their capabilities, their tools, their writings, and what we know about them. We know an awful lot. Like they do, we have tools from the ancient Egyptian toolbox. We've found them. We have depictions shown on walls of how they did things. They were very good about documenting them. So we have the tools, we have the depictions. We also have lots and lots of artifacts that match those tools and depictions. We've got these clearly handmade artifacts. And this is across all the categories of artifacts from things like stonework columns, obelisks. Oh, sorry. Yeah, obelisks and vases, boxes, pyramids even. And then you have this other category of artifacts that is doesn't match. You can can't be explained by these tools and techniques. And there's just no depictions on walls of how they made the precision artifacts. There's no... Do you give me an example of these precision artifacts? Of course, yeah. And any category. I'll have it in that tale of two industries, a director, Jamie, on there. It's... Game on. Week one starts now. And every touchdown brings you closer to a payout with Draft King Sportsbook, an official sports betting partner of the NFL. Every touchdown could hit big. Don't just watch the game when you can win with it. Draft King Sportsbook brings the unmatched intensity of the NFL straight to your fingertips. With your backing, the first touchdown score, hitting any time TD props or riding the thrills of live in-game betting, every play is packed with possibility. New customers, this one's for you. Bet just $5 and get $300 in bonus bets instantly. Plus, grab over $200 off NFL Sunday ticket from your YouTube and YouTube TV. Your season starts now. Download the Draft King Sportsbook app and use the code, Rogan. That's code, Rogan, to get $300 in bonus bets instantly when you place your first bet of $5 or more. Plus, over $200 off NFL Sunday ticket from YouTube and YouTube TV. In partnership with Draft King's, the crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1-800-Gambler in New York called 877-8 Hope and Wire, text Hope and Y 467-369. In Connecticut, help is available for problem gambling called 888-789-7777 or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly. On behalf of Budhil Kacino and resorting Kansas, 21 and over, agent eligibility varies by jurisdiction. Void and Ontario, new customers only, bonus bets expire 168 hours after issuance. Four additional terms and responsible gaming resources, cdkng.co slash audio. Devices are probably the best example. They're a smoking gun example. It's a 3D printed one. Yeah, so these, to me, I mean, this is why the Vaze project was so, I mean, to me, quite validating when it came up. Yeah, so it was a real thing. Yeah, the shisk disc. Yeah. So these are the smoking gun because they connect to everything else and we're learning so much about the precision of these things. However, but we could start with statues or boxes or columns. It doesn't really matter. There are two categories across all of these artifacts and the advanced category again, so you can't really make them with the tools that the ancient Egyptians were just, we know that we're using that we found. They don't show the, there's no scenes of building stone pyramids. There's no scenes of them making giant statues, like thousand ton statues. This is the type of thing that you see on the wall. And this is in the tomb of the nobles, the West Bank at Loxor. And here they're building mud bricks. So they're firing mud bricks over the fire. You can see them, they're pouring on the shaping and they're carrying them. They're very relatively primitive. And we know they made mud brick pyramids. They made mud brick ramps. And some of the mud bricks are big and heavy, but we know all about this. But you don't see is the, is the stone pyramid building, the really massive megalith stuff. The next slide with the vases is a good example. This is what I've been calling the Talot to Industries. It's a whole theory that I've been putting together for the last few years. Again, you have a primitive industry that is clearly observably handmade. It lacks precision and symmetry. We found the tools, the Egyptians drew the scenes, the artifacts matched the tools and techniques and then you have this advanced industry. Visibly sophisticated, usually very hard stone is the other characteristic. The primitive stuff is usually soft to stone, although not always. These artifacts, as we're doing analysis on them, are showing this depth of precision and complexity that's phenomenal, the vases are just, this is where they become a smoking gun to this whole argument. I think for people that don't know about this stuff, you can just give them some numbers and what. Sure. So yeah, the vases go back to pre-dynamic times. There's no debate that these are pretty dynastic. They pre-date what we would call the dynastic civilization. And over the last few years, we've been starting to analyze them. We, the vase scan team, various groups of people now, have been scanning these with modern technology, light-ass scanning, like laser scanning, even CTX ray scanning. And basically they're coming back with precision terms of circularity, flatness, like centering numbers that are very much equate to some of the best industrial processes that we do today in things like aerospace industry. So where it's really important to be within two or three or four thousandth, thousandth of an inch of perfection for the parts we make for jet engines or rocket engines. Those are the numbers that we're seeing come back on a lot of these vesels, not all of them again. Like I don't want to say this is true for all of them. It's not, it's true for a lot of them though. And this is, again, these are levels of precision that are not visible to the naked eye. I mean, you're talking human head, like a sheet of printer papers like six or seven thousandth of an inch thick, a human hairs two to three or four thousandth thick. And you're seeing sometimes tolerances even lower than that. So it's not something you can feel or see or touch, but we see it again and again. And the only way we can achieve those sort of tolerances today is with very advanced machines. You know, 3D, 5 axis mills, really high precision lathes, cat, like computer controlled equipment. Problem with the lead, those the handles on this one. Right, so yeah, if you get into it, so this is the issue with this. And one of the craziest things about this, and this is the OG vase, the original granite vase. This is the one that started at all. It's one of the more precise ones. And yeah, you could, you can imagine without the handles, you could lay that if you're spinning it. But if you had the handles, if you wanted these handles, you would have to leave a ball nose that runs all the way around it, and then come back with a different process, a different tool to remove that space, that this basically the space between the handles off the body. And you don't see a lack of symmetry in those species. Well, precision, so this is the thing. So when we do that today, it's called you basically lose some positional calibration on your tool. So we account for that in the way we do industrial design of these sorts of parts. So we know that we're going to lose a little bit of precision when we change tools and process. So we account for that. But you don't see that on this. When we did, I went back and we did analysis of this area of the vase body in between the handles, and there's no drop in precision relative to the rest of the vessel. So that means one of two things. One option is, okay, they could handle that position or that lack of, that loss of positional calibration better than we can, or it wasn't done on a lathe, and it was done in what you would call a single pass with a single tool. And the only way you can do that is with a tool with five axes of freedom. So now you're talking about a five axis CNC mill. Like one of those, if you're to control things that can just cut it out in basically one pass, but without changing tools and process. With incredibly hard stone. And that's the other challenge with this stuff and there's some samples of the stone there in front of you. From vessels. It's actual, these are actual pieces from vessels. Yeah, they've got a private collector. Just gotta think, like who made this and how old is this? How old is this? This piece, at least five, six thousand years. I think it potentially quite old and we can get into how old I think. But so that's the other challenge that is rarely talked about is the material. Like these things are made from granite, direct, rock crystal. That thing's rock crystal basically quartz. It feels so hard. It's insanely hard. Yes, all these different, oh yeah, it's like I have a granite mortar and pestle. It's big heavy thing. It's like I don't need to protect it from anything. I have to protect my countless from it because it's gonna destroy anything it hits. And this is so thin. So that's the other, it's translucent. You hold a light up to it. Even the rock crystal ones translucent. So that one gets down to about two millimetres thickness just under the lip. Yeah, you put a phone light on it. It comes right through it. I mean, so with granite and with diorite and particularly granite, I mean, it's essentially a conglorin, right? So you have it. It's not a material that's homogeneous. So inside a granite, you've got silica and horn blend and mica and all these different quartz and it's the pattern. Hence the pattern, but also almost microscopically, it changes hardness. So some of that stuff is less hard than other bits. And the way granite takes millions of years and heat and pressure to bond those things together and that's the stone we get when it pops up out on the bedrock and we mine it. But it just means that when you're machining a material like granite, it, you know, your tool tip is going from stuff that's really hard to softer to hard and it's like you have to account for that yet we see this, you feel the surface of it. It's phenomenally well polished and finished. I mean, if you were doing this today with a lot of modern tool tips, you'd be ripping chunks of quartz out rather than cutting them. So something that the actual tool tip that made these things we know is also very fine because this is a very difficult substance to choose to work in. No stone sculptor chooses to work in granite unless that's what the project calls for. There's a reason they use marble is that it's both much softer and it's homogeneous. Like it's the same material. It doesn't vary in hardness wildly. So making these sort of precision things and objects out of stuff like granite and getting it down to two millimeters thick like that other piece near the lip. Yeah. That's crazy. And it's, there's even examples that get even thinner than that. Flinders Petri talked about a direct vessel that was 140th of an inch thick about he's he called it the thickness of stout playing card. Yeah, this is it here. Wow. Look at the lake going through it. That's about two millimeters thick. That one's one of Matt Bell's vases. It's probably my favorite. It's like typically called the thin walled vase, but it's a phenomenal piece. I'm amazed it's actually survived this long because it is. That's one of the rare few delicate ones. You could break that because it's so thin because that again with this type of stone, it gets really brittle. And it's like glass, like a cube of glass bang that on anything. Right. Thin glass, shadows. Same as the stone. Yet they did this again and again and again. And how do we know that this is pretty dynastic? Well, from where they're found, I mean, they're literally found in pre-domestic barrels. This is the real, this is why the vases are so important to me. It's and why I think they're the smoking gun. It's one of the big reasons is that they're uncomfortably, or incontrovertibly pre-dynastic because they've been found in barrels that are 100% pre-dynastic. Naccata culture, Naccata to, you can go to any museum that has a reasonable collection of these and find them in the pre-dynastic section. All over there's no debate. Like they're found in these barrels and they carbon date the barrels or they culture date and the reference data in two periods of thousands of years prior to the dynastic Egyptian civilization. There's good evidence that they may even stretch back as far as 12 to 14,000 BC that they're in barrels that go back that far in like the southern Egypt, northern Sudan area. Yeah, it's crazy. And there's a lot of those barrels, unfortunately today are underwater because of the dam that created like NASA. But either way, I don't people will debate the how far back they go. It's just not controversial at all to say that they are pre-dynastic 100%. And I think the reason is is that they're this size, right? You can bury this with you. If you have it and you can be buried with it, you can't do that with a thousand ton statue. It stays on the side. And then maybe someone down the road writes his name on it, like Ramsey's a second, or somebody puts Carves his name into it. And then we come along thousands of year later and say, oh, Ramsey's the second's names on that. Therefore, he must have had it made. I mean, that's essentially one of the core principles of Egypt, oh, they do use the writing primarily as a source, not the only source, but they do. And the vases, what's the problem with even dating them to those pre-dynastic settlements is that there is nothing about those cultures that indicates they had this capability. In the Carter culture and even the ones like Toshka, these older ones, pretty similar in that you're talking like the burials are often like shallow, fetal position graves. That you find these precision hardstone objects with fishbone cones, sticks and stones, very primitive hand-thrown pottery, not even thrown, just hand-formed pottery. No other stone work. I've seen antique steelers that are selling these vases because there is a huge, there's a lot of these in the private market and in private possession because of their size and their availability and how many they work, because there's hunt, like are they illegal to possess? No. So you could get a hold of one of those, Billy? Yeah, there's, I know collectors with like 89 of them, 100 of them. What? Yeah. Really? Yeah, they're on, they come up with the sale. How many of them available? There's, I would say today, there's easily over 100,000 hardstone vessels for sure. I mean, they found 50,000 of them in one spot, like that's the famous discovery at the step pyramid. But yeah, it's crazy. There's a lot, I think there were even more. Like this was an industry, like that's the other key and a lot of these are semi-exotic types of stone too. We don't know where the stone came from. It's not local. In a lot of cases, no, there's lapis lazuli artifacts that are pre-dynastic and there's no known quarry for lapis in Egypt. The closest one's Afghanistan. What? Right. Yeah. Well, there's... How far is Afghanistan from Egypt? I don't, it means must be right over on the other side of the Middle East, I think, isn't it? It's over towards, yeah, it's up towards Russia and China. It's... Should I have that image again, Jimmy? Yeah. Did you just pull that? So there's the fire in those Egypt. So Turkey, Afghanistan over here, Uzbekistan, again, over here. On the other side of Saudi Arabia and Iran. So you've got to go all the way from Iran. Oh my God. So that's the nearest lapis quarry. I mean, look, this is not a problem restricted to the vases, either. There's a box in the Asara shaft, which is more, the box itself, just, they say, it's what's fourth dynasty. It's made from a stone called Dassite. And again, there's no known quarry in Egypt for Dassite. This happens a lot. So it's all about... Back to that image, Jimmy, please. It's one of the things that freaks me out about the map, is when you go out, it looks like it was washed over. Oh, 100%. Yeah. 100%. I've talked a lot with Randall about this. Look at that. Go back out again. Look at that below it. Yeah, that's an ARA. That's exactly what it looks like. It looks washed out. It is. That's what it is. Yeah, but that's crazy. It is. Like how much water washed that out? And how else would you get what looks exactly like how water wash out? How else would those features be on the surface? It's a... Yeah. Yeah, I mean, some of those amounts and mountain ranges, but I can tell you in the desert, not so much. I mean, there are mountains. That just looks like channels. It just looks like an insane amount of water literally washed over the area and smoothed it out. Yeah, I mean, there's huge... There's a massive amount of evidence for the giant floods through the Nile Valley as well, not just across the Sahara, but I mean, Petri was talking about, he was up on cliffs, you know, and finding water lines and flint points and stuff that were indicative of massive floods. This is Hwara. Yeah, this is the labyrinth. Wow. So there's the canal. You see, that's the canal I've been talking to the bar wabi canal. It is so crazy that when you get to like Sub-Saharan Africa, like how little of that has been explored and how much of that was like insanely green and fertile. Not that long ago. Well, certainly not. Yeah, that means. Thousands of years ago. Well, it's interesting. I just... I did a... I did this long video on the erosional features of the Giza Plateau. Because last year, 2024, they released a paper that they, I think, some geologists, I can't remember the names unfortunately, but they talked about the fact that there was all of the valley temples. So these pyramid, you know, on all these pyramids that are on, like what you would call the, I mean, lower Egypt, the Giza Abber-Wash, Abucir, Sakara, my doom. They all... The pyramids aren't just a pyramid. It's a pyramid complex. So it's like you have a pyramid, you've got a structure in front of it, you've got this causeway that runs down to what the, they would call a valley temple, a structure that's the end of the causeway. So that's the well-known valley temple that's next to the Sphinx, is the valley temple for the middle pyramid. Like it's connected by this causeway. And then I figured out that during the African human period, which ended thousands of years before dynastic Egypt ever started, there was a branch of the river, Nile called the Aramat branch, that ran exactly where all of these valley temples are. So it's like, it's almost, I mean, I just look at it and go, this was built, these were built for that water source, because I think it's super, I'm very skeptical about the idea of these, all of these valley temples, particularly the one that Giza Plateau being used as harbors for like a couple months a year to transport all these blocks from the quarry and Aswan. Again, 600 miles away right for all the granite. And there's thousands of thousands of tons of tons of tons of granite on that plateau that had to be transported. I don't think there's the depth there. I've seen pictures and photographs in early times pre-damned when the Nile flooded, there's not that much water there. However, during the African human period, which ended at the latest 6,000 BC, but stretches back thousands and thousands of years before that, that's when the Sahara was a savanna. You had river basins and lakes, it's like lakes and rivers. You had, you had a much more rainfall. And it wasn't like, it wasn't this flood situation. It wasn't this annual inundation. There was just rainfall and there was enough water in that Nile Valley to support this Aramat branch of the Nile, which was said to be like a mile or two miles wide in some place. So really not like an insignificant waterway. But it was high and it was running and they've traced the path of this Aramat branch and it turns out all of these valley temples from these pyramid complexes are on its banks. And it's like it's flooding, it's like they're all the time. And this period ends and you get the desertification of the Sahara starting around 6,500, 6,000 BC. And so it's not like until 5,000 and 4,500 BC, 3,000 BC. That's when you sort of, that's 3,100 BC's kind of when we say the Egyptian civilization started. So it doesn't make sense to me that if they built these valley temples and these, and these, all these structures in like 2800 BC, I mean, what do you, you would build a way the river is. Like the river was way down there at that point. Yeah. And so I, what is the response to this? Well, I just put it in my, I mean, does anybody try to debunk it? No, it's a peer reviewed scientific study. This is what happens in these, with a lot of these, these papers, you'll see this in, it happens in genetics and the DNA studies that have been done to you. You don't, these other scientists will not really step on the toes of the archaeologist or the historians, right? They'll present the data, but stop from inferring what it could mean for the picture of history. Got it. So there seems to be left to throw the data out there and go, you guys figured out. Yeah, pretty much. And they just, whoop hands off like, I'll just say, we're not going to touch it. Yeah, they ignore it usually. They're not going to hit. It's, yeah, it's left to like rogue scholars and idiots like me on YouTube. People to write books to really try and put the pieces together. God, there's a YouTube dude, right? I know. I mean, thank God there's a place where a video like yours can get millions of views or so many people all around the world can watch that and go, wait, what's going on down there? Like, who really knows? And why do these people, why are they so sure? Like, why are they so arrogant in their ideas? Because it's very clear that it's not a, there's not a, you know, like we know civil war ended in 1865, right? It's like it's all written down. Everybody knows people were alive. There's like photographs of the soldiers. We're pretty accurate with that. Yeah. You get tough. Fuckin' 6,000 BC, man. You're just guessing. All right, yep. It's a, it's, yes, throw the back you go the much, you can't tell. You can't tell. You have a playlist evidence. Yeah, and it's also, it scares them because something like that, if you really do find advanced structures that are at 6,000 BC, well, you know, before go back to the topic, we didn't even know that that was even possible. Right. And that's that famous conversation that happened with Robert Shock and that really arrogant archeologists. Shock, land, yeah. Which is, he's laughing. Like why would you laugh about ancient history? First of all, what, what ancient civilizations are, is that guy's still alive? Lying it, yeah, show me the pot chuds. He must feel so stupid now. Well, yeah. Have to go back to that, like so much to show him that video and go, why are you laughing? Lying it. Because this is just human ego. Yeah. This is human ego on display for the world. You want to be the gatekeepers of this information. You want to be the one person or the person that represents this group of human beings that are the scholars that have published work, that have taught it universities. And you're the only ones, you're the only ones that know the ancient history of Earth, despite the fact that there's people like yourself and Graham Hancock, and who have spent a lot of time, and they're very careful about what they say and spent a lot of time investigating this. And they just wanted to dismiss those people because they don't have the proper credentials or what are you talking about. Well, I think it's, yes, that's exactly what's happening. I think it is as a result of the fact that the conversations is getting out of their hands. Right? If you, yeah, it's one of the things I admire so much about the people who started this, what we would call archaeological Egypt, Egypt, to logical space, guys like Flinders Petri, and they're very open about what they didn't know. Like one of my, like Petri would tell me, he talks about the machining marks and you can read between the lines at the wonder at what he's finding. And he's like, I don't get it. Like we can't do it. We don't know how they did it. And this is, I think because the conversations happening in those halls of, you know, the academic halls or the geographical club or whatever these pieces. He just doesn't get out to the hall. It doesn't get out. And then, and so that's slowly changes with the rise of initially like alternative authors, you know, which best represented by Graham Hancock, friend of mine as well. And he, you know, his books and they start to gain in popularity. And now these, I guess, the people in the, in the academic halls of residence that are typically considered the authority as seeing this conversation get out of hand. And now you get to YouTube where, you know, it's, to some extent, I think it is possible to do an end run, and run around what they're saying. And I do watch people and there guys like Flint that are trying to embrace that new media space and try and get on podcasts. You know, if you read the S.A.A. journals and articles, the Society of American Archaeology, they literally brought into themselves saying, how can we become more popular in this space and how do we start podcasts and get into it? The problem is they're still doing it the same way. And it's this like when CNN journalists get fired from CNN and started podcasts and everybody like, no, you're doing CNN outside of CNN. That's what they're doing. They're in academia, which is like gatekeeping of information and also like, pajouratives, mocking, really shitty behavior towards anyone who's outside of it, including calling them racist, calling them white supremacist. It's so dumb. It's so dumb because one of the dumbest parts about it is, no matter what, those are the people that lived in Africa. So no matter what, no matter what happened, no matter who ever built that is people that lived in Africa. There were some shut the fuck up. Like the white supremacy thing makes no sense. Yeah, it's right. I mean, it's Africans. One hundred. Look, that's the people that we're living there. If humans made it, you know, if you're not an alien camp, which is a bizarre camp, but if you're not in the, I'm in the ancient civilization, incredibly advanced, cataclysmic disaster, wipes them out, civilization takes a long time to rebuild, finds the remnants of these ancient civilizations, and then sort of claims them over generations. After a thousand years, nobody really knows who fucking built it. You know, and then this is this is where I think we find ourselves. That's that's where I'm at. But if you're in that camp, you're talking about Africans. Yeah. All these shitty things they do just show their hand, just show what they're really all about. What you're really all about is silencing. Yeah, so all these shitty things they do just show their hand just show what they're really all about What you're really all about is silencing Anything that really throws a monkey wrench into everything you've been teaching for decades Like you've claimed that you're the expert you've claimed Arrogantly that you have all the information when you clearly are wrong Absolutely that is what's happening. It's actually it's a quiet that I steal from my friend Christopher Dunn quite happily Which is you know you wouldn't trust an archaeologist to design the chair is sitting on but if it's an ancient chair He's gonna claim he's the expert on it like this and this is what happens. I had Joseph Wilson Non-apod cars talk about he had this great quote for him. He said oh, you know Just because some engineers standing there, you know shining a laser on a vase Don't let that don't let don't mistake that for him knowing more about the guy who can read horror glyphs because he can read what they wrote about it And he's the authority on it kind of thing is just like you're just dismissing all of these other disciplines that are that I think are required for a a True and complete picture of trying to assemble this evidence, right? Like you said, there's there's very little evident evidence That shows us definitively what happened in the dim dark distant past But it's you got to try and make the case for it as best you can and I think we should try and encompass all of the evidence and One of the disciplines that's missing from that approach is the engineering stuff. It's the precision stuff It just gets dismissed out of hand and yeah, we just because we're not The authority figures on that on that topic it it just yeah, they ignore it which is what happens anyway I don't know how you can ignore the vases how you can ignore the statues the symmetry Yeah, the construction of the faces. It's it's starting to become a problem like they're trying and and and even in the past when I Would guess the mainstream approaches to try and solve say some of the machining Examples the tubular drills or the saw cuts. I mean just when you when you dig down into them and the Answers that you get and the explanations that are offered are just Don't hold any water. It's they've kind of they're frankly ridiculous like what the issue with the drill bits is the revolutions per minute, right? I mean The course yeah, it's not the revolutions per minute. It's the penetration rate. We don't know how quickly it does how yes So how quickly it penetrates into stone it I suspect that it's That it was it could have been turning quite slowly But it's like a one in 60 penetration rate is the rate of the spiral groove on the cores that have been analyzed Particularly Petri's core number seven one in 60 meaning one in so for like if you unwind that circular motion to a straight line 60 inches horizontal travel one inch vertical drop which is 500 times greater than how we do it today with modern diamond tipped source Holesils which do turn so our modern ones bear in mind they you know 900 rpm They'll cut through grant slowly, but it cuts. I mean no doubt it grinds more more so than cutting but Yeah unwinding that spiral and looking at that's what Petri was first of all like how is this possible? His numbers got refined a bit by Chris Dunn, but more or less or one in 60 penetration rate So it's very difficult to explain There are multiple cores like this and this is the This is the other element that I think the vases are showing is that you have a technological link Between the vases and these other precision artifacts the bigger ones that couldn't be buried in These civilizations that to me suggest that they were made with the same technology You see the same machining marks the same tubular drill marks on that quartz piece if you look on the bottom you can see the On the inside of it. There's no other side. You see the tool mark. There's a this right here. Yeah, so this is like that's the tubular drill So this is that's a core function of how these vases are made you would often find so this is the bottom the box So they've called that thing out and then they've snapped it off and polished it down But they didn't eliminate the full tool mark and you'll see that in a lot of vases So we know that these tubular drills were used with the vases as well and with no idea the power source no idea what the material was that cut no Well, yeah So yeah, the vases have big it's become interesting one of the let me talk about the provenance part first because that's been the one Crit like the the pushback on the vases. This is where it's become a problem is is nobody's really been able to push back on the data like the the scientific then the measurement data that's come out the precision fact the geometry there's a whole bunch in the geometry space that that indicates that they are like designed they're not just made they were designed with mathematical and geometrical geometric principles in mind They show pie they show fire the golden ratio Fibonacci sequence all this sort of stuff is in them No one's pushing back on that the major pushback on the vessels and the early days of the vase scan project was that are these a Modern fakes or something like they're not they're not the real deal because they're not coming from museums They've been their modern forgeries. How can you say they're real? So what's happened in the years since and when I first came on here and talked a little bit about that That was very much the early days of this project about two and a half years ago now now The the vase scan in particularly the artifact foundation Adam young who started this whole thing who owns he actually this is his copy of his vase They've been in now four museums around the world. We've scanned close to a hundred vessels from inside of museums with impeccable provenance Those results are starting to come out. They're matching the results that we found so far. So the provenance thing is It's kind of it's that's going away the people that I think chose to fight on the Hill of Providence have died on it now It's their hundred day our legitimate and to be fair you can also find vessels in private collection with impeccable provenance Just as you can find a lot of vessels in museums that we have no idea where they came from It's a it's a it's a much it's not as clear as just while if it's in a museum. It's we can trust it if it's not We can't it's not like that but What else has happened is that there's other as so the the project came out and it gained a lot of Interest from really talented people around the world And there's been several of those one of the guys that I've been working with a fair bit lately over the last couple years ago And I'm dr. Max Zamelov who's a physicist I believe he taught for ten years. He's a nuclear physicist taught for ten years I think at Penn State. He's a he runs his own company now And I first he'd reached out to me and actually we took these fragments to his house and I roll up to his house in Florida and Sitting in his living room at two like a leg scanning electron microscopes, you know as you do who who doesn't have 2 SNs in their living room So we we started to do things like like look at these pieces through a scanning electron microscope to try and find evidence for The materials that we use to cut them so you should if these were used with a tool So that the orthodox explanation being well, it's a copper tube and it's sand or it's some sort of cutting medium and it's it's it's spun and ground out You should find traces of copper or whatever that material was in there. We looked at we spent days looking at several pieces Zero zero copper like nut didn't find any copper nothing at all the nice scanning electron microscope Not only do you get the magnification, but You can focus a beam of electrons onto a particular spot and that backscot of electrons You can then map out the elemental composition of the material So you can pause you for a second here. Yeah. Are the oldest tools they found copper? Yeah, yeah Copper and stone and what are the dates of the oldest tools? Well, they go back all the way to to the old kingdom 26 27 2800 BC like Yeah, it was it was early days. They were smelting. I mean obviously the older tools are stone tools like Flint I mean a lot of carving you can carve stone with harder types of stone So there was definitely flint and things being used But there's no evidence like not up until like the very later periods of the Egyptian civilization Is there any significant evidence for iron and things like that like it's pretty much copper and bronze alloys 10? You know copper and tin is gone So when they analyze the the traces there's no copper we didn't find any copper We didn't find some other stuff which is very interesting well the most interesting thing we did find was titanium What titanium and titanium alloys with iron we found iron zinc 10 third-on alloys. Yeah, so titanium and it's not that we've yes so Yes, so when you find term alloy doesn't that refer to something that has melted right that's been put together exactly in fact You and you don't titanium as we know it as a metal doesn't exist naturally so it's in in nature is titanium dioxide that is Found in rocks. This was not titanium dioxide that we were looking at because you see a again that the SEM gives you the spectrum Right, so you would see oxygen and titanium together. We didn't see that and in fact I did it I have it I have a video on this and it's we found a piece actually like a small maybe 2030 micron wide piece embedded in one of those grooves In a tool tip that look like an embedded piece. It shines up very brightly When you see metals and on this in the SEM It's like a bright spot and you can aim at that It is just straight titanium and it looked like a small piece of a tool that had been wedged in there and I mean look in the in our modern Sometimes I mean think titanium was discovered even in the late 1800s. It wasn't used outside of laboratories until the 1930s as a material But there seems to be evidence that there's some titanium uses No, I wouldn't I know Max is trying to work on that. I would It was not a systematic so we spent days like a couple of days and it's we didn't do like a systematic grid search like even in one of those pieces You could spend it would take you a long time to just map it properly right like the scan of the whole thing but It's a pretty good devil's advocate would that be evidence of a lack of a chain of custody that perhaps Someone was potentially using titanium to see if they could cut it. Yes, it could it could be contamination so we looked for signs of contamination I didn't this didn't seem like contaminant in fact at the end of At the end of when we'd finished scanning we actually took he had some titanium darts like he was we put some on On one of the pieces and put it in to see what that would look like just these like a tiny like just like literally a matchstick and just The tiniest end and just tapped it and then looked at that under the microscope to look at what contaminant It just didn't seem to be contamination. You can't rule it out There's it's we found other types of metals as well So it didn't seem to be contamination. What is the reason why it didn't seem to be that well because it didn't it So we looked at what contamination would look like like if there's a well So it's like smaller specs where you can actually see the material the one piece that we found It seemed to be embedded in the stone like it was as if something like this tiniest fragment of the tool of some sort of Imagine it was a tool tip wedged itself in the stone and then it stayed there But it was only like 20 or 30 microns wide which is pretty big under a scanning electron microscope But there was the only piece of tatina We found other other specs of it and then occasionally be titanium and iron mix together And then we we also found specs of like zinc Zircon and tin and then various combinations. I honestly I think it's it's grounds for more investigation I think the most significant thing was the no copper thing like this that's like all right No copper like that that to me was the biggest takeaway The fact that we found some other elements and pieces of what let's say questionable provenance I know these are legitimate pieces from these vessels Ideally the best thing if we could make this would I'd love to work with the Egyptians to do something like this because I know There are fragments of vessels in the step pyramid is there's 100 thousands of them down there still in fact Like the last time we've got down to the very bottom level which is you know There's a special permission required to get into the step pyramid and then even then they generally won't let you down to the bottom level There's another ladder and 30 feet down to the big bottom level It goes down further, but the hits the water table again But in one of these corners in this very bottom level like 150 200 feet under the step pyramid We found a wall and it was a collapsed it must have been a collapsed magazine of these vessels And this is the place where they found 50,000 originally like like John Philippe, Loyay in the 1930s found this huge cash of these vessels there and In this wall, it's incredible little video. I've not published it. I mean I do want to talk about it But you could you literally see like it's like a wall of dirt of not rock but dirt and in the wall There's like fragments of vessels because it had been a a cache of them that there's something a tunnel had collapsed And it decrossed them so you got these like pieces of worked granite or Or die right or whatever just in the wall so I'd that would be interesting if you could go down there and like Get their permission to say well, let sample because you have then You know, you've basically got it in its original environment from dynastic Egypt and put it in a zip lock or whatever Just keep it don't mess with it right clear channel Clear chain of evidence and then scan it so I think it's an interesting observation of the found titanium on that Holy shit, I think the Russian there's a Russian group who did something similar and they also found a metals I think they found titanium as well LA H the laboratory of alternative history. I was titanium made It's a smelting process from titanium dioxide I don't know the specifics of it But you have to take that titanium dioxide and I assume smelt it down or do something like it again It took us up until you know 1930s to use it at just anywhere outside of labs So it's super interesting, but that This I wouldn't even say that's the most interesting thing Max found so he's a crazy dude an interesting guy He's you know, he's doing fusion experiments in his spare bedroom It's got like this apparatus surrounded by boxes of borax and Ten for the glass below so He took so get then this this is this sort of ties back to the tool marks It ties back to a question you asked me one of us here last which is what's my wildest speculation? I actually have some now which is based on some evidence and it's early days He has published on this on his website, but he took precision vases He took base rock samples of the rock that these were made from from the place actually got him a piece of basalt He took non precision vases and he put him in a germanium detector basically to look at the radioactive and the isotope sort of baseline radiation of These pieces and it turns out the precision vases are radioactive there There two to three tested several relative to the base rock samples and the non precision vases they have two to three times the thorium decay products in them All of them so far and in fact that piece right there has a he said has a the quartz piece or the crystal piece has a notable Caesium 137 signature in it as well So that's an interesting Nuclear titanium Could be I don't know about that But it's so he's look it's again early days But he's he has published it on his website the findings and he is he's obtaining more equipment to do more testing Some more in depth testing that he will be much more definitive about He did take some recently to the petri museum in London to test some of their artifacts but it's a very interesting result these this has to have been something that irradiated these vessels that give them that signature even after however many Thousands of years with the half life again. We're comparing it to the base rock samples and the non precision vases which have they're just like Nothing and they need not dangerous or anything. It's just the it's just above a baseline But two to three times so something happened to them and one of his hypotheses which is very interesting is a concept called nuclear machining So he's he actually this is not a new idea. It's not something we figured out how to do as a civilization yet We're on that path that You can if you take his theory is something like palladium or another Like radioactive material that is a strong alpha or beta particle admitter that you could put on a tool it would a blight Either in neutrons or its blasting electrons or something it would it would a blight the stone surface away in such a way that would you could carve this stone with ease kind of like a lightsaber basically and And it would also leave a signature in the stone and you fuck yeah, and you take it back to that penetration rate of that spiral to Yeah It's not all we can say about things like that spiral to drill and the other Thing the other striations and toolmarks is look it's not it doesn't seem to be the same thing We do to the stone and it's certainly not primitive. It's not something you can do just by hand So is anybody the cores is anybody tested the radioactive levels of the course? I think he I don't know He might have tested the cores when he was there recently. I'll talk to him. I was talking to him to the morning I can ask him about the core. That's a great question Because that would it's this if it was the process it should show something similar if that's indeed the process the look the other possibility is Okay, they weren't machined with this method, but these were used in some method the other the other theory has that these may have been Part of a process for enriching material for some other nuclear abuse although a part of a system that that Using nuclear material they had advanced nuclear science somehow or another that that's just too much it's I mean it's not too much But it's too much too much too crazy. Yeah, I mean so crazy but also like when you do see some of the sculptures that look 3d printed and you go well, okay Now it kind of at least makes a little sense. Yeah, see if we knew for sure that there was a cataclysm and a loss civilization that civilization had achieved some immense heights of technological sophistication and a completely different pathway than we've done in Modern times. Yeah, if we knew that for sure then everything would be so easy You'd go okay Well clearly they were doing something what were they doing? But instead we deny that possibility so by closing off that door now you're left with nonsense You're left with sand and copper and it's dumb I agree. I yeah, I agree. I think it's something fucking crazy happened. Yes. I I Yes, there's I think there is that this is I try to follow the evidence where it leads That's all we're doing here with I mean I'm quoting what Maxis said about it with this nuclear machining hypothesis and here's a normal study needs to happen The nuclear machining hypothesis if it started in a review But if you go a thousand years from now for sure we're gonna have that. Yeah, that's that's yes You have I'd like to put that the same context in these arguments forward as well It's like we just don't to me the answer is you know We tend to look at the past and and it always has to be the subset of what we know Right, but it's like if you look at the history of knowledge and technology Give us 50,000 50 years a thousand years 50,000 years You know that there's more out here to the sides that we're gonna learn right So that means there are realms of science and technology that we don't know anything about I think I think if we were a bit more open-minded about investigating some of these mysteries of the past with some of these inexplicable Characteristics the precision or the machining the engineering things how we how the stone was cut I Think some of those answers could lay in those realms of the unknown and by being open-minded about them and by Investigating them with all of our capability We might even end up learning something about them which is what we're doing like the the vase scan project We are learning the depths of precision in some of the machining aspects of it and then Maxis starting to learn like okay There's some weird like radioactive characteristics of these things. Let's let's let's try and look at more and figure out some more I mean we can speculate a bit now and I want to be clear This is all very speculative at this point lots more testing and data is required to to even shore up some of these theories about these possibilities But the fact remains they could be they are possibilities right and it's also this assumption that there's been a linear path a linear path of progression Always, but that's not that's not even the case today, right? You can go to ancient sites whether it is in Mexico or even in Greece and you see really shitty construction Right next to the path in on yep, right? I mean the Acropolis and the path in on is right next to crappy apartment buildings They're really close right? Yeah, that's a decay. That's a you've obviously you can't do you not? Why didn't you do that? That again like this yeah, it's huge. It's it's something there's something weird. There's something weird going on this is like 2,000 years ago where we knew who they were we know the people we know they did it like amazing precision amazing construction methods incredible art incredible engineering and architecture right yes and all Understandable but yet more advanced than the techniques utilized in 2025 in the exact same area Which is weird right so that just that's without a cataclysm Right, well, yeah, it's it's also nice criticism of modern architecture to be to be fair Yeah, I mean you get done even go back 2000 years just go back to like the Gothic arrow with the churches and the cathedrals I mean Jesus why don't we build that anymore right right right good point But so you see a decline at least in craftsmanship that can be attributed to a changing of cultures and But this assumption that there's always this linear path of progression and if you go back They were dumb you go back far enough. They were dumber. Yeah, but that doesn't seem to be the case here And Egypt is the best example. It is like explain that Yeah, dude exactly and it's one of the biggest if if anyone it's one of the biggest contradictions about Egypt is exactly it's the technological progression I mean you're talking about a tenastic Egypt's Egyptian civilization at least 3000 years right say 3000 years, but if you look at it from a technological progression perspective It's almost like they went backwards the whole time. I mean you have You have the emergence all of a sudden of this culture and language like their gods And one of the craziest things about ancient Egypt is this emergence of hieroglyphs just boom here It is here's this like this this complex extremely complicated language cultural system Gods and everything pops out of nowhere. It's pretty consistent. It evolves over time. It doesn't really it doesn't change that much I mean uniform in Samaria there's there's a clear progressive path where we can see it being developed We don't have that that's not the case for ancient Egypt and then it's all of the best stuff is the oldest It's the biggest stonework the valley temple the 2500 tons of granite in the king's chamber structure That's that's in the great pyramid the great pyramid itself these things are amongst the very first pyramids ever said to have been built Yet progressively as you go forward in time. I mean they just they don't get to mud brick pyramids It's almost like it's you're going backwards and there's just you know, they technologically speaking It doesn't seem like they progress very far So I think there's another interpretation for that data one that fits the evidence a little better Which is that I think yeah, I think they got a kickstart they got a head start They inherited an awful lot of objects We know for sure these precision objects were around before the ancient Egyptians They don't match even the cultures that predated them. We have no idea where they got them from they I don't think they made them. We don't know how old they really are and I think there's a lot of other artifacts and architecture on these sites that They match these like technologically speaking. There's a link the same tools the same precision We're seeing that yet these are massive artifacts sometimes like a thousand ton statue That you can't bury with you. It stays on this side. It gets inherited. It gets renovated. It gets reused eventually you get Kings with hubris and arrogance guys like Ramsey's the second that says you know carve my name three inches deep onto that sucker It's gonna be me. I want to be part of the gods. These are the you know I want to tie myself to the ancients and The really crazy thing is that doesn't often get admitted is that this is literally what the ancient Egyptians themselves said They called themselves a legacy culture They traced their own history back 40,000 years They have a list of kings. They have a they they talk about these different eras of time The shams who haul the followers of Horus was this 12,000 year period where these mythical semi-divine beings walk the earth You can talk about kings and rulers and that and then before that you have zep tepi when the gods themselves walk the earth and they trace their own history Way back into those eras That's them stuff that I brought up was I and it's like what is this? He is he does he got very mad. It's funny. Yeah, I'm reading where I'm listening to the book of Enoch right now. Okay Yeah, that's the mall to it. Yeah It's so wild because you're you're going. What are you saying? Like gods the watchers go down and Mated with women of earth and created Phenomenal yeah, the nothing like what are you saying? like what? What what what what were you trying to say? Thousands of years ago when they wrote this down. Yeah, and you know and the version I think that we're getting this from is from the Dead Sea Scrolls from Kumaan so How long did they write it down before that like how long did they discuss this how long ago did this happen? And what are you saying like what what were they trying to record? Yeah, it's I mean why does it match up with what they're saying in Egypt the gods walking amongst us? Right. Yeah, it's it's it does to some wild places I know it gets so squirrely and that's where you get into the alien camp Well, that 40 40 meter tiktik shaytimataly cool. Yeah, what is that thing? Well, then what kind of metal? We don't know if it's titanium Could be he said it didn't match any signature that he'd seen before that's crazy Dude, I never itself. It's one of the things I'll remember always about when you were sitting here talking to Bob Lazar and he said that some of those craft came from archaeological digs. I mean Part of his story there's long been rumors of that type of stuff in you know in Under the ground in Egypt. I don't I'm not saying that's what it is But this is what yeah, this is what 10 hours at about it. I'm amazing It would be there's a UFO down there all layers converge at a central corridor Avenue like the HMO shopping mall where you can see all floors from one vantage point my personal interpretation is that this entire hall was constructed to house a centrally positioned freestanding object about 40 meters long the central object is hard to classify it appears metallic Not stone or wood. I named it Dippy after the giant Diplodica skeleton in the Hinci hall of London's Is that I said that right? Yeah, hence I think hence Hall of London's natural history musician Museum it could be anything its shape resembles those tic-tac hard mince it might also be an upright Disc or even a colossal Shen Ring and what is a Shen Ring? It's like the katush You know that thing around the country. Oh wow big object alone raises profound questions How did it get there? Why is it there a more speculative theory is that it's some kind of portal? Oh boy now We're going we're going full tin foil either interdimensional or interstellar a stargate It's material signature is like unlike anything I've seen in my entire career But it's there undeniably there. I would the future find out what Dippy is Tim Acres Well, that's he went full art bell right there. He did interdimensional or interstellar stargate Hey, the the Egyptians talk about stockites today did go to where is it? Dendera there's actually a couple places the literal translation you can read it on the walls I always show people when we go there. It is there are two or three depictions of Stargates that is the little translation for it showing a constellation with a gate and it's a specific constellation a Couple of different they're all on different constellations It's this pictures of star gates from dent in dendera temple. I think it's in the upper rooms Yeah, it's up where the zodiac so that's actually that the dendera is incredible like it is a it is a start oriented temple there's massive depictions of the zodiac and this is all You know redone from older versions of the same temple But that is the translation of that what's on the wall with the constellation and the gate and it literally translates as stargate That is part of it. So well that's I mean the ceiling is the zodiac You all you you even have depictions of like solar boats going up to the moon Dendera Randall loves that temple. He I have sent him a lot of footage from that temple No, it's it's actually There's a you'd have to look up the Dend yeah, just just stargate glyph maybe at Dendera Yeah, glyph. I'll tell you if you see it No, I don't see the exact one, but it's not I mean it's literary cluster of stars that represents a constellation Finally, but this is killing me I know I probably have it on my hard drive Do you have it with you? It's him on my laptop if you want to see it up. Yes. Yeah, you're laptops out there. Yeah. Yeah. Go grab it will pause You sure? Yeah, yeah, yeah, all right But now what you gave me huh? It's not on that one. I didn't think we'd get into the stargate. Oh, you got I'm gonna try and find it I'll try and find it. Okay. All right. We'll grab back box Okay, so we found it from a video from Trevor grassy on YouTube The video is titled hieroglyphic proof of stargate technology with Mohammed Ibrahim Mike Rick See on YouTube, the video's titled Hieroglyphic Proof of Stargate Technology with Mohammed Ibrahim, Mike Rick. Rick Secker and Trevor Grazie. So, this is what we're looking at. See, it's like there's a glyph, as you can see the star, and there's a gate, actually trying to find one of the other pictures, maybe. The stars of the circle, that's what the star is supposed to be. Yeah, the star on the right. No, no, the far right. Yeah, there's a hieroglyph. So again, yes, Stargate. It's the, you see the gate and then the star, and then I assume that that crooked hook or whatever is part of this as well. Oh, I see. So, how the way you translate the hieroglyph? Yes. Yes. And Mohammed Ibrahim, who I know quite well as well, he's very good at translating these glyphs. When I travel in Egypt, we usually go with Professor Mohammed Jabra, who's one of, I would say, top four or five in the world. For reading Hargle, if he can just read whatever's on the wall and tell you about it. He travels with us on these tours. It's phenomenal. He just shows us this. There's probably some better pictures of ones with the actual constellations up at Dendar, if they get into. Yeah, but that one without was standing next to each other. Go back a little. Where's it? Now, back a little. Yeah, there. Yeah, so see this is the one I'm talking about. You see the stars, the stars above the gates. So it's literally different. These, these, and with the words, they relate to specific constellations. This is in the top the, what's the zodiac room at Dendarra, where they have a replica of the circular zodiac on the ceiling. The French have the original, but this, this is original Hargless. And it is the translation of this is literally stargate for these constellations. So say what it is bananas. And what are these constellations? Must be. I don't know off the top of my head. We do tell people when we, when we get into it, there is, yeah, I could find out, but I don't know off the top of my head. I'm sorry. Click that. Would that one that you just had, Joe, Jamie? No, no, no, no. Well, you just had all, yeah, right there. So yeah, more gates. They same similar again, the gate with the book and the star. Yeah, that's bananas. Yeah. Yeah. So when they're referring to a stargate, are they saying in any way, would it, with that means? No. No, it's, I mean, they would, I mean, most of the, the interpretations these days would tell you that it's always symbolic. I mean, they do look at like the, the, the, you know, the, the constellations in the sky is being connected to the duet or, uh, to, to note like this, this, the duet being the space and nuth the goddess who is the sky and you know, it's all part of that passage from the, of the soul going into the realms of the mortal, of the immortal that happens after death. So this is the, you know, the symbolic interpretation that we, that we, that we give it all. We say, oh, this is none of this. It's, it sort of falls into this category a little bit of like everything is symbolic. Everything is ceremonial. Nothing is functional. I, you know, I, I'm fascinated by these temples because it goes back to something you were saying earlier, uh, and I use this analogy to kind of set the stage for it. Imagine again, imagine if younger drives happen to us tomorrow, whatever. I hope touch would doesn't. But say it wipes out civilization, but we survive as humans. Within what two, three generations, we're sitting around campfires telling stories about fucking these, these things that were like a black rock. And it's just, and you, you know, it's like all plasma TVs, but you say, look, if you get this shiny black rock, you know, you can get answers from the ancestors. You will know everything. You can talk to anything. You can see anything. You can ask a question. You can ask it questions. And maybe you go and you start getting black rocks and making them like this, and you start dancing around the fire. You start ritualizing this, this memory of technology. Now, if you take that concept, like say, there's a cataclysm and now there's people that remember and they tell these stories of stories get passed down. Now, imagine there's a civilization that comes up in it goes through thousands of years of structuring those legends and stories of technology. They go through just distortions and representations and symbolism, but it's just twisting all of these stories into this iconography and this complex symbolism that we then I think we go to a temple in Egypt that was made in the Tollumac era or whatever. And it's, you see things on the wall. I think there's a great way to interpret some of those symbols and some of the paintings to say that well, is this actually an echo of something that was functional or is an echo of of technology like every staff that you see has a tuning fork on the bottom of it. Every single one on these walls. It's always got a tuning fork on it. What's that? What's that all about? Tuning fork. Tuning fork. Like a little like a tuning fork. Yeah, all of the staffs with the wasse head, it means power. Like literally the interpretation of this symbol is power on top of the staff and every single one of them has a tuning fork on the bottom. Can we see an image of that? Yeah, you can look up any of the temples in Egypt and like the depictions of gods with staffs that then they're touching or they're giving like the the the Jed pillar or the you know, the the bunk which is Jed pillar stability. The ungus life, the wasse is power. So in a lot of cases these gods are granting kings, you know, life stability and power sometimes just life and power. But what are those depictions of these enormous, cylindrical, cylindrical things that they're holding that look almost like one of those transforming clubs. Yeah. Like that one there. That's like the Jed pillar here. Yeah. What the hell is that? That's a great image that that literally is the symbol for stability. And that thing down is what I was talking about. Oh, the, the, the, the, the quite a quite light bulbs. Yes, that then there are temple and the scene is a Jed pillar there too with the hand. So the Jed pillar is stabilizing it with its hands. Right. And you're on a boat. You're actually part of this is on a boat. It looks like some kind of technology. So you know what's crazy about this. So again, we get down into this. This is in a, in a crypt at then, there are you have to like crawl through a hole. Again, it's like an inside wall. It's amazing because the Christians and the, they couldn't, they didn't get into the crypt so they couldn't deface the glyphs. Like a lot of the glyphs are defaced. Look at that guy. He looks like an air traffic controller. Oh, he's like a reptilian too. Is that frog dude with knives? Yeah. What is that do with his tail? Does he have a fucking tail? Yeah, he does. He does look like a, he looks like a giant frog man. Yeah. Wow. So what's crazy about that there is a whole story about this that he's written on the walls. And again, this is thanks to my friend, Yusuf, uh, A1 who like, who I guide with and then, um, you know, Professor Jabra who can interpret this and we actually, I'm going to do a video about this soon because what he is saying about this crypt is that there was, it tells you on the wall that there was a physical version of that thing in that crypt. That was, he said it was made from mostly gold and it was the span of like a dude with his arms out like a, the span of a human wingspan. I thought I was someone across something. They're called it Electrum. There are these two, there's a, the metal. All these 3.3 ton, uh, obelisk that were made out of a metal called Electrum. And gold and silver. Yeah. Yeah. Electrum's gold. And so they definitely used gold and silver. The lot of the obelisks had electron, uh, which is I think great for conductivity. Oh, it's fantastic. Yeah. I mean, which is really the only good reason to have it other than looking good. Right. Yeah. Other than ball and that, yeah, other than ball. It's they were balling, which is obvious. A little bit of a sidetrack. But when you're talking about the nuclear stuff, I found these stories of the Aquaman and Gabon, which is a nuclear natural nuclear reactor. Reactor. Wow. That is very cool. Or billion years old and a hundred thousand working. All this new reactor and history. It's, uh, uranium from it. Oh, okay. It's enriching uranium. Yeah. In rich uranium. Yeah. Imagine if it's in Africa. So I don't know if that was the only place they've ever found. Mm. That makes sense. Right. Or something like that in Afghanistan where this stone came from. Oh, the, the lapis lazuli and everything else. Yeah. I don't know. I mean, I, I assume that I would be, I wouldn't be surprised if that sort of thing is happening somewhere in the, in the mass of uranium in Australia either. Cause that's like one of the world's biggest uranium deposits. I imagine if it's enough mass of you, I think it's uranium 238 and they're trying to get nine two three five to get to two three eight. Well, the other way around. But if there's enough mass and neutron hitting each other, it might be enriching it. Somehow I think that's probably what's happening there. I'm no nucleus on it. So. Right. Let's go back to those hieroglyphs, Jamie. Um, the, the lizard guy, the frog guy, whatever that reptilian thing is, that freaks me out. Dalia, it's the stuff and nightmares at times. It's, it's kind of me because that's, you know, one of the things that the weirdest, when the, when the, the weirdest stories when we start talking about aliens is the, the different types that visit. Right. And that one of them is a reptilian species that are the, the most creepy to deal with, which makes sense. The same thing. It would be. Yeah. I mean that reptilian. Chickens are assholes. Right. They are in sore, comodo dragons. And the idea that somehow or another, they could eventually reach incredible levels of technological sophistication and intelligence. We kind of rule that out. But look, there's, there's clearly primates that are way dumber than us. Right. So why do we assume that it's only primates that reach an incredible high level of sophistication when we know that crows, which are really fucking close to dinosaurs, crows super smart, like, like smarter than most kids. Yeah. Problem solving smart. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't think you can, you can't put a, a, a, a restrictor on what evolution might produce. Not in any of these. Especially when intelligence is being exhibited by things that are really close, evolution arily to reptiles. Yes. Yeah. And that would just be, yeah, you get to that like just lack of empathy, just that reptilian brain, it's just aggression and like everything that's not ours is the enemy. That's the line. Fuck smart dinosaurs. Oh, yeah. I mean, that was interesting part. Great. The raptors. There's a good one. Yeah. There's smart, which, you know, makes sense. Yeah. It's that whole pack. Yeah. But the idea that there's that we were visited by intelligent reptiles is fucking bananas. Yeah. I put, look, it with the alien, I don't often address it. I, I, but I put it firmly in the realm of, of like possible, like it's just, I don't, I think when you, you look at the vastness of space and the length of time, the fact that we've, you know, we're, we're just this crazy, you could, they could have massive civilizations, collectively could have risen and fallen a million years ago. And we just weren't part of it. And that's literally a blink of the eye in these, in those sort of timeframes. It's, it's not surprising this, this is a fermi paradox, right? Like how come we haven't got like firm proof or anything, even though people will say we have, but it's like, yes, there's, it's, it's the length of time, like we can rise and fall that span of a million years. It's just nothing on those timesgales. And, you know, you can, civil, whole species can rise to massive prominence and then just be nothing but dust at the end of that period of time. And you got to try and do that across what 14 billion years and even that's in question now, because the James Webb telescope, seeing stuff that's supposed to lead way older than that now. Right. I mean, we're going to find out like this three eye Atlas thing. Yeah, what is that super weird, right? Well, Harvey Loeb is convinced that it's a UFO. All right. But that's what he does. Right? He did with that other one, on the new Marumua, on the Muhumua Muhua Muhua. So that one was a little odd. That was weird. So not, it wasn't the weirdest thing about a Muhumua seems to be it's, it's, it's path when it took, it went after it turned around the sun and accelerated. Like that was the, you know, standard model of physics said it shouldn't have done that and it seems to have exhibited sort of motion that was not what we predicted it would do. That's the reaction we can accelerate. It accelerated. It was out so it was a ball. Yeah, it accelerated. But like to the factor of what? Well, not that. I think it was only a few percent, but it was not what should have happened according to the calculations that astronomers and I guess the orbital dynamics people have done. That's what I understand was the most, obviously it's shape and size. There was something about its reflective properties as well, right? Well, it's, yeah, I mean, just because it was so long and narrow and it was tumbling, that's what caused it to, we would catch like the long side of it, which brightness would increase. So we had this oscillating brightness on it and then it just, it passed through the system and it's, you know, it's going whatever 87 kilometers per second or whatever it was, huge velocity enough to escape the, you know, the gravity of the sun. But it, it accelerated where it, it's what I understand it did it accelerated where it shouldn't have. And then there was another interstellar artifact that came in that was pretty much a comet, behave like a comet. It had a tail. It was offgassing water. It was just an interstellar ball of rock and ice is what they say. That was it didn't get a lot of attention. Now there's three eye outless thing is much larger. It's traveling much faster apparently than the previous two, but it's also not behaving like a comet. It has this aura of light that it's emitting around it for some reason. It, I saw a report that said it, it almost seeing a metallic like smelting signatures off it. I don't know how much credence I can give it, but we'll find out like it has a, it has a, it's going too fast to stop in our system unless it dramatically alters its velocity. But it's, I mean, it'll, it'll pop out. We'll lose it on the other side of the sun, but then we should see it again on the way out. So we'll know one way or the other if it actually is going to, if it, if it changes behavior, I mean, what's he put it out of even, I've even thought I put it like 40, 60 or something artificial to natural, but do you, it's so funny. I'm into Warhammer 40K in a big way. And it's just like I'm like, okay, we're going to be joining the Imperium here soon, boys. All, all how the on the soil, the thing might be a mechanic is vessel. I don't know. If that's how they travel, I'd be very disappointed. They just shoot through the sky. Well, it takes months. Move it slows down. I know, but I'm, I'm looking for portals. I'm looking for, I mean, it, it, I mean, it advanced civilization that visits us. I don't want the advanced Vikings, right? Right. I want the advanced scientists from the 21st century. Yeah. I just, I, you know what I'm saying? I mean, the ones who come fast on a burning spaceship, they're the dangerous ones. Because they're probably, yeah, they're probably the war like conquerors. The ones who are going to rob us of our minerals and force us into slavery. You know what I mean? Yeah. That seems like if that's how you're rocking it, you're still doing it the way we do it. We have something thrusting you insanely fast through the cosmos. Yeah, I get it. Yeah. I know that like the whole dark forest thing, like the, the, the dark forest theory. No, it's about that. So it's this came out of, it was the three body problem. Great series of books by Chinese author, Tunkkotunu. Amazing, no. It's a great show. The books are phenomenal too. And it's just, but it's, it's this idea that look, we shouldn't be making noise. It's, it's like imagine you're a hundred and a dark forest. So it's just, you're out there. You know, there might be other things out there. And it's, it's this, it's this, like a philosophical engagement of like, what do you, what should you do? Should you start light a fire and make a whole bunch of noise in the dark forest that's full of, you know, it's full of predators. You don't know where they are. They don't know where you are. What's your behavior? What should you do? Should you see another predator? What should, should you be friendly? What's the risk to you to do it? And these could be like, you could be there with a, for the baronara, this guy could have a tank. So the guy could have a, like a mass, some other energy weapon, whatever you don't, there's massive differences in capability and scale. And pretty much every scenario works out to like the, what you should do is just be quiet. And if you see something, you should eliminate the threat. That's kind of the way it goes in, in the dark, dark forest. It's like, it's too risky to reveal yourself. You should, just, you should basically eliminate that threat if you can do so safely. And you apply that to kind of the galaxy and where, I mean, in, to some extent, I feel like where the equivalent of like a baby in a caught that's screaming around a roaring fire because we per, and there's, you know, leopards out there. And, you know, because we're just like sending these signals out into space for 100 something years now. Well, and we just hope, hey, we're friendly, please. Well, you have to hope that something is so evolved that it's gotten past war. It's gotten past the way we behave. And so we're hoping in assuming that space daddy, space brothers, yeah, that space daddy, space brothers will be benevolent and wise beyond our imagination and that they will come here and want to take care of us and give us information and hook us up. I, I, I, that's my, I had this discussion. I've had this asking for you to end my response to a lot of that is, well, we can take nature. What happens when we take night? Let's look at the apex predator, whether it's in the sea, in the air, on the land. The apex predators don't tolerate competition. They, they don't suffer any attacks. They don't, I mean, we don't treat, we don't, we just, we just dominate like you just, if it's in your way, it's inconvenient, you kill it. If it has, if it has something you want, we take it. If those bees have honey, we take it. Like it's just, yeah, there's no, we're not like helping them. And I, we're not like trying to teach the dolphins how to talk. Like there's still parts of the world where we're just eating them. You know, like there's, I don't know. It, it, nature suggests that that apex predator, but maybe, maybe when just, I think this is the other element that you're saying is maybe you have, evolutionally, you pass those primal nature at some point. The territorial prime instincts that we exhibit, like hopefully one day, because clearly we're on a pathway to that. Right. We're clearly much kinder now. Yeah. At least locally. You know, if you don't live in Gaza, you know what I'm saying? Like, you know what I'm saying? Like if you're in the middle of war zone, you're like, what are you talking about? This is as bad as it's ever been all throughout human history. It's the same behavior exhibited over and over and over again. Yeah. Well, we want is aliens that are a million years more advanced. We don't want aliens that are a thousand years more advanced. Got it. Cause they might be just like us, but way better. We just, just bad. That's what we don't write because as soon as we start going into the cause, we venture into the cosmos in 20 years. We're going to be the same animal. Right. Right. We're not going to be significantly different unless we integrate with technology and remove the ego and emotions. Yeah. Mushrooms. No, no, emotions, stuff, and maybe mushrooms, help us get that to emotions. All the things, the human reward systems that exist that we, you know, we currently struggle with, we would, we would be the same way. If we just think of what we justify on earth in terms of destruction of habitat, of native species, animals that we do, all the different things that we do on earth, factory farming. Now imagine why would we care about these lizard people that live, you know, in caves on some fucking stupid planet, you know, we would probably kidnap them. We'd kill them. We'd pickle them. We'd bring them back home, like a freeze them. Got golden name caves. Yeah. Right. Look at Columbus did when they arrived and took the natives and had them get gold. And if they didn't they cut their arms off. Yeah. Horrific. Terrifying things. So imagine, there's no evidence that aliens are currently doing that, which is the promising thing. Right. Right. They even the abductions, although I'm sure they're terrifying if they're true, they seem rather benign. Like in fact, in the Travis Walton case, do you know that that one? The most famous ones. None of the time. I'd real simple 1970s. He's a logger. He's working with a group of guys. They see a ship. He runs toward it. He gets hit with a beam of energy. gets knocked back unconscious. His friends flee. They come back. They're yelling at each other. We got to go back. We got to go back. They go back. He's gone. All four of them get investigated for murder. They tell the story. No one believes them. They all pass polygraph tests. Five days later, he shows up. He finds a pay phone, makes a phone call and has this fucking insane story. But the story was that they took him aboard the craft and healed him and communicated with him and that there was a bunch of different types of these beings. And then he has been telling the exact same story ever since the 1970s. But relatively benign compared what we would do. For sure. We fucking, you know, we shoot elephants. It tends to matter. Think about the horrible things that we do right now on earth. No, I agree. Yeah. And it's something that's great quoted from Christopher Hitions, which is, you know, we're just not the end of that evolutionary chain. You know, we're just now our current, our current, the current version of humanity, the frontal loads of two big, our adrenaline, sorry, a frontal loads of two small and our adrenaline glands, a two big, our fun, four finger opposition is, is an all that's cracked up to be. We love violence. We love violence. We love violence. Our national supporters, dudes who are enormous running at each other. Full speed. And the other one is guys punching each other. Yeah. I mean, it's kind of, yeah. I mean, it's kind of crazy. We're so, and then we're also involved in multiple wars simultaneously. At least proxy. Yeah, proxy wars. It's at least human beings are involved in a significant amount of war. Always. Yeah, it's never, it's, this is literally the status quo throughout history. I mean, it's just, we've always been at war with each other. I mean, I will, I still do, I mean, personally maintain the idea that it is that's still the best time to be alive. 100% technologically speaking. But also, I mean, obviously we're much more aware of conflict around the world. But on a percentage scale of what it's been like in the past, it's actually far less than it has been. Like even though it's terrible when it happens, but we're in an era where there's actually less of that going on. Yeah. And hopefully that can continue. I actually genuinely think that it's one of the reasons why this whole investigation into the past is important to me. I don't, it's not, I haven't really talked about in videos or put it down. It's going to be, it's part of the book I'm writing for sure. It's a big part because it's, it's not just some benign investigation into the past. I genuinely think it could have a significant impact on our future because it, that I, that concept you talked about it of, of like this linear progression, right? I mean, in general, we get taught in school. Okay, we were Stone Age dudes, we were in caves. Civilization happened. We haven't had many thousands of years later here. We are. This is the only, it's like this is the only way that an advanced civilization can happen is on this path, don't worry about it. It's almost like it's preordained. Just worry about next election cycle, next quarterly result, whatever, right? And we just don't think about it. I do, this is this conceptical. It's, I think it's a fundamental pillar of what it means to be a human being today. It's in everybody's mind to some degree, like, alright, Stone Age, us, we're advanced. This is the only way it happens. I do think that if you can change that at that fundamental level to this cyclical version that is an oscillation between civilization and cataclysm. This idea that, okay, we've actually risen in the past. We've become relatively high technology, we've become civilized. And it happened, it would have been different to us. But we fell, we fell again. And we're somewhere on this oscillation and this circular motion between civilization and cataclysm and on a long enough time scale, we know it's going to happen again. Yes. Right. And if you can change that, if you could change that fundamental concept in people, like, that's what we teach people in schools. Okay. We're rising again, we're at this crazy point in time, we're in our technology, super advanced. We can solve some of these problems, but we know in this time scale, if we don't do something about it, we might end up like our ancestors did. I genuinely think that stands a chance of changing some of our behavior. And some of our, like, little less money on tanks and guns, a little bit more money on space exploration. Yeah. It makes solving the longer term problems a bit more of a priority. And it's altruistic and it's ambistic, a crazy goal. I know it's altruistic as all hell, but it's just, I think there's precedent for it, too, though. I mean, whether you agree with it or not, I mean, it doesn't matter. But the fact is that the term climate change has changed our behavior over the last 25 years, right? It's changed. If you think about what's happened with that concept and that movement, it changes investment decisions, it changes our interactions with each other, with the planet. You know, it's changed our behavior in the way we think about stuff. It's like this is corrupt into our zeitgeist as a species and it's changed our behavior. So I look at some of this stuff in the past as it's not just being some harmless investigation into things. I think it actually getting to the root cause of what's happened in the past actually could help us in our future. I think it's an important, it's what drives, I think, my interest in it in a lot of ways, too. It's another piece of an example, another example rather of how primitive we are that we still, the actual climate is political. That's bananas. Pollution is political. Yes. I mean, if you disagree, I mean, I always find it crazy that if you even question any of some of the official narrative about this stuff, the first thing you've got to do is make sure you decraw in saying, no, no, pollution bad, pollution bad. Just because I think that some of the science might be off, I'm not saying like, let's pollute the oceans like, no, no, let's be stewards. Yeah. Also, the amount of time that we've polluted the oceans in is spectacular. What we've done just in terms of the depopulation of the ocean. No, yeah. That's nuts. Like 90 plus percent of all big fish are gone. Yeah. In a short amount of time, like a couple hundred years of like hardcore fishing. We fished out the ocean now. Just about that's nuts. Not only that, we polluted the fuck out of it to the point where you're not even supposed to eat it every day. Right, which is more of a pretty crazy. Oh, I agree. Yeah. That's crazy. If you eat sushi every day, people don't recommend it from a beer bottle on the married bottom of the marionna. What? Yeah. That's crazy. Man. Yeah. That's how gross we are. Somebody was over there and they chucked one overboard and it looks like it. It looks pretty recent. Right. He's got the fucking label on it. Yeah. Right. The label hasn't even eroded. It's challenging deep. Recent. Like, why isn't it covered in sediment? You know what I mean? Yeah. Yeah. The surface covers things up and moves over time. It probably won't be there forever. It'll probably won't be sitting on the surface like that. It's still floating around. I don't think it's just a feeling. Oh, maybe. Oh, right. Right. It's some how it's. Wow. I've been imagine. Unless there's some sort of a downward or upward current. Yeah. Scientists find beer bottle the deepest point of the ocean. That's a little bit. 6.7 miles, 35,000 feet below the set. I didn't want to blow it. But that sub does. Oh, yeah. No way. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Wouldn't last long it was a cap on that, but yeah. Yeah. I don't want to get in there. I like fuck all that. Yeah. Yeah. I'd rather watch a video. Not only that, they were watching a video. That's what's even crazier. Yeah. You're all the way down and you're watching a screen. Yeah. It's only because there's a window. It's not exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Like one little or just if there's one just joint thick thing at the front. You can't imagine the freak out of being at the bottom. James Cameron, nice. I mean, even on that. Yeah. Not familiar with that by himself. I know he's crazy in that. Yeah. In that he did it right. But I guess if you're going to do it. Yeah. Why did you do that? I want to see him speak a titanium around me. Like in a sphere. Yeah. We need you to make movies. Maybe not a cum-fob tube. Yeah. Well, especially not one that the engineer said wasn't really designed for those depths. Yeah. That cracked. Did you ever watch that documentary? It's, dude, they're putting that thing on. They do the scale model and they're testing it under pressure. And they're all standing around in a room and just goes bang. Like it's just, it's in every test they did. It went bang and blue. And they're like, oh, it's like 20 successful trips with that. They did a bunch. Yeah. And it was, well, even the scariest part is like when you're in the footage with it and you can hear it popping. Like it's literally the carbon fiber strands snapping. Oh, it's terrible. It's terrifying. Imagine being one of those people that successfully made that journey and then the nightmares that you have every day. Like a one right barely missed it. You bear, yeah, the one right before barely missed getting instantaneously destroyed. Yeah. I'm sure you've seen the animation, the, the cuter recreation of what it would look like. Yeah. And blood. Yeah. Turned to blood cells. Yeah. Just splatter. Yeah. And the time it would take for you to even register that it had like for your senses to register in your brain that it happened. It's over. It's pressure. The pressure. Yeah. I mean, just the fact that we're that weird that we choose to do that, that we have technology like, let's see. Yeah. Let's go. Yeah. I mean, these are so funny the way they skirted the, I mean, he signed everyone up as like basically expedition team members. They were, that's how they got around. I'm not selling seats for this. They're, they're, they're coming on. They all had a technical role supposedly. And it was like, I'm not, he was getting around the regulations and the safety regulations. But yeah, no interesting. That sort of person. I mean, I dive, but that not like that. Well, diving is swimming. Pretty much. It's just like hardcore swimming. Yeah. The, the implosion is very easy. Yeah. I haven't seen this. It said that, it would have happened in 20 milliseconds. And it takes like 150 milliseconds for your brain to feel pain. That's, yeah. That's true. Yeah. And I thank you. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. This, why does this freak me out so much? Look at this. Yeah, and I thank you. I Oh my god. This why does this freak me out so much? Look it's because a guy went on with his son Yeah, it's terrible. So I mean it's just why I Wish I was friends with that guy like dude. Yeah. No, it's not the place I'd want to explore like there was some stuff off cube But they say that's they the rec and pyramids. It's kilometers deep in the ocean But I've seen that I've seen well I've seen internet videos. Yeah, I'm imaging. Yeah But I did die we were in Alexandria. I dived on the the lighthouse So there's and actually there was a news article just the other day about the the Egyptians were pulling like more stuff out of the water there at Heracle on and at the lighthouse of Alexandria Quite an interesting story and we were in Alexandria, Diven the Mediterranean on the Egyptian side and I Mean it's it's amazing There's megalith massive columns and massive megalithic blocks in the water from when that the lighthouse it fell down or it collapsed There was there was an earthquake and so you were actually you're in the water But you're diving over like megalithic blocks like these and huge columns and it and it has a history that stretches back too, right? It's the megalithic stuff is what's associated with the very earliest periods of building All the stuff that happened later is typically not that big, but yeah, this is actually nuts That's what's nuts is it the older you go the bigger the stones are well and it's what's funny We looked into the erosion at places like the Giza Plateau you It's it you have two or three feet. It's not an everything Everybody knows about the Sphinx enclosure erosion But you look at places like the pyramid temple of the middle pyramid There's some of the blocks on the Great Pyramid the casing stones that are there that we can see now that they've taken the boat museum away And up and down the cause way there is there is Limestone blocks with up to two feet of the erosion like it's these ways I think I have a have a directory on that on that drive with the erosion on it and it's you have to juxtapose that against all the other Stuff they say is fourth dynasty, right? So right next to the valley temple. There is another structure That's built from small limestone blocks doesn't have any erosion not like the valley temple does The Western cemetery that's behind the Great Pyramid is beautifully made. It's small limestone blocks It's apparently older. So yeah, here's a good example. This is the mortuary or the pyramid temple So these are what you can see where the face of that block originally was but it's been eroded in Like up to two feet in places as huge amounts of erosion That you can find in a lot of places at the Giza Plateau yet at the same time you have what is said to be contemporary structures Said to build have been built roughly in the same time sometimes. I say they're even older That have just no erosion at all made from the same stone made by this allegedly by the same people and And what forced the attribute that erosion to well, it's got it. It's wind and sand, right? It's that's what they will say look at this is just regular weathering and Here's the crazy thing about these structures are like this was also cased in granite. These are the inside blocks So this this structure was fully cased in like four feet thick granite blocks and that was Excuse me that was stolen and they were taken but it would have protected this stone from erosion foot However many thousands of years he find it does another picture in here of like the That's that's so there like see this is this is said to like that picture I just showed with the heavy erosion. That's where the arrow is at the pyramid temple And I back to that back to that one yep So that deeper oceans at that pyramid temple This one wall to the right they say this is older than that and that this has never been cased in granite That other stuff was cased in granite. It's mega lithic that you get there's a block in that complex. It's 450 tons And it was cased in granite now. There's been studies, right? So we know how long it takes to where the limestone there's been a bunch of studies the US the government departments have studied it but limestone blocks on the top of the building in Washington DC and a government department and studied it over 11 years. There's endless Semitaries with conveniently carved and dated limestone pieces in the form of headstones that you can measure You can go okay This was carved and whatever year this guy died and as you can measure it and over time get a sense for like what's it take with rain with wind We've done studies of like alright, we put these blocks in a river and We and we let it wash over like a very highly erosive environment where we've got running water running over the stone and how how long it takes to erode For some of the erosion that you can if you reference those studies for this type of hard limestone to get two feet of the rosive where on those blocks just with regular wind weathering and this is this is in places that have a lot more rainfall than geyser You're talking dates from like 60 to 122,000 years To get that much erosion on it. I mean and that's and I think that's in a more erosive environment than what the the desert is What? So yeah, no, that's that's the neck. That's it side by side. So you have Literally, they'll tell you that thing on the right is older. This was built by Kufu. This is supposedly cover his son But it's it's completely different So this is that tailored to industry thing as well But they attribute all this to the same people but you can baseline this because it's the same stone It's at the same elevation level. It's supposedly the same age the differences are in the construction Like it's megolithic and a lot of this stuff was In case in granite This is the Sphinx temple down at the other end of the cause way same thing So all the megolithic stuff that was case in granite has severe erosion yet There's buildings all around it and up and down the plateau. They say it built at the same time Yet it's smaller blocks. It's not as nice work and it's not eroded like that What's the conventional explanation from that? This is just they just don't address it like I have not seen anyone Well, I mean because the arguments always been this thing like this Sphinx Tampa like this Sphinx enclosure Robert shock John Anthony wears they can't he talked about the fact that you needed thousands of years of rainfall erosion to get those patterns on the walls That's where the discussions been focused. It's not there was no comparison made. It was always like well. This is this This you know the geologist and the experts say it's wind and sand it's water erosion But then you have the archaeologist in the Mark land and say no, it's wind and sand wind and sand but I Think there's a better argument to be made when you start to do comparative work like this you go alright hang on Let's take the Western cemetery behind the Great Pyramid supposedly built by Kufu fourth dynasty It's at the same elevation level. It's the same stone type as the Mortuary or the pyramid temple of the Middle Pyramid complex. So after Kufu So if he built that then his son Kufra built this one how come this one? Which was also cased in granite and this wasn't how come this is so much more eroded than this there's no It's at the same elevation level. It's the same stone. It's you would assume that it's been subjected to the same weathering Why is this so whether and that is not it's that you can't explain any other way? Yeah, I've not seen anyone respond to that To that argument with anything that makes any remote sense like remote sense with dictate ones older. Yeah, I mean We show you literally like to show people like which one which one looks older like? Seemstone same stone same elevation level same everything to be yeah, I mean it's And again, we know it's crazy That's crazy and it's not like this. This is very hard noumolytic limestone like it's full of fossils It's not a soft limestone the idea that there was a civilization that built monolithic construction yeah a hundred thousand years ago is Crazy it is that's so crazy, but have you seen any of Michael buttons work? Yeah, yeah I saw the episode. Yeah, that is a very interesting episode when we was talking about how Human beings in this exact same form have been around at least 300,000 years at least at least so that's the fossil Right, that's all we found there might be human beings that were 500,000 years ago There's six good evidence for actually really yeah There's so yeah, so the Morocco find I've talked about this for years as well It's that the fossil record so we used to be bought a hundred ninety fifty thousand and then it's a hundred nine five thousand with the Ethiopian bones And it's three hundred and fifteen or nineteen with the Morocco find that's the latest in the fossil record and atomically modern humans however There are studies. I think this is in the other vectors director. I've got less studies There's there's two studies that I referenced usually one is a DNA study that suggests like from a genetic perspective Neanderthals are our cousin like we didn't evolve from them we both evolved from a common ancestor and They then based on but just looking at the genome and trying to trace it back They the the paper suggests that we split with a common ancestor somewhere in the realm of eight hundred thousand years ago Us in the end of all split from a common ancestor like that's when we Coved off hundred thousand years ago. Yeah, and there's another study on teeth morphology Which is which was it actually got set up to try and prove that we're only? You know two three hundred thousand years old and they were looking at all right somewhere near as common ancestor How quickly does our dental teeth have to evolve? And more like this teeth more teeth morphology how quickly does that have to happen for us to basically have the teeth that we have today relative to our ancestors? And they thought well it's gonna have to be this right to make these numbers work And then they did this big statistical study on a lot of different people from all around the world and they figured out the teeth The rate of dental evolution is much slower So they'd send they they basically work backwards from there and said okay So if if that's how quickly our teeth evolve then we may have been around as many as eight or nine hundred thousand years So yeah So you you have two different studies I mean again fossil record 300,000 but other studies do suggest the possibility could be any up to towards a million years old for a human human beings It gets real interesting even within the 300,000 years, but certainly if you stretch it back further. I mean you can find graphs of the temperature and The global temperature in ice-core record ice-core data from Antarctica goes back four hundred thousand years So you have these peaks and valleys like we're in that peak right now in the Holocene the nice warm period where Civilization flourishes but we've been through a bunch of those peaks before and some of those valleys are we know as a result of Cataclysm like massive changes to the surface of the earth when nothing would be left so I Look I honestly put the realm of possibility for advanced civilization not just the last ice age, but Within and you know up to a million years potentially Could be it well, it's not it'd be dust for a lot of it, but it would be dust well We would find now yeah, but it's not but that's what Michael buttons argument when you're dealing with anatomically similar human beings are Amatologically exactly the same. Yeah, creature Give us give us warm weather and you know enough food to eat and we start fucking solving problems Which is one of the reasons why Egypt itself was so spectacular was that it was very fertile It was in the African human period. This is one of my arguments is I think if you so if we just Assume for a moment that there was a civilization that flourist during what you know the African human period before it when this a horror was a savanna and I that's why I think this are such an appealing target because what happened right? So if that civilization ends We're knocked back to a stunt to a relative stone age The people that were populating the non people have been in the north. We know for like hundreds of thousands years like people And and they if they're gonna start that civilization they're gonna do it in the only part of that country that was habitable the Nile Valley and that's where all the sites of ancient Egypt are that we know about but they've all been Let's assume they kick started with stuff and they've been inherited and renovated and reused and the domestic Egyptians made them their own If assuming there's something there before So what's fascinating to me is the possibility that out there in the Sahara maybe near an ancient water source or an ancient Aqueduct or something or an ancient aquifer We might be another Assyrian out there like this subterranean things. There might be another syrupy in them I'd be another labyrinth buried beneath the sand somewhere that's not been touched and it hasn't been inherited and reused Well, that's where the rush art structure gets weird Right and that's that's on a timeline that could be very ancient because it's very eroded It's then this hard to see anything like this You know interpretive almost at this point to figure out that there's if there was a structure there or anything. Yeah Right. Yeah, it's interesting, but it's also that's another one when you go above and you look at the satellite imagery You go oh boy that place got washed Yeah, it did take a while. I mean that was what that place is one of the clearest examples of a place that looks like it got washed Because there's literal salt deposits everywhere Right. Yeah, I mean it's which is nuts. It is nuts. Yeah, the whole thing is nuts Yeah, I don't know what happened like Jimmy Cordell you have some amazing videos on that. Oh, yeah Everybody's interested Jimmy does and you do as well Jimmy's awesome. Yeah, he's Yeah, that's that's that seems like it could be one of the places to look I mean actually so Michael Donaldans is an interesting talk about melon boroughs and that same satellite scan company There's a guy named Michael Donald and who's been working. He was working with them still is He's putting out a documentary pretty soon called Atlantic here and he thinks he's found at least if not Atlantis a part of Atlantis off the coast of Spain and they for 100% found some shit in The waters and I've been diving on it for a couple years now and building the documentary, but he's pretty convincing He's found again another like underwater If nothing else mega-lithic city He thinks it could be Atlantis as well off the coast of Spain Wow, I saw that that documentary was coming out Yeah, it didn't know exactly what they had discovered. Is there images that we could see right now? What's not he's he we saw it like an advancement is really well for the clothes since until it comes out But it's been it's they discovered it with that melon boroughs scanning tech the same satellite base tech and then they went and died on it And I've we saw like a cut down version of three episodes at this conference. I went to a mad him I've since talked talked him a bit Fascinating 100% found something like it is man-made like whatever it is is yeah, so this is like the preview Well teaser thing who when does this come out? I'm not sure when it's when the streaming I feel like it's got to be this year I hope he's mostly done with it says 2025. Okay, so then or at least the trailer That was to make us for a second there all guy with the beard when he was still alive when did he die? I think it was just last year or the year before damn. Yes, it's I'm very happy I got John Anthony West on a couple of times. I passed I Spone on my big regrets and never actually having the chance to meet the man. He was great He's phenomenal. You know, there's a clip I use in my videos of him back in the 90s No, really Back in the nice John Anthony West. I use it in some of my videos and he's standing at this cabinet the same cabinet I stand in front of take people there to the car in museum and he's looking at this beautiful dioro vase with a super thin neck and it's just it's like this beautiful But tiny little thin neck on it and fled and he's just saying, you know How much these vases are in anomaly? They're pre-dionastic We don't know how they made them. You know how do you machine out the inside of this vase through this tiny little neck Someone did and he said I can only hope that at some point in the future will people will start to like apply modern technology and Study these things and try to learn some more about it. So it's a fantastic that that vase scan project is Basically doing what he thinks we should be doing that is we're learning a ton about it his DVD series magical Egypt is what got me hooked Yeah, I know yeah, that's that series is insane. I think it's so good He's he was great a symbologist and that's and I think that's Sim that symbologist view of ancient Egypt is Is fantastic occasionally he would touch on that the engineering side of things that I'm caught a deep on Sometimes you ignore it too. It's pretty funny. I have a copy of his guidebook Which is hard to get these days his guidebook to ancient Egypt and it literally has about this much on the Serapean because there's just no real writing down in the Serapean That's the place with the 25 giant like hundred ton stone boxes. It's one of the most Remarkable logistical feats that come from ancient Egypt, but he just wasn't there wasn't a lot to like for a symbologist to interpret in that place So yeah, it's pretty cool. Go check it out This is what you know where I was down there. It's interesting you think of him like being concentrating on the symbolism and how much work he did oh and just you need one of those two right for sure a bunch of different people looking at all the different aspects of it. Yeah, and He was another one that had his interpretation was this is a lot older. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah It seems no one seems to like do a deep dive on it and go on. Oh, they figured this out No, right. It's I he's example With was so crazy his explanation was this was the national project dude. I've it's so I tried to watch that Imagine if we're all going to fly without wings. This is the national project. This is gonna use your mind If I were that wings, we're all just gonna work on that. I have heard him say that for ten years the 11 you Yes, I asked him that question 2015. I was in the room with Graham Hancock and him having this debate Which wasn't a debate and a young like because I flipped out earlier in the day, but You know, we asked him that question. I've heard him in giving that answer so many times You're asking about the anything precision or logistics, you know, all these these difficult to explain topics That's the response. It is it's basically They tried really hard therefore. They did and it's It's I it drives me nutty. He's not the only one who gives that response by the way That's that's that's a pretty stock standard answer to anything we say well How did they move a thousand times statue of thousand miles, which is what they did at one point? Or how did they build a pyramid so precisely or whatever or how did they do it in the time frame? No, no national project There's really wanted to and it's the response a good example is like the apartment Let's assume I mean the Apollo 11 project a pilot program, right? Going to the moon that wasn't that was a national project at the time There was a huge amount of resources put towards it from a relative to what NASA is today But we didn't just fucking all come together with a big You know piece of fabric and fling some people at the moon this tick this technology involved, right? You can't do it without the technology. That's that's the aspect of that answer that annoys me It's like no you know. I don't care how hard you try try does not get you Like precise down to within a thousandth of an inch or in in the case of one of these vases for tenths of a micro Six tenths of a micron. It's that's the most extreme precision of seeing on one of them What's interesting to that these vases these small things that you can hold in your hand are Evidence of this incredible technology When these enormous statues also exist But you don't think of the vases as being the thing that's the smoking gun, but it kind of is they are it's it because they It's because they predate the domestic Egyptians because they were buried with those people They exist we know they existed in those times you can't do that with the big statues But it's I have a whole long two hour talk about How these things connect to those things like the two drills and the precision and the machining? It's the same technique. It's the stone types. I mean that got there are there are a bunch of like two bullet drills on the Great pyramid a whole bunch of them people don't know about them Well where they are but I've got pictures and I can show people the statues show the same machining marks the statues reflect the same precision the boxes The the obelisks a lot of the stone work reflect the same thing as well the same tools we use the same precision shows up and in pretty much all of those cases The oldest and the best examples of all of those things are typically Also the oldest like it's like the best examples of all this. Yeah, yeah The single piece columns are absolutely incredible like those The Romans didn't make columns like that like the fact that these columns have granite in Egypt I mean they start off white and they get narrow and narrow and narrow and then they flare out at the top and it's all a single piece And that means that the entire piece that was quite had to be as white as the widest part at the top and then machine down These columns are friggin vertical. They have lathe centering points on them like there's like a hunt like imagine It's like 150 tons of turning on a vertical lathe or something that they did to create some of these things So there's points that show that it was oh, it was definitely centering points Yeah on these columns there's a forest of them laying out at Tannison you can see it on the endpoints and Can we show that that and not? And it was the weight of these things. Oh up to I mean I imagine the bigger ones and maybe 150 tones 200 tons they And you have these existing on all kingdom sites. They saccara giza abu cia the single piece columns They are also on sites later on that are attributed to the new kingdom places like the Luxor temple of kanak however I Think that those places or had a granite core and an infrastructure there already and then those kings of the new kingdom Setty the first marin pothar ramsis the second built Around them and you can see the difference in technology But of what's in the granite core with the giant obelisks and the columns and the granite buildings that look like the valley temple and the old structures They're outside of that. It's all sandstone and it's blocks and they made giant columns too But they're made from blocks of sandstone. They would stack them up and shave them down It's a much softer stone and making blocks out of rounds and just you're making columns out of rounds is way easier and trying to build a single fled You know Granite column and even the Romans leave. I mean it has to have been something like that I mean it can't have been that all the way because you have actually Jamie in that precision large Directory there's a picture of a column end like it's I'm standing next to this amazing Endpiece, but some of them are faceted so it can't have all been lathe work Right, they have little they have little buttresses and features But certainly the column of the lathe the circular part could have been done or the column the center of the column could have been done on a lathe I'm sorry Yeah, it's it's fascinating. I mean how big is it's leave huge I mean this is it Chris done things. Yeah, I mean that's one of the columns. I'm standing next to That's at Tannis and if you flip through there's there's like a column end point that's yeah, there's an end there So see this there's a hole in the In the tip So you have you have a lot this is a place called temple bass turt and there were forests of these things like look at that thing That thing is one of the most look at that. That's one of my favorite artifacts in all of Egypt. It is Immaculate that that the fascinating Look at that that ball knows that runs up the center of that front of the palm because he's a like palm shaped pillars I mean it tapers It's thicker one end and it thins right down to the end and it's exactly the same on either side On each of these fronds. Oh, I would love to get there and scan this thing One of my favorite pieces and you just had like I mean probably hundreds of these things on these sites I mean even and it goes back in time again this is from this is these are picked these are columns from saccara and Abucia which are all old kingdom sites So again, these are existing in the early times that they didn't build columns like this later in the civilization They build them with sandstone pieces Is that those images again, please? Look how crazy that looks yeah One solid piece of granite. Yeah and fled Even the Romans who by all accounts had far superior technology to The Egyptians they had false multiplies that iron they had all sorts of Mathematical skill they got from the Greeks. They've built they built single piece granite Pillars, but they but they were they would tape it the whole way like they and they weren't anything is precise They're quite rough if you go you've been to the pantheon. This one's one of my favorites This is called Pompey's pill you can see the dude standing at the bottom like this like I've actually got a picture of me there as well But it's yeah, you see that dude at the bottom. Yeah zoom out so we can see the whole thing with him It's not working There it is Look at that. So I think that's been a re that's a reworked column that the Romans reworked and they either they carved that head top Or it's a separate stone. I'm not actually sure But this is this is in Alexandria in Egypt, but huge And where did that come from? And so this is how they do it that's I don't I mean it's asked one in granite It's but it's it's like a thousand kilometers away. So then when you get to new kingdom So that's what this is what they yes So this is the stacked rounds of sandstone and this is I always like to show people this corner of current because it's an unfinished Column on the end there you can see how they did it They'd stack up those blocks and they'd basically shave it down And that would end up and this is imitation too, right? This is the other a key Thing you see even with the vases they would I mean people knew what was sufist duck anyone who works with stone whether you're primitive or not you see an artifact like That or one of those statues or a column out of stone you're like holy shit. How did they do that? So you it's from the gods, right? I'm gonna imitate it And I'm gonna try and replicate it and so they were doing their best to replicate and imitate But with sandstone with sandstone and in it and a technological method that they were capable of which is to put blocks of sandstone up Shave it down and make it make it look like one of these columns And they did great work right don't get me wrong Khanac is this is the great sort of hyper-style haul at Khanac. It's phenomenal and it is the work of the new kingdom But it still pales in technological significance to like the older stuff the single piece stuff But it's fabulous like it this is I love the carnex one of my favorite places because you have all those examples right in front of you of like high-tech and then low-tech And so by new kingdom what you're so like 14 1500 BC Fish So even then they're still doing spectacular stuff. Oh, it's just not a sophisticated. It was by all it's right By all the kentie old kingdom in the new kingdom that was Egypt's height like the height of the dynastic Egyptian civilization like Ramses The second in particular who like always call him the You know the greatest of the Egyptian kings they would Egypt had the most power the most The most ability to do that sort of work so they built these great temples And it just it's very very clear. Yeah, this is that Pompey's pillar that they call it It's very clear that um They built them around and on top of existing infrastructure In fact at Khanac which is attributed to Ramses a second. I mean you Again the devils in the details you have the names of kings that go back all the way to the old kingdom on various structures You also at one point at that in that haul where they pulled up a massive floor tile Underneath the ground at the bottom there is a is a column base It's another like an older and white calcite column base that is the same sort of column base that you see on the very oldest of sites Which tells you there was a column hall here before and either got destroyed or knocked down But the whole place was rebuilt you see this evidence for these layers of infrastructure on these sites that tells you okay? This is It's like looking at these ancient sites you always have to keep that That in the back of your head like alright. There's been thousands of years of Not only inheritance, but renovation and reuse and claiming like it's It's you know people have asked me if I think the statues are so old. How come they look like dynastic Egyptians? I think the answer is it's the other way around. I think that the nasty Egyptians Look like the statues so If you imagine there's there's evidence for like five or six of these giant thousand ton statues Which are the typical stuff you see at Luxor with the You know the head jet and the the namest crown or the big the bowling pin thing on the head and there was in that iconic Symbolic style of ancient Egypts. Do you guys some of those? Yeah, I have the precision largest probably got the statues and Imagine that you are a tribal culture that's emerging from the dark from this the stone age But you have this history and these legends of these stories and you come across Yes, so this iconic this iconic look and again this stretches back. There's an old kingdom status attributed to this is made of Dyrite by the way, this is called cuff ran thrown by my favorite statue with the columns from So comes like iron the background. This is made out of that same Insane is ably hard. Yes It's like a six point five to a seven on the most scale and it's it's phenomenon This is an incredible statue and this has exhibits that facial symmetry is what looks like it I've not seen this actual scans from this but this thing actually has tubular drill marks and and saw cuts in it too So it's it's got between his heels is a you see the remnants of a tube drill keep that I've probably got a picture of that in my machining directory of the actual the tube drill between the heels and then in the legs on the inside you can actually see overcuts like a Saw cuts from where there was they cut too deeply into this insanely hard stone And it's it's overrun which is if you were doing this by hand. That's a mistake You'd have to be making for about four hours You know to actually get the depth of the cut But if you had some sort of power tool that was moving removing material quickly It's you can overcut in there and and there's like little mistakes go to the fall of this please Yeah, so your thoughts are that the Egyptians were imitating these ancient looks. Yes. I think they I think they inherited their iconography from the things the artifacts that they that they gain in like statues like this and also the thousand ton versions of statues like this and And I mean if you look at their art style This is one of the things that blows my mind. It's it's it's like across that 3000 year civilization That iconography didn't And I mean, if you look at their art style, this is one of the things that blows my mind. It's like across that 3000 year civilization that iconography didn't change very much. Like it's the same look and how do the kings draw themselves on the walls? They're always trying to position themselves as being one of the gods. Right? They were talking about eventually they got this aura of divinity. You became a guy like the pharaohs became divine. That wasn't always the case. But they grew into that over time as that civilization progressed. And they always matched themselves and they tried to make themselves look like the gods. And again, eventually once you get hubris and ego involved in some of these really big, really rich kings, you're like, damn it. I am one of the gods put my name on the statue. That's how I want to be remembered. And that's there were multiple gods. Setty the first did it. His son Ramses the second his son, Marin Petar, particularly in the new kingdom, Petar called Ramses the Great Yisurpa. That's what's his name for him because he was putting his name on everything, trying to label himself as one of the kings. And I think if you look at that, I can from the old kingdom through to the Tullumac era, it's the same. Like they're depicting themselves as one of these gods who are always depicted in the same way. And that's like that's part of it from day one. Like it feels like. And I think where do you get that picture from? It's like that, what's the poem from Percy Shelley? Ozzymandius, look on my works you might even despair. Like it's literally a poem by Percy Shelley that talks about it. He actually gets it from, I think, deodorant, an account of deodorant, secular is coming across one of these statues in the desert. That's a thousand tons. It's like a weary traveler in a desert of an unknown land comes along to vast and trunkless legs of stone over like nearby a shattered visage lies, still like sort of sneer full of sneer and arrogance. And it's basically written upon this stone of the words, my name is Ozzymandius, King of Kings, look on my work, you might even despair. And then the endless sand stretch far away. I mean, I'm paraphrasing. People are dicks. Yeah. Especially when they become kings. There it is. Look on my works, you might be in despair. Nothing beside remains around the ground. It's okay, that colossal wreck, boundless and bear, the line and level sandstry. So it's like if you imagine you come across in the sand in the desert and you find the remnants of a thousand tons, David, if you probably, I'm sure you've seen pictures of the Ramacim and the thousand tons statues. Like there's four or five of them, at least that happened. But they're incredible. Single piece stone statues that were moved in some cases up to a thousand, like six, 700 miles away. I have them in like colossal directory. And did they fall from earthquakes? Is that the speculation? I suspect either that or the hands of men, I think it was like, I think, but enough dudes with enough leverage, you can probably eat that thing over and it'll crack when it falls. And I think it's, they were definitely, there was a long period of them destroying all the the gods and all the, you know, the false idols of the past. Of course. There's a place called Tannis. There's a foot, there's a giant foot that I can't, I mean, my whole astro's hand wouldn't fit in the tonal. And it's a repurposed block of granite and petri-founded and there's other pieces of this statue. So we know it was a statue that had it been standing. It's about the same size as the statue of liberty without the pedestal. The foot's about the same size. Just give it a frame of reference. And that thing's made from Aswani and granite now. Tannis is in the north and that's one's, and it's north of car like it's up in the delta towards the Mediterranean and car is down here. It's like a thousand kilometers. So someone at some point took a at least a thousand ton probably more like 1500 ton block of stone because they didn't finish them. They didn't ship them finished. We know they finished stuff on site. Like a thousand kilometers north. And there's an even better example, Jamie, I think in the foot. The foot at Tannis. No, that's it there. The first one. I in my, in the massive, there's actually my video thumbnail in the ancient Tannis largest stone statue ever made. Press giant, huge objects, huge objects. There you go. So there's go up on. That's the foot there. So you see, that's the, it's actually this funny because this box blocks been repurposed. It's been cut off on both sides and used as a block in a wall. They cut the front off foot in the back off it and stuck it in and rebuilt it. This thing, this, there's a picture of the whole arm when it was put together in that directory. So that's a joint thumb holding a scroll and they put the whole arm together. There's, I've got one picture of it. One time I was there, they put the whole arm together. And that is probably the most impressive example. It's in there. I'm sure. It's that, then, then, then, then. Yep. Up, up one. There you go. Yeah. So this, this is, it's made from composite quartzite. So this is a karnac. This is one of several of statues of this size at karnac. And what's impressive about this, they put this together for one year, and they took it apart because and I got told that it was because they didn't, people freaking out about how big this must have been. They didn't kind of, it gives a sense of scale and people like, what the fuck? How are they doing this? So they took it apart again, but you can still see the thumb there today. So it's turn on its side. Now what's cool about this is that it's a straight arm. So a lot of those statues like the one at the Ramacine, they're seated. So they always have their, their elbows bent at their knees. This thing was standing. So it was a standing statue thousand tons made from composite quartzite, which is in a lot of ways more difficult to work than granite. It's a very hard compressed form of sandstone. It's like 6.5 to 7, but it's full of flint. It's a stone carves nightmare. It's like you can see the chunks of flint in the stone. But they somehow worked that surface just with no problem going over flint, which is 7, 7 and a half on the most scale. The trick with this statue is where that stone came from. That's it's a karnac in the south. As one for granite bit further south. Combs of quartzite doesn't come from as one. It comes from the red mountains north of Cairo. And the tricky part here is that the Nile River flows north. So it's like people, it's because it's north of people like that's flying out. But it flows to the north. So they had to take the block for that thing. I'd say fun 1500 tons easy. They had to bring that up river, up river, 600 miles or something, 500 miles. I don't know how you explain that. And there's certainly no depictions of them doing that. That is a logistical feat. I mean, it's I don't know how you can rival it. It was a national project. Don't you get it? They just don't get it. Just a national project. They really wanted to do it. Well, it's one of those really amazing mysteries because the actual facts of it are so spectacular that it defies any conventional explanation. To the point where it opens up people to the possibility that maybe we don't know. It almost everyone listening to this. It's even remotely reasonable that sees that goes, oh, okay. I think I think this picture is a lot bigger than we thought it was. Yeah, that's honestly my response to it too is I don't know how they did this. You can't do it primitive fashion. Like we literally tried like we've had the thunderstone as the other is the other. How would they even do it today? Hydraulics and diesel power like huge bar. I didn't even know you try to move. I mean, it's like makes newspaper headlines when they shift a load of like 150 tons on a truck somewhere. A thousand tons these days. A thousand different tons. 1500 tons. I mean, we have cranes. We have the capability, but it's usually by water and giant. I don't know if we could how we'd transport a load like that over anything other than water. Imagine the wood and boat and how hard those do it to. Up river too. Not only that, how deep is the water and when you're dealing with 150 tons, how far does it sink? You know, displacement. Yeah. How much of a boat do you need? Can you fit about that wide? In the impostor and all you can, but I'll tell you this and I've looked at this that you sure shit can't do it at the quarry because this is what they say. You go to the quarry and this is an example I like to give people all the time. The unfinished obelisk. You know what I asked one question. 1,200 tons more or less. 10 tons off of them. They will tell you that oh yeah. So there's this low area in the quarry that's the harbor where they park the boat to take the stone. I mean, you just there is no chance that you could put that thing on a boat that even would it's like there's not in the realms of possibility for a boat to displace enough water to take a load like that obelisk. It would literally just be this giant clunk. It would just it just can't happen and what's more that quarry or that that harbor in the quarry that isn't a harbor that's an extraction. They pulled a fucking block out of there that same size as the obelisk and it's gone. You can see it. I showed it's an off limits area to the quarry but now we kind of get in there every time. So someone somehow pulled that off. That's already been done 100%. Well, you know it has because we've got the statues of blocks of that size and tonnage have been have been successfully transported and shaped. However, in that place they call the quarry in the harbor. It is it's all scoop marks. It's the same technology and here's where it gets wild is that that there's you can see the extraction that's come out. It's massive like the basically like the obelisk, the unfinished obelisk. So something like an order of 12 to 1300 tons in a piece got pulled out of there. And on in the corner right up at the end where you see the box the end of whatever this was was taken out on the wall there's red ochre painting. It's paintings of like e-musal flamingos and some other dolphins and other stuff. And it it's an identical match for the art style and paintings that you find on pre-dynastic pottery that comes from the car to culture and before it's exactly the same. It's not it's not dynastic Egyptian. It's pre-dynastic artwork. That's been put on the wall. I hope I have pictures of that. I know I do on here. It's actually I have a video called it's it's on what I have a video where I look at all this on my channel but it is it's the exact same artwork that you see on the vessel. So it's to me it's an indication of there was a primitive these people that were there are living there in the thousands of years before the dynastic Egyptian civilization rose. We're obviously in that quarry and they found this convenient wall to put some artwork on and they painted on it which tells you that well this extraction had to happen before that right had to have been taken out before that. And how far before? Right we don't know can't date the stone so but somebody took a piece like that out of there 100 percent with the same technology the scoot marks and stuff. Um could have you found anything on that Jamie? Can't once you get that let's look at the unknown obelisk too so to give people a run for an established yeah the unfinished obelisk is how many feet? That is definitely in that other directory. That's yeah that's the that's the the video about the obelisk. Do you have finished obelisk is how long? Oh god it's it's got to be 100 feet long or something like that it's a 1980 90 feet long I'm thinking you'll see it in the picture it's I mean it's a giant giant block I mean so it's not extracted either that's what I should say it's it is it is still attached to the bedrock so they were cutting it out and then for whatever reason they stopped but if if you assume that the obelisk would have a square section which means you know same width as you know like this a square section it would have it's mass with the granite there at like 2.7 tons per cubic meters is roughly 1,200 tons and had it be stopped because it was cracked or does it know? That's what they say I don't think so I don't think that it doesn't to me that's hard to say whether it was cracked or not it was people tried to quarry it after there wasn't much attempt made to quarry I don't know why you would even if it cracked why not use it if it's actually part if it was done during domestic Egypt I mean you've done all that work you've cut out the trenches on all of it around you could cut pieces out of that it take way less work you want to get a smaller piece of stone for something else just cut it like you should use it but it does not that's not what happened unless the technology was so sophisticated that what they wanted was very specific and they could just do it again yeah and maybe it didn't crack I think that's an example like you do see on a lot of these sites like the Serapean like the Assyrian that the quarry that something happened that meant tools down yes so here's the painting this is this is the pictographs those are the paintings and if you compare that to what's on like the pre-donistic vases you'll see exactly the same thing now so these depictions of flamingos was it possible to date the paint that they used I think you probably could I don't know if anybody ever has I'd love to see that done yeah I would love for that to happen that's that's a very good point because it's it just there's a few things in Egypt where I'm like why don't we date that sorry Jamie scroll down a little bit that scoopy thing to know below that yeah they're right there what's that so that's another piece near in the quarry and this is puts the light of the stupid pounding stone theory of of how they explain this in the mainstream because these scoop marks they tell you are pounding stone this is another big piece this is probably we guess this piece it was probably going to be like a smaller seated statue but still something's maybe 150 tons and they were they were cutting this out so this you can see this is the process of like carving out underneath it and so you can get in these trenches and and and the scoop marks are crazy though because they they extend basically from the top of the wall like 15 feet straight down these ridges they go all along the ground under and then up on the roof side so if you're you're pounding what you would have been doing this pounding up to pound that out and it also it's a very sharp turn on the inside there's some it's the result of some tool like also someone's going to be underneath it when it finally crumbs loose yep that would not yep not at all don't want to draw that short straw thank you very much yeah we take people down into that area around this block every time it's great and there's very bizarre looking you can grab that stone and whack out it and just see how how little effect you'll have with the meat you know but those stones were is that an example what they that's trying to claim was used yes how long would that be so is that the unfinished obelisk that is the unfinished obelisk and so where is that sucker cracked so there's couple cracks right so this is the thing that there's there's attempts at quaring that have been made it's it's I think it's that crack up the towards the top is what they say how it cracked but we don't know how we don't know if it cracked after the fact either it's possible that I mean like a lot of these places that it was a tools down situation just something happened to stop with a civil unrest cataclysm right and this thing was buried too like that's that's the thing there was a lot of quaring that happened after this at high levels like so this is you got to imagine when you go to this quarry it's like they've cut the top off a granite mountain I've taken so much granite out of there huge granite mountain so to get down to you know this sort of high quality granite which is not surface level granite you have to go 10 12 15 meters into granite to get blocks that are even possible to be this size or this you know one single piece and in fact even now that you can see that like all of this has changed this is not happening there's no staircase all of that's that gravel up to the north of that has all been moved we're still clearing the site out or they are but when this was first discovered it was buried in like seven eight meters of quarry rubble from all of the quarrying that had happened above it and around it like for thousands of years the Egyptians of Romans yeah this was buried and they know it was there well so there was like there was like an edge one little edge piece poking out like what the hell is this and then it was how would it was it was Flinders Petri's assistant who actually excavated that site and he had to like split a bunch of big blocks to even get it out of the way took them forever but they eventually uncovered it all yeah but it was the back end of this like seven eight meters of rubble that had to clear out I mean yeah that's nuts yeah it is it's and to me it's like it's quite plausible it's a possibility that that was there it was done to me possible there's more of that stuff out there for sure I mean there's many more quarry so this is just because that's in the quarry that's the quarry that's sort of been cleared and made available for tourists but just tons quarries like there's yeah these are great pictures that's the the dual image this is uh when it first popped out yeah so they had this section over there like wow this is something else but and so what happened with the pounding stones are really interesting because there were thousands of them on the site these round stones however the vast majority of them were broken that was split and god I'm blanking on the name of the guy who excavated the site um however he was like huh how come these are all broken and he tried to break him so he stood up it unlike a you know 15 feet up and he's hurling these stones down onto the granite and bang bang you do it like ten times and eventually he cracks a chip off on them because they're the dollar right they're hard they are harder stone and look you will eventually create enough dust eventually I mean it's it's like they're they actually have been studies done uh Dennis stocks that are study and it's the volume it's basically you remove about I think it was two thirds the volume of a golf ball in an hour of pounding yeah so not a lot not a lot yeah and if you can imagine I like to tell people it's like you can only fit like you know these these trenches around this cot it's not like you can put a thousand to it and they've got to sit in there's like one person in one spot and then do it and so all you have to do is imagine all of that space being filled up with golf balls add another third for the you know because it's two thirds golf ball and then maybe add another half again to that to account for the negative space between the balls that's how many hours it would take which is ye I mean decades of effort like it's not it's not remotely possible to do it in any reasonable time frame people can't and pounding stones it's like come on how do you break it free well that's the issue who's underneath it when that's pounding like how does that's what I think these balls were so I think the really they're very difficult to break they've taken away all the broken ones the only ones on site now these like little nice rounded ones and even then you you can't do it from all the couple you have to kind of let it go and catch it and you would your arms are burn out no to me but I think the reason so many were broken I actually I think and you can actually see this in the in the harbor area there are these channels that I think they cut under them you can see the remnants of them where they took the big extraction out and I suspect what they did was they would shove these balls of dollar right in there and it would provide them enough movement or just enough support where they could they could cut the rest of them of the whatever scoop out or remove the other attachment points and then you're also once you get out of that trench you can now shift this thing ever so slightly to get whatever you would need to get under it to lift it up out of there because that's the other problem with the obelisk is like it's on an angle and I mean the trench is going to be when it's completed they didn't they had only dug down two two thirds as deep as they needed to go so that trench at its it's thickest point would have been like 12 15 feet deep and down there and you got to get under it so you still it's on an angle you have to lift that thing up 15 20 feet up in the air to get it out of the trench and then somehow move it to again it's this rocky crazy environment to move it to get it somewhere then take it wherever else you're taking it but you'd have to be able to maneuver so I think I honestly think those dollar right balls could have been used as primitive ball bearings that were just that's all they were useful was to support it while you cut it free and then and then it would a lot of them would have snapped in half under the mass of something like that which explains why so many of them were broken because you ain't broken those things by pounding on them like it's just not going to break that actually makes sense that they were used as some sort of a ball bearing yeah but even so even if that's the case like wow what well how you lifting it what you're doing to lift that oblisk it how many people are involved if it's just manual labor you cannot fit enough people around that oblisk to even come close like not you're probably not even to get 10% of the amount of people like it's so it's such a rock rocky weirdness you can't fit that many people around it today I have no idea how I mean I don't think they were doing this without the expectation that they could get it done you know what I mean but what kind of conventional explanation is this there's nothing for this there's nothing there's nothing there's nothing just glass over it we don't know this we don't know they don't address the realities of the thousand tons I'm not seeing anyone address those realities well okay so they do and there's and it's like with logistics they will show you pictures where the Egyptians are moving something that is a hundred tons or 150 tons and say see now that's not how logistics works so for example with the statues we know they scale right up to you know thousand tons or more there is a picture on a tomb of a guy named Dijutihotep and I've got this in the statues directory I think it's a it's a painting on a wall and it's it's a it's a sled with this statue and there is like you know rows of guys they've got the you know the imprint of dudes behind dudes and they're all pulling on a rope no pulleys again they didn't have force multipliers they were just straight pulling wooden levers a wooden sled they drag in this statue in the case of this statue we know about this statue there's pieces of it left it was made from alabaster cow sites not as heavy as granite but it probably weighed the the estimate of how much it weighed was 57 tons which is quite a lot it's respectable right and you can imagine but with enough labor and on a sled this is it this is a 57 ton statue there's a guy pouring something on the sand or in front of them so you can count all these dudes and the shadows of the dudes behind them on these ropes and so there's a figure about it and there's been papers written about this there's literally I think a Japanese team wrote a paper about what would it would take to do this and okay this is possible for 57 tons with enough people enough horsepower you can do it now it's not like that scales up on like a linear increase in difficulty to something that's a thousand tons it's more of logarithmic exponential curve you cannot you cannot take this explanation and apply it to something that's a thousand tons it's 20 times as heavy the coefficient the friction coefficient goes through the roof that those sleds would literally just drive into the ground you can't you get to mitt you're in your in realms of mass where it's like material failure becomes a problem would there's no longer sufficient to support that you cannot you certainly can't move it up any slopes you have to do all this ground preparation work to even attempt it and they move these things like a thousand kilometers if there's a place that you could go back in time and see that is it that is it yeah quarry would be a good one god if you could go back in time just to see construction just I guess quarry but I mean I mean pyramids and how you lifting things what do you do and what what is your machinery look like you must have some some kind of technology that is just dust in it has to be because we've tried this like there's an exact do you know about the thunderstone you heard of this thing no okay so no I did hear about yeah in like the 1700s I think it was pre industrial age well at the early days but no diesel power no hydraulics and this is the thunderstone so we did that in Russia they move this thing from Finland to Russia it's at St. Petersburg that carved it as they went it's the it's the base now for I think a bronze statue of of of a Peter the Great but this is how they did it and and so basically you can see the cap stands the twist things these dudes are working on they're rotating they would dig these giant holes to anchor these big logs in the ground to then use pulleys and force multipliers with dudes on giant rails and then they would have these huge big iron rails that they would put on the ground and carry back and forth and the whole thing was was moving on these bronze spheres these big giant bowling ball sized spheres of bronze and on a good day they'd move this thing 150 meters three what's that 450 feet still pretty impressive yeah but it took them years and years and then and and it's this thing weighed around 1500 tons it's interesting that using bronze fears it would brass spheres I'm sorry but whatever metal spheres which is very similar to what you're describing with the obelisk right but there's again you when you compare that level of technology here to ancient Egypt ain't there's nothing there's that they have they show you what they did with that dujudie hoe tape image it's a wooden sled no force multiplied no cap stands no pulleys no none of that just dudes yanking rope there's no evidence they use pulleys pouring water on the sand yeah but miracle whatever right or you know it's it's just stupid you can't take you cannot explain it when it took us everything they had for years and years to to move that and by the way they did they took out across the Gulf of Finland and it wasn't on some little river barge either they built a giant platform took them a year to build it and then they had to put warships on either side of it to keep it balanced it's massive to even pop this thing in the center and hope that they got this thing and go over to to Russia to then move it the rest of the way so it ain't no barge carrying a thousand tons down the Nile no that's nuts something happened so it's all so fascinating and something happened is actually the only answer we have yeah yeah i would agree yeah ben you're awesome man i really really appreciate you coming on here your channel uncharted x fantastic channel so much good content how long you been doing it now i've been doing it i i mean i quit my job ten ten years ago but not i mean i'm tired of x god you have the courage to do that it was a big old step the wife was like what are you doing i know but look you were right and worked out i am super grateful as worked out in fact i want to i mean i see thank you for the hospitality and the invite and i genuinely also think do i've come full circle with this a little bit like i what got me into it in the first place jenny i mean i was always interested but it wasn't until grams first who i've gotten to know very well over the years i love that man it wasn't until his first appearance on your podcast back in the old days like was it 2011 2012 something like that who's the first real guests yeah that was just me and dunk in that one you and dunk in right at your ozejia house house i was doing it at my house that one yeah was what really i mean after that i followed him really closely i went to Peru and belive with him in 2013 and then 2015 and went with him to Egypt so it's like the fact that i'm here talking to you now you you started me on this and it's it's come full circle so thank you for that and and the fact that you are interested in this topic i think is such a boon to everyone else out there that you know you get to spread the word and and and it's it's just such a benefit to the whole the whole space well i'm so happy that guys like you took that fucking baton and ran with it but i mean well right i love it i my my answer to all this is who's not i don't understand you if you're not interested in this how how is this not unbelievably fascinating yeah right 100% i agree i'd that's that's what happened to me i'd fell down this pyramid shaped hall and i was doing i mean i had a had quite a career before this in the tech world but i mean i got a conference as in tech events in the second that we're out in the break room i'm talking about the young address and pyramids and matches that she's told this shit drain man co-organ to like this is really interesting i'm like i know it's the literally the most interesting thing about civilization that time period and the mysteries that are involved in trying to just decipher what happened yeah it is the most fascinating time in history i think yeah i agree i agree yeah in the middle again thank you so much thank you to it will definitely do this again i would love to especially some more information comes out about the labritat and hopefully more people you know we're also picking up the baton and i people get involved i see that happening i'm very glad that that it is i i'm i'm absolutely thrilled to see other people getting into the field i'm not i don't see any this is it's not competition it's like all the time you can see how much you can't support yeah you can definitely see you found that you could everybody will agree that you found it we didn't talk about the sphinx and the stuff in the star shop but save that for me soon again that yeah definitely do it again all right i would love to thank so much thank you so much thank you all for having me