The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast, my night, all day. Yeah, I have been fascinated by the subject for a long time, and I'm very, very happy that you made this documentary, and it's a very good documentary by you. Thank you for making it, and thank you for highlighting this very, very important issue that seems to have been really confused, and I'm really glad how you covered it in this documentary about Three Mile Island and Chernobyl and Fukushima. We have these ideas in our mind about the dangers of nuclear power, and I love the analogy that you made in the film about how driving a car is not scary, but it's dangerous, flying in a plane, feels scary, but it's far safer. And this is a great analogy to nuclear power. And you went over the data when you talked about the amount of deaths from coal every year, when you talk about the amount of deaths over all ever from nuclear. It's stunning. It is. It's stunning. And then when you cut to, in the documentary, you showed the anti-nuclear movement that happened after Three Mile Island. And how crazy it was. There's all these stars and celebrities, and they're doing concerts. You've got to stop nuclear power and what a mess. That happens when a fad, I mean, becomes fashionable. It's a very successful movement. You're talking about the negatives here, and the accidents, and we cover all that in the film, which is called Nuclear Now. And the idea behind it was because I really was like you. I went along with those things in the 70s and the 80s because I didn't know better. I didn't know I wasn't educated. I really wanted to know what is nuclear power. I wanted to go back to the source. And you got to go back to the beginning, and you got to go back to Marie Curie in Albert Einstein and World War II and all how it got developed. This nuclear energy is a beautiful, incredible, almost miracle that was given to us. We have an earth. It's all in the earth, uranium. It's everywhere. We've got to plan it, the earth, the sun. And we, in a sense, we took it like Prometheus and we kind of misinterpreted it, misused it, which is kind of normal for giving what we do with natural things. World War II was happening just as the nuclear fission was being understood and made the bomb. They made the bomb with it because there was a war on. They rushed it and they did an amazing job, Oppenheimer, the Los Alamos. And they got it and they were successful. But as you know, it was misunderstood that that point that nuclear energy was not nuclear bomb in the contrary. A bomb is very difficult to build and it takes years sometimes. It takes scientists and they have enriched the plutonium and they have to work at it. There's all configurations in the bomb that don't exist in nuclear energy. So when people see a nuclear energy plant, they subconsciously, they cross it with both war and they cross it with horror films that they've seen in the 1950s with radioactivity and monsters that come out of that. You know, a spider bites the man and he becomes spider man. You know, it's incredible stuff that happens and it's all, and it's Hollywood has done no favors to it. It's continued for years and years and years and then of course you had a three mile island. The film was coming out at the same time, China syndrome and with Jane Fonda was a good film. I enjoyed it. We all enjoyed it but it really was hysterical and alarmist saying nothing happened at three mile island except the reactor did melt down but nobody got hurt because the containment structure worked to keep it in, to keep it in. So there was no lease of radiation and they continued on. Silkwood was another one and then if you remember not too long ago, there was the HBO thing, Chernobyl, which was a complete fictionalization of what happened at Chernobyl. So we went to Russia and we talked to the scientists there and we wanted to know what happened at Chernobyl and we found out that it's in the film. And the same thing is true for Fukushima which is unbelievable because when you go to the bottom of it I was astounded to find out that nobody died there from radiation, not one Japanese. They checked the whole thing out and it's been done to death. But you hear about 15, 20,000 people died from the tsunami and the earthquake which was the biggest earthquake to pan ever had. I mean really we show the earthquake. We show the tsunami, the wave was 100 feet tall. There was a badly built wall. The wall was not a seawall that was could hold and the generators were flooded beneath the water. And these were also not state of the art. That's great. It's like what they can do now in terms of these power plants. No, everything gets better. I mean yeah. Even those nuclear reactors built 60, 70 years ago are still functioning. They're legacy reactors. They do work. We must dismiss them. Yeah, it gets better. Technology gets better. As in any business there's another generation and it's better but hopefully better. But the point was that they can avoid what happened in Fukushima today. A Fukushima was if you look at closely Japan had built 20-sum reactors at that point. And this one is the only, the others were exposed to the same earthquake and the same kind of tsunami. Several of them were on that same coastline. But this particular one, this plant was the only one that was shaken up. And even then all the radiation that was released, there was a hydrogen explosion. That radiation released in the air. You heard about it. It was supposed to be another terrible. Well we have shots in the film showing the taking tests on all the Japanese citizens. And nobody can, it's low level what they call low level radiation which is we can sustain it. We have DNA in our body that fixes, repairs our body as each day goes by. But it's also, you point out very well in the film, that there's a lot of radiation that you don't even take in the consideration that you encounter constantly. We have this idea of radiation as being a net negative. It's a terrible thing. But it's just a thing. You get it from being outside. You get it from rocks. You get it from all sorts of things. There's radiation in this room. You get radiation from eating a banana. I think what you said is so, it's so true that films and comic books and our fictions of radiation. That's part of the problem. Yeah, that started early. It's a giant problem. It's a giant problem. Because comic books and all that. It plays to the worst aspects of human nature. We just love to get terrified about headlines. We don't read into the devil of the details. Exactly. That's what was confusing to me. And I really, we're miseducated. And there is still a bias against nuclear if you mention it to anybody. Yeah, it's scary instantly. Yeah, but the point is we can live with it and we have to because we're facing, we're facing a very difficult situation, a cliff. We're going to go over. And it seems that no one's really getting it. So that's why I felt like the film I wanted to know. I need to educate myself. So in doing the film, I think I was able to bring out these things you talk about. What is wrong with nuclear energy? It can work. It is a miracle. We should use it. And we should use it abundantly. The Chinese have, and the Russians are way ahead of us. They've built it, they built it, and they built it with government backing, not like the US, where we kind of back it, but we don't really back it. So as a result, well, China is really cutting out now because they have about 70 reactors, approximately 70 reactors, about 74. Anyway, they're building. And I heard, I can't, I don't remember the source, but I don't know. I did hear that they're putting another $140 billion into this thing, which means that they're going to build 150 some reactors over the next, by 2038. That is a serious investment, serious investment. Wow. That's a serious investment that would take a long time for us to catch up to. Oh, it's not about competing. Right. But if we wanted to do what they're doing right now, well, we even if it's not competing, just to be current. Yeah. So they're the leader right now. Well, no, we're the biggest country in the world. We still have 90 some reactors online. So China's climate goals hinge on a $440 billion nuclear build out. That's interesting. So we still have more, even with all the negative stereotypes about nuclear reactors, planning at least 150 new reactors in the next 15 years. More than the rest of the world has built in the past 35. Wow. That's why I'm surprised you remember. No, just says it right there. Oh, you just had it pulled up. China has, well, you got a system workout out there. Yeah, James is the wizard. Look at him over there. He's the best. He didn't know what to tell us about. This article that you just pulled up, Jamie, this is from Bloomberg. Jesus Christ. Yeah. Well, you see, you got the source right away. Yeah. And this is from 2021. This whole thing is exactly how you lay it out in the film. It's almost like we have to cure ourselves of these misconceptions. And if we don't, we're screwed. China's building, man. They don't fuck around. Now they have a lot of coal. They still building coal plants because they have a huge demand. And they have to get off the coal. That is crucial because they are completely contaminating the atmosphere as well. The more nuclear they build, the better it will be. the contamination from coal is terrifying. We showed a documentary that had been done. Do you remember the documentary? No, but I remember it was a documentary. It was a documentary who was all about one of the things that was highlighting is all the people that live around these plants and the air quality they saw for it. It's insane. Their cars recovered with like a thin film of, you know, all the particulates in the atmosphere. It's horrible. They estimate from air pollution alone. I've read figures of 4 million deaths a year. It's just so many cases of, you know, respiratory illnesses. And that's hard. I want to say 4 million a year from air pollution, but one million at least from coal a year. That's what I've seen. But there could be more coal in the... And who knows what the health negatives are on top of that. How many people are suffering with illnesses and ailments? Because of those particulates, especially around those reactors or the plants rather. It's horrible. Well, we still have coal in the US. Yeah. No, this was in the US. This was in Indiana, correct? Oh, yeah. They have coal everywhere. I mean, President Trump said, Trump digs coal. I dig coal. He said clean coal once. What the fuck are you saying? Cleaner than what? The other lighting tires? Now, the other truth that we miss is gas. We know how ugly the oil thing is. I mean, there's the waste and all the oil. And this fossil fuel itself is destroying the universe because we're putting carbon into the atmosphere CO2. But gas is considered... They're using gas. They're using gas everywhere. Even it seems like a modern thing. They say, well, renewables, which is solar. And when those are... We're all for that. I want solar. But they don't work all the time. They run out and winter at night. Is it also a problem with battery technology when it comes to those? Well, that's part of it, too. But the point is when they run out, what they need is gas back up. It's back up. It doesn't need storage and it doesn't need backup. What's the beauty of it? It's a real clean energy. And gas... I mean, renewables do need backup. And that backup is gas. So it's not 100%... One of the issues is about storage, the waste. And when you talked about just the size of the amount of storage, it's not nearly as much. as a lot of people think it is. Of the amount of... All the waste that we America has used up to now and the last, since the 1958, whenever shipping port was built, has amounts to about the size of Walmart. You could put it in a Walmart. In other words, people make a big deal about waste. But they don't realize that it's so intense and energy. It's a huge amount of energy that it's... And you're saying, compact as a result. So it's... It's into... If waste itself is a positive about nuclear, because, first of all, there's been no harm done. So it's been buried in casks. And it, first of all, it goes into water for maybe two, three years. And that's a conductor that takes the radioactivity down. And then it gets put into casks that are 12 to 14 feet. They build these casks in the United States. Concrete and steel. Concrete is a great... Does not conduct radioactivity. Concrete stops it. So concrete and steel, casks work. They can go for 100 years. And then you can put another 100 years. And then eventually, eventually, you realize that radioactivity drops each time. And for five years, it's way down. It tops to almost... If you... I don't have all the fingers, but you can see that it's a ridiculous fear given compared to what, given that climate change is so dangerous. And compared to the deaths that are already occurring every year, just from using the methods we have now. And in comparison, the amount of people that died from nuclear, it's very, very small. Well, the only people who've died from nuclear, they know how bad they were. They were... Right. 50 first responders who died in the actual... They were the badly protected. They were sent in by a corrupt and decaying Soviet government. And then they were hiding the fact that there was a leak. The radioactivity went all over Northern Europe. And still, that was... It was not... What we think it is. It's not like Hiroshima and Nagasaki. It wasn't that enriched kind of radiation. It was a low-level radiation that exists that went out there. And they went out the UN, went in, and the WHO went in. And it was really exhausted what they did. And they came up with a number of about 4,000 possible deaths from cancer after Chernobyl. Now, since then, there's been another examination by another scientific organization. And it says that he's even in a high number. We don't really know because people die from cancer naturally. So we don't really know how bad Chernobyl was, but nothing like what has been... What the environmentalists say is the end of the world and all the... Or the HBO. Oh, the HBO was a... I mean, it was... I didn't see it, but I heard it was great. Yeah, it was great attention. It was tension and... Yeah, I make movies, I know. You can make movies out of disasters, but it's not fair. It's not fair. It's not fair. It's not fair for me. It's not fair for me. One proponent. Nobody in... That's what bothered me. Nobody said it's a good thing as opposed to... It's a horrible beast. It's crazy that it's something like that that's right in front of our face. It's not like something that has to be invented. It's not theoretical. No. It's like, again, myth over... You use your reason. Go scientific. Yeah. It's a science which is very hard to do in a world where... Imagine tobacco with your soul to us. Tobacco is good for you. Right. Car seat belts were not necessary. We have automobile safety. You know, all the good things that happen take... They happen against the desire for profit. Yeah. But even this desire for profit, we're talking about renewables. You're talking about... Yeah. It's really interesting that that gets connected to green. Everyone says, that's green. This is green power, green energy. But there's very little that's more green than solar. Yeah. That's... It's never mentioned. We went to Davos with a film. And they're taught here at the R. Davos, all the world's richest businessman, biggest guys, movers and shakers. Leonard people... They don't even have it on the agenda. They talk about clean green discs. It's demanding. It's demanding. We had to struggle to get a screening of nuclear. And we got one. So in other words, people know about it, but they... It has to become trendy. Right? Right? It's almost really what has to happen. It's almost like that has to become the trend of being one of the people, the early adopters, to recognize that nuclear is the way out of this. It's a sad thing because the truth is they work for 70 years and it still work. Yeah. But, okay, we want new stuff. That's the American way. We always have to have a new thing because we get bored with the old thing. Oh, nuclear, I heard about that. That's dangerous. Right. That's the way the reaction. Right. So now they're building in the U.S. They have 50 new companies working on 50 companies working privately toward some Department of Energy help, towards making SMR small modular reactors that are sleek, great looking, and they all have different methods of working, including nature, including bill gates, is there with a new company. Does this lead to nuclear power cars? Because of so, I'm not sure. Well, no. That's another thing. I want one of those. No cars, transportation. That can be done with... That's another... She's not just electricity that has to be improved. We have to, we have to nuclearize electricity, which is about a third of the problem, but we still have the problems after that of... Internal transportation. ...transplation and aside from that, heating buildings, heating offices. Cooking. Hating in general. Yeah. For apartments, for offices. And then there's the industry aspect of it. The concrete steel. These are huge, highly intensive CO2. Yeah. They consume a lot of carbon to make these things. And don't forget agriculture. Yeah. It sounds horrible, but ammonia is one of the worst by-products of the... ...emonia is in the air. And you remember the Oklahoma bombing. Yeah. But ammonia is terrible. And what we have to do is get electrify everything, essentially. So the demand for electricity, given the whole world's coming into... Look at all the people in Africa, Asia, who are coming to want what we have. They see television, they see what Americans have. Have you gotten into regenerative farming at all? I looked into that. Not really. It's something to consider. Because when you were talking about ammonium, when you're talking about... Just the different fertilizers and pesticides and herbicides that get put in through around... I don't know if it's scalable for the entire country. That's the real problem with it. But there's people like Joel Salatin and white oak pastures that's down in Georgia. And they figured out a way to have farms where it's regenerative, where the animals are eating the grass, they're fertilizing the grass, the fertilizer, they use the fertilizer for, you know, to grow food. And they bring in these animals to these ecosystems and they have them exist in a way that it's just basically contained nature. It's just the way the natural cycle is and they have a zero carbon footprint. It's essentially... Everything sort of works in balance. And that's how it's supposed to happen. And if you look at... Especially from white oak pastures, he had a video of the runoff from a rainstorm onto... From his property into the river, which is nothing, to the next door neighbor's property, who runs an industrialized farm. And it's a fucking disaster. It's horrific to look at. Because you just see the top soils gone. Look at the difference. It's a clear line between his property on the left and the neighbor's property. I mean, how insane is it that this is normal for us? This is the problem. The problem is they've gone into these monocrop agriculture situations where they plot. They use the same land over and over again and they have to apply fertilizer. And they have to apply herbicides and pesticides. It makes it toxic for everything. But whatever the fuck it is, they're growing. A lot of the stuff they're growing is genetically modified in order to be more tolerant of these pesticides and herbicides. And that's not good. This is a major source of the problem. Yeah, fertilizer. But I can't comment on that. Yeah, it's really interesting stuff. It's obviously not my wheelhouse either. But these people that have had to talk about it. But the point is that we're going to need... They some people say three, four, five times amount of electricity that we have now. By 2050, which is the... We used 2050 as a gold mark because that's the IPP. The IPCC standard. They said that by 2050, all the countries in the world have to bring down the carbon emissions to zero to zero. Yeah. Now that's going to be... That's going to be... It doesn't work. I mean, the green renewables are great. There's great idea. It made great sense when you saw Al Gore's film. But the truth is that CO2 keeps going up, not down. It's gone up since then. We've spent trillions of dollars since the 2000 period. This is 20-some years now. And it just hasn't worked. And nobody admits it. That's what's crazy. So the only way to get the carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere is do it... Do it clean... Do it right now. You got to get rid of gas and you got to get rid of oil, basically. And you got to be severe about it. That means you have to have an alternative, a clean, cheap, scalable alternative. And nuclear is the only one that's proven itself. Proven itself for so many years. And yet nobody... It doesn't even get talked about it. I mean, journalists will say, and there's nuclear, which is dangerous. But it's not dangerous if you do it right. If you build it right and you keep it right, it's been done time and time again. It's just that one... I wish there had been more accidents than what have really taught the lesson. Every industry has had needed accidents. I mean, when they started the railroad, they thought that your brain would get pushed back in your head. Because of the speed of the... Going forward, same thing was true with airplanes. You had more crashes before the airplane has been modified into this incredibly powerful machine. We're not going to get rid of the airplane. We're going to have to use fuel. We have to use aviation fuel. And it will come from the marriage of hydrogen and carbon, actually. And it will need a lot of heat. And that heat is going to come from nuclear. It's not going to come from anything else. That amount of heat. We also have to take it into consideration that if the population continues to grow, and we're doing things the same way, whatever our output is now that's damaging, it's going to get worse and worse and worse. It's going to be more people. United States is in good shape compared to the rest of the world. But look at India. Yeah. Look at Africa. I mean, people will burn wood if they have to much less coal. I mean, they're not going to stop people from getting things. And they're going to want energy. That is going to be the pride. India is crucial. We bring it up in their film. They have some, they are doing some great nuclear work. They have 20 some reactors in India. But they are definitely on the path of coal, like China. They're going to get, their demand is enormous for coal. So what happens? There's no luck. We can't get out of that mess. We're going to have so much pollution, so much warming that the only way we can do it is by building nuclear now and taking everything else we can throw in there, including renewables alongside it. Well, I think it has to become something that people are aware of and becomes trendy. And that's one of the great things in the film. The, this Brazilian woman that lives in Austin? Oh, yeah. She lives in Austin. Her name is Isabel Bonkey. And BOM. She makes TikTok films. Yeah. And these little TikTok videos, the great thing about those is they become viral. And maybe that is how the message gets out. Yeah. I think that's part of it. I think it needs to be addressed by leaders. The leadership of, let's say, President Xi of China has committed to the UN that he by 2060, they will have zero carbon emissions. Well, I think that's a vow. It's going to take someone who's got some courage because it politically, it's an issue because people do have this false narrative in their head. Yeah. So it's going to take someone who's willing to step outside of what the polling would show. Because I would imagine that the polls most people, if you just started to talking about, we've just switched the entire country over to nuclear power. If you're running for president, people go, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. So many people just have the knee jerk reaction that is brought about because of these films because of the anti-nuclear power movement. There's still that propaganda existing people's heads or the false narrative. The necessity is the mother of invention. As things get worse, it will be clear that we need nuclear more and more and more and more and more and we'll come late to the game and we'll say, well, we've got to build more and more nuclear because we're not working with wind and solar. Right, but I don't think you're going to see that from a politician. I don't think a politician is going to stick their neck out. I think it's going to have to be so prevalent in the public narrative. It's going to be so prevalent in the zeitgeist that they think politically it's okay to be a proponent of it. Well, I think the younger generation is changing the numbers on the demographics of that. I think 60 percent I'm reading are pro-nuclear now. That's great in the US. It's probably TikTok. Well, maybe it might be. But it's a new generation. They're more scared about climate change than they are about war. Yeah. And a lot of the older generation, they confuse nuclear energy with nuclear bomb or dying off. And I think there is going to be a change. It has to be. There's no other ways. There has to be. It's just on top of it. It's a miracle. It's incredible. If it's handled correctly, built correctly like I'm in Rick over dead with a Navy, that's the Navy was one of the biggest developers of nuclear in America from the 1950s. They milk nuclear submarines and they kept going. They just don't talk about the power in a nuclear submarine. How long it lasts too. One small reactor can run a submarine for how many 50, 60 years. That's insane. And also, if you put two of them into an aircraft carrier, you've seen the size of those. Yeah. That's just a giant 6,000 people on that thing. That can go for also, the two reactors can make. That's what they're doing. Actually, two reactors can make an aircraft carrier go for... I don't know how many years, 50 years, 40 years. That's insane. It's incredible. I mean, really, is there there's nothing like it? Nothing like it. No. The fact that that is not something that people marvel at. No. They have a ship at sea that's powered entirely by nuclear power and it can go for 50 years. Whatever it is. We try to show that in the film. It's just a miracle. It's insane. It's so much different than anything else. And if you just do it right, like they do with the submarines or like they do with you need discipline and you need to redo it and do it and do it. So you standardize it. The United States never standardized it. Japan did, Korea did. They built one type of reactor and they built it consistently. Just recently, Korea built four heavy water reactors, big ones in UAR, the United Arab Republic. Four of them, 1.4 gigawatts each, a gigawatts, a billion watts. So it's 5.6 gigawatts. That's a huge amount for the United Arab Republic. They don't cover a huge area. That's the kind of building you need to do. But you have to do it consistently. Didn't the frame either go ahead and play it either way. You can ship it too. If you assemble the line it, like in Korean shipyards or something, you can build it in a way that with SMR parts, you can put the parts in and ship them, like a Lego set, down up and down the coastline of China or the coastline of America and any country. That Russian just did that in Pevek, which is an Arctic outpost. They built, they sent a large green piece, of course predicted it would be a nuclear titanic. And it wasn't in arrived in Pevek and it set up and it's working beautifully to this day. So SMR is a shipable and they can be built in shipyards. They can be assembled by the thousands. There's no reason not to. Now, what about if one of those thinks sinks? Yeah, well water absorbs, absorbs radiation. So like what happens when there have been nuclear submarines in a song, right? Well, if they did, there's been no damage. Isn't the phrase can either confirm nor deny? Doesn't that come from, I think that comes from an operation, I believe I heard this on Radio Lab, I think that phrase comes from an operation where they were trying to recover a Russian down submarine. Right, I remember that. And they had to answer the question. And so when they were questioned, their answer was, we can neither confirm nor deny. Because they were put in a position when they were supposed to interact. So how do we say this? We can't lie. We can't say no, we're not going to tell you because we have to answer. So the answer they came up with is we can neither confirm nor deny, which is a beautiful, it's very eloquent. If you really think about it, if you want to be a bullshit artist, that's an amazingly eloquent statement. That was the one that Howard Hughes was involved in Global Global. Is that what it was? Yeah, Howard Hughes. Yeah, that sounds right. Yeah. I've never heard more about it. You know, whatever happened happened. It was, you know, the world, the world's like the world. The world is the one that's the thing about it. Right. People say, well, when something goes wrong, it really goes wrong. But that's just no evidence. That's an exaggeration. But in comparison to the things that we absolutely no go wrong with just transportation, just driving. Like deaths are inevitable when you have hundreds of millions of people. Obviously you want to mitigate them as much as possible. But we're just victim of, like, bad narrative. Industrial accidents. You know, many people die a year, too many of them. It's incredible. So 50 people died, it's turnable. And here we are running away from nuclear. Yeah, it's kind of crazy. But that's humans. We're so weird like that. Germany is the craziest of all. Yeah. They're smart people. I thought they were mathematical. Genius is. And you explain what you're talking about. Because a lot of people probably don't even know that they should. Well, they show them. They originally did. 20 some reactors in the sixties. And they were doing very fine with it. And they had no problems. And now they've shut them all down because of the green party, which is a political party, green party, which is also pro war pro NATO. You know, it's strange, green party. It's a hybrid. Anyway, they came into power. And they're, it's a democracy. And they don't want any nuclear. So they destroyed. They shut down the power of the world. They shut down all their plants that were working. And we show that in the film. It's a danger. And what did they go with? They, they replaced it with coal and gas. And as a result, and a lot of solar and a lot of turbines, the in fact, if you think, look at the solar park that they built, they built the gigantic solar park in Germany. 495,000 panels. 495,000 panels. 495,000 panels. That's enormous. And that park, if you took, they took down a nuclear reactor in the area. That one was about a hundred acres. But it was producing about a hundred times more electricity than the, than this 500 acres on one fifth the land. Not only that, at what point in time does that become pollution? Like, if pollution fact. I mean, just whatever the panels are. Like, whatever that area is. Like, what have you done to that area? I know we don't think about, we just think about it as land. But that's part of Earth. So you've covered part of Earth with this, with these fucking panels. It's, it looks gross. The turbines look gross too. I went down to, I was going down to South Texas and I drove past this turbine farm. And I'm like, how is that not bothering people? That's it. It's like eye pollution. You're looking at these things that are spit, these giant machines that are spinning instead of just the landscape. It looks like we're tricking ourselves. And to thinking that this is like a hundred percent clean. It's not clean. If all you're looking at is turbines. If you're driving on the highway and you see hundreds of turbines with lights on them. So planes don't fly into them. That's not clean. Like, that's a part of the problem. Like, that's polluting the environment. Well, it looks like shit. I understand. Each country's different. It depends what they want to do with their land. I mean, Denmark has had some success with that. Germany's had greater success with when than they have with solar. That's for sure. But they're not dealing with it because we're still putting up. Yeah. We're putting out shit in the air. It's also, yeah. I mean, it's certainly better than burning coal. It's certainly better than many alternatives. But it's still it's perfect. Well, we should talk about methane because that is not better. It's more damaging in the short term. Methane is. Methane is horrible. And it leaks all along the line as we say in the film. That's gas. Natural gas. Natural gas. Natural gas. And we talk about it like it's some kind of savior. It's a perfect partner for renewables. That's what they sell themselves as. And they advertise it. When they show the footage of how much gas. That's released from those pipes. It's crazy. I showed it in the film. We showed the infrared camera. Yeah. And how much gas is leaked? This is your turn. Your gas stove on. And that's a leak right there. And that goes along way towards destroying the atmosphere. A lot of people are upset that they're trying to ban gas stoves in future buildings in New York City. That's a big thing. But I was like, OK, are people over reacting? Who's over-acting? And then you think about it. It's just for the convenience of cooking that you enjoy cooking more with that? Is it a price thing? Because nuclear would solve the issue of the availability of power. But would it, I think people just like to cook with gas. That's really weird. If it's really bad for you and really bad for the city and for the environment, they're just the fact that you don't like cooking with electric. Well, I can't comment on that. I just know that methane has a short-term huge effect on the atmosphere, long-term less. But they did recently ban at New York City, correct? I don't know. Did they jamming? I think they banded for new home construction. Yeah, I think that's right. And everybody went crazy. And I was like, wait a minute. I don't know about this. Maybe that's not the worst thing in the world. You know? First statewide ban on use of natural gas and new buildings. Yeah. Because if that stuff really does lower IQs, isn't that one of the things that they've discussed? I don't know why. See if you could find that. Yeah. See if you could find, because I remember there was something about it having an effect on cognitive function. Yeah. You know, we found out, when we just talked about this the other day, but we found out from leaded gas, that there's a giant dip in IQ points, not a giant one, but like a measurable dip in IQ points, amongst people that grew up in my generation, with leaded gas everywhere. Yeah, well, I wonder about my own brain. I guess, you know, we've been around long enough. Well, we're getting old over. And that's part of the problem. I think it's the child it has. The child it asthma. The child it asthma. That's it. Didn't say anything about cognitive function. And I even typed an IQ here and it did. Interested. It didn't bring up any. Maybe I'm completely so much heat comes off nuclear that it really is not being used. Right. As the scientist says in the film, it could heat New York City. Yeah. So if it's caught, even if it's causing kids asthma, like it's not good for anybody then. Like, if that's really what's going on with the gas. But the amount of time that it would take to get the United States, like what would that take to get rid of all of the things that are polluting the environment, all of the things that are putting out particular coal and all that stuff. So we can place it with nuclear. We give it that we showed that graph from here to 2050 thinking backwards and trying you have to get this thing going. You have to get the nuclear part going. It's going to go slower at the beginning because they take longer to build. But once they're up, the maintenance is very, very easy to do on these things. Yeah. So in 2030 to 2040, if you're built, this stuff is going to start to pay off from 2040 to 2050. It's going to be your huge run, a huge race. And we can do it. We may not get all the way to zero, but it's certainly doable if Rick over were in charge of a program that he would push it through. But it's not just us. Honestly, the Chinese are doing their part. They're really trying because they see the problem. For a president to say that Zee, when he said he's going to go down to zero by 2060, that's 10 years later, that's pretty good. That's amazing if they can stick to it. Russia too plays a huge role. So does India, but... Well, they obviously have much more control over how things run. They don't really rely on the public's opinion. Well, people play exactly. That's okay because we're talking about the earth here. But let's talk about France. France has been nuclear since 1975. They built 56 reactors in 15 years. That's pretty fast. And they were all working. Some of them are getting very old now and they have to be either renewed or replaced. But they still have those nuclear. A lot of their electricity in France, 70% is nuclear. They have some hydropower. And I think some gas, but not much. Well, I genuinely think that it takes someone like you making a documentary about this to get the word out there to the point where people really start demanding this. I really do. Because I think you're countering all those movies that you discuss. All the fictional movies. You're countering all those. You're countering all of the stuff that we had growing up, Godzilla, and Spider-Man, and all that. That's what it is. It's like we associate radiation with negativity and nuclear power with radiation. We show images in Brazil. It's going to... Brazilian is going to Black Sand Beach. To absorb the radiation. It's good for the body. Yeah. We show, you know, in cancer therapies, it's used radiation. It's used to kill off tumors in the body. We show in Iran. Ram Sar Iran, which has got huge radioactive activity. It's very high. And it's tremendously... No one's... They're doing very well in Iran with that. Ram Sar, no one's dying. Yeah. So in other words, we can live with radiation much more in a way because DNA has has crick and Watson found that redopligates, it has a double. So we tend... The body repairs itself as it's damaged. And that was a big argument in the old science because the Rockefeller Foundation, of course, put out the scare and their oil people. They put out the scare to the public in 1957 where they said, you know, any amount of radiation to the body is dangerous. And that really worked and put in New York Times, publisher put it in the front page and a column and then it gets out, you know, that fear. So that's where... Meanwhile, the counter comes later, but you don't hear about it. And the counter claim is we repair our body as we get... As we move through life, that's what DNA does. So it's a wonderful system we have of DNA. But we just have scary stories about radiation. And, you know, rightly so in some cases, like the radium girls, those... Do you know about this? I don't know. These use radioactive paint for, like, indices on watches and things on those lines. You know, loom... Do you know what that is? Like on watch face, there's these little dots, right? Well, these little dots collect light when it's light out and then when it's dark, they glow. Well, people used to apply those things with paint. They didn't realize the consequences of the radioactivity. So these girls would sometimes, like, lick the tip of their brush to wet it, to shape it, and they develop horrible cancers. And it's a very famous story, but these poor women, like they develop these holes in their faces. It's really scary stuff. But it's from very specific type of radiation. And it's also from direct contact through this paint with no protection at all. Well, I can't comment on what I don't know, but... Yeah, I know. But there are some consequences that are negative that are associated with radiation rightly. Yes. This is one of... High levels of radiation will hurt and kill. Exposure to radiation. I mean, it's the reason why they make you put a lead thing over your junk when you get into an extra machine. That's correct. Yeah. I went to a lot of that when I was visiting the plants in France, Russia, and here at Idaho, the National Laboratory, we talked to a lot of scientists. And people handle it. Those people who know, know, they don't freak out again. Was this something, this subject that... When you decided to make a documentary about this, was it simply just because you had the information and you felt compelled that this is just not a story that's being told correctly? No, I... I read a review of book review and then in the New York Times of all things about Joshua Goldstein's book with Stephen Kavist, the Swedish nuclear scientist. And it was called Bright Future. I bought the book, read it. It was very practical and simple. And it goes into the truth, which is... This has been a lot of lies. And I bought the book and made the movie with him. He gave me a lot of... I had to learn a lot. I had to travel. And it was difficult. It was not an easy film to make. I wanted to make it understandable to a ninth grade level, you know. Trying to make it simple. I think it works at that level. Yeah, absolutely does. Yeah. Definitely. It's just very important to do. And I'm really glad you did it. Because I've talked to so many intelligent people that share your perspective on this. But it's just not being discussed publicly enough. Well, that it might have been our solution the whole time. It was. Yeah. It was. Yeah, I shouldn't have said, might have. Eisenhower was on the right path. Yeah. And John Kennedy supported it completely. Yeah. And remember, we used... We quote him in the film. It got derailed, obviously, in the 70s with Ralph Nader was very influential. And he's done great work, not neater, but of course on car safety. But he was wrong about... Exactly. He exaggerated this to a degree that was not necessary. Do you think people exaggerated it because they had their own heightened anxiety about it? Yeah. And... Yeah. So it's not like they did it on purpose. They did it because they were genuinely missing forms. Yeah. I do believe that Nader is the good man. Yeah, I believe so. And he still believes in it that he's right. But it's a question of degree. You know, like not... He said, all Cleveland is going to blow up from one nuclear reactor. That's right. That's true. If it blew up, it's not going to blow up Cleveland. Right. And it's not a bomb. And unfortunately, that was a original confusion. It's never been... But there wasn't also no one to counter him. Like, who would counter him back? Exactly. Because I'm a publically scientist. But some are publicly... That one I can't answer you because I don't remember. Well, frankly, do you remember the guy who started Greenpeace more? Dr. Moore, he was with the co-founder of Greenpeace. He came out and said, you know, we were right about a lot of things at Greenpeace. The way I was saving the whale, we were right about toxic waste. We were right about nuclear bombs, but we were wrong about nuclear energy. We got it wrong. He says that in the film. It's a wonderful statement. But again, people, I guess when you get... You hear the negative first, you don't go... You don't listen to the positive. Yeah, that's the problem. We're slaves to our initial impressions. Well, that's the point of maturity. Yes. That's where you have to get smarter. Yes. It's just very difficult for people to do. It's a lesson that doesn't get taught enough that you are not your ideas. And once you start talking about a subject, particularly something that is a world-changing subject, like nuclear power or renewable energy, you have to be... It's not you. These arguments are not you. You have to look at just the data. You have to look at the data. And just because you have an initial idea about something, don't... Exactly. Look at it correctly. Exactly. Because people associate themselves with ideas. And if they've just spoused an idea, they somehow or another think they have to defend it to the end. And it's a terrible trap to get into. And I've seen brilliant people get into that trap. Yeah. It's a terrible trap. You're not your ideas. Well, I'll say well said. And you're certainly not something that is a very nuanced and complicated issue, like nuclear power. You could be a person who was anti-nuclear power a few decades ago or even a few months ago ago and getting new information go, oh, okay. This is what I thought. And this is where I was wrong. And that's better for everybody. And if people learn how to do that, we can move past a lot of silly shit in this country. Yeah, I wish Jane Fonda would come out the other way. What is she on now? I admire her for her Vietnam stand. Oh, yeah. She could mean a lot if she understood this and came out against. But there's a lot of the people know this. That type of Russell Brown brand. Yeah. They understand. They've done reading. There's smart people. We got to get it out. And it's going to happen. I do. There's smart people in their courageous enough to just start talking. As I say in the film, you know, with Josh, I said nuclear has been around. It's been discredited constantly. But it won't die. It's like something that just sticks around because it's good. It's a truth. And I think it's going to be inevitable because there is no other alternative. I mean, we can talk about carbon capture. We can talk about all the things that they're doing. Fusion is a great solution. I love fusion. I was just up at MIT with Dr. Dennis Swite. He's the head of the program there. He's fusion plasma through. It's a beautiful, amazing amount of work. And maybe it'll work in the second part of the century. But right now we have from 2020 to 2050, we got to deal with his hump. And fusion is not there yet. It hasn't delivered. The fission has. There's also some research that's being done on utilizing the spent fuel cells and utilizing the waste and converting it into batteries. Correct? Isn't that it? I didn't know about batteries. I know in Russia they had the breeder reactor that I saw at Belly-Arsc, which I went out to the middle of Russia. I forgot exactly where it is. And it's beautifully designed. It's a 600. It was designed many years ago. And it does breed more than it eats up its own fuel. And it reuses the fuel over and over again. That's why they call it a breeder reactor because it breeds more. Yeah. And they're using it. It's expensive. That's the problem. Can they standardize it? That's the other problem. You have to make it cheap, too. But the Russians have done it. And now they're building an 800, which is a bigger one. So, you know, I'm hoping for that. But on the U.S. side, we have all these smaller... We have GE working with Hitachi, which is Japanese company. They're building an SMR, a small modular reactor with, you know, some capacity. It could make a radioactive... A radioactive diamond bath. Oops. Oh, I'm gonna start now. Pop up bad gosh. We had batteries. Unveils battery made from nuclear waste that could last up to 28,000 years. The nano diamond batteries power comes from radioactive isotopes used in nuclear reactors. Yeah, that's what I was talking about. So, as technology advances and obviously technology would, you know, whatever, they're able to do now or even... Have they actually done this or is this just theoretical? The article is 2020. It unveiled an unveiled a battery that uses nuclear waste. I don't know. This is... They're saying that they actually have a functional product. Whoa. That's what I was trying to... The water quality had to pop up with a nuclear water. Oh, I thought it was theoretical. I don't know. They're already making batteries out of it. But if they can do that, I mean, Bingo. Now we have a problem with electric cars, right? That was the problem. Electric cars, the batteries. That's the giant issue is you're getting lithium out of the ground. And most of it is sourced through unethical waste. You're getting cobalt. Most of that sourced through unethical waste. But if they can make batteries out of fucking diamonds. And to make... I mean, how crazy is that? We're all running around on cars built on nuclear waste. We still... But you still have the problem. You have to be cotton. It has to be a country size dimension, scalability. You know, if you can make an iPhone, you can make a car work on an individual basis and gear in there. But how do you make it so it works on a cotton size? You know, we're talking about it. Look at the world map. Well, I think we have to look in terms of a long period of time. If you go back to just the invention of electricity to the time where everybody's carrying around a battery powered cell phone in your pocket, you're not talking about that long. You know, we're talking about a couple of hundred years. We're looking at it like, oh my God, we've got to get it done tomorrow. I don't think you do get this thing done tomorrow. I think... But I think a big step is what you're describing in your documentary. That's a big step. A big step is understanding that nuclear power is a fantastic way forward. And if they really can make batteries out of nuclear waste, well, now we have... Instead of a problem, now we've got a commodity. Now you've got something that they can utilize. Although I remember what Bill Gates said. Oh, hold on a second. Yes, I think Google did it again. It said like the 2017 they were saying this was still a hoax. But... They always say that. It's so... We have to keep up to this. So our nuclear diamond batteries too good to be true. You're probably wondering what the catch is. There's a diamond battery out there that really uses nuclear waste. Last thousands of years involves layers of only the most minuscule diamonds. It's slightly more complicated than that. Each battery cell will produce only a small amount of energy for one thing. So scientists must combine the cells in huge numbers in order to regularly power large devices, raising the cost a great deal, along with increasing the complexity. So I guess the battery would have to be big. Touts the tiny share of the nanobattery diamond cells as an advantage for scalability though. Take the battery for a wristwatch, for instance. It consumes around two microwatts. Much smaller NDB cell would be sufficient. Okay. So that's smaller than the battery that's on your watch. That's pretty small. So if we need power at different applications, the number of stacks cells can be increased to meet the demand. That sounds like every battery. Listen, Bill Gates in the film says, you know, he's put a billion dollars into the battery business. He's really done a lot of exploration. And as well, he's doing great work on nuclear. But he says there's no battery that's going to... It would take a miracle. It's just not going to happen. He says we're going to need nuclear. Even he said that. And he's not proud of that. But I don't know why he's running away from it. I think we should be very proud of using nuclear because it wasn't tremendous discovery by... Very curious. I think a lot of people are skittish about the conversation. Yes. I just don't want to have the conversation. I've noticed that. Yeah. Why does an allegory come in the film in the new convenient truth? And then even mention nuclear energy. Yeah. That's true. Good point. You know, it's nuts. It's nuts. Can we take a break? Yep. You got a pig. Yeah. I just do it. Yeah. No worries. The most rare back. So, Tridium is the stuff that they make. That also lights up the watch hands. They put that stuff inside watches. Yeah. It's just really 25 years. Yeah. I have one of those. I have a marathon watch. And it's like, even if it's like pitch blackout, all of the... Our indicators are all lit up permanently. It's really cool. Yeah. Yeah. And that's radioactive too. And it's totally safe. That's what it looks like. That's what the Fukushima. That's what Tridium looks like. Have you ever seen it on a watch hand? It's really beautiful. Click on the image again, Jamie. That's what it looks like. Yeah. So, it lights up permanently. Like, you have little radiation on your wrist. Well, that's been the big issue in the Fukushima cleanup because they said that water is filled with Tridium. And Josh, my co-author was saying, you know, I could drink a gallon of Tridium and it would be about the equivalent to one banana. So it's a lot of bullshit. Really? Yeah. The Driggaile of Dridium. Yeah. And it's about what negative aspect of a banana. It says electrons in it. Oh, wow. I just don't penetrate. They don't... You know, it's a sign. I'm not a sign. I understand. But I'm not either. So I buy it. And I love the fact that my watch has these little... There's a gear that are there. There's a gear that are there. They're everywhere screaming. You know, you can't dump it in the Pacific. That's what's environmental. Let's say there's a wrong. You got the water is safe because of my way, the sea absorbs a lot of radiation. Yeah. There's a company called Ball and all of their watches in Tridium. So, and they've been doing it forever. Like, they've been making these watches for a long time. Mm-hmm. I'm famous for the fact that all their indicators are little radioactive things. I'm terrible for the watch market. I never had a watch a few years. You never had a watch? No, I don't like to keep track of the time. I know the time in my head. Yes. I kind of have a sense of it. Good for you. Yeah, you don't want to be a slave to this thing. Exactly. Yeah. I don't want something on my wrist telling me what to do. Do you still rock a smartphone, though? I use a smartphone as little as possible because it's essential now. They've made it essential. That's basically a clock anyway. You're getting your time from your watch. Yeah, it's a clock. I can set an alarm to it, but I wake up on my basically earlier. So, the phone is, I just, the only thing I don't like about the phone is, I'm always worried about losing it. I lose a lot of time looking for phone. You know, why don't they make a double of this? DNA copy. Yeah, you can't have two because then someone else would copy your phone. Is that right? Yeah, and they would start using your phone and it's about copying. Yeah, it's about getting access to your, you know, whatever you have credit cards that are on it and all the data that they can sell. Yeah. I mean, they're selling data no matter what anyway. It's the weirdest commodity that's ever existed. A thing that people just didn't even know is worth anything. Are you worried about losing your phone? I mean, the people know. Sure. Yeah, I worry about losing my phone. Yeah. You probably have an automatic shut off on your account, right? So if no one's going to rip you off for American Express or credit card. Yeah, but it's still, it's very inconvenient, obviously. It's inconvenient. I use my phone to get my car to. Mine can be. It's not dangerous. Right. It's not dangerous. My phone operates my Tesla. I don't even have to have my key. Just have to have my phone. Your phone operates your Tesla. Yeah. How do you do that before you just? It knows that it's me. So the app knows that it's me. So if it's in my phone and rather the phone is in my pocket, and I walk towards the Tesla, the door's open. And let's me in. It's like, knows it's me. I don't even have to have a key on me. It's like, hey, dude, I go, I don't have my key. Don't worry about it. We know it's you. But also someone could take your phone. And without even unlocking it, they could just start driving your Tesla. That's true too. Because when you walk towards the car, it just goes off. Even if your phone's not even unlocked. And that's not good. Because if somebody gets your phone, then they get your car. Let me do so smart, Joe. I'm not that smart. Come on, get my phone. Where'd you go to school? Oh, dude, I barely made it through high school. And then I went to UMass Boston. I was in Newton, Newton South High School. In Massachusetts. Yeah. Somewhere about South Boston. I think the thing that's helped me more than anything is being on this show. Having conversations with people. It's like, you think of education as being something. Obviously, when you sit in a classroom, you're observing a lot. You're getting a lot of education. And the kids today that are going through the work learned that they have to go through to put in to get a bachelor's degree. And then a master's or a PhD, it's insane amount of work. You're absorbing information. That's the key. The key is that you're learning about all these different subjects and absorbing all that information. You prove it with your degree. That's the beauty of also making films. You get that opportunity to spend time to look at your aid in this. You get to talk to people too. You get to talk to us. Yeah, this and that. I was so grateful for this. I've done 20 fiction films, feature films, and 10 documentaries. And you want to get out in the field. You want to talk to real people who are doing things. Yeah. Well, I think it's so important, especially to do the work that you're doing. How else could you relate? How else can you have to get out there? What kind of thing that's bothering you? Yeah. What really is bothering you? And in this matter, it was of course, what do they mean? This is confusing climate bullshit. They go for it back and forth. Even if you don't believe in climate change when I found out, you thought I would still go nuclear because it is the cleanest of all, no battery, no storage. Absolutely. I think there's two schools of thought when it comes to climate change. There's the school of thought that it's not an issue. It's a natural cycle. And there's a school of thought that human beings are pushing the world to the brink of demise. Right. I think human beings are doing a lot. Whenever people try to come up with excuses for things, I was like, well, it's always been this way. But how much impact are we having? Instead of looking at it like the climate is always going to change, which it always does. That's the thing about the climate. If you look at the climate models of when they do ice core samples, when they try to figure out like how warm it used to be and what the atmosphere was like, it's always changed. I mean, it's changed radically. But how much are we fucking it up? Forget about it. It's never static. It's never like the climate is like this. If human beings never existed, internal combustion engines never existed, you still have volcanoes. You've got chaos. You've got asteroids. You've got all kinds of shit. There's no stable. There's no flat safe. We get to this. We're on our life vest. We're on a life raft. We're going to make it out. No, no, no, no, no, no. Even if I lived at a moment. No, no, no, no, no. That's all not a nice small town in a country town. That's what we want, right? We want this idea. But the reality is the reality is ice ages. The reality is super volcanoes. The reality is asteroid impacts. That's the reality. Those are the horrific things that radically change. The temperature of Earth and the environment and all kinds of things. What about that lady in somewhere in Missouri? The tornado came out of nowhere and just blew the house away. Yeah, she's crazy. That's crazy too. Those are things that are absolutely real. Those are things that are absolutely real. I saw those in the Midwest when I was shooting, you know, especially in Louisiana and Texas Panhandle that area. Yeah. They have a lot of whirlwinds, a lot of wind shifts. Oh, it's incredible. There's an amazing video that's got driving at night. Yeah. And the tornadoes in the distance. And you only see it when the lightning strikes. Oh, go ahead. And it's huge. I mean, it's like city blocks. And it's in the sky. There's just massive funnel. And these people are in a car. Jesus. And they're just driving down the road, watching this. It's fucking wild. Do you find it? Watch this. Look at this. Look at that. Look at the size of that thing. Yeah. I mean, how terrifying is that? Terrifying. Terrifying. Oh, that's scarier than King Kong, Godzilla, all the above. Real things. Real things. Not nuclear power. The angry sky monster that comes down and destroys cities. There is nuclear power in that electricity. Oh, yeah. It's a point. This was all came from the beginning. The supernova that exploded. Yeah. Supernovas exploding all the time. Where does it all start? I mean, at the beginning of the world, we don't really know. There's no beginning. No, we don't really know. If there ever, I think we have these biological limitations that we put on the universe. What are the first? The first version of death. Where's this explosion come from? Right. And before that was another explosion? Right. There was a great document around hypernovas that I watched once. And when they first started discovering hypernovas, they thought that there was aliens having war in the sky. Right. Because there was explosions that were taking place in far distant portions of the universe. And they were like, what is happening? These are happening on a regular basis. And then they realized that these are hypernovas. I never heard of that. Yeah. They destroy solar systems. They destroy everything. Like, it's such, it's an immense explosion of power that's beyond our comprehension. And they're happening all the time. Do you believe in extra, to us, to your life? Yes. 100%. 100%. Yeah. I just don't know if it's here. I don't know if it's visited. But just the vastness of the universe itself. And if you believe in the concept of infinity, that means the possibilities of this happening exactly the way we are are also infinite. It's not, it's infinity. It's really hard to put it in your head because it doesn't make sense. But the true infinity would mean that everything that you've ever done and everything that I've ever done and everything we've ever said and every piece of paper you ever put down, all that has happened in infinite number of times in the universe in some other place. That's how create and every other variable in between. That's how crazy infinity is. So I think that if we imagine that we're the only ones, that seems silly. It doesn't even make sense. It's just too, it's kind of like nuclear power. Because you talk about nuclear power to people and go, wait, nuclear bombs, nuclear bad, nuclear, it's dangerous, nuclear is dangerous. I think we think that way about aliens. Because I think there have been so many coocs that have had, so many fake stories and so many doctored photos and everything's blurry and just weird people that probably lied. And then compelling stories that are really confusing, like really intelligent people, a Commander David Freaver who was a fighter jet pilot in 2004 and encountered this thing that they track going from 50,000 feet above sea level to 50 in a second. I think I saw, was there a clip? There's video of this. Yeah, I think I saw. Yeah, there's a video of this thing. They tracked it. They think it was interacting with something that was submerged. They were as close. And then this thing, when it jetted off at this insane rate of speed, first of all, it blocked their tracking. It blocked their, whatever the radar or whatever sensors that they were using. And then it shot off in insane rate of speed and stopped at their cat point, which is the point where they had the predetermined point where they were going to meet up and this exercise that they were doing. And this thing went to that spot and it was 20 feet long and looked like a tick tack. And it was just hovering. A tick tack, like a candy, like a little white tick tack candy. So they called it a tick tack UFO. When I talked to guys like that, when I talked to guys like that, I go, well, if it's not a UFO, if that's not from another planet, that it's maybe more scary than if the Chinese have something that's that advanced that can move like that. Is this some new type of technology that might be available to the, probably just like the high end military applications that they're using for drones and all these different propulsion methods. If they've figured something that crazy out, it's kind of game over. a thing will 50,000 feet above sea level to 50 in a second. Like what is that? Well, if they wanted to use it, they would have done it by now. Perhaps, or perhaps it's an alien or a probe from some alien planet or something non-biological. Maybe they've gotten past the necessity of biological. What's your own alien? Would you want to visit this place and share with a culture? No, definitely not. Why not? The same reason why did you watch chimp empire? Who? Chimp empire. It's an amazing documentary series that's on Netflix right now. And it's about these embedded journalists who document chimpancy life. And this part of the very deep in the jungle called, a place called in Google. And it's incredible because the scientists that laid the groundwork for this documentary, they've been studying this particular group of chimpancies for 30 years. So the chimpancies have become completely fine with them being around. They have like rules of interaction. They have to stay within, I think, 20 yards of the chimpancies at all time. And as long as they do that, the chimpancies behave as if they don't exist. And they enact in war, they kill monkeys, they hunt, they defend their territory, they take over new territory, they do all the stuff in front of people. But they don't interact with the chimpancies and they don't interrupt their life. I think that's what the aliens do with us because that's what we do with intelligent primates. Why would you do any different if you were an alien? I think if I was an alien life war, I would make sure that the chimps don't blow themselves up. Like if chimpancies and in GoGo, if all of a sudden they've developed TNT and they start soldering and they're building bombs and they're planting. Hold on, fellas, you can't blow yourselves up. You can't just be blowing the jungle up and start in fires. Let's stop. If I was an alien life war, I would treat human beings the same way that I as a human being would treat chimpancies if they started developing bombs. I would like, we didn't get the bombs away from the chimp. If chimpancies developed missiles and they start shooting missiles at each other through the jungle. They think we'd be like, hey, hey, hey, cut the shit. You're not even people. Only people are allowed to kill people like that. I think if alien life forms do exist, I think the most likely strategy is the one that we use on higher primates, on lower primates rather. We don't interfere. We observe, but they're true scientists. They just sort of stand back and watch. And the chimpancies don't seem to have any problem with these people being around. That's occasionally they get curious. When they start walking towards the person, the person just keeps backing up. And as long as they stay a certain distance, the chimp loses interest. Really weird. You just can't eat in front of them ever. And you just can't ever raise your voice. You can't behave in a threatening way. And they just interact with the chimp. And this documentary is coming up. It's out right now. It's out on Netflix. It's fantastic. It's really fantastic. But learning too much too. My point is, I think that if there are aliens, I think they would do the same. I think they would just watch. Just make sure we don't blow ourselves up, watch, and maybe, maybe let us know occasionally that we're not alone. That's what I would do. I would like, just like the scientists had to slowly habituate themselves to the chimpancies, they had to slowly do it. They did it over the first of the chimpancies ran. And then they had to figure out some sort of a way that they can just be around them enough. The chimpancies relaxed. And as soon as they realized they were never a threat. And then generations of them realized they were never a threat. Then they could do the work that they're doing. Pretty wild stuff. I think that would do that if I was an alien. I would just sit around and watch. Well, that's why people have dogs and cats. I love cats. They're great. They watch us. Yeah. Sure. I think it was an alien form, isn't it? I can't. Oh, yeah. Sure. So are dogs. Wolves, wolves, I mean, it's a... A solar alien cell phone. A solar alien cell phone. A goldfish for that matter is an alien form. Oh, my God. Some of the most alien-looking stuff is in the ocean for sure. I mean, octopus is the most bizarre. They're smart, I hear. They're so smart. They figure out jars. They know how to unscrew jars. Jesus. They can also camouflage themselves to look exactly like the floor. Have you ever seen octopus do that? No. Oh, my God. You have to see this. My friend Remy Warren, he used to have a show called Apex Predator. And it was what he would do. He would study all of the different methods, the different Apex predators used. And it's see like, is there anything you can emulate as a human being? But this shows some footage of octopuses camouflaging themselves to their environment. It's insane. It's alien. And this is what Remy said. He goes, dude, they're aliens. He goes, you've never seen anything like it. And he had no idea until he filmed this show, I don't think, of how complex their ability to blend in is. But that's octopus. Which one? Right there. That thing you're looking at. They make themselves look like plants. They make themselves look like coral. They make themselves look like rock. Watch when they get over it. Look, look how they change his color depending on what he's looking at. What is on? Yes, that's octopus. Look at that. Watch what he does. He blends in with the plant. That's pretty wild. And he blends in with the texture of the soil underneath the plant. Is that because there's a predator around? No, because he's a predator. Oh, see. So as these fish swim in, looking to eat, this octopus is hiding. Like they have octopuses that kill sharks. There's a video of, they had this, see, Google octopus kill shark in a query. Yeah, they camouflage themselves look like anything. Look at this. Watch how it does this. Wow. See, just get some good footage of what they do when they get over things. But when they get over it, they've done it like cuddle fish, which are also similar, I think they're called cephalopods. They do it where they've done them, where they try to emulate a chess board. Oh, geez. Yeah. What is this? Very. So, you know, I wouldn't let you see. The chance at texture. I want to be an innocent fisher around here. I mean, what a crazy little thing that's moving around at the bottom of the ocean, changing its texture, changing its colors to look exactly like its environment. Like, look at this thing. It's fucking bonkers. That's an alien. I mean, if we found that on another planet, we would be like, what the fuck is that thing? For the DoD's studying it, trying to make octopus weapons. Yeah, they probably, probably definitely have studied these things. Figure out, how are they doing this? Yeah. Instead, they're sushi. We turn them in the sushi. That's right. Look, we just grill them. That's scary. That's a insanely fascinating animal that we just eat. You know, we just don't. We think of them as being so far removed from us that they're okay to eat. Well, if you think about it, no, I stopped eating eels and octopus. I don't know why. I just, and I stopped eating me about a few years ago. How do you feel? I feel great. Do you eat eggs? Once it all. Yeah. Chicken, I don't eat at all, but eggs is different. I think they're earlier chickens. Well, they're not even earlier chickens. They never become chickens because there's no rooster. They're just non-fertilized eggs. They're totally, it's like karma free. Yeah. Like as long as the chickens live in a good life, the only karma that you have is you're keeping the chicken from getting laid. That's the only karma. Uh-huh. Right. Well, like, don't want to be chickens. I don't want to eat at all. They look, I mean, I saw that Netflix documentary years ago. Game changer. Was it, you ever see that? Yes, I have. Yeah. Yeah. Turn me off. Turn you off to what? Yeah. Yeah. It's, that's a complex conversation. Yeah. Human beings would eating meat since the beginning of time. Yeah. And a lot of the problems with these studies that are associated with whether or not meat is bad for you. Yeah. A lot of these things are what they're doing is basically they're asking to take a survey. And if you say you ate meat four times a week or five times a week and then they make some sort of a correlation, they say, well, the people that ate meat more consistently had more cancer, more this, more diabetes. All of a sudden, which maybe true, but also what else did they eat? Because if they ate meat five times a week, I guarantee you they were drinking Coca-Cola. I guarantee you they're eating bread. I guarantee you they're eating spaghetti. I guarantee you they were to eat and candy. I guarantee you monster energy drinks. I mean, oh, I want to know what the fuck they ate. I don't tell me that because the people that ate meat more, because people that eat meat more generally, if you go by the net, if you go by the narrative, the same kind of narrative that you have about nuclear power, that it's bad for you. If you go by that narrative, the people that chuck it off and don't give a shit, those are the same people that smoke cigarettes and drink whiskey, they don't care if it's bad for you. They're going to eat meat, right? But that doesn't mean meat's bad for you because if they did a real study on like what happens when people eat nothing but grass fed meat from and fruit and vegetables from an organic farm? It's monitored that. I bet they would do a lot of fucking better than the standard American, right? That's the problem. The problem isn't meat. The problem is what kind of meat, what are you eating with meat? People have been eating meat since the beginning of time. It's not the problem. If you look at human beings, look at photos of people on the beach in 1970. You ever see that in 1950, 1960? And then look at people on the beach today. Yeah. That's not meat. That's not meat. That's sugar. That's sugar. That's a good obesity. You don't have a good obesity. But yes, an abundance of complex carbohydrates, an abundance of simple carbohydrates, so the abundance of food, just too much food. I know it as well. Way more food than your body is burning off and you get bigger and bigger and bigger. And the food is addictive. It's addictive. Especially during the depression in 1930s. Oh my God. There was photographs. It's quite shocking. Yeah, they did. Well, also preservatives have allowed us to store things on shelves. People binge eat in the middle of the night. On the other hand, we did muscle up a lot, didn't we? Oh yeah, we got more jacked. I think people also learned to eat more protein, got larger, learned how to exercise better. It became more of a thing. Like actually, you really should just do it. Whereas before it was probably seen as a luxury. You know, people had to work all the time. It was harder lives. They didn't think of getting fit and muscular as being important. What about women? Yeah. Do you ever talk about that with them? I mean, why didn't, should they work out? Oh yeah. Everyone should work out. I think every, just to maintain your body. You just want to do it in a way where you're not going to get hurt. That's the most important thing. Doing it in a really smart way if you can do it with a trainer. But everyone should do something. Whether it's yoga or push-ups or sit-ups and chin-ups and body weight stuff. You can get an amazing workout done with a chin-up bar and just your body. Just your physical body weight. You don't really need to go to a gym, but you really should get someone to show you how to do stuff if you don't know how to do it. And it helps if someone can help you write out a program. That's like a good program for someone who's, if they assess like your physical ability. You don't want to get like a person who just started to go run like David Goggins. That would be ridiculous. But you want them to be able to build up and build up in a way where the body's recovering. And they continue to push themselves, but they're not getting hurt. Yeah. That's what you got to do. I say that to everybody. I think everybody should do that. It's just my suggestion. I know people that are very happy that don't exercise at all. It is possible. It's just not possible for me. And I don't know what it's like for everybody else because I'm not you. But I can only tell you how it feels for me. And for me, you know, I believe the people that say they don't need to exercise. Maybe everyone's different. It seems like we are anyway with everything else. Yeah. But for most people, if you just want to maintain your physical frame, if you want to maintain your functionality of your body, I really think it's imperative. I don't, I don't, you know, I don't know what makes less sense. If you just, if you don't use your body, it breaks down and then you can't get around that sucks. And when you can't get around, then you would be willing to do anything to get it motion again. But you can mitigate a lot of that by exercise, a lot of it. Just keep your body fit and strong and you don't have to worry as much about all the things that plague people. You're going to have to worry. We're getting old. But you worry less. If your body works well, much less. Well, you know, we got out of this with climate change. Yeah. I was saying to you that, you know, climate change, if it didn't exist, which I believe it does, but if it didn't exist, I'd still, I'd still advocate nuclear energy because it's clean. Yeah. I think that's absolutely a great point. And the IPCC, when they did their, you know, that's, I believe them. They're a body of sinuses. A lot of them. I mean, it's, I think, 200 of it. No, I believe in them. And the IPCC says 2050 is a marking point. And they mean, and they, you go back and you check their charts from 1980s and you find that from 1980 to 2000, they were accurate. And then you go from 2000 to 2020 and they're accurate. Very close to accurate. In fact, there were a little bit more optimistic. But now this, so you have to believe it, there's a 40 year span. Now we're looking at this. What doesn't make sense to me is the eologic of pursuing this path of CO2, considering these charts and saying what they're saying. I mean, well, yeah, absolutely. You see the hurricanes, you see the wind, you see the storms are bigger. It seems to me. Well, I don't know of their bigger. I think the new argument is that what is, what is the actual stats on? Because people say that all the time, like storms are bigger than they've ever been before. I don't think that's true. I think the storms have actually lessened than intensity, but increased in the amount of them. I think that's the data. But all of it's not good. Whatever we're doing, see the problem with me with climate change is that I always get wary when things become ideological. When people start talking about it, like, you know, like, listen, you've got to act now. And if you don't, I'm like, oh, hold on. How much do you know about this? And how much are you just saying an narrative? Because a lot of people want to argue ferociously about a narrative that they didn't even really look into that much. And it's, that's the thing about on both sides, even the republicans had the people that wanted to dismiss it. I was having a conversation with a guy at Jujitsu once of all places. Like it's a natural cycle. I'm out of what? It's a natural cycle. The earth warms. I go, how much work have you done on this? Do you know crazy it is like be that sure when no one's sure? That's the whole reason why they're having this debate is because no one can definitively prove how much of an impact we're going to have on us in 100 years or 150 years. Or what's going to happen? No one can. How can you be so confident that it's just a natural cycle that's, but it's a right wing perspective. Like he had bought into this. It's all bullshit. It's a natural cycle like bro. How do you know? But you know because you don't like the people that think that we have to ban cars that use internal combustion engines. You don't like the people that think we have to stop and close coal plants. You don't like those people. You think those people are annoying. So you've decided to be annoying in the opposite way. And that's what it is. But when you go to a city with horrible air like Los Angeles used to be like India. How do you feel terrible? Well there's also an issue with brake dust. You know when you're in a very crowded urban environment, you know brake dust that stuff that you get on your wheels? No. You don't know brake dust? Yeah. When you're using the brakes in your car, what's happening is there's this hydraulic pad that presses against a disk. And the friction of that is what stops your car from moving forward. Right? Okay. So when that happens, it makes powder. And this powder goes in the air. And the powder gets all around your wheels. If you've ever cleaned your wheels, if you ever have like a nice car or an aluminum clean your wheels, there's all this black shit in there. That black shit is brake dust. And that black shit is everywhere. It's all over the place. Brake dust contributes to 20% of the fine particulate matter pollution compared to just 7% contributed by exhaust fumes. As all cars give off brake dust, there is no such thing as a truly zero emission vehicle. An electric car or same thing? Yep, same thing. Same method of slowing the car down. Right. Yeah, of slowing the car down. It's the most effective method we know of. And that's what happens. Yeah. Does it happen less than carbon fiber brakes? Is it the same effect on carbon fiber brakes? Google that. Well, you have a good idea. They don't encyclopedia here. Yeah, because they don't show up. What's interesting is when you have carbon fiber brakes, it doesn't leave that dust all of your wheels. At least I don't think it does. I don't think it leaves the same amount. Does it say anything? Yeah. Carbon fiber brakes brake dust. Yeah, here it goes. They're quieter than organic or metallic pads and produce less dust. There it is. They also last significantly longer can tolerate a greater range of temperatures and fade less as they heat up track reports. I have a car that has those. Well, I've heard a lot. Yeah. Carbon ceramic brakes produce virtually zero brake dust. I mean, like they literally do not dust at all. That does not sound scientific. Like I mean, like they literally do not dust at all. And the wheels will be what's on your paint normal road dirt from driving around. Yeah, that's what I've found just from driving around with my car. Let me ask you this question then, because you make me very curious. The pessimism in the air that you feel the dystopia and movies you constantly see it, hate those movies, you know, that's always about negative sensational stuff. The news is awful. The media is just thrives on sensational bad news. I mean, wars this that. So they make you afraid. Do you think this is like we should be afraid? Do you want to live afraid? What are you afraid of? Those questions. I don't think we should be afraid, but I think we should be aware. And I don't think that the look, this demise fear. It exists because it happens. Like civilizations collapse. You can go visit ancient Rome. You can look around. You can see the Colosseum. They're not there anymore. Those people are gone. Right? The people that built that meant that's just going to happen. It's going to happen to us too. And it's going to happen to us biologically too. So there's just constant fear of so many different things that we have. We carry around with us all the time as you hold a day of the dead school. So, you know, okay. I don't think it's healthy to live your life embracing that. I think you got to be aware of it. But you got to live in the moment. It's stupid and corny as that sounds. That's the only way. Otherwise you're going to be freaking out from anxiety. If you don't, if you can't just live in the moment, you're always going to have too much anxiety. It's my experience with me at least. That's what these people who talk about radioactive waste. Yeah. 10,000 years ahead. And even then, it's the radioactive isotope just decays and decays. Well, not only that, if they really do have technology currently available, where they can convert that into batteries. Well, that's great. 99% of it decays. Yeah. So you can swallow the 1%. Right. You can. You can swallow it? Yeah. Not a lot though, right? I really don't swallow it all the time. Well, you know, there is a certain amount of radioactive, you know, our bodies. Sure. The banana is very, is the most radioactive of the food, some of the weed. I mean, you probably can, you'll probably find some other foods that are, I don't know what foods are radioactive. I know what airplane travel is. And then, yeah. You want to check that out, James? I bet rocks are, aren't they? Like rocks? Yeah. Sure. Yeah. Banana contains about 450 milligrams of potassium. And when eaten, it exposes the consumer to about 0.01mm due to its K40 content. Wow. A chest x-ray delivers 10mm. So there you go. Interesting. So it's the tiniest amount. Yeah. Interesting. You need 100 bananas to get there. You need 100 bananas to get to that one. That's one. Oh, 0.1. Okay. What about air travel? Like isn't that like getting an extra? They say steward is in pilots, absolutely. Do they three times the level? Yeah. Are they in danger? No. They just absorb it over time. So the body gets close. Some people will tell you, we're exposed to low levels of radiation. When we fly, you'd be exposed to about 0.035. Million years. Okay. Of cosmic radiation, if you were to fly in the United States from east coast to the west coast, this amount of radiation is less than the amount of radiation received from a chest x-ray. Okay. Less. Interesting. Well, those are the most severe things. The x-rays, the dental and MRIs. When did doctors start leaving the room when the x-ray out? I don't know. Like when did they get hit? Yeah, they're just getting the fuck out of here. I'm doing this every day. I don't know. I want to know that. Because they must have stayed in the room for a while. Like I want to see this thing up close. That's not the state get really nervous. They're like, oh, I'm going around with a owner. You stay here. Bro, it's like they're setting a bomb. I'm just cutting it over here. You're setting a bomb. When did they start doing that? I don't know how to... Well, when you think about things like the iridium girls, with that horrible, radium girls rather than horrible. Well, they're heekily dying eventually from handling radium. Oh, right. Right. She looked with the... 30 years of it, 30 years of it. How many years of it did you do it? Okay, the shields... Okay. I have to be around then, right? They were wearing a shield, like a fucking... Like a jouster? Well, I mean, that's what they give you at the dentist office. I'm trying to figure out like how... It's not giving me a great answer on when they start doing this. Can you go to Ramsar, M-A-M-S-A-R? You're on. Just do something interesting here. Ramsar? Yeah, that's the radioactive springs that they go to. Oh, right. Where you were saying, in this area is... Here. Okay. Uh... Waste level. H-B-R-A's of Ramsar. Gamma radiation levels are up to about 20 MSV-H-R at waste level and a population of about 2,000 lives in this area. Annual exposure levels range from about 20 to 260 M-G-Y for people in hot areas. So, and they don't seem to suffer any sort of health complications for this. The radioactivity is due to local geology, underground water dissolves radium in urine niferous, urine niferous, indigenous rock, and carries the surface through at least nine known hot springs. These are used as spas by locals and tourists. Yeah. Wow. So, they're getting radioactive bath. And the black beaches of Brazil? Yeah. You can ask for that. Yeah, sure. That's another one. Similar sort of a situation, right? Yeah. Less radio. Can you run black beaches? Yeah, he's doing it. Brazil. He's just trying to find some good footage of it. So, people can see what it looks like. It's half. I don't know how fish I put that other one just was. But I don't know what's that. I don't know the comparison. Okay. So, half-ish, a 170 MSV every year. Hmm. Interesting. It's a radioactive beach. That's a movie. Isn't that a movie? Yeah. It is. It is older. Older. Older. It's an M-night chamalan that's just moving out. Yeah, I just watched it. Pretty good. That's one of that movies. You know? It's called old. Yeah. That's what it's about. Yeah. Yeah. But in that movie, it's not so good. I mean, I want to give a spoiler away. Yeah. So, the concern that people have about radiation, about about... Overblown and exaggerated. Overblown and exaggerated. And now that you've put together this documentary, what's next? Like, how else do you kind of get this message out? How much we're going everywhere. I mean, we went to Harvard, we went to MIT, we go into... How has it been received? How has it been received? Very well by people who know. Yeah. I can't tell you. We're going June 6, which is next week. June 6, we're going wide with the digital will be on iTunes, Amazon, Google Play. As that's his... Your son of Netflix wouldn't take it. Yeah. That's why we have to struggle with this thing. We have to get the word out. And we have a great foreign in Korea. I think I have just contributed to a sale. I was just there. Why do you think Netflix wouldn't take this? Because it's controversial. And then, you know, it's the same. But they have a lot of controversial stuff on that. Why are they scared of that? Even game changers is controversial. Well, okay. Why do you think I have to ask you? I don't know. That's why I'm asking you. Well, that's what... That's a problem. It doesn't seem like... I just doesn't seem like... I never know why they turned down. The documentary is brilliant. I can't imagine... Well, it's... Why anybody would not want... Well, they're starting to get out and told history. They turned down. Food and interviews. You know, it's... Why? It's like every time I go into a... Is it a business decision? I mean, what is that decision? It can't be... Ugh. Ugh. Untold history is also fantastic. Like, what is that decision based on? Is it controversy? Are they trying to avoid a certain kind of political controversy? That's my fate. Is that what it is? Yeah, I know. Yeah, I know. Yeah. It's a bummer though, isn't it? No, yeah, it's a bummer. So, but anyway, we get out this way and we're going to go... We'll go. We'll just keep going around the world. I'm going to England to address the royal institution of South and rather than scientists. And it's going to be available on iTunes. It's also going to be available on Amazon Prime Video. Google Play. Google Play. And it really lays in gentlemen. I can't urge enough. Go watch it. Watch it and take in the information because it's pretty stunning. And it's really well put together. And the fact that it's a difficult message to get out there is kind of this heartening because it really does have hope. It's a hopeful film. It's a film that's like, hey, wake up, we've got a real solution. I wanted to make it hopeful at the end. And I think I think a very uplifting ending because it can be done. And why we behave like we can't hide from this. Right. We have to be like, I'm in Rick over, that kind of about it to it. Yeah. How forward and can do. What kind of resistance have you received from people when you're bringing this film out? Have there been any of this? I'll tell you exactly. I mean, we went to Venice Film Festival and I could feel that there was fear about it. You know, fear about it. Screening it. Then you know, you send it to the US festivals. They're like, tell a ride and the Sundance and those ones. And one lady who runs one of these festivals told my age and she says, you know, it's a great movie and I hate it. I don't want to run it. That sort of kind of strange attitude. It's just crazy. Yeah, it's like, no, it's going to create controversy. But I just don't want to have anything to do with it. So she might be from the 70s that generation. She's, you know, listened to Ralph Mater. She's terrified. Hmm. I don't know. Well, it's one of those things I, I, in growing up with the fear of three mile island and Chernobyl. I was terrified of nuclear power. I was glad when they stopped using it. When I heard they were still using, I was like, that's terrible. Why would they use nuclear power? Because I didn't know. Because we, we were, I had no politically correct. Right. Well, it was just this message. And again, it's a great plot line for film. Yeah. So I wish I could do it as a fiction, but I don't know how. Maybe I can come, some of one of your customers. How could you do it as a fiction? I feel like you, you could. I'm sure. But it would happen. Hmm. But you'd have to figure out some way where it's significant that it happens in a two hour film. Something that's going to take place over the next like five, ten years of construction. I don't know if you get into a female scientist saves the world kind of scenario. It doesn't, it just to be. Yeah. Well, the own scientist. Wulfism. Yeah. That's what happens today, right? Yeah. Yeah. It's very strange. The guy who made a big short, he was very talented. Adam McKay. And he did that film with the star cast about, he thinks the world has been in six years. He told me, you know, he really thinks there's a definite date. There are a lot of strange theories out there. You saw the film, man. I'm talking about it. No. DiCaprio Street was in it. What movie is this? Yeah. Was it called? I don't think I saw it. Adam McKay, last film. Yes, you saw it. I bet I didn't. I have terrible taste. But it was bogus in the sense that it was about an asteroid or something. Don't look up. It was called. Don't look up. Oh, I didn't watch that. And was it. I heard it was good though. Is it about an asteroid? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, problem coming. I heard it was great. Well, but I didn't watch it. Why not? Just another time. Other things were more interesting to me. There's a water in this thing too if you'd like. Oh, yeah. And there's coffee as well as well. Yes. Not that it wasn't interesting. I just never, you know, it's like there's some, it's really just a abundance of choices. There's so much to watch. I definitely want to watch it. And I was going to get around to it eventually. But I don't watch that much stuff. I'm too busy. So I have the time to like, if I'm going to do that, it's like once a week, twice a week. You watch it really hard to catch up. Do you see the last six game? I did not. No. I generally don't watch, watch basketball. But it gets exciting in the inside. It is very exciting. When you get to the club. I love, when I do watch it, I love basketball. I love any athletic events. I love watching people compete. It's exciting. Yeah. It's fun. I enjoy it a lot. I can only watch the, for the amount of time that I have and the interest that I have. I can only really watch one sport. Which is Jujutsu. Martial arts. Martial arts. Yeah. So that's really it's combat sports. It's the only sport that I could really watch. That's what you see. You see. You see. That's UFC. But it's combat sports. That's boxing, wrestling, it's everything. That's the, I concentrate on combat sports. Are you going to watch the seventh game? Which is on Monday night tonight. I do not know. You should. I made this. This is worse myself. This is great. This is a great story. That was a great story. Yeah. It's going, I'm sorry. Because what you may call us. Chevy thinks it's so fun. I know how hard you have to catch you up, Jodick. You have to find out what's going on in that game seven. There's a whole lot of. One team is, Zula was up three nothing. Which team? The Miami Heat. Miami Heat. There were up three nothing. Three nothing in the other team. Boston Celtics, they've been around forever. They came back. They won the last three games. They're the skin of the teeth. And now we are. 150. What's the, what's the, what's the, what's the, what's the, what's the first time anybody's got the three zero and one up coming back. And that they got back to the seventh game four times, but only one seven like last 30 years. Wow. The first team to meet to a sports fan would be what's what's the outcome? What's, is it going to work for the, for the underdog now or now I'm excited or does he, one who was the original underdog was Miami. I wasn't excited until now. No, no Celtics have been terrific team and they have great experience. And here they were down and they've come back. So what is the, what has the outcome? Will the gods intervene? The Trojans or the, or the Trojans or the Greeks? I mean, you can't have to know. It's a battle, you know. Well, that's why things of chance are so fascinating. Yeah. That's why boxing is so fascinating. Yeah. So I did you watch the, uh, uh, Devin Haney, uh, Viscilla, little, little macheco fight? No, I missed him. It was a, this insane fight. And Loma Chanko, who is the older guy, he's about 35 years old, just served in Ukraine. He's a Ukrainian. And he served protecting his country for like a year, took a year off a boxing and then came back and had this insane fight with Devin Haney. It was insane. It was so good. It was just this crazy back and forth fight that most people thought or a lot of people rather thought Loma Chanko should have got the decision and he didn't get the decision. It's very unfortunate when stuff like that happens too because then people don't appreciate how good Devin Haney's performance was because they're, they're all they're thinking about as Loma Chanko should have won. But Devin Haney fought amazing too. It was a very good fight. It was a really, really top high end fight. Like the consequences of that going into a fight like that when you're watching something like that, like anything can happen. And it's such a wild risk that you're going to do this for a living. And then you get to the pinnacle of the world champion, the greatest two 135 pound fighters alive and they'd go to war in front of the world. And watching stuff like that to me, it's so overwhelming. There's so, there's so much, I'm so interested in it that I don't have really time for other some more. What about dating? Do you date? No, I'm married. Oh, you're married. I didn't have that. Well, I did what you have to do. You're trying to do it. Yes, I have plenty of time. I have time for stuff, man, but I have to be smart about what I do. And I can't get too involved in too many different things because I get obsessed with them. I don't want to be watching all the basketball games. That's like if you think about how many hours a week it is, if you have basketball, football, baseball, all these different things you're watching as well. There's no time left. Where's your time coming from? Right. There's no way. Right. I think it's very enjoyable. I would enjoy it very much. I just stay away because I just can't get involved in too many different things. Well, I relax sometimes with idle time. I let myself. Okay. I'm off. I'm off. That's good move. And I just enjoy watching all movies, which have nothing to do with the world today, which is more like a fantasy life. I love the I love fantasy. I spend a lot of time in it, I guess. Yeah. It's good to do. It's good to be bored too. It's good to just sit around and just be alone with your thought sometimes. I know. I think we're so constantly being inundated with other people's thoughts. It's like, this is part of the thing that happens to with social media as well. I think it's also just the way people behave on social media is an after effect of it is that you're just constantly inundated with people's opinions and thoughts on things. Because you're always looking at something. You're always looking at a television, you're always looking at a phone, you're always listening to music, you're always listening to people talk. There's always someone giving you input. Always. Always. It's always a sad when you're asleep. Seven years later. Do you sleep? Yes. Normal hours? Yeah, I get seven and nine. I like seven and nine. Eight and nine. If I'm working out really hard, seven and nine is good. Yeah. Seven and nine seems to be a function. Eight is ideal. Right? But seven is like, I can perform pretty well. Seven. Very good. But if I'm under seven, I get dumber by the hour. Whatever the hour is, like, five hours, I'm dumber than six, four hours, I'm dumber than five. Like, it's really... It certainly haven't been dummed today. You've been pretty sharp. Thank you very much. I got some sleep. On that note, I think I should get out of here. Over a year, a brilliant person. And I appreciate you very much. And it's always a pleasure to talk to you. And I think your work is amazing. Both your fiction films and these documentaries. And this one that you have right now, nuclear now, I think it's one of the most important ones that I've ever watched. Because I think you and this film and just the conversations about it can counter this sort of destructive narrative that people have about that. That helps. So thank you, too. I appreciate it very much. Thank you, John. My pleasure. Thank you. All right, bye, buddy.