Is it recording? Yes. Okay. Yeah, we always have these things where it hits three hours and like God damn it We can You know, but at least you don't have a 30 or 60 minutes show they have to put your commercials in the middle and everything By the way, I'll give a plug for legal zoom that when I first came to California It took me two days in a law library to get up to speed so I could write my will and I was glad to see that there's still a discount with Rogan because that's my project this month is to redo my will and Leak, you know, I've known about legal zoom for a long time. It's a really good group That's another thing that I think the internet sort of made a lot easier finding out what your your rights are You know what how the law lawyers mainly know how to use the library and have their secretaries type of all these things You know because they got to go by so legal zoom can take care of probably 95% of all your time How did you go from being a lawyer to running a computer company? well, I was practicing law in Houston and We had primarily a business law my partner and I owned a title insurance company and we were doing it was in the heyday in Houston when the savings and loan thing was going on but One day our main client came in and he had a big construction company and he wanted to sue one of his subcontractors and You know, I looked all things. I said well, Jim, you know You can file lawsuit, but you're not gonna win because he's in the right here. He says. Oh, I know that I just want to hurt him Oh, so I said give me just a minute I walked around to the next office to my partner I said figure out what my share of this off is worth. I quit. I'm going home and that was when I just I It had been building up to that because I've been doing stuff that I didn't come a lawyer to hurt people and do stuff like that and so I just walked away from it and I gotten locked involved in multi-level marketing Wow and Yeah, what I found out is that if you say hey, I'm a lawyer and I'm doing this people just flock to you You know, I signed up lots of people and because you're a lawyer doing well They say well the lawyers doing it. You know, it's got to be great. Yeah, so is it like a pyramid scheme pyramid come Yeah, we're selling do it yourself at home facelifts What What it was it was before anybody knew about aloe Vera We want the first aloe companies and it was really easy to sell we do a meeting and a bunch of people Be there and you'd paint half their face with this stuff and leave it on for like 30 minutes and take it off and It looked like they're too face in one size a little higher and yeah, it's sort of like putting What's that hemorrhoid medicine on your face or so? What's hemorrhoid? It just tightens you up it tightens your skin up for an hour So when you put aloe Vera one of this with a whole bunch of it actually did work It did tighten up your skin and get rid of some wrinkles for the yeah Yeah, oh yeah work for the evening for the evening. Yeah one per Wow But and we sold a whole variety of things why don't like actors do that before they make movies? I don't think you can get this stuff and you can get out of there or you can get aloe Vera But this is this had some powders and stuff you use a chemical thing you mix What happened to start fucking out people's faces no the company went out of business You know there's you know all these pug you know I know a lot about these multi-level companies they they all spring from a vitamin company neutral light I think it's called and that's where the Devos and Van Andle at certain Amway future line yeah, I think amway finally bottom or something like that But what's that big one? That's the big one with the leaves? Oh, that's I'll think of it a huge company. Yeah Anyhow the herbal life herbal life and in fact one of their their first vice president came out of this company I was in ideal incorporated but there was a dare to be great and cos-caught and One that the California governor campaign that guy. Yeah, I used to know a whole lot about this And they all sprung from the same core of people at one time They all knew each other and I got involved in that for a while and we were selling all kinds of things and then my partner I started jewelry company and we kind of fell out and I was in the computers. I started a computer company It was a pyramid company and You know it was a lot of fun, but you know I finally lost the faith because for a while I really believed that you could do these things You know we had a woman who is a German refugee that wound up making twenty thousand dollars a month and stuff like that And so those things did happen, but they were so rare finally You know I was able to see the light well it happened after I started taking him to me I that's when I got out of the motivational business and everything and the motivational business that's a slippery business You know what's fascinating to me people that have never been successful at business But give motivational seminars on how to be successful at business. Yeah after my computer company crash That's what I got into it's a fascinating thing Isn't it that the people would it's sort of like you know like there's comedy classes that are taught by extremely unfunny people I believe people that have never had a career as a comedian But they decided to start teaching comedy and then they started making more money teaching comedy than they ever did doing comedy itself Yeah, it's like a lot of that back in Boston There was a guy that was terrible comedian. It was teaching the local comedy class I was like that didn't make any like what the fuck was going on here You couldn't get a real comedian to teach a comedy class. They didn't want to have any part of it And you'd be surprised how many motivational speakers are great depression all the time, you know We really we'd go back after the thing to be over we get off stage. Oh, see my wife is leaving me And I'm broke and you know all these things we had more problems in our audience combined probably That's hilarious, but you had some good ideas. You just had to figure out you know there's something they were all you know From 100 years ago, you know, there's not much new in that field. It's well Anthony Robbins is another one right Tony Robbins He's a super successful at that, but what else is he done? I mean is he like had like a successful real business You know when he first came on the scene I just started kicking myself because I was doing that and I'm better than him You know he's very handsome. It was beautiful. Yeah. He's a great teeth. Yeah. Oh, yeah He's skin he's got he has a lot more confidence and I yeah booming voice But throws karate kicks, but you know eventually you kind of push yourself to and he started doing all the firewalking and stuff like that And yeah, that's firewalking My wife did it and did not get burned. Yeah, the first time you could do it and not to burn too Well, no walk quick. I could not do it because I'm not gonna walk on fire barefoot Okay, but if you did you'd be all right the whole idea is getting through it quickly if I did I know I'd get through all right Because I wouldn't do it unless I sure it's gonna get through all right You could think that you were gonna be all right and not be all right, but that's what happened there the second time How far did you walk longer this second time? I think it's probably the same real. Yeah, I don't know I mean I didn't know her then I promise I'm gonna talk about it I get it symbolically, you know, but unless it's fuckery like we all know fire burns or why's firing up burning because I don't believe It's gonna burn. Mmm. Boy, I'm not sure about that. I think you might be playing games here Well, you know the three laws of taking psychedelics are number one cars are real Mmm-hmm number two fire burns and number three gravity is still a law if you lift his nose three things You can't go wrong. That's like the Bill H. Choke your the Bill H. Choke I'm gonna ask it thought he could fly jumped off to building and he's like if you thought he could fly what did he take off from the ground? Lost a morrow. Yeah Yeah, I remember that. That's so logical Logical like wait a minute that guy was an asshole. He was a Houston guy right? Yes, see I I'd left Houston by then when I was going to law school in Houston The only celebrity I saw that wasn't a celebrity then was Glenn Campbell was was singing for tips in the spark I used to go to but I used to hang out and lightning Hopkins bar He was a black blues guy and a Couple of us would go down Houston. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It was that down the fifth ward somewhere Well, it was yeah, and we'd have to go in a little group But we went regularly enough that we got known. We're the only white kids in there, you know, and wow So One and he'd you know, he'd wrap with us and stuff and I said hey, I can play the spoons He says yeah, give the boys some spoons get up here. So I start playing the spoons while he's playing guitar, you know And he he stops and he says you're in law school, right? Yeah, I said yeah, he says go back to law school. You'll never make it as a musician What an asshole. Oh, no, no, he did it in a funny way, you know, I you know He was he was actually right. I couldn't keep a beat, you know Houston had two of the greatest comedians of all time come out of it Sam, kennison Oh, can listen to yeah, that's right. They had that whole Houston annex Down back and then they had like a real creative group of young up-and-coming comedians And they you know, they started this thing the Houston comedy outlaws and it was Hicks and kennison and a bunch of other guys fascinating sort of a development. Yeah, I went to law school there in Houston I taught sailing at Houston Yacht Club. That's how I got there well because of kennison they all had like this unique style this very aggressive in your face thoughtful style of Comedy break breaking things down in a very logical way You know, but but making good points, but also you know being like really bold about it I heard you and I think Mark Marin talking about kennison and yeah, boy that really gave me a whole new Marin has some amazing kennison stories when he was on this podcast He was talking about doing coke with kennison and you know how he like was hearing voices for like a year And they did so he was a young kid then when he was with him, you know, but you can you imagine he did so much coke He was hearing voices for a year Wow Man, holy break your brain Batman. I was lucky. I never liked Coke. I was lucky never tried it I I the same woman that gay BMDMA for the first time gave me my first line so Coke And I said oh this is awful man. It's like being a dentist office and she said well Yeah, it's always like that in the beginning, but you know after after you know 10-12 times You get to like it. I said, you know, I went through that was scotch And it's cheap and legal. I'm not gonna go through that again. Yeah, there's weird things like caviar It's the choir taste. Why would you acquire it? Why would you acquire something cost ten thousand dollars and tastes like shit? Yeah, and if you don't like it to begin with why acquire it. Yeah, why acquire that? It seems really silly Yeah, I never did the cocaine, but I I've had a bunch of people near me that had problems with it I I always associate cocaine with a lot of negative things that I've seen but one of the biggest ones was uh I was driving with some friends We were in revere massachusetts and there was this two lane road that were leaving this area That was like it was this famous place where we go Kelly's roast beef and everybody would go there and get clams They had like fried clams there. It's like a famous spot people travel from far and wide to go to Kelly's so we were driving back from that and there's this people behind us People beside us in this car. We're doing coke and there was a girl in the back seat and they had the light the dome light on And she was doing coke and she looks over and sees us looking there and she goes like this fuck Yeah She's like as they're driving by just looks at me like anger and craziness. All right, fuck you And that's how I view coke. Yeah, I view coke is like that lady look I was looking at her you're doing coke you have the dome light on and I'm looking at you and you're mad at me Yeah, I didn't do anything. No, I've had a few friends that got into it too far and it's it's a man devastating Yeah, it's another thing It's another one of those things that your body connects to chemicals and become it becomes a massive part of your life or some Really strange reason. I've only done meth twice. Oh, that's a weird thing to say and And the reason I would never do it again is because it's the one drug that could hit me. Wow The first time I did I didn't even know what it was. I was uh, crewing for racing sailboats over in New Orleans at the Marti Gracotta and Got it owned the boat was from Houston and I was in law school there and he wanted me to drive his boat back and trail is on a trailer in the dragon and I said, oh, I can't go back. You know, I'm sleepy. I haven't slept in two days And he says here take this he gave me this and I drove straight through from New Orleans to Houston I was wired, you know, and it was about a year later. I said hey I want one more of those things and he gave it to me and I thought you know I could get really hooked on this stuff. I never driver mess. What truck driver mess. Yeah, that's the real mess Right, I don't know, but I I never came near it again after that. I've had some people gotten real trouble with that too some friends. What is the come down like? It's it's crash for me. It was just a total crash I could once I finally came down I didn't go to class for a couple days, you know when you were taking pure MDMA you had no crash at all. I didn't not you know because nobody knew that you're supposed to I think but The other thing is I was working at the time So maybe I was just so busy I didn't notice it But I'd never had to come down crash when I was in Dallas. I had a big one. I looked at it once the next day I had a perform. Mm-hmm. I had to do a stand-up set and I went to a coffee shop in the morning And I was reading a magazine. I couldn't read I was like I couldn't read it couldn't couldn't stay Focused long enough to get through a sentence. I couldn't get through a paragraph. I couldn't do it It just I did to have it in there. I was like wow, I am stupid as fuck. I was like what's going on with my brain I didn't know about 5htp. I didn't know about supplementing afterwards try to read right Greek kickstart your brains ability to produce serotonin and dope me but It didn't didn't sit me well. I enjoyed the experience as far as like what I got out of it But I also thought this would be very dangerous because that reality of the loving warm Ecstasy feeling when you're locked into it is very appealing and you could want to do that a lot and then if you wanted to do that a lot You would experience that more or enjoy it more than you would enjoy regular reality and then it would You know it's sort of like a pointed diminishing returns. I can't get any anything out of this build up the tolerance Yeah, I did more MDMA than is You know sensible and because I didn't know what I was doing see that was the problem back then Nobody knew anything about it in Dallas, you know and we were terrible. No, it's safe to worry about it There was just no literature. There was nothing. How did it start? Well, I don't know if the story ever really got out, but this guy Well, he went by the name Thomas Crown. He was the He was really the mainstay although There's a guy that I'll think of his name in a minute. Everybody thought was the number one guy in Dallas But he was a good friend of Tim Leary and he's out here in LA and Tim Leary says here try this and that's when he found He's oh, this is great. I'm gonna take it back and he lit up Dallas with this stuff. So but I Actually did a motivational speech on MDMA one time whoa about two hours after I'd taken it So I was still pretty much up there and they'd pay me to do a 30-minute keynote speech at this big corporate Thing and I was an hour into it when they finally caught me off this day I had people on their feet and one of the best talks ever gave why they could they cut you off Well, I was only supposed to talk 30 minutes and after an hour they said, you know, that's really enough Wow, that's nobody there's only one person in the room that knew I was an MDMA It was one of the women there that Actually, she's one of my distributors And what did she think she couldn't believe I was gonna go on first of all Wow, I Did last stupid stuff Yeah, well, that sounds like nobody really knew what the hell was going on with that stuff You're really the chances you were with human guinea pigs. Yeah, I and in that little interview I did I told about the time that Well, I took a way excessive dose. What does that mean? What's way excessive? 1500 milligrams. What's those what's an average 120 is what is that what you should take? You shouldn't you should what 120 so you took 10 times? Yeah And I still have these two cassette two 90-minute cassette tapes that I filled up talking that whole time I've never had the courage to listen to them again But from that time for another seven years. I'd tried MDMA about five years Not long after nothing happened five years after nothing happened about seven years after I finally got MDMA to work again I only did it once a year after that and I haven't done it now and I guess five six seven years, but It really fried my brain now You know Oprah put this bad news information out about the holes in the brain thing and the night before a couple days for that show aired Her producer was informed by maps that this is a you know totally bogus It was a lie they put out there. There's no holes in the brain. It was a blood flow MMI or something like that and I you know maybe I would be a genius today if I hadn't done that But it you know it didn't really fry my brain now it was so stupid I had a Monster headache for three or four days and MDMA did not work again for long long time But it didn't kill me and it didn't I don't think put holes in my brain The holes in the brain thing was what everybody said that was one of those well Oprah did that you know she had this MR at this woman and the woman knew that it wasn't a hole in her brain You know maps got a hold of it and they really gave her all the information what this is It was about blood flow or something But it was not a hole in her brain and Oprah's producer knew that going in and she still let that hit the air It's sort of like the Benghazi thing only didn't get busted. That's so silly Why it's you know why why why but you know I think they probably were trying to save people They're probably trying to like scare people off from doing and maybe in this day and age when you're dealing with something That's ultimately you know cut with a bunch of other shit No, I would never take something that that I got it a rave or a party or something like that that you just can't trust this stuff And a lot of it's you know you don't know who's making it and we at least you know had good sources good supplies We knew who the chemist was stuff like that, but today it's it's really not safe unless you're the chemist or friend of them Unfortunately, you know all could be fixed You don't need to you got pot. Yeah cannabis is really the miracle Drug it you know the plant does so much things for you the hemp plant does the cannabis is really a medicinal plant You know it certainly is but for PTSD is nothing like MD MDMA you know but see that would be used with with a doctor who knows his fly and stuff like that Now I'm not saying there's anything wrong with dancing. I've danced all night on it too. It's really good. Oh, there you oh It's wonderful How old are you when you were dancing all night on MDMA? Oh, it's in my 60s. You were just learning. Yeah, I'm just catching up You know you kids gotta get me everybody there ahead of us Yeah, how do you there ahead of me the kids of today? They they're starting from the jump of the information They just need to be cautious Don't have to be crazy about these things. It's just so unfortunate when we have so many dangerous drugs that are labeled their prescription drugs They're they're their their dosage is clearly marked right we know about them and yet there's these legal ones that are just floating around out there And they're they're in commerce they're in connection. There's money money's being exchanged back and forth before taking them There's no way you can ever regulate that unless you make a legal you can't yeah It's legal and then you get some kind of a structure to take care of it But then again the argument is like oh, that's gonna be legal you're gonna make math legal to like Start with cannabis. Yeah, and see what happens. You know that We you down for legal truck on math if truck on math is legal Well, yeah, because you could regulate it. Yeah, but still and you'd regulate it and say you know who needs it nobody But still people would use it like crazy to be way fucked up on it Yeah, they would go to the truck stop. You know, I really don't ever give much thought to those kind of things because you know I'm not an activist and drug policy or stuff right and so You know mushrooms you can you can grow at home now There's a new new method to grow them in hydrogen peroxide so you don't have to worry about all this You know sanitation stuff why and grow mushrooms and hydrogen per oxygen bunch of YouTube videos about been out about two years now 35 hours every second goes up there something like that at least right yeah, yeah, that's just amazing I'll tell you another thing not to try is not that it's not dangerous, but you know when I first moved to Florida, I know in little after several years after I moved there and I lost all my connections and stuff The word on the street was that nutmeg was very similar to MDMA and you could take some nutmeg So I got one of those little McCormick tins of nutmeg and I capped it all and I took you know Not the big tin but the captain me putting put him in capsules. Yeah, and I took the whole thing at one time. Oh my god I got real sweaty Got a horrible headache and today at Christmas time. I can't get near the eggnog if it's got nutmeg on it because I'll throw up That's hilarious to this day to this day nutmeg will make me sick But I have heard of people getting high from nutmeg. So what's that about? That's what I heard too, but well Maybe you have to get the big tin, but the little tin Do it a big tin of nutmeg. Well, Tim will just get you sick with a big tin will get you high Well, I don't know I would not try it myself because a little tin convinced me not to try it Yeah, there were some guys on my message board that were experimenting with getting high enough. I've heard that I just don't believe it is that on the airwood they have trip reports on getting high on nutmeg maybe they do I don't know I know earth and fire friends of mine and it's a really some arrowwood.org That's the first place to go if you're gonna do a drug. Yeah, arrow with us and spend a lot more time There than you spend doing the drug. Yeah, arrow with nutmeg. Let's find out they have some horrible stories about About Basels all the time. Yeah when somebody asked me well, what's this like should I try this? I said go to arrow would and read the bad trip reports and if you can't handle a bad trip Then don't go but don't read the good trip reports anyway can handle a good trip. Yeah There is apparently there's a page on arrowwood It's all about nutmeg I love this. Arrowhead provides information about psychoactive drugs to educate to reduced harms and to support much-needed policy change You know that Some of their big customers are not customers or readers are DEA agent police agents They have a whole separate section for law enforcement and for parents and see they start out It's just a little database for their friends and now it's one of the most visited websites on the on the nut It's it's a huge so what did DEA agents go there for education? Find out more about you know the new drug will hit the streets and that's one of the first places They'll go to find out what it's about that's interesting. I wonder if that's how they found out about Basels I don't know You know they'd find out about it on the street but to find out the trip reports what you know How do we know what these kids are on what's it doing to them? And what do we do do we take them to hospital or put them in jail and yeah There's gonna come a day when people look back at this day and age and go God they were so nutty Like they just made it well, we're just gonna add oxygen to it and find the sell it You know we take this so this is illegal to get you 30 30 years in jail for one ounce This however is exactly the same effects plus this other weird thing that it does and you can just buy it as bad as They're gonna go why didn't they fix that? Why did they let that go on for years and years and years right? Yeah, it's crazy people and poly drug ing is a real problem with the poly drug you know putting a bunch things together Candy flipping well, you know some of them are safer than others But a lot of the poly drug ing is going on with prescription drugs now. Oh, that's really fucking I'm off Yeah, well prescription drugs just with alcohol That's scary one just you know in the original hearing for cannabis when they're gonna make it illegal in 37 The only medical testimony was from the AMA and that was in favor of cannabis and they cut the guy off and threw him out of the hearing But the only medical testimony in Scheduling it or that taxing it at the time Was in favor yeah, we're in some weird times still it's I mean it's amazing that 1937's work You know in 1930 whatever it was when they made cannabis legal was a 37 yeah to this day it's still effective a massive amount of Generations, you know they just had to just get grandpa and grandma just get them and then they're gonna tell their kids And they're gonna tell their kids and everyone's gonna be scared Well now there's a huge movement in Gerry Act and Gerry atris Gerry atric medical marijuana real and I know some one Geriatric doctor who is prescribing her for his patients. I've I've you know some anecdotal evidence of older people in nursing homes and all that Have had some marvelous things happen to him. So it's it's finally getting into Grandpa and grandma Wow, that's amazing It's amazing after all these years people are finally start in the catch on Yeah, I've turned on people in their 60s that you know we're very anti-drug But they are all seven in all this pain or they're they're going through cancer treatments or something there Yeah, you know they can't keep their food down and I say hey try this brownie, you know and Precise in there they're going to the dispensary regularly, you know Especially if you live your life without it and you thought this is all it's available now all of a sudden you have this new copy You're here old you can't move around much. Hey, you know there's something I can do here reduces inflammation too A lot of people that have like a serious problem. He's walking around they take some pot and it just makes y'all loosey-goosey A lot of folks that have experienced some pain relief from all especially if it's high in CBDs, right? I I use it for pain relief and actually I When I'm in pain, I can't tell it. I'm high when I smoke it, but the pain doesn't I don't think it goes away except you just don't pay attention to I mean, I don't know what the mechanism is about UFOs Have you ever had any experience that? When you were on any sort of a psychedelic that you felt was like some sort of a paranormal experience like a UFO experience or like being Contact with something or seeing something that you Experience where it felt like it was a real thing. Yeah, yeah several times. Yeah Mainly on ayahuasca, but there was there was this one time that you still is just crystal clear to me where there was this We were sitting in darkness, you know, and it appeared like there was a black curtain in front of me With just a really bright light coming out from the bottom And from back behind me this this female kind of entity. It's just very dark and shadowy I said what is that and this you know this could be going on in my head. I admit that but to me it was real and this entity She said well, that's what you are really made of. That's your core Do you want to see it and she reaches down and start to pull this up and it started getting so bright I said no, no, no, I don't know what I got scared. I don't know why and Some of my friends said I can't believe you didn't let her pick it up But it was it was like a message like you are this bright shining spirit behind this thing To me that was a real entity encounter of some kind So you think that that was like an interdimensional thing that you were communicating with it could have been or could have been a figment of my Imagine you know I I I not tried to distinguish between it because the Emotional impact of what went on and what I was thinking and saying and afraid to look at my own core was kind of fascinating You know what's also what is the source of the imagination and why is the imagination so obviously affected by different chemicals And where's the imagination come from exactly? Well the imagination is clearly affected by cannabis clearly also affected by caffeine clearly also affected by alcohol Definitely affected by siliceye. I've been definitely affected by many many many other things airplane Glue do it you have ideas that are different than the ideas that you have if you're in a baseline So pretongesness and the real question then becomes what exactly is imagination is imagination? Just a series of chemicals interacting with neurons interacting with thoughts and ideas and learned experiences Because out of the imagination comes everything that everyone ever used on earth Thing that wasn't here already anything we made whether it's a phone or a television set or a curtain that all came out of the Imagination so the imagination isn't just something where you think things up and they whoa, you know, maybe I just imagined it Nothing happens without imagination. Exactly the imagination is the source of every single creation It's a weird thing when you look at it that way we don't look at it as something like oh You're just imagining things that aren't really there right we you're also imagining the wheel You're also imagining internet connections. You're also imagining airplanes. Yeah somebody had to imagine all of us all of that without that There's nothing without the human imagination the world would look radically different It would be a hundred percent natural and we'd be animals The imagination is the one step that takes us from animal into animal that changes its environment radically and starts to transcend itself starts to symbiotically attach itself to its own creations which Coincidentally came out of the imagination the imagination created technology that Like the glasses you're wearing or the watch I'm wearing or any any of the things we're talking through these microphones All of that is technology created through the imagination right shoes are yeah You know so when you see something and you say well, maybe it was my imagination I'm not exactly sure what that means. See I don't really care whether it's my imagination or some other Multidimensional entity what I focus on what am I learning? What are my feeling first? What's my emotional state and then what am I gonna take away from this? What am I gonna learn and Recently a podcast I put out McKenna says something to the effect of what makes us think? emotional state and then what am I going to take away from this? What am I going to learn? And recently a podcast I put out in McKenna says something to the effect of what makes us think that the entire cosmos can be understood using the neural network of a primate. He says we're here to observe and appreciate and I like that. You know rather than try to figure out black or dark matter and all that, that's great. I'm glad people are working on it but I'm not going to worry about it too much. I'm going to appreciate and you know look at the wonder of the world. Look at nature. It's just amazing. It's just looking at all those different varieties of insects. They're just freaky, weird alien creatures that we just take for granted because they've always been here. Well, spiders. We're going to live without spiders, you know, or bees. Or bees. Yeah, and that's getting to be a problem. It certainly is. And there's a lot of theories about that but one of the more fascinating ones to me is that they are absolutely convinced that whether or not they can survive it or not, cell phone signals are damaging bees. It's fucking with the way they can communicate. And people hide power lines and cell phone towers. You don't want to live near any of those. Yeah. Well, I think that high power lines has there been a direct correlation ever established between them and sicknesses? Between some high power lines. Not like a type. The real super high frequency power lines. Yeah, there have been, in fact, I know somebody who died of cancer quite young who lived under those for a long time. And that was anecdotal. But I think there have been some studies now showing because people in certain neighborhoods have sued and things like that. I've been around them before where you feel them. Yeah, you can feel that weird. You hear the, your standing next. And you can kind of feel those. Well, you just realize like this is enough energy to kill everyone you've ever met ever instantly. And it's just shooting through these wire lines. Well, we don't know what we're doing to ourselves with all these electronic signals. You know, you can't get away from it. Where there's Wi-Fi everywhere now. There's cell phones, there's TV, there's radio. Think that the information is just in this room that we can't see. Right. But with the right equipment, we can tune into. Well, that's what it's going to be really weird when that equipment is actually inside your Yeah, that's going to be very, very, very, very strange. It's getting there too. So close. You know, they gave the person the first ticket for wearing Google Glass. I saw that, you know. And I think that was a valid issue of a ticket too. I don't want people driving and looking at Google at the same time or the net. I don't like people talking on their cell phone unless they have hands free. My question is how can they prove that it's active? Because if you just have that thing on your eyes, I don't think you can. I think they'll beat that ticket. But I think it sends a message. Yeah, that cops don't like technology. Well, they like the technology they have. It's also the other messages. They like right in tickets. Yeah. They want to write as many as they can. They have to fill quotas. Filling quotas is one of the most disgusting things anybody ever got away with. The idea that there has to be a certain amount of crimes that are committed in a month. Like, what if everybody agreed to only go the speed limit for like a year? What would happen? Would the police officers just explode? I mean, what would they do? If we all agreed, that would be an interesting project in some small town if we could get everybody to do it. Then nobody has any money that's coming in from speeding tickets. What do they do? Because they rely on it. You know, they rely on it for a source of income. There's a couple little towns on the way to Burning Man. That's most of their income is being taken. But do you mind saying? I mean, look, it's one thing if you want to ticket someone because you want to give them an incentive to slow down to make people safer. That's one thing. But as soon as you start developing, like, you have a standard amount of money you have to make every month from you. You're just saying that people never improve. You're just saying that people will never get better at following the law, never get better at being safer. And just the fact that you bank on that, you have a quota, that's disgusting. There were known speed traps in Texas, you know, that you wouldn't go through this town because there's 15 miles an hour and 16 and get your ticket. Connecticut's horrible because Connecticut between Connecticut and Boston, there's a lot of stretches where it's 55 fucking miles an hour and that. And there's nothing there. It's just straight line. I just want to gun it. You want to get to New York. But between New York and Boston, it's like three and a half hours at 55 miles an hour. We're just going, cheese, a scrotting. Yeah. Everywhere you looked, some asshole disguises a tree, pointing radar at you. So stupid. And now in Jamie put up a picture just a moment ago, but now in Colorado, they're developing this new technology to tell if someone's smoking pot and not look at these things. Tell if someone's smoking pot enough inside of a building for the smell to leak outside. So they have developed this instrument that measures the amount of cannabis smell in the air on the street. And they're going to start to give people tickets for these things. Yeah, that'll help vaporize your sales. Well, this is in Colorado. I made pot legal. This is so fucking stupid. Those are the 40% that didn't vote for it. It may be dad or it may just be the fact that people are just figuring out the control and they're just weeds blowing everywhere like, you know, like tumbleweed, you know, like the smell of weeds just wafting through entire communities and people are catching contact ties and they've had enough. But you know, used to be, you'd put your pot in coffee and dogs couldn't smell it for the coffee. Now they've trained the dogs to look for the coffee as well. I don't know if this is true, but a friend of mine told me that, oh, what he's been doing is buying a bear piss and wolf piss and sprinkling it around his tire, tires, and then his trunk because he says when a drug dog smells it, they go crazy. They forget about drugs totally and they want to go attack a bear, you know. Well, I don't know if the cops do. Well, I don't know. This probably is made up, but it's a great story. Wouldn't think it would be made up. I mean, dogs instinctively freak out and they smell wolfs, right? Yeah. And so, uh, beats coffee. Yeah, that seems to make sense. That's a, hmm. I wonder if they can get in trouble for like pasting wolf piss on your tires. How do they prove that? Yeah. They have a wolf piss nose thing too. They put it on and bring in the wolf piss dogs. They have a wolf piss detecting device just like they have a cannabis smell detecting device. But there's some, some sense that a dog can't resist. That's not the one scent that's supposedly universally applies to all animals. It brings in deer, brings in els, brings in moose, beavers piss. Really? Yeah. Beaver smell or beaver, beaver, estrogen, whatever it is, beavers scent. I know a lot of young men that go after beavers. Exactly. Which is interesting that term beaver, because they don't look like, look, if your woman's vagina looks like a beaver, she's ticker to a doctor, something wrong. It's not supposed to look like that. So if you call it a beaver, why you call it a beaver? Because somebody else did before. Right. Because well, then the other, the other ideas that it was created back when they were really hairy. I mean, we don't know what that is for porn. Before an internet porn. Yeah. Yeah. Porn in the internet. I think porn got women to trim it down a little bit. And the internet came along and it was just, it was just fire through bushes. Just fire the poop. But apparently the scent from the glands of beavers is the best sexual attractant for other animals. Never go figure. Yeah. I don't know what that's about. I mean, you thought that the beavers were the studs of the animal world. They're certainly a weird fucking animal. I mean, if you see one in real life, you know, and you see their crazy houses that they build next to the lakes where these giants are going to lake in Florida and you take canoe and puddle out there and there was a big beaver dam there. You could watch them and they were busy as busy as beavers and they were otters around there. And people eat them. Apparently they don't taste bad. I don't know. I guess when people think it's starting to death, you know, I watch a lot of those Alaska shows where people live in Alaska and eat whatever they can get a hold of them. A lot of people eat beaver up there. They eat beaver tails. They cook the beaver tail. That sounds like be pretty sealed. Eat a lot of seal marinade. Yeah. Seal and beaver and you know, got to eat what you got to eat. Yeah. Whatever the hell you get a hold of up there. Probably if you didn't know what it was, you'd say, hey, this is kind of interesting. Well, we just can't be picky. They just need a source of calories and protein. Yeah. That's that's right there. Take it. You know, and apparently seal oil is very important for them because it's very high in calories and the cold you deal with. Apparently, that's one of the best. The worst losses of calories is your body burning off calories to keep itself warm. It's like one of the best ways they say to lose weight is to actually walk around with like less jacket or less coats than you would feel comfortable with because your body in order to keep warm is actually burning off. That's interesting. So are you going to go hunting in Alaska? No, I'm going in Wisconsin. I'm going actually this weekend. Oh, wow. Yeah. What are you going? I would go on Alaska too though. How are you going after? Deer. Yeah. There's a guy who's got a farm. It's overrun with deer. And he brings in people to hunt them to manage them every year because you know, the reality is, as you said, especially in Wisconsin, a lot of them are going to die. By predator, there's a lot of them are going to hit by cars, a lot of them are going to freeze death. And you know, to keep the herd healthy and management, you got to you got to have a tenant and you've got to be the wolf. And I want to, I want to try to live this entire year. I want to, I want to pick a time like after the first of the year and try to live the entire year on game meat. I think it's possible. I think it's possible. I think if you're going to be a meat eater, you know, to know the exact source of your meat, I think it's probably the best, the most ethical and sort of sane way to do it. The disconnect between us and our food, whether like, I love growing food in a garden and then cooking and eating the vegetables you grow. I mean, I think it's a beautiful thing. It's an interesting connection that you have between where your food actually comes from. I have chickens now and I get, I get fresh eggs from the chickens and I'm trying to get closer and closer to my food if that makes any sense. But we mainly organic are almost all organic, but mainly vegetables. We chicken maybe twice a month and we have a friend that solders his pig once a year and we know how it's grown and raised and everything. But mainly vegetarians, but all of our food, most of it comes within 25 to 40 miles of our house. That's good along one of those CSA communities for Forted Ag culture. And I do most of the cooking and so it's really fun. You get this box each week and then you got to figure out what you're going to do with stuff and that's really cool. That's a lot of fun. I would love that. I think I've talked to my friends about that. everyone's so goddamn busy. We never get anything done. But the idea of getting together, everybody buying a plot of land and then hiring someone to run that plot of land and produce food for this group of people. Like I say, get 20 people together and say, well this is our grocery bill for the year. If we can manage a plot of land and buy a plot of land together, everybody pay for one 20th of it or whatever and then hire someone to take care of everything and hire a few people. There must be some CSA's up here. There must be. I don't know how many. There are several of them in San Diego County and we've belonged to this one for quite a few years now and they supply most of the local organic stores and so what we're getting are the tomatoes that are or they're heirloom. They're not perfect. We're getting food from a farm like it would come and not everything's the same size and shape and all like that. It's real food. It's real food. It's picked that day or maybe the afternoon before and it's real good fresh food but that way we don't have to get our own group together. Now we've gotten a bunch of people involved in this and some people don't like pomegranates or persimmons or whatever comes sometimes in the basket and we swap around with each other and stuff and so we usually eat everything so I get all the throwaways from everything. My idea had a bit of doomsday to it. My idea was like if the shit hits the fan, but you're in the survival stuff and you read all that too and when I was younger I was into that too but now that I'm you know my dad, my brother and my mentor, I'll die at 63 so I'm eight years past my expiration date so I feel like it's all free time. Sure I'm just in awe of exercise I eat well but you know it's I'm not stressed about that. I see the Google kids are working on longevity things now and and I just commented to a friend yesterday. I said you ever notice that all of this longevity work is done by people in their 30s and 40s but by your 70s or 80s you say oh no I don't really need that I've had a lot of fun. I want to have a little bit more fun but you know if you gave me you said here's a pill or give you another 100 years I'd have to think long and hard about that really yeah oh yeah because you would worry about deterioration or not having fun. Well because there's a lot of pain in watching your friends go through what they're going to have to go through everybody's going to go through love affairs or broken and tragedies and stuff like that. I just don't want to watch any more of that you know. Wow I love affairs that's the big one that just show you the edge. No I'm thinking of my grandkids now oh they're the hearts broken and everything. Oh that's funny that's like we were talking about the radio lab thing earlier about the guy who went through this horrible circumcision process of becoming a runner wouldn't want a son to go through it. Yeah you don't want your go through heartbreak. My children have already gone through heartbreak now it's my grandkids and I poured and I told this one of my grandchildren I said you know if I'm not around when some young man breaks your heart I will come back and haunt him. Wow she remembers that. Well with the guys why is it his fault he doesn't want to be around her anymore. Well see I have five grandchildren, four girls. If it wasn't for that I'd have a little problem with women but I have a new sensitivity to women. Well I have a very good sensitivity to women too and I have three daughters but my point is that a lot of heartbreak comes from the fact that people just decide they don't want to be with you anymore and it doesn't work out right and people think that when someone leaves them that they're taking something away from them they feel like this deep sense of loss and they're connected to the idea part of growing as a person is realizing you're going to be okay and here's where MDMA would be really cool if it was legal because when you and your partner get points say you know if it's bad for one person it's going to be bad for both of them even if you're not talking about it. So if you sat down got together one evening just the two of you did MDMA and talked it out. Now I know from personal experience that you know my marriage my previous marriage was really getting rocky when I found MDMA and we stayed together another six seven years. That's good. Yeah it really worked out because it died after that. Well the kids were growing with a lot of things happening but it did extend our marriage and extended it in a really good way. Oh that's good. And we were married 21 years and we're good friends now. There was a rocky period for a while but we've worked ourselves through that to where we both respect each other and we realize that it was not a one-way street but you know I think that MDMA would be great for a couple's therapy of people when they hit that seven-year mark or whatever it is you know. Yeah well I think there's a lot of things that people hold in and they repress in relationships and don't communicate about and then sometimes a psychedelic journey together can open those ideas up and you start talking about things and you find out that there's been a misunderstanding all along or that it could have been a lack of communication that you could have worked things out much better much easier a long time ago or that you're both feeling the same way that you both want to move on. You still know how to do it. You know I've had one experience where I went on for months something was building up and finally you know got it out and she said huh that's no big deal you know and it's something that had been a big deal to me for a long time and turned out if I had just been talking about it I would have had a month of bliss instead of hell you know so communication is the key and there are some things that help you communicate. Pott helps you communicate. Yeah don't you think that those things and those hard eggs and those that's a part of what makes you a person it's a confirmation you have to get that information it's feedback. Now I wouldn't want to not have any of my heart breaks and stuff like I just don't want to see it happen to somebody. I understand and I agree to a certain extent but I think it's very important that everybody goes through a certain amount of it just to understand what it's about. Well you don't have a choice. You're going to be through it. Look I've had friends that have gone through it where I know they became better people because of it. I don't know. Friends I went through a devastating breakup now he laughs about the idea of being stuck with that woman you know back then he thought there was no way he could live without her and I was like you know it doesn't matter what happens to you how big the tragedy is that after some enough time passes eventually that becomes one of your funniest stories. Oh I doubt it. Oh no that's right some of these things that the kid was eaten by a wolf. Oh no you know that's what he talked about. No that's that's I'm thinking what you fucking saw your family dying a plane crash. I'm thinking things happen to me. But you know if you think about some things that happen seem to be a tragedy at the time and usually there's that between people you know carve. I'm just talking about like breakups. I'm talking about like getting fired. I'm talking about things that are not really devastating. I'm getting fired as a good thing. I've had that happen sometimes that that can turn into a good thing. It can be a changing experience and change I think oftentimes opens up the door for good. You know a change opens up the door for good because it gives you a newfound focus. If you survive it you're going to be stronger. Yeah every time I've like had something happened to me where I had to rethink things that's always been a good thing. Oh yeah. And when you get fired you all right what are we doing here? And you all suddenly get this new motivation. And I realized objectively this would be a good thing for my grandkids when it happens to him. I just don't want to go through it. That's part of being a grandpa. I mean is now what they always say that the strictest parents were always like the most lenient grandparents. I wasn't the strict parent of it. Well even more so than you're even more lenient. But yeah the idea especially when you're an older person and you've experienced so much pain and hardship and you see the innocence of children. It's how beautiful it is. They don't know any racism yet. They don't know any homophobia yet. They don't know any blind, other objective hate. They don't know the disillusion of government. They don't know all this. Right. They don't know any of this yet. They don't know like you know rebal, you know the rebellion against taxing and all the different aspects of society that you know bring people to this hysterical freakout point where you're like this fucking thing is I'm mad at hell and I'm not gonna take it anymore. I love that. I love that. Yeah they don't have that. They have you know you stepped on my toe. They have that's my toy. But relatively speaking these are big problems for them too. I mean all of their little kid problems that we just have to learn how to work our way through. My three year old has a way bigger problem with my five year old taking one of her toys than I have with anything in life. My five year old takes her toy and she's like that's mine. She screams tears are flying out of her face that never happens to me. So for her that's a devastating apocalypse. A huge pop-ups of toys. Yeah. It really is. It's relatively speaking and you have to address it that way. You have to sort of respect the fact that they actually are freaking out. And although it doesn't seem normal to you, you're grown adults. Right. But for a three year old, this is a fucking real problem. And you've got to acknowledge that this is a real serious thing for them. You know, and so you've got to treat them like adults. My parents didn't shut up. You know that's how I grew up. Shut up. Shut your mouth. I'll break both your legs. That's the kind of shit I heard. I was really lucky. I grew up liking an Aussie and Harriet family school. Really? My problem. You know, but I couldn't have asked for better parents. That's amazing. Yeah. And we were looking at you turned out, ecstasy dealing, Dallas and drug dealer. I got to send them to college and he deals with me. But hosting a drug podcast, guys crazy. What is this book that you wrote? The Spirit of the Internet? That's, that's, I wrote that in 2000 actually. It's, it's one of the first books that compares the internet to a psychedelic drug. Speculations on the evolution of global consciousness. Wow, look at you, you fresh face, little young. Yeah, that's a long time ago. That's 2000. You know, when you wrote this? That's 2000. Yeah. 13 years ago. Yeah. That's an amazing thing. I was 13. That was the last nonfiction. I've got a fiction book up now that's a first of a quartet. I'm writing, but I went to fiction because it's so much more fun. Do you remember sort of Graham Hancock? Did you remember when people thought that the world was going to end in 2000? Oh, yeah. Why two K? Why that was a big deal, man? See, I got involved in why to K in about 1995 because we set aside millions of dollars to fix all those problems. And most of the software industry did. I mean, there was a huge thing and the press only picked up in the last, you know, nine months or something. And we'd already spent millions of dollars in years and years of work. There's specialized companies working on it. And so I really didn't think anything bad was going to happen. I wouldn't be somewhere in an airplane right then because there were going to be a few glitches. Well, I didn't know. I didn't think the airplane would crash. I thought I could get stranded somewhere and they couldn't get my reservations. Oh, right. That wouldn't worry about the plane itself. That was a fear, though. Like air traffic controllers that their computer systems were going to go down. There was a potential for that, but it was nothing like the press made it. What the fuck did they do for air traffic controllers before they were computers? I ball, I guess radio and I ball. Like in the 1960s, how did they describe like how I guess it was like coming in at 30,000 feet, you know, 25 degrees, north, I guess to talk them down. I don't know. I'm a commercial pilot by the way. Are you really? But it's restricted to hot air balloons. You're commercial pilot. It's restricted to lighter than air aircraft lighter than air aircraft. I don't have a balloon anymore, but I used to fly balloons. Yeah. Whoa, that's got to be spooky. Oh, they're great fun. What is that like? You're having a basket in their space. It's just awesome because now it gets allowed when you burn, but then when you're not burning, you're just floating. It's quiet. And you can hear the sound, you know, there's no obstruction. So you can hear people talking in the ground. And in Dallas, there is this one track that we had taken Sunday morning because there is a woman who would lay out in her backyard, but they could make it. Yeah. And so we would come in, we'd burn. And then we'd come up high so that we'd coast down in low and come over the lake and just, and then we'd say good morning. She jumped, you know, how rude. Yeah, it was, you could hear everything. You know, in Texas, cars you'd fly over in Sunday morning, you see pickup trucks with people passed out in the back of all my stuff. Wow. How dangerous is it though. It seems like it's pretty dangerous. The reason I quit is because I wasn't paying close enough attention. I almost hit a power line. And it scared me so much. I was flying people for money and stuff. You know, I got wrapped up in the conversation these guys were having. That's my problem. And paying attention to them more than the flying. And they didn't know we had a close call. I knew we had a close call. How close? Not that close. Close enough. I was coming down and I didn't burn soon enough. And so it takes a while to get your momentum back up. And, you know, I cleared it by 50 feet. But, you know, I should have cleared it by 500 feet or something like that. And I was coming in for a landing, I guess. And, how it scared to hell out of me. And I said, you know, that's it. How many people have died hitting power lines? Oh, that's mainly what was happening to people in balloons. Not all that many compared to the number of people flying. You know, it's safer than regular aircraft. No, are you harnessed in when you're up there? Oh, no. Oh, Jesus. Now, I used to sit on the edge of the basket, you know, and burn and reeling. Oh, yeah. What if a crazy rebel win came along and knocked you off? Well, you wouldn't have launched. If it's over 10 miles an hour, you wouldn't launch. We have a lot of trouble. They're so spooky. We're trolling my toes, just sitting there looking at that video. We'd go to these air shows where they bring in, you know, biplanes and stuff like that. And for the balloons, they would put up a pole in the middle of the airfield with a keys to a Cadillac or something on it. And you had to go five miles away. Anywhere in the radius of five miles away in launch and whoever could grab the keys got the balloon. Wow. What if the collide in each other? Oh, you'd kind of bounce off. But if you're at the same altitude at least, but you rules the road so you're not supposed to do that. But nobody in anything cyber fluid ever got the keys. But you have a bean bag too. So you throw that and whoever got closest would do in money or something like that. Wow. It's great fun. You know, that my ex-wife took me on a balloon ride for my 40th birthday. And on the way back, I said, well, how much do they say in cost? How did he get started in the next morning? I was taking the lessons. I had a lot of money then. How much does it cost to get a balloon? The balloons got 35,000. It was back when I bought it. Yeah. And how do you fold that bitch up once you've done flying? Oh, they pack into a basket that's, uh, no, maybe a third of the size of this table. Wow. And, but then you have your basket too. So you have a trailer behind your car. And do you have a parachute up there? Anything things just shit hits the fan? Oh, no. Nothing? No. Dude, I had ball. I had one guy wanted to pay me to take him up in a parachute. But and he wanted to jump out. But I didn't want to do it because once once the guy jumps out, you get so much lighter. And if you're not careful, you shoot up too fast. You collapse the envelope. That doesn't happen very often, but they're really safe. They're really safe. They're a lot of fun. And that's on scary. How do you lower yourself? Do you have to lower it naturally? Well, there's a hole in the top. And you have a line that goes through it or rope. You pull it and bleed air out of the top and let it go. And then when you're actually landing, the top is held in by Velcro. And so, except for the little flap that's open, when you're just buried a land, you rip that, you pull the top out. You pull the top out and then it'll deflate and land down. Sometimes your landings are a little rough. I've had landings are dragged for 50-year-hundred yards where bounce stuff. That conditions sometimes make it tough. And in North Texas at the time, you had to be really, you know, you can, you're allowed to land anywhere when you're landing. You know, the FAA lets you because you, if you, if you're out of fuel. And there was this one farm up in North Texas up by Cisco, I think it was. And whenever the blooms have come in landing, you could see dust coming on these gravel roads from two directions. One would be this farmer with this pickup and his shotgun. And the other would be the sheriff to come to protect you because the farmer hated you landing on their lawn. You know, when blooming started in France, they would carry a bottle of champagne to give the farmer when they landed. As, hey, thank you for letting us land here. Here's the champagne. When blooming started in the United States, the balloonists never gave it to the landowner. They drank it themselves, you know, champagne and propane breakfast, the balloonist. How rude. That's why they ruined the whole thing. Yeah. Look at this. That looks like Albuquerque. Yeah. There's one in Colorado too and Colorado Springs, we went to. Yeah, the woman that taught me the balloon moved Colorado Springs to the. Yeah, we went there to see it, but there was bad weather so they never launched. Yeah. It's so you've got to do it, you know, at sunrise and sunset, you know, a couple hours until after sunrise and a couple hours before sunset. That's the only time the air is stable enough. Have you ever met anybody that was up in a balloon saw UFO? No. No, I mean, it's too early in the day and plus you're looking at other things. What most people like to do on their first balloon ride is picked leaves from the top of a tree. Wow. For some reason, that's a big thrill. You know, so we go and skim the trees and they can pick leaves. Wow. That's weird. Great fun. It's weird that we figured out how to float float around in the sky. Yeah. You know, it's just a matter of time before we figure out how to do it with suits. You know, you know, some jet packs are coming around pretty good. Yeah. Well, they've got guys that have those wingsuits that jump off and cliffs like a pass some. I can hardly watch those videos. So hard for me to watch. There's one where it got crashes. It's really hard to watch. That one I haven't seen. But it's just a matter of time for to figure out something with like a wing. Yeah. Those that technology is going to grow. I think. Yeah. Everything's going to grow. You know, I mean, if they have a jet pack now and they do, you know, I watched one when I was in Denver. There was my friend Willie has a KLG. But is it KLPGKLPG? The radio station had a guy come in that's a that had a jet pack guy come in and he launched a jet pack in the parking lot and flew through the air for like 10 seconds. You can only do it for like 10 seconds. And they was like within, you know, X amount of years we're going to be able to do five minutes and then, you know, X amount of years after that, they think they're going to figure out some sort of power source. It's going to be able to make it a viable mode of transportation. But it was very complicated as far as like the control. Oh, it's got to be. Yeah. The yaw and what is it called? There's like two pitch pitch and yaw. Yeah, apparently it's like it's not a simple thing to figure out how to do it. We didn't have to learn that to get a license for balloons because you know, it's just up and down and he had what do they have to learn whether clouds. You have to learn about procedures with the FAA because you have to call the FAA in the morning, get a weather report and all and you tell them where you're going to launch and so they know some balloons are going to be in the area. How much different is that than a blimp? Can you can you talk at a blimp? I've never been in a blimp. But you pilot one with your license? Oh no, no, it's lighter than air. Well, maybe I don't know any bit crazy enough to let me do it. But I guess I guess that would be legal. It's lighter than aircraft. Yeah. Do you have to renew that license or is that once you get it? You got it. That's the crazy thing. You don't ever have to renew it. But you have to have a check flight every year I think with somebody else who's a commercial pilot. So all you have to do is get a friend and go up and take a ride with you and you're current again. I'm not current. What was that when you just put up, Jamie? Lady Gaga and address that flies. Lady Gaga, the actual Lady Gaga? Yeah, there's a guy. It's like remote controlled. Oh, so is it Lady Gaga or is it a toy? It's Lady Gaga. Lady Gaga is in a jet pack. Okay, here she is. She's going to helm it on. Let me see this. Let me just show us after it's over. So she climbs into this fucking thing and flies around. I didn't think jet packs could be annoying. That was wrong. Look, there's Lady Gaga and jet pack humans. We ruin everything. This is so stupid. I didn't think Jeff Hacks could be annoying. That was wrong. Look, there's Lady Gaga and Chep Hacks. Humans, we ruin everything. This is so stupid. She's connected by wires. Shut this off. This is a fucking charade. It's not even really a jetpack. She's all wired up and everything like that. It's more like a little helicopter. Yeah, that's horseshit. That's what that is. It's wired. But you know, there have been guys going to the stadium, football stadiums and those jetpacks. Yeah, well, there's that one guy that landed, he was in the middle of a boxing match. Van Der Holyfield was fighting Riddick Bow. And the guy landed, he had like a parachute connected to fans. And he called himself like the fan. I know what you mean. Remember that? And they landed and delayed the fight for like a half an hour while they had to arrest this guy. They were bringing police and they beat the guy up and everything like that. And then it sort of changed the atmosphere of the fight because there was a big break and a goal of fighting. Everybody cooled off and then had to go out it again. But that was why. I used to walk in the bluff down by Dale Mar, and you know, helped me be 30 feet or something. And one day a guy came by and one of those. He was a parachute, had a big fan on the back and he was at eye level with me. And he said, you know, hello, hello. And he's moving very slowly. Yeah, this is the video where Riddick Bow and a Van Der Holyfield fight and look, they stopped and they're like, what the hell? And they're looking at this boom, the guy lands ringside in the crowd. They should have turned the Holyfield on into him. Let him wild. They're in the middle of a fight. He has another big, more important things to do. They just beat the shit out of this guy though. I can see why. I think that guy's probably still in jail. I'm surprised they didn't just reschedule the fight. That's not really fair to do that. I think people wanted a conclusion. Yeah, it was all going on. And all the money there. And all the money on paper view as well. Poor fighters, so. Yeah, you know what? They should have just started it up immediately. Should have been a way to the half an hour. Just to give it a little five minute break, cut the cords. Just let's do this. But I think it was quite a break. I think all the arrests of this dummy. To needy bitch. That's an example of a needy bitch. It should have those fights indoors. Yeah, I think they're probably mostly do. Yeah. I usually rarely hear about fights out. Do I know they do a few occasionally outside in Vegas? Yeah, there's a big one way back in Hudson Africa or something. I can't remember it. They do Muay Thai ones. They do Muay Thai ones in Vegas outside. Well, then get quite as loud. I think. Yeah, but it's also the environment is different. You're dealing with outside. Yeah. Rain, it can get weird. I went to a king of the cage used to have these fights outside. I went to a couple of them. They used to have them in an Indian casino in California back when mixed martial arts was illegal in California. They would hold them in this outside casino. And one time, it started raining. Pouring rain out. And so they decided to let the fights continue. Pouring rain. So these people are fighting. They're slipping. And they're trying to throw kicks that fall on their ass. And people are climbing on top of their pole. They're soaking wet. It was like the craziest. And they released it as a DVD. I think it's called King of the Cage Wet and Wild. But it's a really insane series of fights where people are trying to fight in a torrential rainstorm. People are just so nutty. Did you ever hear of an old long time ago, wrestler named gorgeous George? Yes. Sure. George Russell. My dad took me to see him in the Elgin High School of Gymnasium. And the big deal he had long hair. Well, it was maybe almost down to his shoulders, but not quite, but at that time, I was huge. And when he come out in the ring in the beginning, his hair would be up. And he'd take Bobby pins out of his hair and throw them out to the audience. I was so disappointed I didn't catch one. That's so funny. Gorgeous George. Gorgeous George. It's another thing that people would come if they came here for another plan. They'd be like, what the fuck is going on there? Those guys are not really hitting each other. Why are you watching that? Because it's fun. We had to find out who's going to win. Who's the champion of the world? You're like, what? This week. Yeah. We're strange. We're strange. Floating around the balloons. Pretend to hit each other. We're not nutty race. Listen, man, this has been a lot of fun. That's been great fun. I'm really glad to get to meet you. I don't think you realize what you're doing, but you're filling in a role here for a lot of young people that you don't know how smart you are. Maybe you do. But you're extremely well read. You know so much. You're talking to a green handcock about stuff. I read the headlines. And you know all these terms about the skull and stuff like that. But what you're doing is you're taking a really a high level intellectual product to the masses and to especially young people that maybe hadn't had the advantage to go to college or something. And they find out, hey, there is smart as anybody went to college. You're really doing a really good service with these podcasts. Well thank you, but I'm not trying. And I'm extremely excited to get it. That's why it's working. That's why it's working. I'm extremely uneducated. You know what you're very well read. Well I read a lot of things, but you know what is education if not if reading, but as far as like formal education. And it was also as far as like I don't you know, I just like what I like. I mean interested in certain things. And I find that there's a lot of things out there that are fascinating that people just aren't paying attention to. And I think what I see and what we talk about on the podcast is really reflected by what I see on Twitter. And when I see on the internet, when I see when I go to the various websites that I visit for information, I see just a massive new upsurge in curiosity. I think the people are way more curious than they ever have been before just by virtue of the fact that getting more information than they've ever got. And they can get it. You know, that's not being held back. So I think what this podcast is, we came along in the right place at the right time and is the right type of person in me that kind of can bridge a few different worlds. Exactly. That's what you're bridging quite a few different worlds. And that's really important in the pod heads. Exactly. In the bridge between the meat heads and the pod heads. We're not all that different. You know, you might look different. But there's prejudice against people who engage in martial arts and exercise just like this prejudice against people who smoke pot. And some of it's justified and some of it's not. Yeah, there's assholes in every group. Absolutely. Absolutely. It's so easy to define people because of that. And I think that conversations like this and podcasts and it kind of gives everybody a better sense. Yeah. We're getting into people's heads because you're right in their ears. They've got the earphones on. They're listening. It's theater of the mind. Yeah. And it's the old voice in the back of the mind that you hear. I've heard so many of your podcasts that I feel like I've known you all my life. I feel like I've known you long time too, man. I've seen you on many road trips. Give the introductions to all these different various psychedelic talks. How many episodes do you have? I just last night did 378. Wow. So you are on episode 419. You almost got on 420. Yeah. Oh, you know what? We were going to do a special 420 episode. But now I'm like, well, that's so stupid. I'm so tired of that whole 420 thing. It's like, come on. What is this a number? The podcast or the pot. I mean, we kind of hypocritical because we always like make a big deal of each 100 that we hit. But 420 seems stupid. It seems like a tired thing. 420 dude. Come on. I'm thinking about for 400 what I've been working on. It's not too far along yet. But I've cut out little sound bites of McKenna. 30 to 60 second sound bites. And I have about 100 of them from 100 different, you know, toxic. And I'm going to try to string them together in a cut up and try to make it a single cohesive type thing. Hasn't been working too well yet. But it's worth a try. I think that's one of the cool things that you do that's kind of scary and dangerous and sacrilegious. You edit McKenna speeches. You get a lot of grief. People fucking freakin' want you to cut out the stuff about the stone dave theory. Because it's the 80th time you said it. Yeah, we heard it. You know, I'm not a historian. My job is to get the, you know, I'm a carnival barker. And all of the masters, copies are going to arrow would of all the masters. And then the real master tapes and all are going to go back to a Finn McKenna. Beautiful. Yeah. Yeah. And they're out there now. They're out there. You can get a hold of them. Yeah. I've got about another 100 McKenna talks nobody's heard yet. Including me. I'm 100. Yeah. Oh my God. Wow. So I'm good for another year or so. And plus we're doing the Plankin' Northay talks at Burning Man. That gets you another 30 or 40 every year. Wow. You changed your name because of Burning Man? Yeah. I had to. Well. That's when you know you get too high when you change your name. My friend Aubrey did that. It used to be Chris. I mean, I came Aubrey after something. I came up to it. And my sister-in-law who died had called me Lorenzo. Oh. So it was a family name. And then at Burning Man, the damn parrot crimes up in my arm. And I said, what's that parish name? He says, Lorenzo. I said, oh, that's my name too. And that was the day I changed it. Wow. That's hilarious. It was really hard for my wife and family. But they finally got there. Oh. So the Twitter is Psychedelic Lozo, L-O-Z-O. So follow on Twitter. And the podcast is the Psychedelic Salon. It is available for free. It's on iTunes. And can people donate it if they want to? Yeah. That's how it's kept alive. I can't get it done for me. I've got a donate button on the Psychedelic Salon.us has a donate button. I'm putting us.us.us.us. Come net orger us. And it all goes to the same place. And then I'm going to put a Bitcoin thing up there too. Beautiful. And they can go to LorenzoHaggerD.com. There's links to a little 15 minute video of my life. And then the MDMA story in Dallas is there. And all the links are LorenzoHaggerD.com. Outstanding. And the book, The Spirit of the Internet, is back when he was Lawrence. Yeah. I'm looking for LorenzoHagger. It's not about the spirit of the Internet by Lawrence HaggerD. And Genesis generation is my novel. It's just beautiful. All on Kindle. Thank you, sir. They appreciate my event and honor to be here. It's cool. It's great because for me as well, it's really cool. And both of our audiences cross a lot. And so I'm glad they both got to hear it. Absolutely. Like I said, I think that's how I heard about you in the first place. I'm pretty sure. I've got a lot of people in my audience say the first time they heard about me was from you. What goes around comes. Indeed it does. Thank you, sir. You're welcome.