the general gun experience. So we're following and pleading with them all the way out there. Please just tell us, please, I swear on my life this happened. He gets in the car, door's open, he looks up and I'm only reason why I'm telling you this because he died. He looks up at Marco and I, and he goes, it happened. Close the door and off he went. Now, the reason why I share that is because that's something that I can put any weight on for the documentary for people like you, right? But as a personal message for me, knowing that level of validation on the inside, it kept us going. It was like, okay, why on earth would he have done that? Why on earth would he say, and that kept Marco and I going, and that was a personal level of validation that? Is there any conventional explanation why the military shut everything down, why they had military barricades set up around that area? No, they did try to say that the creature was this guy who's got some deformities, but I've seen the guy, a mowedine or something like that. But you talked to the witnesses. Why would the military shut that down? Yeah, I know. I know. And then the deformities. And then for the doctors in the hospital, they said, though, there was like a midget having a baby or something. We were just something that was just so ridiculous. It was like, and you talked to the witnesses and they're just like, oh, come on, I'm I'm going to, you know, that's laughable at best. You know, I mean, these girls came within eight to 10 feet, three, three women, Katya, two sisters, Lilliani and Valkeria, 14, 16 and 21. They got within eight to 10 feet and broad daylight of this creature. And one of the things it doesn't come across in the film, when they saw this thing, they're looking like, what are we looking at here? They're walking through this field and it's up against the center block wall. And one of them is looking at that. What is that? And it was crouched by the wall. It was weak and feeble. And one of them kind of like screeched. Now, like, what is that? And it turned and it looked right at the girls, locked eyes on them. Lilliani grabs her younger daughter, her younger sister, who's 14 Valkeria and makes a high tails at out of there. Katya is 21. She's frozen in her tracks, locked eyes with this creature and it's communicating with her, please help me. It's weak and feeble and it's scared and it's crouched down. Lilliani realizes that Katya is back there. She gets, I don't know, 100 feet down the path. She leaves her sister, stay here. I'm going back to get Katya. She runs back. And I asked Katya and I asked all the girls during that moment of contact. When you lock eyes, I know it's only a brief second. But during that moment of contact, what did you feel like put me there? That's where the title comes from moment of contact because that was when they locked eyes on this creature. And that's when Katya said, help me. I'm scared and it was feeble and suffering and it's a very powerful moment. And these girls have been saying the same thing, the mother. So the first time I'd ever reported on these so-called like men in dark suits show up and intimidate witnesses. Honestly, I've been hearing about those cases for so many times, but I've avoided them because it's got so much baggage from men in black. It just, it's just ridiculous. I just didn't even want to be associated with it. But I heard it. I can go on and tell them I'm blue in the face. I go talk tomorrow morning with the amount of cases with generals too. But this time when the mother said that these men showed up and tried to get the daughters to say they were lying and offered her a briefcase for $100 bills, they could relocate. I don't know. For some reason I said, okay, for the first time in 25 years, I'm going to report on these guys. And I did. And it's in the movie. You can hear the mother talking about it. And she's so emotional and the mother came back to the location where after happened, the smell, that stench, and the footpin on the ground. I mean, everybody talks about that stench that it was so. They said, if you have take like a skunk, multiply that by like $100,000, that would give you some indication of the level of like how putrid and nasty was paralyzing. And it stayed in. Like it stayed in the areas like the hospitals when they did the X-rays and everybody talks about it. That stench, I'm believable. It fills your naval cavities and doesn't leave for a week. It was incredible. And then they all said the same thing. And they couldn't get it out. They couldn't get it out. Yeah, they sanitized the hospital. The guy said that he had to close off that wing in the hospital when they were sanitizing it because it was so intense. You know, so I, how long did it last for? I heard days and weeks is what I heard from people. And even the mother said when she went to where the creature was, she said that the stench even there after the creature was gone. Got in her nasal cavities and she tried to flush it out with water and saline or whatever. And she couldn't get it out of her nasal cavities. Really crazy. But they all did. I mean, everybody talked about that stench. You know, I mean, the military officer, the guy that drove the creature around, I was sitting across from him. You can't see his face, but I did. And I'm looking in this guy in the eyes. I'm thinking, I could be looking at a guy that drove a fucking, you have no idea. Dude, you have no idea. How did he describe it? When I came back from that trip, people were like, how is your trip to Brazil? What was it like, man? They got great, you know, smoothies and coffee. I'm just like it. I think an alien's a spaceship crashed. And they recover live aliens. And we made contact and the Americans came in. I don't know what I'm thinking about. So I told a couple people, on the last trip I came back, I was just like, I was so rock. I couldn't reintegrate back into culture. It was Joe. I was just like, it's the biggest story ever. So people were asking me, even my neighbor who runs like the, he runs that Make-A-Wish Foundation. And he was like, James. He goes, bro, I like your lot. I got a lot of respect for you. But you lost me on this one. And I was like, I don't blame people, bro. I really don't. But listen to the witnesses. That's all I say. And I would tell people, and I realize I can't talk about it. All I can say is, just listen to the witnesses. Don't take it from me. But I'm looking at that guy in the eyes, Joe. And I've been at this for 30 years. I've made almost, we're going to my seventh film right now. I'm looking at this guy in the eyes, and I'm like, this guy probably. And it tripped me out so hard. And it ruined his life. He's to get this guy to go on camera, just like a week earlier. He was like, I don't care all the money in the world. I'm never coming forward. The risks are too high. How did it ruin his life? Because you're harboring this secret. You're being watched. You're being told not to ever talk about this. And you're looking over your shoulder all the time. And they call you. The military calls you periodically. They want to know where you are. And he's got this secret inside him that he can't tell the rest of the world. And he's thinking about all the different. Everyone's out there speculating as it reels. It's fake. It's real. It's fake. And this guy drove a body around. Just think about that for a second. Think about the doctor who took the X-rays of this thing. Marco Liao. Thank you, Marco. You're the man. Marco Liao found him eight years ago. And he was like, he confirmed the story. And he was still working in a regional hospital. He was on the never come forward. Marco kept going every year back and forth. And he retired in four years after he retired. He agreed to meet with us. He wasn't even sure he was going on. I said, look, man, we'll put you. We'll film you from the back. We'll disguise your voice. Show us photographs of him at the hospital. We know we've been trying to get at him. Excuse me. At the end of the interview, he's the thank you. I feel so much better. I've been soldering that burden for 26 years. And I've told so desperately wanted to tell somebody to share that story with the rest of the world. And you meet these people. And you think, why on earth? They didn't come to us. They're not trying to sell their story. We tracked them down and begged and pleaded with them to come forward. When I found Martha, the sister of the deceased military officer, Marco Chirizi, we were knocking on doors. I remember the sound guy from Rio de Janeiro. He was like, you're out of your mind. What are you doing? Can't just knock on random doors. I was like, man, if there's a will, there's a way I'm going to find this lady. And we found her. And it was like this kind of sketchy area. You know, it's like when you get out of your car and you could see people drawing the curtains back and looking at you and you're standing out, like, do I still like a sore thumb, man? And then we walked up. I had Marco with me. Thank God, we had camera crews and stuff. It's kind of sketchy. And Martha appears and her husband appears in this big, guy and he's got like a white beater shirt on. And he looks like he wants to rip my head off. And I'm like, and she's looking at me. And he's just looking at her going. Martha's looking at her husband and her husband's looking at Marco, like, give me the signal. I'll kill this guy. That's the fucking. And I was looking at Marco and I was like, James, you need to think quick on your feet right now. And I said immediately, please translate this. I'm here to give your brother justice. I'm here to get the story out. Please talk to me. And we developed a relationship with her slowly over that. And those are the first words that we exchanged. And we eventually got her to come forward. We talked, she'd gone forward in the past. But she doesn't know who the hell I am. I want to take you back to the doctor. OK. When you talk to the doctor, what did you describe? And he said that it was a normal day. January, 1996, regional hospital. So every day, and all of a sudden, all these military trucks and police cars showed up at the hospital. They come in, armed, and they got a bag. They got a thing in a black body bag. And he was like, hell's going on here. They're like, you're going to be taking some x-rays. And he's like, OK. And they had him inside and they had armed drugs. And I was asking him, like, what was it? Like, when I interview witnesses, I always want them. I always ask them to project. Like, I sometimes I'll even close my eyes because I'll use their words to recreate. So I'm like, living it through them. Do you know what I mean? So I'll close my eyes. And I'll recreate the scenes in my head with their words. It's harder in a Portuguese because I'm having to get it translated. But I ask questions like, what was the atmosphere like? Do they, are they talking? No talking. Super tense atmosphere. Very tense. Armed guards on the outside. Armed guards on the inside. Military truck's running. Nobody comes. Nobody goes. And he said, I first time in my history of my career, I took the x-rays and I couldn't even verify that they were good because it took them immediately. And then they said, this event never happened. He said, the stench and the hoe in the hospital was overwhelming. And he goes through the different x-rays that he took. The abdomen, the head, the arms, the legs, the thorax. And it was incredible. In fact, Uba de Jada Rodriguez, if you're listening to this, he's one of the leading researchers who's gone quiet. Packuccine disappeared for 20 years. So did he get to see images himself? Did he get to see the body themselves? Oh, he saw that. Well, they didn't open the body bag, but he was, he said the stench was just overwhelming. So they x-rayed it through the body bag. They x-rayed it through the body bag. So he never got to see. He did not see the alien. And he didn't get to see the x-ray images or anything. Nope. Now, there were two doctors. There was a guy named Roger Lear. Roger Lear found out, these are people that I really want to meet. I mean, people are coming forward in droves right now. We just got two forensic pathologists for the first time ever working together to come forward to make statements and they're providing documentation of the autopsy reports done on the deceased military officer. That's the first time ever these guys are coming forward and it's happening right now. Let's explain what happened. People haven't watched the documentary. Do you have deceased military officer? Yeah. So right after the three girls came within eight to ten feet of this creature or being or entity or ET, whatever you want to call it, about an hour later. When I was about three o'clock in the afternoon, I would say probably maybe around five o'clock. There were two military guys on patrol on the lookout for something unusual. What they were told, they didn't take a UFO had crashed. They were on the lookout for something highly unusual. And it was Eric Lopes at the wheel and Marco Shurizi military police in the passenger seat. They were about a block and a half to two blocks away from where the girls had seen the creature a couple of hours earlier. And this thing runs across the car in front of them. He had slammed his brakes on and without a moment's hesitation, Marco, Shuriz, jumps out of the car and grabs the thing with his bare hands. Yeah. He puts it in the back seat and they drive it to a clinic. And the doctor is like, what the hell is that? Get it out of here. I don't know what you know, leave. So they went to regional hospital. And then ultimately I went to humanitarian status hospital. And so we have tested money from military acts that when he drove it from, he might have tested hospital. It's in the movie, but he drove it from humanitarian status hospital to, as a military base, where it spent the night, the truck for one night. And then it went from there to esposex, campiness. It's like a university. It's what all the intellectual scientific heavyweights reside. And then it was there, I think, under examination, according to the witnesses that we talked to for a day or two. And that's when the Americans flew in to Campinas. And we have the radar military control officer who came forward last year, actually two years ago, when we were there filming for the last time. His name is Marco Fettis, F-E-R-E-S. And he came forward for the first time and said, yeah, in January of 1996, he was a plane-came-n-y, ooh-saff, he kept calling it. United States Air Force came in, it didn't have the authorization of the Brazilian government. He was like, this thing can't land. And some higher-up stepped under the room. This is all, this is his testimony. I'm just relaying it what he said. He said some higher-up came in the room and said, let it land. And it came in it landed at Campinas. And then from Campinas, two helicopters, according to him, flew to Vargina, Brazil, Vargina, back to Campinas. Then they loaded something on the airplane and then off to the United States. He said, hey, it's a place, it goes cold.