and we're live ladies and gentlemen, we're live sporting the latest round earth shill. We're just coming out with it. Round earth shill t-shirts. Both Jamie and I get $3 per month from the federal government to tell you that the world is round. And Mick West is a big part of it all. He is one of the main shills that tells everybody that he knows that he has a whole website dedicated to arguing against people to think the world is flat. Yeah, the differences that I get paid for anything. Come on, stop lying. I know you're getting $3.50 per month. Yeah, I wish I did. I did. I paid for my web hosting and it's coming in on my pocket and nobody pays me anything. See Mick West is serious. He's not joking around with us. This is the gotta be one of the most bizarre trends. And Jamie, I think you said it first that you thought it was originally a troll. You thought that they were fucking around like, I still think some people are. Yeah, for sure. It's yeah. But I feel like it started out with like four channels, something like that. Or maybe read it. These crazy kids, these wacky kids, they decided to start trolling saying that they're at this round or the earth is flat. That's some of it. But a lot of it is just people who, they actually believe it. Yes. There's a lot of people actually believe it. And then there's people who see that there's people out there who believe it. And then they start like kind of of egging these people on. Yes. And then it becomes really, really hard to tell whether dividing line is who's actually trolling and who's actually a genuine true believer. There are absolutely a lot of true believers, but there's also a lot of people with like little green frogs in their avatar that think it's fucking hilarious. Yeah. I think it's the kind of that type of person that's kind of adopted it. Yes. Yes. You're talking about a ship posting the yes. And that's just something that you could do is if you want to just annoy people by ship posting, you'll just post a bunch of flat earth memes because they're so infuriating to the average person that they're just going to be what the heck is this? Yeah. This person is posting. And you know, the ship poster enjoys that type of thing. I was watching a video with this guy was ranting on and on and that it's not theory that we need to stop accepting that the flat is a theory, but that it's a fact when you start accepting the fact that it's a fact, he was hilarious. Let me find his because I saved it. His, I think his name was like vegan warrior or something like that, which is always a yes, vegan warrior. He's a realist. It says it's no longer, he's not only a flat earth or he's a realist. Yeah. I think I've come across him. I didn't actually a relatively small number of people who are really active in promoting the flat earth stuff on YouTube. What's a doorable is that they keep claiming that all the photos of earth are fake, but they don't have a single photo of this fucking ice wall that's supposed to be around Antarctica. Yeah. And they keep saying erroneously that you're not allowed to fly over Antarctica. Like yes, you are. They keep saying that there's no photographs of earth from space that they're all composites. No, that's not true. Why do they keep saying that? They keep saying that. There's a fucking satellite is a bunch of satellites, but there's one from Japan that takes high resolution photos of the earth every 10 minutes, the full earth from 22,000 miles away. Yeah. That's the Japanese Himalwarya. Yes. But there's also like the US satellite that was just low in slash year, the go 16 satellite, which is basically at the same resolution, pull the sucker road up to your face. Yeah. And the Russians have a satellite. Everyone's got their own satellite because this is basically where they're satellites. Yeah. So they put them like over the equator, so they can see their own, their own country. So Russia has one. You can versus India. China has one. It's not as good as the other ones. But the Russian ones are like same resolution, 121 megapixels. That's the size of the image they do. It's like 11,000 pixels view of the earth. And you can zoom in and you can see cities. You can see contrails. And you can actually use these images from the satellites to actually match up with the views of clouds and contrails from the ground. So you can actually check to see if these images are actually correct, at least for where you are. Right. Then you could like find a friend somewhere else and ask them like, do you have this type of cloud overhead? So you can actually verify whether these images are actually real or not. Well, I brought it up to my friend Eddie and he said it's all fake. He said all the photos are fake. They look fake. I'm like, but how would you know what a real photo of earth from 23,000 miles looked like? Wouldn't it look exactly like earth? I think when you get to that stage of deep belief, you kind of have to believe that they're fake. There's no way. And there's a real challenge. Like how do you actually break through that to somebody? How can you actually convince them that something isn't fake if they just automatically issue them is fake? And I think has the person actually looked in detail at these images? Most people know. And how they looked at the fact that you get one every 10 minutes or one over 15 minutes and do every single image is there's 121 megapixel image. And the all matches up exactly with what the weather is around the world. And it matches up with all the other size images, one from the Russians, one from the Chinese, one from the Japanese. They all match up. And I really don't think that the people who say, ah, spake, I've really actually looked. No, you're absolutely right. They definitely haven't nor do they have any desire to. It's a belief issue and it's almost like a religious issue. It's a really fascinating. It's completely infected the world of professional pool players. Really? Professional pool players? Yeah. Professional pool players. There's a guy named CJ Wiley, he's a top pool player who's 100% convinced to Earth as flat. Wow. There's another guy named Max Everly, he's a buddy of mine out of his mind. Thanks to world's flat. I wonder if that's related to their like obsession with the table being flat. I don't think so. It has to make sure the table's level. But then they've got these little round balls on the table as well. That's confusing, right? Yeah. He got a little solar system going on with your pool balls. What's confusing is they're smart guys. Like you've talked to them. You'd be like this is a reasonable intelligent guy. Are they really believing that it's flat? 100% yeah. They're not shitposting. It's unusual. People they go down a YouTube rabbit hole and that's part of the problem is once you believe something, it's very difficult to unbelieve it. It is and there's so much out there. Yeah. If you tell people to do some research, what the end up doing is just looking at more crazy videos that confirm what they they believe that they prefer the ones that confirm it. Of course. But it's just amazing to me that people would decide that all of these photos were fake so that they don't believe the world is round. But yet they don't have a single photo of this fucking flat earth. Not one photo. Not only that, every planet you see is round. You can you could follow them. You could look at them with with if you have a reasonable telescope. You could see the difference as they change and spin. I mean you can tell that they're round. There's a lot of flood earthers have the same camera that I've got which is a Nikon P900. Flat earthers have an excellent camera. They have a broad one with me. They have like Nikon has a deal with the flat earth society. It's this this camera. It's just like it's not like a SLR or anything. It's just like a $600 camera. But it's got this really really long zoom lens on it. Like it's like a 2000 millimeter zoom lens. So you can see you can zoom in on the moon. You can zoom in on the stars and planets. Right. And you can use this camera. I've used it a few times to actually take pictures of Jupiter and of Venus. And you can actually just make out the roundness of the planet and the actual shadow of the sun. Like you see you'll see Venus as being like the moon being like an arc. And you'll see Jupiter and you see the bands of Jupiter. And you can do that with this camera. And this is a camera that a lot of them have because they're obsessed with zooming in on things that are on the horizon. Like ships going on the horizon. But if they just take the same camera that they have and pointed upwards, they will actually see things in the in the you see the solar system basically that really can't be explained any other way. Like one great thing is the moons of Jupiter. If you look at Jupiter really closely, even with some binoculars, you can see it's got these four little moons that are orbiting it. Then it looks like to just follow the lights in the line with Jupiter. And they actually move around in a regular pattern. And they've got all bits of like some of them are 80 hours or something. So they move around really fast. Like every day is a completely different pattern of these little dots around Jupiter. And you can actually see that with this camera, I've taken photos of it, posted them on the website, or even with binoculars. And if you actually watch it from day to day, you will see the moons of Jupiter move in exactly the same way that science predicts that they should move when you're using Kepler's laws of planetary motion and Newton's Newton's law of gravitation. They will, you know, they move exactly as if they are a little simulation of a planetary system. So either there's some kind of weird hologram up in that little corner of the sky, which moves around, or there is actually a planet there with little moons orbiting it. Probably hologram. What, what, when did you first become aware of this? Like you've run Metabunk for a long time. And for those who don't know, Mick and I met on the sci-fi show that I did, Joe Rogan questions everything where we, we discussed chemtrails or contrails and what causes a jet engine to make what looks like artificial clouds by passing through condensation, the heat of the engine produces these contrails and people were absolutely convinced that these are, that they're spraying the government to spraying something in the sky. And you, you caught it, you had a really good explanation for it. You said they're basically like to training wheels for conspiracy theories because it's, yeah, it's something you can see I think is kind of more enticing. Yes. And I think the same thing applies to the flatter. Now, you guess when I got into the flatter thing, it was, I became aware a few years ago. So, so, so the government is trying to up, is it your camera? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah man. Spang. Yeah. So, like, when I first heard about the flatter thing, obviously, I've heard it before, actually my father going back, when I was young, he told me that he was a member of the Flatter Society. Your father told you that was joking around. Kind of, but what he was doing in a kind of satirical way, ironically, he was doing it because like he was like saying people are too sure of themselves and so I'm going to join the flatter Society. He didn't believe the earth was around. So, it's been around for quite a while. The flatter Society. Yeah, the flatter theory has been around, obviously, like, thousands of years ago people thought the earth was around and then slightly few thousand years ago people figured out that it wasn't here. It was figured out by the ancient Greeks like 3000 years ago that it it wasn't. And by the, like, it wasn't around, it wasn't, it wasn't blatter. Oh, you fucked it up. You gave up the goose. You, you said thousands of years ago that people thought the earth was around and they realized it wasn't. Yeah. You just, right now, you gave them fuel. That's a quote that's going to go on the YouTube. Fuck, fuck, fuck, fuck. I am a shield quote from the last one. Yeah, strike that one. A slight misquote. Yeah. So, so, yeah, what happened was science basically figured out the shape of the universe. And, you know, in the 1800s there was like, gentleman scientist doing all sorts of kinds of cool things with stars, like measuring the orbit and checking out how far away things were and discovering that there were galaxies and things like that. You know, there's all the science going on. But then there was this kind of, this guy comes along called Samuel Robotham who published under the name of Parallax in about 1860. And he started publishing what is basically the same as Eric De Bez book that's been published now. Pretty much every single thing that is in Eric De Bez current book you will find in Samuel Robotham's book from 1860. And in fact, if you read De Bez book, which I don't recommend, you will see that about 80% of the text of Eric De Bez book is actually quotes from these books from the 1800s. It's not actually this new stuff that he's discovered. It's all stuff like, you know, if somebody walks away from you, you will see their feet disappear first. And then he has a two page quote of Samuel Robotham saying the exact same thing from the 1860s. So, it's basically recycling this theory that started in the 1860s and then just adding a few little sprinkles to it like, you know, saying that astronaut must be fake and the space station is fake. Does that sound a laser fake as well? Yeah. But De Bez, he's hilarious. He thinks that dinosaurs are fake, nuclear bombs are fake. I mean, the idea that one person would be this mastermind that discovers all these monumental frauds. Yeah. And well, I don't think he's claiming to have discovered these things. There's lots of people who think that Newcophake and the dinosaurs being fake is an obvious thing for creationists and people of that, that they look. Yeah, he's basically recycling theories in a way that is popular to the reader and figuring out how to get them across to people. So he writes, he does these YouTube videos that are very engaging. And they sound good. And then this sounds, if you don't know what's what, they sound like, they make sense. That's the problem. And some of them are quite technical, like at least they use a lot of technical terms. But they delve into things like, there's a variety of experiments that the Michaelson Mollie experiment that Eddie mentioned is one of them that keeps cropping up and then there's the which has never been reproduced. That's the experiment that supposedly actually has been reproduced because it's a well, the wrong way. Not the way that they wanted to. The Michaelson Mollie experiment was an experiment to detect the luminiferous ether, which is the supposed medium through which light travels. Now back in the 1800s, we didn't know that light was made about a photon because light was was wave. So we thought that there was this stuff that permeated all space called the luminous luminiferous ether, luminiferous ether, sort of hard to pronounce. And that this is what light travel through as waves going through and like, didn't know exactly how he worked, but the figure there must be this stuff that permeates all of space. And then the figure that since the Earth was moving and the scientists actually knew at the time that the Earth was moving. So they were using this as a basis for the Earth experiment. They thought that if the Earth is moving, then they will be able to detect the ether by doing this experiment. So what they did, they said it was experiment where they shot light one direction and then the other direction. Then when it came back together, it combined and if they were moving through the ether or if the ether was moving through them, then the light that went one way would interfere with the light that went the other way. So that was the whole experiment was just this thing. They shot these two light beams in two directions. And the figure like, you know, if we turn the table this way, it will change because we're now going through the ether in a different direction. But what happened was nothing was detected, which was kind of the start of people realizing, oh, there is no luminiferous ether. Right, but they used that to say that it's because the Earth isn't moving. That was what the flatter of people tried to use. They did, they did, but Michaelson and Molly, knew the Earth was moving. Right. They wanted to figure out whether the ether was moving with the Earth or whether the Earth was moving through the ether. Right. So they were trying to detect the ether. So people who thought that the Earth was the center of the universe, not really so much flatter of Earth, people who were geocentrists, people who thought that the sun went around the Earth and the whole all the stars went around the Earth. There's still people like that, by the way. Oh, yeah. Yeah. The recent resurgence, some thing was Gavin McGinnis sent me something where some guy thinks the Earth is a center of the universe. Essentially, he was saying that it sort of confirms everything in Genesis. I was like, what? Yeah. Well, I mean, if you need to shoot on the whole universe into, you know, the descriptions in Genesis, then you're probably going to have to take a few shortcuts. But yeah, there's these experiments like the Michaelson Molly experiment. But people bring them up and they say that what they detected was no motion. Right. But what it actually detected was no luminiferous ether. Right. And because they detect no luminous luminiferous ether, they eventually led to like, theories about what light actually is, which is a wave particle duality, you know, the light is photons, which act both as a wave and as a particle and eventually to the theory of relativity. Well, you started Metabunk when? When did you? I think it was about five years ago, but I've been doing the chemtrail stuff with control science for like over 10 years now. I was just looking at one of my old posts when satellite images. I was quite surprised at how long I've been doing it. And yeah, and Metabunk being going about five years. And the flat Earth stuff came up maybe two years ago. I started to decide to see things about flat Earth. And a bit over a year ago, I wrote a post on, you know, what should we do about debunking the flat Earth? And basically said, like, all these people are basically either trolling or they're crazy. So there's no point addressing either of them. And I think most of them are just trolling because no one could seriously believe this. You have to be like, I don't think you're right. I know. I've come to realize that I'm not. I was wrong. And that post now, you know, it's gone down the line. But it's, it's, you know, I've almost done a like a 180 from that. It's stunning. It really is stunning. And it's stunning how many people like this is why Jamie made these young Jamie dot com. You can go and get these flat Earth shill shirts that somehow another we're being paid to say that the Earth is round. Like the idea that anybody would actually believe that I've had so many people tweet at me, I know where your checks are coming from. Bro, you're fucking sell out. I may sell out. Like, why would I do? Do you don't think that if I really thought the Earth was flat, like if someone thought the Earth was flat, what a revelation that would be. What an amazing discovery. P every scientist would be clamoring to expose this every single scientist. The idea that all these scientists who make their name off discoveries, by the way, especially a monumental and provable discovery like the world being flat, like somehow another they would hide that. And then the big question is why would the government say the world's flat? I mean, why would they in any way, why would they rather hide the fact the world is flat? Like what motivation would anybody have to show that the world was round? It'd been pretty fascinating if we lived on this flat disc and everybody else throughout the universe was on a planet. We'd be like, whoa, what's going on? And there's a weird thing that's going on with some of these flat earth people where they're linking to a sign that we are in some way special. We are the chosen ones and that we're, you know, and some it keeps going back to Genesis and that, you know, that we are the children of God and that creation is true and that evolution is a lie. And it gets to some weird anti-juice stuff with a lot of these guys. A lot of conspiracy theories basically boil down to some kind of suspicion of other people and quite often suspicion of Jewish people. Why Jewish people? Why is always the Jews? People can't catch a break. I don't know exactly why. I think perhaps, you know, perhaps because of the whole, the Jews killed Jesus, so Christians don't lie to Jews or some Christians don't like the Jews. So they've just been viewed as being in other. And they're often the other Jewish, the broader Jewish population is often like a minority within cities. So it's going to an easy person to pick on when things go wrong. But I don't know. I'm sure there's loads of books written on why Jews are the subject of conspiracy theories. There doesn't do Bay have a recent video about Jews and about Hitler. They all go down that road. What can be done if anything, other than your website? What can be done if anything to like my concern is these young kids that are on the fence? My thoughts are, look, I'm not going to reach out. There's some 45-year-old crazy person who's making YouTube videos three times a day about the world being flat and ranting and raving and challenging everyone to debate that he's never going to engage in. Those guys don't mean anything to me. You can't do anything about them. But there's some 16-year-old kids out there that maybe are in high school and maybe don't have a real formal education in science or astrophysics and they're getting confused and they maybe smoke a little too much that's you. I've been tricked before. I wrote this big Instagram post recently about rods. How about those Roswell rods? God, they got me. I was convinced. I was convinced. I never looked into it. I just watched a documentary and this guy had the footage. I was like, wow, these things are flying around. We can't see him. That's crazy. Then a show called if you never saw the Instagram post that I made, there was a guy that made this video, a documentary. I think he made more than one. It showed that there was these things that looked like tubes that had jellyfish-like wings that were flying through the air. Supposedly, it speeds undetectable to the human eye. They were moving so fast we couldn't see them. I was convinced, man. There was a show called Monster Quest and what they did is they set up two cameras. One camera which was a very fast high-speed camera and the other one which is a standard video camera. The standard video camera caught all these rods flying around. Then the exact same images right next to each other with this high-definition high-speed camera showed actual bugs. What those rods were was just a video artifact of these bugs that were moving so close to the screen and so fast that the camera couldn't register correctly and so it created this elongating effect and made it look like they were these jellyfish. Yeah. I think that type of thing, that type of video is the type of thing that needs to be done to counteract this type of... But I don't think it would work though because people aren't looking at the Himawari 8 if they see those images. I put those images up. Dude, if you look at at my Instagram post, it's filled with people angry at me because they think it's fake. They think it's fake. I'm a shill because I put that up. If you can't get people to look at things, that's a challenge. How do you get people to look at things? I think if you start slowly, I engage with a lot of conspiracy theorists online. I know when I'm doing it, I'm not actually going to reach the vast majority of the people I'm talking directly to, but I know there's lots of other people reading what I'm saying who will. Just because people are complaining about your posts of the Himawari 8 images doesn't mean that there aren't people who actually went to look it up. Oh, I'm sure because I think it got like 50,000 likes or something like that. So I'm sure even beside people who didn't like it, many people they were like, oh really? Because because that was one of the big things that the flat earth people kept saying, that there's no photos of the earth that aren't a composite from space. It's just not true. And this rod's video that you saw with the two cameras. If that hadn't existed, you might have taken a bit longer to, I mean, you might still believe it now. You might be telling your friends about it. Have you checked seeing these crazy rods that are everywhere? The guy who made that video showed up at a Q&A that I did once for the UFC. I do these Q&As where people yell out questions like, what do you think about this guy if I'd knock a guy and that kind of thing? And he waited in line to get the front of the line to tell me that I was wrong or that the rods are really like dude. Like, come on, you're still buying it? You're still selling it. They call them Roswell rods, which is hilarious. They're implying that somehow another alien. Yeah, I got the probably some guy was at Roswell taking pictures trying to get UFOs and some bugs flew by. It wasn't even Roswell. That's what's funny. They call Roswell rod the best footage was from Mexico. The best footage was from a bunch of cave jumpers. You know, they have that one really enormous cave, but it's a whole, essentially a gigantic pit and people skydive into it. Have you ever seen that? Yeah, I've seen things like that. It's pretty wild. It's pretty wild. But they filmed, they set up a camera to watch them jump off the edge and parachute down and you see the rods flying by. That was like the best footage was from Mexico from this one place. So they had nothing to do with Roswell. They just called them Roswell rods because they're dorks. They probably had to, yeah, they were probably looking down at the darkness of the pit below and then they had a the shaft of sunlight in front of that. So the bugs are flying through the sunlight with a dark background, which is something you don't normally see. So it would have been like an unusually good environment for rods to show up in. Exactly. Exactly. And it's in that guy, I mean waiting in line to get to the front of the line to ask me a question and tell me that, you know, he has the evidence. I need to see it. It's that kind of thinking. It's once someone commits to an idea. It's very difficult to shake them off of it and they just look for confirmation bias. They just look for someone else to agree with them. They find communities. They find these flat earth communities, which is hilarious. The flat one of the best, one of the best fucking unintentional hilarious things I read online. This dude wrote the flat earth society has members all around the globe. Whoops. Did he even realize what he was saying? Or is that just him fucking trolling? I hope it's him trolling. Yeah. Yeah. The community thing I think is like a key thing. Yes. I just I recently did a debunk of a UFO that the Chilean Navy supposedly saw. What was that? I'm not aware of that one. It was it was like this, this thing, there was a Chilean Navy helicopter had this infrared camera and they saw this black two black dots off in the distance that looked like a weird thing like like a figure eight type thing flying away and then it started like spraying out this stuff and they couldn't figure what it was and they chased after it but it was too fast and you got away from them. And the Chilean government has an official UFO investigation team and they set them on it and they spent two years figuring out what it was and they couldn't figure out what it was and they said it's a confirmed unidentified object and then they published their findings and then I and some other people on Medibunk looked at it and we figured out it was actually just a plane flying away from the helicopter leaving some contrails behind and we actually figured out exactly which plane it was. And so this got a bit of play online and there was on like cupping them posts and things like that and some UFO enthusiasts started talking to me and I joined their groups and I joined a few other groups and then I found myself in this kind of weird corner of the internet where everybody believes in UFOs unquestioningly and they're always putting up these photographs of things and people are like oh great captured dude and it's just something like street light or something. They think they have this confirmation bias this group confirmation bias where they can't disagree with someone and they know they're in a safe space so they can put out whatever theory that they like and they know that people will be like they're just very supportive of them. Yeah. One that happened a couple of days ago some woman put up a picture of a strange light that she said was in the sky and so I downloaded the picture and I boosted the brightness and I saw it was actually a reflection of something in a security light on a porch and you could see it it was like there was trees behind it and it was a security light on this reflection so I posted that and then I started getting called like a shill for pointing this out. Yeah. There's a couple of people who are like oh yeah it's just this light but other people were like why don't you believe me why are you like invalidating like you know my claims and so they want to have these kind of walled gardens where everybody believes the same thing. That's a good way to put the walled gardens. It really is a good way to put it because that is what those community seems like and that's one of the things that I found when I did that television show. I still harbored a few conspiracy theories before I did that show but doing that show for several months and constantly interviewing people who believed in outlandish things I found the same thing over and over and over again. Eological people with very little evidence believing things in almost a religious way and I found it with Bigfoot and I found it with UFOs and I found it with chemtrails and I found it with it was just one after the other in varying stages of ridiculousness. I feel like contrails and chemtrails were the most nutty people UFO people seem to be the most reasonable because it's the most reasonable theory. At all of them the idea that we have spaceships why doesn't someone else have spaceships? There's hundreds of billions of galaxies in the known universe hundreds of billions of planets in each galaxy the odds of there being some sort of a life form out there it's pretty high but there's nothing that's the craziest thing like the more I went into the more I talked to these people the more I went over all their evidence air quotes evidence the more I asked them why they believe things there is nothing there's not a goddamn thing that you could put on a scale. The more I went over all their evidence, air quotes evidence, the more I asked them why they believe things. There is nothing. There's not a goddamn thing that you can put on a scale. There's nothing that you can measure. There's nothing that you can look at a photo and go, wow, that's compelling. There's not one. There's just an idea. And the idea is that there's something in the sky that flies around that we either might catch. If you're there, the right place, the right time or not, and that they're from another planet. Yeah, if you look at what they put forward as the best evidence, it's often like, nothing cases from the 60s where there's an eyewitness who said something like there was some guy on a road who says he blacked out and he's like, you know, he's car got messed up. It's always that. From the 60s. Well, that's the other thing that I know too much about psychedelic drugs. And I know about endogenous psychedelic drugs. The brain producing this chemical called dimethyl-tryptamine that happens when you're sleeping. Now, they've proven that this stuff is produced in the liver and in the lungs. And they believe it's now they've got evidence that it's produced in the pineal gland. It's a very potent psychedelic drug that your brain produces and your brain produces it during REM sleep. So these people, they all take naps. And during these naps, they have these crazy fucking dreams. And it's entirely possible that during these dreams, what happened is they got some endogenous DMT dump. Whether they were under stress or whether they just add just a erratic dump of this human neurochemical that entered into their bloodstream, whatever it is, they caused it. All these fucking UFO abductions, all of them, like almost exactly happen at night. And they happen why these people are sleeping. Like wouldn't you just assume that you were dreaming? Why wouldn't you assume you were dreaming? Yeah, I have these, I used to have these kind of night terra hallucination things which were kind of like that. And it was always the same type of thing. It was like a giant spider coming down from the ceiling towards me. And it couldn't move. I was like frozen for a second. And then I would jump out of bed and turn on the light and look for the spider. But it's happened all the time. And I knew, because there was no spider that it wasn't real. But I could see if someone was having a different type of hallucination that seemed a bit more real. And then it came in between sleep cycles for them, then tell it. It seemed completely real. I used to have them all the time. And it was always horrible. It was this giant, really realistic spider. And it wasn't like I was dreaming somewhere else. I was in the room and I could see it. Like I was seeing something crawling across the table right here. It was a hallucination. I don't really get them anymore. I don't know what it was. Yeah, my brain speaks to itself or whatever. But well, it's probably a lot how it's doing young and confused and hormones and nerves. And then also like your brain starts filling in the blanks feeling a very good understanding of the universe. You know, your brain, your imagination runs wild. It was very confusing to me doing that television show. And it really changed me a lot. And it changed me to the point that people started accusing me of being co-opted by the government. That the government threatened my family and told me to stop talking about conspiracies. Like, and then the idea that I wouldn't say that if that was the case. Like, you don't think I would fucking tell everybody if someone threatened my family because I was talking about UFOs. I'd be telling everybody. I'd be like, hey man, I would tell all my friends. I'd be like, dude, they fucking threatened me. Because I was talking about UFOs. This shit is real. Hang on 18. Harry, 51. I think it was a paper a while ago published on like how many people it would take to cover up certain conspiracy theories. And the probability of none of those people ever talking. Yeah. And it's just ridiculous. Like, you can't have tens of millions of people in on a conspiracy. Well, the flat earth one is the best one for that. Yeah. I mean, that's what about all the science. All the science. Every single scientist. Yeah. And everyone who is involved in shipping routes and overseas flights. And the fact that you can fly west and land east. I mean, you can. You can just land in one spot, take off again, land in the other spot. And you could eventually get to the same spot that you're at with a bunch of different flights that you can track them on a GPS. That's fake too, GPS. Everything is everything's fake. Yeah. Well, one thing I want to try to introduce to people who believe in the flat earth is this concept of ground truth. Now, ground truth is a concept in satellite observations, which I kind of touched on before. Like, you take a satellite observation and you see, does it match what you see on the ground? Or if you've got something like a weather prediction model, like you're predicting the weather, you see does that match what you see on the ground? And this is something that you can do if you're actually really interested for looking into the flat earth theory is figure out what the actual ground truth is for something. Now, I want to talk very briefly about a program called Stellarium, which you might have seen is just basically a solar system simulator. It shows what's in the night sky. You've probably seen this little things on your phone where you hold it up and it shows you what the stars are. Yeah. Yeah. It's well like that for the PC. And you can use the one on your phone as well. So what I would encourage people to do is figure out, like, is this program actually correct? It actually showing me what we see in the night sky. And you can do it really easily. Basically, you just look at what's on the screen and then you go outside and you look to see is this what I'm seeing on the screen here. So this is basically you checking the ground truth of this program, which seems like, you know, very straightforward thing. But then what you can do from that is you can then use the program to look at the sky from other positions. Because you've verified that it's correct for where you are and you can ask someone else to verify it's correct for where they are. And you can check like other photographs that have been taken to see if they match up as well. You'll eventually build up, you know, the knowledge that this program is correct, this Stellarium program. All the little program you have in your phone that shows you the stars in the sky. So you've got this computer showing you what it expects to see from any position anywhere on the world. And you, by doing ground truth observations, have figured out what it actually is here. So that's the type of thing you see in Stellarium, obviously in a much less light polluted environment than you have here. Do you think that a lot of what's going on with these people that are theorizing, keep that up, it's pretty cool. Look at with a lot of what's going on with these people theorizing about Flat Earth. There seems to be some desire that people have to expose hidden truths, hidden discoveries or things that are somehow or another being kept from everybody. And what's fascinating to me is they're looking into this nonsense. They're looking into this thing that's not real. And when the real space, like what is observable about space, is so mind blowing. And somehow or another, that is what you absolutely can see every day when you absolutely can observe what you absolutely can read about and learn about. And what scientists are discovering on a daily basis is so mind blowing. When you see like, they don't believe satellites are real. When any satellites we actually have, that's what's really fucked. It's not that there's no satellite. There's too many satellites. There's way too many. Like, I stopped bashing into each other and then, well, I've never seen a light. There's thousands of them up there and they have the time like space flights. They have the time space lights based on whether or not they're going to hit these satellites or space junk or some of the stuff that's been ejected from various rocket trips. I mean, it's still floating up there. You see the movie Gravity? Yes. And so it's like, yeah, been in that where the satellite starts bumping into each other. And it's this big chain reaction. Eventually all the satellites get knocked out. Did you see that Japanese expedition that they tried to do? They tried to capture space junk. Yeah. Yeah, I don't know how well it worked. They were like, had a big tether that they were dragging behind it. Yeah, they were trying to catch a bunch of space junk with a net, right? Yeah. Somehow or another. Yeah, it's amazing. Yeah. This stuff is way more interesting than that. It's the real stuff. The first Earth idea is so it's last this tiny little thing. All the Earth is flat and we're stuck in this weird prison where people are keeping us here. Yeah. Yeah, that's the thing too. That somehow or another by being on a flat planet, it gives you a different perspective. They don't want you to have that perspective. So they tie the world's round. Like, it doesn't make any sense. Yeah, one thing I've heard is that they think that if they can convince you that the world is flat when it isn't, then it's kind of like in 1984 where they get people to believe that 2 plus 2 equals 5. And they're actually indoctrinate people to genuinely believe that even though they know it's not true, but they still believe it. And it's a way of mind control. So the same thing would happen with the flat Earth, but on the far ground of scale, you're not just convincing someone that 2 plus 2 equals 5 and war equals piece, etc. etc. You're convincing them that the Earth is flat when it's actually round. So by twisting their minds around something that's demonstrably false, I'm making them think that it's correct, then you're gaining power over their minds in the same way that they did in 1984. Right. Well, in the same way the Scientologists do or Mormons do or anybody that creates some sort of an ideology that's provably false. I mean, look, there's not a whole lot of difference between Scientology and Flat Earth theory. I mean, there really isn't. I mean, if you really read Elron Hubbard's work, if you read what his actual theories were about the origins of mankind, it's pretty fucking loony. And yet there's thousands and thousands of members of Scientology at the point where they're making documentaries about it and writing books about it. And these people are coming out and they've escaped the church and these harrowing stories. I mean, I had this guy in my podcast a couple weeks ago, Brian Miskidditch, David Miskamaj's dad was like, what in the fuck? This guy's been wasted his life. The guy lived in the Scientology world for 50 years. It's crazy. It's crazy. It is. It is. It is. It's not much difference between that and Flat Earth theory. It really isn't. You know, Scientology works, but it's like gradually sucks you in a bit at a time. It just sounds all very reasonable at the start. It's very self-helpy in the beginning. It's very self-helpy in the beginning. It's more and more felt like the further you get into it. Well, also the first original principles of it, like when you start thinking positive and doing positive things, there's a lot of benefits to that. People start seeing those benefits. They start feeling positive and then they get into the thetons and the frozen souls chucked into the volcano and they're like, what? Well, I think you could argue that there's some good in the Flat Earth, not the Flat Earth theory as such, but the Flat Earth way of thinking, like questioning things. And I think this is something that people really like about it, is that you don't believe scientists just because scientists say something. It's this thing called the zetetic method, which basically is a Greek word meaning questioning. So you've got a question everything. You can't believe that gravity exists or the planets go around the scientific of scientists. Do it. You actually have to observe it for yourself. And if you can't observe it for yourself, then it isn't real. Which leads people to think the Earth is flat because it kind of appears flat from various positions. And they haven't been into space or they haven't done the various experiments that showed it's not flat. So I think you've got young people who are exposed to the idea of zeticism, and they think, oh, that's great. I'm rebelling against authority like young people do. And they think, like, I will not believe, I will not believe the scientists. I will do my own research. But then they get sucked into people like Debay, who feed them all this nonsense. It's very articulate, very smooth way talks, and he makes his well-edited videos, and they're very compelling. And because he's not an authority, he's not part of the government, he's perhaps of the alt culture. They tend to give his arguments way more weight than mainstream science. Yeah. And then they'll find out something like that New York Times article that was out a couple months back, where it showed that scientists from the 1950s were paid off by sugar companies to switch the blame to saturated fat. And they started attributing all these health problems that were really about sugar and about eating processed sugar. Sort of attribute them to saturated fat. And it changed a lot of people's diets and really fucked a lot of people up in terms of, like, people started to get margarine and all these things that are filled with trans fats and very unhealthy for you. And they did it because they thought that they were, you know, following science. And so questioning science and questioning scientists, you know, occasionally you're right. Occasionally you'll find something like this, this conspiracy by the sugar industry. Yeah, they're all saying like trust yet, verify. Yes. You know, a Reagan popularized that with the salt talks and it was. Yeah, that's a very good statement. Trust yet, trust you. Yeah, trust you verify. And yeah, that's if you want to trust Eric to be, that's fine, but like check, check the things that he says. Yeah. I checked one of his things on the way here on the plane. He has a thing that a lot of them say, which is that the horizon always rises to high level. So on the plane on the way here, I checked to see if this was actually correct. Now, most people when they check to see if the horizon rises to high level, they just look out the window. And they say, oh yeah, there's the horizon over there. It's a high level. But on a round earth, the horizon is actually going down a little bit when you look at the window of a plane because you're 30,000 feet up in the area. It actually drops around two or three degrees. But it's very hard to see when you're looking out of the window of the plane. So it's very easy to get taken into believing that it stays at high level. So what I did is I took this a little carpenter's level. You brought a carpenter's level. Very small one. It's only like eight inches long as an a tape, a small tube to the top, which is like a bit of a pen. And then I set it level and wedged it so it was level. And then I looked through the tube on the top of this level and saw where the horizon was. And the horizon was just below the end of the level. So the horizon had actually dropped away, which meant the debates claim about the horizon rising to high level, which is something you'd expect on the flight of. It was actually incorrect. And it's demonstrably incorrect with this $2 level, which actually got free from somewhere. And anyone can do this. You don't even need to be in a plane. In fact, it works better if you just like on a cliff or something like a thousand feet up. Well, that's another claim that people keep saying that are devotees of this flat earth idea that if you get on a plane and you look up and you look out the window, it looks flat. But I do not think that people understand perspective and they do not understand how huge the earth is. When you see, there's images, someone did an image that showed how far you are up when you're 30,000 feet in the air. And then how, like, huge the earth actually is. And you get this little image of a plane at 30,000 feet. And then the dot of the plane is represented in the amount of distance between the earth is in perspective. And then you see how enormous the planet is. And it's just, you're dealing with something that's so big. It's almost, I mean, it feels like it's flat. It feels like it's flat because it's enormous in your tiny. Yeah, that's a huge issue with people is that they don't really understand the scale of the planet. And they don't understand how little it actually curves. Yeah. There's a road. If you look up like the longest roads in America, longest straight road in America, there's this road is in like Oklahoma or somewhere. And it's about 80 miles long and it's just perfectly straight. It actually isn't perfectly straight because when they laid it out, they laid it out a long, a line of latitude. So it's one of the lines that goes around around the earth. So it's actually slightly curved. But when you look at it, it looks perfectly straight. You have to actually, like, take the whole image and then draw a line from one end to the other in Google Earth and you see that it deviates by just this tiny little amount. But it's used to drive along this road. You're actually driving around. You're actually turning right slightly the whole time. But it looks perfectly straight because it's hardly moving at all. Over this 80 miles, it moves maybe like 10 feet or something. And people just don't don't realize just how small the curve of the earth actually is. It looks flat. And again, I think a real big problem with this theory and with a lot of these theories, a lot of these really outlandish conspiracy theories is once they hook you, it's very difficult to unhook yourself. You don't want to believe that you've got taken. You don't want to believe you've been had. You don't want to believe you've been fooled. So you keep going deeper and deeper down the rabbit hole. And you keep finding more and more confirmation bias, more people inside that walled garden as you put it. Yeah, and some people actually go out and do scientific experiments. And they try reasonably hard, some of them. But then they make some kind of mistake. And then they say this is actually proof that the earth is flat. The level experiment that I did, someone did something similar with that. They said they used like a water level where you have two tubes connected. And used the level of the water cause the water is the level of the same on both of them. And then they held this up and see if it was below the horizon. But they did this experiment and they did it at sea level, which meant it's always going to be exactly the same as the horizon. You've actually got to go up a thousand feet before you can see anything. But they're still, even though they thought that they were doing some science. But they make this one key mistake. And then they weren't listened to anybody trying to tell them what the mistake actually was. People are a ridiculous amount of people doing flat earth experiments on YouTube and just getting it completely wrong. I think the most common one is people taking photographs or something that they think shouldn't be visible from a certain position. They'll say, here's Catalina, Ireland, and it's 60 miles away. And according to the curvature of the earth, that means it should be below 5 miles of curve. And so it shouldn't be visible. And then there's all these mistakes that they make. Some of them are like they do the math wrong. Some of them like they don't account for the fact that you've got a factor in how high the viewer is. Some of them will just get entirely the wrong island. They'll say, oh, this is this island, which is just like 100 miles away. They're like looking at something that's 40 miles away. Well, how can you look out? I mean, here's a simple one. How can you look out across the ocean? You don't see anything on the other side. Yeah. What's over there? Well, so far away that you can't see it. They've got it out there. They've got it out there because you wouldn't get a seeing thing away because of the atmosphere itself that you can get a see through it. You have to get further away the fainter of fainted islands that are living in the atmosphere. They do. And the user has a lot to make up for reasons for certain things like things going below the horizon. That's where it gets weird, right? Is that people use some science to try to debunk science? Or things that they claim a science like the law of perspective. Yeah. The law of perspective isn't exist. There's no law of perspective. And if you were to make a law of perspective, you could say that the size of something decreases in virtually proportional to its distance. So if it gets twice as far away, it's half the size. If it gets four times as far away, it's a quarter of the size. And that's it. Yeah. And that's all the perspective is. Now, you can talk about vanishing points. Well, that came up during the podcast with Eddie Bravo. Yeah. And Jamie brought it up and then Eddie started posting pictures on his Instagram of a guy from the early 1900s who was an artist who wrote something about the law of perspective in drawing. Just drawing. He was just explaining how you how you define perspective when you're illustrating things. That's that's the law of perspective on a piece of paper. Or on a photograph. It's nothing at all to do with the real world. It's about what you can see visually what the image is projected onto your eyes. Or what comes through a camera when you take a picture. You know, what's the actual perspective of things. I think things just get smaller. But it sounds good when you say the law of perspective. It sounds good. Like you're invoking a law. Scientific law. But then they will discover a real law like the the Laura Universal Gravitation. Yeah. I just again. The whole situation. I don't have anything against Eric Dupe or any of these people. I really don't. My real concern is with young people out there that are listening to this that get sucked into this stupid shit. And there's so much that you could learn. There's so much that's fascinating about the universe. There's so much fascinating about the natural world. There's so much to learn. And to waste any time. The only thing that's good about it is you'll recognize that pitfalls that the human mind can slip into. That I've slipped into that many people I know have slipped into. And again, it's not like in any way, shape or form. It's not something to be embarrassed about or sad about. It's just it's a normal natural human inclination to try to find things that are hidden true. or, you know, that are covered up mysteries. It's natural for whatever reason. I think it's very much a part of growing up. And I think it's just it's different for different people. Yeah. I had a whole bunch of crazy ideas when I was growing up. Would you have? I thought I could bring about world peace by getting a whole bunch of world leaders together. And I actually sent letters to a bunch of world leaders. And I figured like I shouldn't send it directly to the world leaders because they'd be. It'll be a bit. Yeah. We wouldn't read my letters. So I sent a letter to Raoul Castro, who is now the president of Cuba. Wow. But back then I thought that I can set up this organization of the relatives of world leaders and bring about world peace. Now I was like 13 at a time. It's fun to either side to get a hold of their brothers. That's kind of hilarious. Yeah. Well, I figured like yeah, sneaky back door moves. Yeah. And I found this address in who's who in the library. I had it back in the day. Back in the day when you look things up in the library. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's not even that unreasonable. That's like you thinking, well, world peace seems to make sense to me. It's idealistic child. Yeah. And you know, you want to try to do something. You think you can make a difference. Yeah. And they see you can have rebelling against things. Yeah. I had delusions of solving great mathematical problems when I was young. There's like, yeah, problems like how do you try sex and angle with, uh, by this, this geometrical method, which was proved to be impossible to do. And yet I still spent months and months trying to do it when I was a kid, because I thought, like, I, they can't tell me what's impossible and what's not possible. Right. Seems like it's possible to me. And if you did discover it would have gigantic, it would have been feather in your cap. That would have been. That was the motivation really. Yeah. It wasn't just like your altruism. I wanted to. I believed in a bunch of stupid shit. And the big one for me that I've clung too long is as big for it. That one, that one, man. Oh, it's so hard for me to let that one go. Because, well, first of all, because it used to be an animal. It used to be gigantic pithicus. But man, when my friend, Les Drowd, actually started doing that show, that big foot show, have you ever seen that show? I don't think so. I did that show with some fucking guy who's just a total hoaxer. And the guy put on a big foot mask and they got this high resolution photo and video of this big foot mask that they're claiming is big foot to stare at them through the woods. It is so stupid looking. See if you can find a jammy. And this guy, this is how wacky this guy is. The big foot community thinks he's full of shit. That's when you know you fucked up. When the big foot community is calling shenanigans, they're like, this guy, I'm not buying this. It's funny, you get these like schisms in these communities. And they fracture off into subcommunities. Yeah. You know, the Scientologists, they're people who have been practicing it off from the Scientologists. Watch this. This is awesome. See, these guys in the woods and he sees it. He sees it. He sees it with the trees. What is it? Where is it? And he can't. He's not even moving. Meanwhile, big foot has just been running for people from day one, right? But there's one animal that's just standing there and he's like, I think I see it. So then towards the end of the video, he gets really close. Look at that. He hit the fuck out of here. He's got like an afro from the 1970s. Look how clean its hair looks. I mean, it looks so dumb. No, he gets close up on it. Look at that. Doesn't it wink or something? Yeah, right. Here it is. Look how bad this is. Look how bad this is. Here's that. Here's how you know it's fake. Whenever something looks like a dude in a monkey suit, it's a dude in a monkey suit. That's all you need to know. Because your brain knows. Your brain's like, hey, wait a minute. Like if you look at a gorilla, a gorilla doesn't look like a person in a gorilla suit. If you look at a giraffe, it does not look like a person in a giraffe suit. You look at Bigfoot and it looks like a dude in a monkey suit. It's a fucking dude in a monkey suit. Like your brain starts filling in the blanks. And also, whether you recognize it or not, your brain recognizes geometry. Facial geometry recognizes a Fibonacci sequence. And you see, that's why people freak out when you see someone fake lips or fake nose. Upside down there. When people do weird shit to their face, like when someone gets plastic surgery in their face, and they radically alter their face, it's jarring to us. And one of the reasons why it's jarring is because the brain recognizes geometry in human facial recognition, facial patterns, and the structure of the face. And when that geometry is off, it's confusing to us. Like why are there cheeks so big? Why is that no so small? Why are there lips so big? Like what the fuck is going on? Like your body starts reacting. Yeah, there's an illusion where they put two sets of eyes on people. And you look at that. And your brain just is constantly resetting. And you think, oh, my eyes across the way, you're in another knot. And you brain is just so hard why it's a recognized face. Yes. Just automatically try to face your face. And your face, in my face, are different. But there's a science to the structure of your face that's applied to the science of my face. And that's the golden ratio. I mean, if you look at a person's face, you can actually do the math where their chin is, where their eyes are, and all lines up. And your brain recognizes when that's not the case. So if you see that, and you see, like, oh, it's a person. What the fuck's going on? Because it is a person. That's a person. That's a dude in a monkey suit. It's not even a good one. And there's so many people that try out that Patterson footage, which is so bad. Yeah. They believe so hard. They believe so hard. And it was the hardest one for me to realize that those people are all full of shit. Because when I was a kid, man, god, I don't want a big foot to be real. That was a tough one. Tough one. I like how. And plus it was a real animal at one point in time. There was really a thing called John Yanna Pithakis, which was an eight to 10 foot tall, eight racket tang to actually think that may have been bipedal, at least occasionally. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You want things to be true, like UFOs. I was going to venture UFOs and all kinds of weird stuff when I was younger. And I think partly, like, me figuring out that a lot of it was just bullshit was part of my motivation for getting into, like, debunking stuff later. But it's a certain degree. I think there's no harm in people believing in things. Like, you know, little kids believe in Santa Claus, et cetera, that type of things. Right. Other Christmas, Easter Bunny. It's just that for some people, it kind of goes a bit wrong because a bit too far. They don't let their child's beliefs drop away as they get older or they stay longer. Or when they come of age, they go on to that kind of the next level of disbelief of imaginary things that they want to be true. And a lot of that boils down to what we're talking about earlier, the distrust and authority, like people, you know, distrust of others and the belief that there's some secret cabal of people doing things to them. The Illuminati. Yeah. I think it's partly this kind of a natural, childish, wunching to believe in things, which we all have. Yeah. We all believe it's strange things when we were young. And I think that aliens in a lot of ways are like a cosmic daddy, the idea that there's someone who's really on the ball that's watching us and you're going to make sure we don't talk everything up. That's what this contact movie is. So popular just the idea of like, oh, aliens coming to help us or whatever. It's so enticing. It's so amazing. Yeah. Meanwhile, I think the movie alien is probably more likely what's going to happen. Yeah. Come down here and fuck us up. The weird thing about the UFO community and the bigfoot community in all these different communities is that along the line, they become people that make a living at it. And they become, you know, air quotes, experts. And that becomes a problem because then they have a vested interest in making sure that other people believe they start writing books. They start doing lectures. They start showing pictures. And also, here's what's interesting as the number of phones that have cameras have radically increased. The number of usable UFO pictures has radically decreased. Yeah. It doesn't make any sense. Cameras like this one is got, you know, 83 times zoom on it. Yeah. You can take pictures of if there was a UFO, you could take a a closer picture of it. I take pictures of planes all the time that are flying, you know, five miles away, or 10 miles away, or sometimes even like, you know, over 100 miles away and you can make out the plane. You see the windows? Yeah. Depending on the angle. That's a claim that the cantrell is put out sometimes at the planes don't have windows. Oh. Which is generally that generally because they've used these crap-a-little cameras and you can't see the windows got the less than one pixel wide. Right. If you go out like a good camera and you zoom in far enough, the windows appear, kind of like, you know, things appearing that are horizon when you zoom in. Right. Right. The speaking of this, the camera, there's something coming up in August, which is the eclipse. There's going to be a totally eclipse of the sun over North America. I think August 21st this year. And I think that would be a great opportunity for people to encourage anybody who believes in the flat earth. Over North America. I think August 21st this year And I think that's that would be a great opportunity for people to encourage anybody who believes in the flat earth to actually start Looking at you know the what's going on. Don't they have an excuse for that though? Yeah, but like how are they how are they gonna justify? By if they actually look at it I think the challenge is getting people to look at things the excuse Excuse the reason we're giving them is that there's an eclipse and everybody wants to look at the eclipse It's an amazing thing the moon goes in front of the sun and blocks it out Yeah, but I think that you're giving them too much credit I think all someone has to do is make a YouTube video with some wonky explanation for why and eclipse works And then it works because the earth is a disc and the sun gets below the disc and it blocks it out from below I mean it just doesn't seem to me that it's it's enough This is a like a solar eclipse though. They can tell that the moon is going in front of the sun Well, I know what you're saying is logical But no even the flight others believe that the moon goes in front of the sun for a solar eclipse Oh, they go yeah, because they can you can track the position of the moon through the sky And they know that you know it gets closer to the sun every every time Don't they believe that like the earth sits flat and then everything spins around the earth They know they do well. Yeah, they you know the earth is flat and the the sun Sun and the moon are like orbiting above Like this, but you know sometimes the the moon is gonna be below the sun and it blocks out the light of the sun And that's how and eclipse happens on the flat earth and on the rounder So it would be an amazing thing to see even if you're a flat earth believer This this very rare coincidence when the moon is in front of the sun So you should encourage people who are flat earth believers to look at this amazing thing that's happening They still they don't give a fuck is there is there uniformity in the flat earth community if they like all greed Or is there is there like dissension? There's some people say You know that it's because they're the ice wall. No, there's no fucking ice wall. It's just to drop off and everybody dies There is kind of like you know this mainstream thing where you know the debate model of things It's kind of like in the chemtrail community. Yeah, you've got this one guy Dane Whigington who's this really popular guy And then you've got like a bunch of other people. What's he is he the guy that made that the videos? And now that was Michael J. Murphy was the guy. Yeah, that guy was he was a little loony and Wigington is the guy who lives in a big house on 200 acres up in the mountains somewhere and He got obsessed with solar panels being blocked by contrails and so became a contrail believer But he he's like the equivalent of debate really because he's the guy who's really promoting it But then there's other people in the the chemtrail community who are Doing their own thing and they say this you know We can think guys for the crap because it believes in global warming and we don't so there's this There's this this this division between people who believe in global warming and who don't so there's some people are think that chemtrails Trying to stop global warming and other people think that chemtrails are causing global warming And then there's other people who think that chemtrails are something completely different And the spreading nano robots to control people's minds and things like that So you got the same type of range of things in the flat earth believers as well like you some people think that the earth is kind of concave It's not actually flat at all. What about the hollow earth people? So yeah, the earth is hollow. That's that's that's not even that's not really a flatter thing That's like a round earth with a hole in the top and a new world in there people live on the inside of the earth which makes Apps even less sense than the flatter from a physical point of view. Well, they think there's monsters in there Yeah, or there's aliens the Rothschilds. They think they're lizard people. They live under the earth Yeah, there's always chun lasers. They make tunnels you've heard that. Yeah. I've heard that. Yeah sounds sounds real Yeah, well, it's looking into it any any any conspiracy theory is gonna have a range of Plossability yeah from reasonably plausible to completely implausible like you think of some of the 911 conspiracy theories like at one end you've got like the World Trade Center was destroyed by nuclear bombs that were in the basement nuclear bombs nuclear bombs people think that yeah I haven't heard that one now. It's there's a fringe one But it's you know, there's got a few people who believe it then there's people who think a bit bit more plausible They were destroyed by energy weapons from space like there was these beams of energy like high-powered microwave or something that Blue the buildings up and then there's you know, you get more and more plausible those pre-planted explosives or some guys running there on the day with some explosives to blow building seven and then you've got just They let buildings have them burn when they didn't have to and then right then they got they knew it was gonna happen But they did nothing about it and then that they had some warnings about it and they didn't think about it So you got this whole range of plausibilities for the conspirators With the flat earth it's pretty much all of this end because like the flutter theory is either the earth is flat or it's round So with the flutter view you've only got Very extreme and then more extreme theories Some of them not the most extreme thing which with all conspirators end up with is the everything is an illusion We are living in the matrix Conspiracy theory by well that theory is very compelling that theory is very bizarre because One day if technology continues the way it has been there will come a time where they're able to create an artificial reality It's indissernable from this reality as long as we don't blow ourselves up and technology continues to advance innovation Continues to advance the rate it is now which is exponential right? It's entirely possible that a hundred years from now or whatever it is. They'll be some way that they can interface with your Somehow with your brain and create some sort of an artificial experience. Right? That's not outside the realm of The especially theory is that they're doing it now and it's detectable that these things that we are seeing are kind of artifacts or That's one of the living in the matrix. You might have heard of the the Mandeler effect. Yes That's you know that's people who believe that this kind of glitches in the matrix Like the baronstein bears. Yeah, they're in steam bears are actually called the bear sign bears. Yeah in an altered timeline or there was this movie called shazam Dunby who work out remember that guy's name now people say sin bad In shack was in cousin yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, but they played they completely believe that this actually happened Yeah, and the world is changing But that is yeah, but they believe it so that's something that said the end of all all these conspiracy theories That's not a very reasonable one But there is some really reasonable scientists that believe that there's going to come a time where the musk Yes, it believes it. Yeah. Yeah. I not really convinced myself because it's kind of a simplistic argument saying that You know technology will always advance and get better. They're a fundamental limits on Information theory like how much information that we can process have you ever messed around with HTC Vive or any of the more recent state of the art now they're mind-blowing. Yeah mind-blowing This is one of the reasons why subscribe to it I mean not today But I mean I think one day in the future where there's a hundred years or whatever it is of technology I mean just got to think 150 years ago they were using teletypes That was the only way to get a message message across, you know And then what can we do today? We can take a film and send it to someone in Australia They get it in real time. I think it's it's very reasonable to assume that if you put on the HTC Vive They have this one underwater experience. It's amazing. Jamie see if you could find it because I know it's in video form But I think it's reasonable to be extremely realistic things that make you think that you are there Yes, but I don't think it's realistic that you would be able to Not detect that and that scientists wouldn't be able to detect That that we are all living in a simulation Simulation just just you is it just you're head. Let's see this right here. This is you put this thing on I mean again We're in 2017 and this is all in its fairly Fairly adolescent stage and man when you're when you're in this thing and you're looking around It's not necessarily high definition. It's it's it's very clear And you know that it's not real But God it gives you this feeling that it's real then a whale pulls up and all these fish swim by it's it's amazing And it more than anything it gives you a window into the future It gives you a window when you sit next to this whale and it makes noises and the noises are all 3d It gives you a window when you start thinking about pong remember pong that game that you'd play It was like I can't believe I'm controlling something on the television Do do do do do do do do do then you compare that to like halo And the games that you can play right now in an Xbox you're like my god Like the improvements are radical and I think that the improvements in this sort of artificial reality this virtual reality that you're seeing in this current HTC Vive 100 years from now I would only imagine that we could get to a point where it's indesternable that somewhat I disagree next to you really this great. That's why look at that that whale that I mean that way The whale is you know living thing is made up of cells You could take one cell from that whale and you could put it under microscope and you could dissect it And you could look at that the cell having it in it. Okay, maybe we're having a different argument here I'm thinking that it's going to feel real. Yeah, you're saying scientists won't be a great I believe you won't be a you will be able to I don't believe that they can make something that you could not detect Not let's say in triple the cripple your intelligence So They'll be able to make something that's indesternable like while you're experiencing it You would a scientist could come along and check it It's a bit of a philosophical question though because like you know what we have now is our observable universe with the laws of physics I don't think within this universe you can make something that simulates the universe That's the same right because there's just too much information in the universe to be simulated by something that is within the universe or even something like a Small as like the earth. I don't think you could simulate the entire earth in our physical universe Not now Paul. You don't think you could do it a thousand years from now No, I don't think so. I think there are fundamental limits as to how much information will be required you can get something that's a At imitation of that, but it would be detectably different It's like each each simulation is going to be lower fidelity than the universe that created it Right so you can only create something that's less complex than the universe you have currently in is that true? Though I mean as time moves on five thousand years from now whatever it is I mean how could anyone possibly discern or how could you even guess an estimate how far it would advance we go back five thousand years ago people were modern humans You know I mean the people that built the pyramid so modern humans right they they looked like us Maybe a little smaller that didn't get as much to eat they looked just like us You went five thousand years in the future. It's not it's not unreasonable if we don't blow ourselves up that you would that we would have some sort of quantum computing some astronomically powerful devices that could render and Create an artificial reality that felt to you entirely real. I don't think that's outside the wrong possibility But could you then create within that universe the same quantum computers that same as it's up so I think you could I think that that would That's kind of a paradox really it has to be as powerful as the thing that is Simulating it. I don't think so. I think artificial intelligence is going to lead us to Well if you can create something that's Artificial intelligent right which we feel like is going to happen way quicker than five thousand years from now If you create something in artificial intelligence it's going to improve upon its design almost instantaneously It's going to realize like if you give it autonomy. Yeah, we don't know what's going to happen right quantum computers We don't know how well they're going to work. They could be like could be a dead people or it could be fucking amazing Could be fucking amazing. Yeah, who knows? It's it's something to think about but when When scientists start thinking that we are currently living in some sort of a computer simulation I don't discard it. I give it a pause. I mean, I don't I don't subscribe or not subscribe to something as ridiculous as that Because it seems to me within the realm of future possibility. Yeah, it's it's kind of like you know It's a thought experiment because like if we are in the simulation We're not going to figure it out right when we're not going to be able to do anything about it if we do figure it out Right right right. Yeah thought experiment. I mean scientists are looking at the laws of physics If they keep drilling down far and far enough Maybe eventually they'll discover like there's some kind of artificial Substrate of the universe which is all ones and zeros and that we are actually living in some kind of simulation And but that's just basically us resolving the laws of physics more Yeah, if we get down that date, what can we we can't do anything about it? Well, not only that does that actually mean that we are Living in some sort of an artificial realm or does it mean that that's what the universe is made of? It's not artificial But that the universe much like what we're creating Like that the universe is almost fractal and much like what we're creating when we're creating these artificial environments that the universe itself is made out of ones and zeros and that this whole thing is really mathematical Yeah, and then just because we haven't been able to detect it up until now doesn't mean it has been running on some sort of some sort of uber complicated mathematical principle Yeah, I think it's kind of a moot point in a way because like what's important is what are the laws of physics and you know can we Is can we detect what's actually running the laws of physics? Yeah, so yeah, it's it's a philosophical question. It's a little bit of a master baby Yeah, it seems to me that that's a thing that people do and I think we could bring it back to this flatter thing is that people love to go down these honey holes of Information and of debate and ideas and whether it's Bigfoot or UFOs. We love to chase ourselves Chase our own tail when it comes to these bizarre subjects that May or may not be real and most likely aren't real. We love to chase and become like engrossing these things And I wonder why we're doing it. I wonder if we're distracting ourselves You know, I mean it doesn't seem to be people that are fully happy with their their life that really Get into this kind of stuff that really go all in and balls deep. Yeah, you don't you don't get a guy who has like a promising Carearies at the top of his field a happy family great friends great hobbies loves his life and then it just becomes a UFO And that doesn't seem to be the case You've got these pool players, I believe It's hard out there for a pool player right now. The guys at the top of the game is there I think those guys just watched too many fucking YouTube videos and they don't have any science most of the pool players One of the things about What's that common expression about pool players if someone plays pool really well? It's the glorious results of a misspent youth Because it takes a long time to learn how to play pool really well and you're not going to be doing that while you're You know, but got your nose buried in physics books I think like people like things like the flight of they get things out of them They're getting something out of it is giving them purpose in their life It's like you know, it's kind of like a hobby in a way like you just doing something because you enjoy doing it like playing chess Yeah, except along with that hobby of doing stuff. They actually have a belief There's required for them to actually do their hobby And they don't you know, obviously think of it like that, but that's essentially what it is They have this activity they like doing like gardening or whatever But it requires them to believe that the earth is flat so they spend all the time like Making YouTube videos about how the earth is flat or doing their experiments about How the earth is flat and they're getting something out of it because it's they're a little hobby. Yeah, I do the same thing except I'm actually doing it for science Like I do these fun little experiments like on the on the plane today I was on the plane like wedged up against the window Like looking through this holding my camera up against it and there were women next to me. So thought I was this crazy guy You should tell me the earth is in flat, ma'am She probably thought that I was thinking to the earth waskla. I've seen other people On YouTube the bringing levels onto the plane and they're like hey, look the level isn't moving Well, if you work all day and you have an eight hour day plus commute plus family plus whatever Bills and issues that you have to deal with and then you get into one of these YouTube videos You simply don't you simply don't have the time to really explore All of the possibilities and all the science behind all the arguments and it's just yeah I think what happens is either they Yeah, they get this superficial understanding of the conspiracy theory. Yeah Or the actual real life stuffers A lot of people get sucked into conspiracy theories like like chem trials or 9-11 truth and they become socially isolated Yes, and they become they they get divorced and they lose custody of their children Happens all the time. Yeah, and this this isn't like you know It's not like the government punishing them or anything like that It's just because they become obsessed with something that is outside of societal norms And they feel like this overwhelming Compelling need to tell other people about it. Yeah, and they you know They say talk about oh, yeah people roll their eyes when I bring up the subject of controls or the flight earth Of course they do but yeah, but from that point of view They're trying to wake up other people. They're doing they're doing like the law's work by Giving the truth to people But then there's some theories that are really compelling like when you look into like Operation Northwoods And you find out that the government really was planning false flag attacks It didn't work that's exaggerated. No, it's not I think I was exaggeration. Well, there it was a discussion document It was signed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Yeah, it's It was rejected by Joint Chiefs of Staff very far. It was just one documents right They signed it that they got it They didn't sign it that they wanted to do it, but it was an idea The idea that you were gonna attack American civilians that you were gonna arm Cuban friendlies and attack Guantanamo Bay You're gonna blow up a drone airliner. These were all proposed things. They were proposed things. Yeah, but it's just like you know But you can understand I understand what you're saying But spitballing that you're gonna deceive the American people and kill American civilians and that this is a normal part of the way Niro burnt Rome Hitler burned the Reichstag that false flag attacks are real and that they have happened throughout history So when you do have an open mind and you are compelled to try to seek the truth You got to be aware that these things have happened in history they are real and If you dismiss everything you'll be thought of as a shill as much as I mean As much as people who look for conspiracies and everything There are also people who try to dismiss everything and you have to be very careful because there are a lot of things that people do conspire to do Like one of the things that I've brought up before and people hate when I talk about this, but I'm gonna do it again People say I don't believe in conspiracy Conspiracies and I say you don't believe in any conspiracy. No, okay, do you believe in 9-11 happened? Do you believe that people flew planes into jet or the plu jet planes in the buildings? Well, then you believe in conspiracies because someone conspired to do that and they did it they pulled it off a bunch of people got together Decide they're gonna attack they flew a plane into the Pentagon They flew two planes into the world trade center towers. I mean that really happened So that's a conspiracy and they pulled it off. So When you debunk all these things that are absolutely false like flat earth and Chem trails and UFOs and all that jazz you got to be careful and not try to debunk everything because people you know I just think like I personally just feel the north was thing is a bit overblown. I don't think it's an awful What it was I think it speaks volumes about what the mindset of the Joint Chief of Staff were is what it's one example and It's a good one though. Yeah, but they can come up with any others What about what got us in the Vietnam? Gulf of Tonkin. Yeah, that was a false flag Well, that's debatable too because that was just basically they thought that they were being attacked Nothing debatable. Yeah. I think that's pretty much been agreed upon that it was a false flag It was a series of events like there was that didn't happen to over two nights the there was reports of the boats being fired upon And it turns out there probably wasn't anything there. Right So it's debatable is did they think there was something there And it was one state of the whole day. They completely invented out of thinner Now probably used it as a pretext to to You know start the Vietnam war But they just took advantage of it. Let's in the same way the bush took advantage of the 9-11 attacks to push his agenda Now is that a conspiracy It's hard to say like what knowledge did Bush have of the 9-11 attacks beforehand We know we took advantage of it and we know that you know the The American administration back then took advantage of the Gulf of Tonkin reports We don't know for sure whether the Gulf of Tonkin reports were fabricated or how much they were fabricated or what actually happened on that night And But we do know that they were taking advantage of Yeah, well, my my whole point is that you have to be careful when you're a person who debunks things that are legitimately ridiculous You have to take in a consideration the possibility that people do conspire to do things Okay, I tell you they do and that's happened within pretty high levels of government with Enron I mean this is and there's been a ton of conspiracies that turned out to be true. Yeah, and there's what the Almsbury ran the Iran country scandal. Yes. That probably went all the way to the top. Oh, yeah Reagan probably knew all that that that was where it was hilarious when it was when Reagan was showing the first signs of Alzheimer's When he didn't remember you didn't remember anything people like always lying and then turns out no he's actually Memory is really eroding. I mean he was an older man. I mean yeah, isn't his late 70s at the time wasn't he? Yeah, yeah, he was a Trump's age, I think Jesus Christ Trump there was a fucking hilarious article about Trump today that he doesn't believe in exercise Because he believes that the body has a finite amount of energy in it and then when you exercise you use up that energy Hmm, and that's why he has so much energy because he doesn't exercise. Yeah, strange diets Like he has his stakes well done. He likes to eat lunch meets straight out of the fridge. Well, it's not at the end of the Sure, he's a very nice guy. Oh, are you Never met the guy Yeah, he doesn't look healthy, but he's got a lot of energy man kind of amazing how much energy he has Alex Jones Yeah, yeah, well, I think it kind of looks reasonably healthy I guess he's not healthy. Yeah. No Alex doesn't look that healthy. He's overweight, right? And he's a he's younger than me Like I always used to freak out that he's younger than me. I was like how are you younger than me? I? He just goes hard Alex goes hard all the time You know now fix it all well, it's also I mean constantly worrying that the government's after you and that there's You know every fucking turn that you take has the conspiracy behind it's the mind You know can only take so much pressure. Yeah. Yeah We talk about some more flat-out stuff sure. Well, so you're out there. You got notes. I do I read that I read everything I can think of on the flat-out. Which is a shit letter stuff The international space station. Oh, that's a good one. Yeah, they think that footage is fake. They think it's all fake But what you can do is you actually you can go back to the skylab footage and Ask someone who believes in flutter how they faked the skylab footage Because there's footage of skylab with people like you know they're running around and running around in circles and zero Gravity there's long sequences of people doing certain zero gravity and it's in a space There's actually two big to fit in any any plane that's ever been built So it couldn't be filmed in a thing. You know where they do the Bombat carbale the moment. Yeah, it has to be something that was actually zero Yeah, for people to know what that is when when you see scenes in movies where someone was moving in zero gravity They would film that in a plane that would literally be they would get the plane up to like 40,000 feet or whatever and then they would just literally shoot down So that you're kind of going faster down than gravity and you could float around and so this there is zero gravity here Yeah, run around in circles the door cans of stuff like they get three of them running and this the space that they're in there It's so big that it wouldn't fit in like probably wouldn't even fit in the beluga thing that they use for transporting Planes, but that brings us back to area 51 because there's some giant airplanes that they make in an area 51 to use to simulate Zero gravity. Yeah, I mean, it's obvious. This isn't space. Yeah, and this is like from the 70s. Yeah Pretty amazing. Well, the space station the International Space Station It flies over at regular intervals and this is that one of the ground-true things that I was talking about earlier You can see it you can look up when it's gonna fly over you can get them to send you alerts There's a cycle spot the station It's a NASA site But you don't have to trust it, but you can still sign up and it will tell you when the space station is gonna fly over To the second you'll tell you to the second when it's gonna appear and how how how how how how It will be and how long it'll be visible for and you can get to send you an email and then get your camera out and take photographs of it When it happens so you know that this website is correct You've proven it on the ground and you can also like do it from different positions and get two people doing it And you can figure out how how high the space station is by triangulating it So yeah, what's this angle? What's that angle? How far apart they are and you can figure out that the space station is actually 250 miles high it is actually orbiting the earth at 250 miles and you can also take photographs of the space station with this camera and You can zoom in Close enough on the space station to actually see the shape of the space station and the solar panels and the main modules and everything So you can see there actually is something that is Moving along the same path that NASA says is moving along and at the same speed As they suggest and it's at the right height and it's the right size Because you can do the calculations on the camera figure out You know what the size of the space station is so we know that something that the exact same size and shape and speed of the space station is Exactly where NASA says it is and there's really no way you could fake that on a flat earth Because you'd have to have this bizarre You know thousand foot wide Floating thing moving along at like 14,000 miles an hour doing this kind of wizzy pattern all around this Spireograph pattern around the flat earth. It's just you know, it's literally impossible Whereas if you look at it from the globe model point of view, it's just the space station Obviously it's orbiting the globe, but does this bother you sometimes you're even debunking the stuff? It does it does I I sent those catch myself. I got Yeah, it's obvious like yeah one of the like most stupidly obvious proofs that were not on the flat earth is That if you get three people you stand one of them at the bottom of South Africa one of them at the bottom of South America one of them in Australia And have them all look south from that position now on the flat earth You got one person here one person here one person here and if you all look south like away from the North Pole They're all looking in completely different directions But in the real world what do they actually see they all see the exact same constellation the southern cross? Right in front of them So they're all looking in different directions on the flat earth But on the round earth, they're all just looking towards the southern cross So it's a very it's literally impossible to do that on the flat earth Right and you can actually see this and take photographs of the constellation in compare yeah, and that's Something I was talking about with the ground truth thing with Stellarium like you can you could go virtually yourself to these places and See what the sky looks from that position So either Stellarium is lying or these you know the southern cross does actually appear From these three different positions Well, that's another thing that these flat earth people keep bringing up as Polaris The idea that this one star stays put it's a great one and that all these other stars rotate around it This is somehow another proof that the earth's not spinning what are there? We're on a flat earth would so stupid about that is that people in Australia have a completely different Constellation right and the stars rotate the the other direction around when the stars are all coming towards us from the east So if you look north the going that way if you look south the going that way So they're rotating around the north star Which actually isn't anything special? It's just the star that happens to be closest to the point the north point and it changes all the time if you zoom in You can actually see there are stars that are even closer If you take a time lapse of the north star it actually makes a little circle Well, and also that north stars not the same north star is in the past Yeah, because the axis of the earth is the single procession where they every 26,000 years and wobbles Yeah, also way yeah, yeah the south the south the south the everyone's looking at the same thing in the south and the stars are Retaching in that direction, but yeah, Polaris Polaris is a good one for a number of reasons one is not really fixed. It's a he said you know one degree off from the center of the Celestial sphere But if you look at a time lapse photograph of the earth with a point the camera up like say from North America What you get is the illusion that all these stars are spinning around that one star is fixed But it's because you're looking at a time lapse of only a few hours where it's dark out at night Whereas this procession the equinoxes is a very slow process that takes 26,000 years and you're just not going to get it You know, the time lapse of only a few hours where it's dark out at night, whereas this procession in the equinoxes is a very slow process that takes 26,000 years. And you're just not going to get a 26,000 years time lapse photo there. You could simulate it. Yeah. You could, it's still area. And, you know, I was going to believe that. What's interesting is that some cultures, it's been pretty much observed that some cultures were aware of the procession in the equinoxes thousands of years ago somehow, that they kind of knew, you know, quite impressive. Well, a lot of old cultures did actually take records at the stars, because stars were used for navigation. Yeah. The pulsed are, you know, this leaves is something that gives you this, this fixed north degree, but the other stars as well, like if you know, you know, what, how long it takes to go from one place to another year. I don't really understand the exact maths, but you can use it for navigation. It's called celestial navigation. What other ridiculous things can we point out before we wrap this up? My head started in the hurt. I had food poisoning yesterday, folks. I don't know what happened. I hate something bad at a greasy diner. Well, Polaris is, you know, a good thing because you can actually look at the angle of Polaris. Was that a banging? Did you hear banging? I heard banging. Yeah. I got checked. Oh, it's next door. He is putting something on the wall. It's like, yeah, they're shit down the stream twice on us already. Oh, really? Yeah. It's a flat earth. I'm recording the whole thing. It's got dammit. What other things are we doing to us? The similar to this wonder why the earth's atmosphere is going to suck off into space. Ah, well, how about the one where that's a good one? But it's a good one because I've wondered that myself. I know now why. Why that is. I know why it's just in such an interface. Why isn't it good sucking the space? Because you think that a vacuum sucks things, right? It's going to suck everything, uh, it sucks everything away. So if there's this atmosphere on the earth, the vacuum of space will suck it away. But the thing is like vacuum doesn't actually suck. Vacuum is nothing. It has no energy. It doesn't do anything. There's no power. The reason that things flow into vacuum is air pressure. And air pressure is a function of gravity. So gravity is pulling everything down towards the earth. So there's no, there's no, nothing that can push it out. If you see, like we see what I'm saying. Okay. If you imagine like if the universe was suddenly filled with loads of gas, like oxygen, say, and then you stick a big planet in there. All the gas would kind of like gravity would bring it down towards this planet. Well, they don't believe in gravity though. Yeah, they don't believe in gravity. Selectro magnetic. This is my favorite new one. Did you see the one where they show that if the earth was a globe that all the water would be on the bottom? Yeah, I think that one's wonderful. I think that one's a joke. You think it's a joke. How can you be so short about the other ones as well? No, no, no, no, bring it up, Jamie. This one's wonderful. I think they're being serious. Yeah. Now the gravity thing though, it's kind of like almost irrelevant. Because, you know, we know that things fall down. Right. But it's electromagnetic something or another way. Well, it's a magical force that's making things fall down. It doesn't really matter. You know, gravity, we could say we don't really understand what gravity is. How do you explain lava? Because lava is a part of gravity too, right? Lava. Well, it's the idea that all these rocks are pushing down. There's like, strain, friction, and heat buoyancy, buoyancy and density. Yeah. buoyancy and density, there are functions of gravity. Like you stick something in the water. It's all the water is flowing to the bottom. This, we're looking at this image, folks. It says gravity is not strong enough to stop a small stream from flowing to its lowest point. Then what is stopping the oceans north of the equator from emptying into the ocean, south of the equator? This is what the earth would look like. If we lived on a globe, gravity is pseudo-science.dot.dot, a theory that can't be proven. If you're out there posturing, can't you fucking dunce? Can't be proven. Look at that image though. It's hilarious. Why is there water on the top at all? How about that? It's stupid fuck. It's raining. Is there what it is? It rains on top only. It's got rice from the bottom and it comes around. Oh, I would be kind of cool if half the planet was dirt and half the planet was water. Yeah. Why would that be any weirder than what it is now? Yeah. The reason they don't like gravity is that if you actually apply the laws of gravity to a flat earth, the flood is actually scrunch up into a ball. Oh, yeah, around a ball. Of all that rock, there's no way it can lay flat like that. It would either be like gravity would be intensely large because you've got any kind of man out of rock underneath here. Or it's like something on the back of a turtle or something and it would just scrunch up into a ball. What do they think lava is molten rock? I mean, they just think it's buoyant because it heats up and becomes less dense than the other rock. But why is it down there in the bottom? Why is it core of the fires of hell or heating it up? Oh, the fires of hell. Look at this. What is this? What is the water fly off the earth? It's been because the force of spinning. This is a fundamental misunderstanding that people have there. They miss the misinterpret angular velocity and linear velocity. We know the earth is spinning around a thousand miles an hour. If this ball was spinning around at a thousand miles an hour, then the water would fly off. But it's not flying off because of the surface of the ball going a thousand miles an hour, it's flying off because it's rotating 50 times a second or whatever, 10 times a second. It's the angular velocity which creates the outward force. Linear velocity is going to do with it. It's only when you're actually turning. When you're driving in a car, like you could drive in really fast. You don't really feel any forces act on you. But when you go around the corner, you get slammed over to one side. So it's the rate of your angular velocity. Now the earth rotates once every 24 hours. So it's going really, really, really slow. Put that back up, please. If you imagine that tennis ball, and if you take it and stick it on a little turntay, well, the rotates once every 24 hours, the water is not going to fly off. It's the exact same force acting on the earth because the earth rotates once every 24 hours. The fact that it's like you're going 1000 miles an hour, it's completely irrelevant because it's essentially going in straight lines around the edge. Jamie, go to that photo on the upper left hand side. Scroll up. Up here. Satan's globe earth lies. This bottom picture here is a great example of how ridiculous things are. It's hold on. Satan's globe earth lie. The big bang and evolution explain life. You are an accident. We evolve from primordial soup. We are specs in the universe. Some people are more valuable than others. Foundation for the new world order, you are worthless. Next image, God's flat earth creation is the only explanation. We are incredibly valuable. The Bible is 100% true. We live on an unmoving firm foundation. You were created by God in all caps. God loves you. Oh, that will, that seems better. It's probably a true believer though. Oh, yeah. But I think that image there is a good example of things that are completely ridiculous on the flat earth. You see they have the sun on one side and it's illuminating how. The way it's curved like that. The thing that runs way closer too, right? Yeah, they think the sun acts like a spotlight. But it's not actually like a spotlight. It's illuminating all of the ice wall. Where's the ice wall? The white stuff around the surface. Oh, the ice wall? Yeah. Which is actually, it's just an Antarctica stretch into this projection. Why doesn't one of those digters get in a boat and take a photo that wore? Well, that's another thing. They think they've got guards all the way around it. Oh, there are guards. Yeah. What is that? That's 36,000 miles of guards of guards in the ocean. And with on a freezing ice wall, it's like, you know, the wall from a game of thrones. It's 36,000 miles. Well, they make up facts and then they use those facts to kind of stay at their point. You can't, it's illegal to fly over Antarctica. Yeah. That's kind of based on like half, well, a quarter of truth. You can't fly a two engine jet over Antarctica because if one engine fails, you wouldn't be able to get to an airport. So they only allow four engine jets, like 7-4-7, a 3-8 is to fly. So all those flights that you see that go over at the Antarctic ice, they're all 7-4-7s. Yeah, because if it fucks up, you're doomed. Yeah. Yeah. It's a long way with nothing. This is a regulation called E-tops, which is all about how far you can go away from an airport and what configuration of plane that you have to do. See now, I wonder how many people are listening to this and it's turning their mind. Do you think it's possible? Do you think there's got to be a spectrum of people that believe? Thrift. The spectrum and some people will be turned. this will cause a lot of ruffled feathers. Are you ready for the shield tweets? Are you ready? Were you wearing a round earth shield shirt? If we get you one, again, Jamie.com. I don't know. I actually don't like it's very comfortable. I know it's all in good heat for a bit. It's very soft. People keep people taking seriously. Oh, yeah, well, that's good. I did T-shirt that said I make stuff up that my wife got me because I'm always making stupid jokes. And someone saw a photograph of me online wearing this T-shirt that said I make stuff up. And he said, there's Midwest, I'm missing. And they were completely serious. Yeah, but they're stupid. Yeah, but it's part of the message. It's part of the message. I wanted to reach people if the point in the middle of the business is a distraction. Right. Something like that. I guess if you were saying I'm pretty easy to dismiss. They always say that you work for the government. That's the big one. You're a government employee. You made video games. Yeah, I'm a retired video game programmer. I helped make the Tony Hawk series of video games. I made enough money to retire on. Now I just plough her around the house, do gardening and do debunking stuff. Do fun experiments in the budget. But you're living the goddamn American dream. So you're doing, you made enough money to not have to slave away. And these assholes want to think that you're some government chill. Like the governments involved in the Tony Hawk video games. They recruited you. They said, listen, I know you're doing a good job making these video games. We've got a better place for you. What you need to do is cover up the flat earth and cam trails and UFOs and what else? What else you cover up? More gallons? More gallons diseases are fascinating. That's one of the ones that we investigated on that show. And do you know that one of the guys we interviewed was a doctor. And what he thinks is that everyone who has more gallons also has Lyme disease. And Lyme disease has a neurotoxicity effect. And he was talking himself about his own hallucinations. That he sees things like crawling across his eyes. That he knows aren't there. Oh yeah. He was a very rational guy. He was also saying that Lyme disease, when you get it from ticks, that you're not just getting this one disease, but you're getting a host of pathogens. And sometimes these pathogens will interact with each other in very different ways. And that some are more extreme, some are less extreme. But he's like, you might be dealing with hundreds of different pathogens that are undiscovered or undefined. And he thinks that what's going on with a lot of these people that have more gallons is Lyme disease and whatever these other diseases are. It's causing them to hallucinate and think that fibers are growing out of their skin. What really what it is is they're scratching themselves and then they get like carpet fibers or clothing fibers on their skin. And then they think it's coming out of there. He was very reasonable and he made a ton of sense. Because we went to this more jealous convention. We talked to all these people that had it and they fucking all have Lyme disease. They all have it. Well, they all get tested positive for it. Yeah. That's a bit of controversy about that because the test that you can do, you can basically keep doing it and it's a very inexact test for Lyme disease. Yeah, it gives a lot of false positives. There's a bunch of different tests. But there's so many people with Lyme disease, which is where it's interesting because Lyme disease is, it's, I know a lot of people that have gotten that from ticks. And it's definitely a real thing. It's devastating. There's a lot of controversy. Well, it's one of those things that the medical community has a mainstream opinion about whether there's this long term effects from Lyme disease and then there's people who think that there is these long term effects. Yeah, there's this long disputes. There is some dispute. But let me clarify from people that I know that have gotten it. One of the things about the medical community is the ignorance of Lyme disease and that you go to a lot of different doctors and they poo-poo it. They say, oh, there's nothing. You know, worry about my friend's son got it and he developed Bell Pause, Bell's Pause, his face went numb and that was when they took it seriously. And they finally gave this intense round of intravenous antibiotics. But my friend was on antibiotics for months. I mean, he was devastated. And we had a guy in here that had it for three years and he had it for a full year where he was undi-y-y, Stephen Kotler. He had a full year where he was undi-y-y, no, since his body just was ravaged by this stuff. I used to write a lot about more gallons, which is related to Lyme disease. And one of the reasons I stopped doing it was that it's such a personal thing for the people involved. Yeah. And I just really wasn't comfortable like calling them liars. Not that, but just trying to figure out what's really going on and raising possibilities that it might not be like these bugs living under their skin. Yeah. Because they just get very upset and you know, you really, you weren't reaching a lot of them. So eventually I stopped that and I moved on to chem trials, which I thought would be more reasonable people involved. But it's another one where people are initially invested in that idea. And then once they become initially invested, it's so hard to shake them off. It's so hard. And I just absolutely convinced that the government is spraying things. Yeah. I had a conversation with a friend of mine. I was like, that is gotta be the most ineffective use of money ever. They're spraying things and what the fuck has changed? Nothing. Nothing's changed. They're spending all this money spraying things in the sky that just happened to look like clouds. But yet we know that you can make clouds with a jet engine, a certain amount of condensation in the atmosphere, the heat of the jet engine causes clouds. Like we know that. But they don't think that's what it is. Yeah. It's established science. It's established science. Well, like the flat earth is established with the lack of flatness of the earth. It's established science that's been going on for a real long time. And people just pick and choose which science they want to use. What keeps you going with all the stuff? With running Metabunk. Well, I enjoy doing this little experiment. I do a lot of stuff like going into my backyard and testing things out. A lot of the pictures of UFOs and things like that. You can duplicate them because some of them are like reflections or things in the camera. And you can go out and say, well, let's do this. Or people are saying that a certain photograph is indication that it's false or these shadows go this way. The moon landing at lots of fake shadow claims made about it. What do you think happened at Roswell? Roswell, New Mexico. The one. That's the big one. Why? 1947. The UFO crash. I think it's what they said it was. Those balloons that they were using to detect a Russian nuclear bombs in the atmosphere. And it was a secret program. So they went a lot of talent buddy about it. So they came in. They picked up the remains of the balloon and then the story just took off. That's a funny one though, boy. That's made a whole town. Famous for UFOs. If you go there now, they have like alien themed gift shops. The milking it. It's like you said earlier, like people make money out of something and then they get stuck into that. Because they're making money out of it, they're motivated to promote whatever rate of it. It's a big photo of its aliens. Have you ever seen anything in all of your years of trying to debunk these things that made you question whether or not this was a legitimate phenomena? The chemtrail thing, anything, anything. UFO chemtrail thing is like with UFOs. There's all things that you can't explain. There are things that are identified. But there are usually plausible explanations for them. Whenever I'm given something, a mysterious thing, I like to list all the explanations that I can think of. Maybe none of them are perfect fix that you can guarantee this is what the explanation is. But it being like a ghost or an alien spacecraft as an explanation is usually pretty close to the bottom. You start out saying it's a balloon or it's a bird or it's a drone or it's CGI or it's something somebody faked afterwards. Or it's an alien spacecraft or something else that we don't know what it is. Is there any evidence in terms of UFOs that's interesting? I have to be honest, I haven't really looked into the whole sphere of UFO biology. I know a lot of people have. But just looking at the quality of the best cases they put forward, like I mentioned earlier, like some guy in 1964 got his car beat up on a road. These are like the top 10 best cases and this was like number two or something. What about Bob Lazar? You were looking at that guy? Yeah, which was he like a car's a guy who supposedly worked at Area 51 and became a whistle blower. No, I haven't. But a lot of something you see in the 9-11 community is, and in the chemtrail community, is people becoming celebrities. And then they kind of start going on road shows and they go to conventions and they speak and then they write books and then they start doing things and they get sucked into their beliefs. And there's been lots of examples in the past of people who made claims like this and then eventually owned up to it. The classic one, really classic one is the Costingly Fairies where these girls in Costingly England, I don't know, went to school then but it's still a world famous thing, faked these photographs of fairies. And they convinced a large number of people including like Arthur Conan Doyle. Really? Yeah, they wrote Tarzan? He believed in the fairies? No, they got her out short homes. Did Arthur Conan Doyle write Tarzan? No, that was William Burroughs? No, no. No. Anyway, but they stuck there. So that, some of the fakes of them. They could have out of a magazine or something. And then they owned up like basically on their deathbed like 70 years later. But they were milking it because once they get into it, it's embarrassing to admit that you made something up. Plus, are you getting all this attention? Right. And in some cases you're getting money. I don't know if they get any money. I wonder how many people were so duped by that, they changed their life and they started looking for fairies and wasting their time. When I was growing up, that was put out as being a genuine fairy sighting. Really? Did you believe it? No. Well, I probably did when I was like, you know, 13 or 6. But yeah, people get sucked in and they become celebrities. And then they like, there it is. TNA reveals the first time letter which ended the cotton-ly, cotton-ly hoses. Yeah, I went to school just behind the house. So for 70 years, this lady kept the lie. There was two of them, I think. What a bitch. And there's people like that in the UFO community who have like, you know, many up stories of abductions and things and later there are stories I had to become so ridiculous and contradictory. You know that they were lying. There's a wonderful one from this guy from the 1950s where it's a great old black and white footage and they talk to him about his UFO experiences and all the different aliens that he communicates with. And he just seems so obviously crazy. And yet this was like heralded as one of the most important cases of ufology and, you know, the guy I'm talking about. I forget the guy's name. No, I was, but he always thought it was a thing called the House of Hubcaps and shit. The Montauk Chronicles. I wish I think you would do the segments on, it was like an island where they have an underground thing where they will ruin it to be experimenting on children, plum island. No, that wasn't plum island. Anyway, there was something like that this guy basically said he had all these remembered memories of working on this given government base. And he became like pretty famous and wrote loads of books. But, yeah, I don't know. I think he might have just made a bit crazy. Well, there's a lot of that out there. Sure. Is there anything else in your pile of notes over there? No. Do you want people to? I think like the thing I would really encourage people to do is look closely at things. It's really hard to do. But if people who are on the fence, they need to look very, very closely at the claims that people are making, like the claims that Eric DeBey is making. If Eric DeBey says something like the horizon always rises to eye level, this is something you can actually check. Now, it's not easy. You've got to be reasonably careful with this $2 level. But you can actually check to see whether that is correct. You can check for yourself if something reappears over the horizon when you zoom in. Or is this something that he claims? Something that's ridiculous claim that's been made for over 100 years that when things move away from you, they disappear from the bottom up. And if you zoom in, they will reappear. It doesn't actually happen. When you zoom in on something, all it does is it makes the picture bigger, makes the image bigger. And you can check this for yourself. You can go down to Santa Monica Pier. You can focus on the North Shore like Malibu. And you can zoom in. And you can see that the picture does not change at all throughout the entire zoom. And when you're fully zoomed in, so you can see the cars whizzing along PC8, you will see that the bottom part of the road is in the buildings that it is obscured. And you can do it with Catalina. You can turn around and look at Catalina. And you can zoom in on that. And you can see that two-thirds of Catalina Island is missing. I think a lot of what you're saying is very important because what we're talking about is just being able to look at things objectively and use facts to determine that this one theory, in particular, flat earth theory is not true. But I think what's really going on is a thought process. There's a way the human mind gravitates towards these puzzles and these problems and these undiscovered truths, these mysteries that people just want to be the person that knows. They want to be in the know. And it's very intoxicating. And that's what really this stuff's all about. More than anything. It's about the way the mind works. And it's about the way your mind can be tricked. And it's an information issue that we're dealing with today with things like YouTube where no one can stop you from making, like you don't have to go through the people that work at NBC or Fox or whatever. You don't have to go through the Wall Street Journal or the New York Times editorial board where they have to review your paper and go, hey, you wrote a bunch of stuff. It's not true. No, that doesn't have to happen anymore. Now you can just make a video and it can be really well done with good music and good images and the way it's done can really influence a lot of people who don't have a background in science or are not curious about looking into the debunking version of it. I mean, when someone sends me something, I would say just Google that, whatever you sent me and then debunked. Just do that first. Yeah. And then I look at both sides, you know, but people don't want that debunk. Well, debunk's not sexy. Yeah. If it's piercing sexy. I know people are turned off by the debunking thing. I hate it. Yeah. And that's why I do tell people to go do their own research but really actually do some real research as they do some actual observations and experiments. That's boring. YouTube videos are fun. You know, you watch a YouTube video about dinosaurs being fake. That's fun. Yeah. You know, like, what? They're fake. I can't believe that they fucking got me. It's just like watching YouTube video about Roswell Rods or any of these other silly things. This isn't kind of excited about the eclipse. I think that's an opportunity to get people excited about it. You think like a scientist, though? Yeah. I think I'm like a loon. And I get excited about the eclipse, but not everyone does. Well, it's exciting. It is exciting. It's pretty rare. I sell the eclipse. Yeah. The moon's coming from the sun. Yeah. But it doesn't happen. Check it August 21st. It's going to be totality in Oregon. But you get to see it from all of the people going to go to Oregon just to see it. Yeah, I'm going to Oregon. Are you? Wow. Look at you. Oh, an excuse. Yeah. They're going to try to schedule some sort of a dinner. Oh, yeah. Very timed there. We're going to be out of the campsite. Yeah. Looking at the eclipse. Anything else? Poor. And I sell the same. Oh, it's going to complicated. But let me just run it by you real quick. Maps. Maps. Maps. Maps. You hit the Mckay to Prokert projection. No. The standard map that you see in school rooms has this really stretched out Iceland Greenland. It looks like this door to it. It's not like the real world. The reason that we use these maps, this particular type of map, is that if you draw a line between two points on the map and then you sail along that heading, you will end up at that point. Now this is a type of navigation called a run line navigation that's been used for like hundreds of years. And the thing is that the map, the Mckay to map, gets stretched out at the top, but it also gets stretched out at the bottom, because the navigators from hundreds of years ago knew that the world was round and that they knew if they drew a line between two points in a southern hemisphere using the same map, it would get you to that destination using run navigation, which is basically just one more piece of evidence that the actual, the globe map matches reality because people have used run navigation for hundreds of years, if not thousands of years. So you're saying that the image of the continents is in some ways stretched out and distorted? Yeah, well if you take a globe and you can't just put it onto a flat surface, because you can have to distort it somehow. So there's various different ways people use of putting it on the surface. You could just take a lot of you do it on a longitude and just map it into a rectangle, and that works out fairly well. That's a nice thing. That's called an equirectangular map. The most common map that was used like before, I'd say 30 years ago, was this Maketa projection, which is the map that people use for navigating ship wraps, so you can get from point A to B. If you wanted to go from England to North America across the ocean, you just draw a line between the two points and then you say, oh, that's the heading I've got to go in, so you head off in that heading. Now that doesn't take you in a straight line. It actually takes you in a curved line, because if you're going on a constant compass heading on a globe, you actually kind of curve in towards the poles or away from the poles, depending which way you're going. I really don't understand what you're saying. But all it is is that there's this method of navigation that people use that relies upon the earth being a globe, and it's this really, really simple map that is in thousands of homes, millions of homes and schools that everybody uses, and you can see that on the map the lines get smaller towards the top and they get smaller towards the bottom. If people are doing a voyage around the world, they're going to use this map, and it only works, and it works on the globe world. That's another issue. Two people have circumnavigated the globe. Well they think they just sail around the outside, which of course would take a lot longer. That's another thing like the Australia. Have you seen Australia on the fly-to-earth map? No. It's like, you see it on the image that was up earlier, it's like this squish thing. What Australia looks like, it's more or less like this. Looks like squish-to-earth is kind of like this. It's all stretched out. It's like twice as long and half as wide. Have you seen the theory, the conspiracy theory that Australia, Scooby-Doo? No. Scooby-Doo's head? Yes. I can see that. It just joke. Italy is a boot. It's one of those joke memes. The distances between places in Australia don't work. Is that the flatter? Yeah. That's the flatter of the map, and that's Australia. And Australia looks nothing like that. And if you live in Australia, you would know it looks nothing at all like that. It's just hilarious that there's so many versions of this. It's hilarious that there's so many people who've taken the time in front of a computer to create this flat earth map and put this ice wall. And the idea that how do they know it's a nice wall? Where's the pictures? This pictures of ice shelves from Antarctica? So they think that's the whole wall? I think that's the wall. Yeah. So that you'll see memes like... Yeah. Globe earth, this be like what ice wall? Yeah, be like it's the greatest. I can't let you show you the suck on this. Picture of a nice shelf, which is like two and a few. I wish you could fly over. Well, that's the mentality, right? It's a bunch of little kids or a bunch of dump people or a bunch of people that have very little education or a bunch of people that are also preaching to the choir. It ties into like misconceptions that are natural, like a funny thing, like when I worked in the video game industry, there was, you know, platform games. You jump from little platforms and sometimes you have like platforms that move around and you jump with them like Mario type things. Right. In some video games, when you jump up on a moving platform and then jump down and then fall down, you will fall down because the platform moves out from underneath you. Sometimes you jump up and you move with the platform and you land on it. It depends on what the program I did. Right. Now a friend of mine was doing a video game and one of the programmers said like, oh, if you jump up and then jump down, the platform should have moved out from underneath you. You should be able to, you should be able to, you know, this is the way we should program the physics and then my friend Matt said, no, that's wrong. And he couldn't convince this other guy. So eventually what happened? He said, right, what we're going to do is we're going to go out onto the road with my pickup, my pickup truck. I'm going to get in the back and you're going to drive along at 30 miles an hour and I'm going to. What happened? He said, right, what we're going to do is we're going to go out onto the road with my pickup truck. I'm going to get in the back and you're going to drive along at 30 miles an hour. And I'm going to jump straight up in the air. And we're going to see whether I land in the truck or I land on the road. So they did this experiment. The guy, the other guy was driving the truck was totally expecting him to like jump up and then fall out of the back of the truck because the truck went and moved on. Because he's moving the same speed as the truck. He jumps up and then he lands back in the truck. Right. And this is illustrating that this video game programmer had the exact same misconception that the flat earthers do. Because they say, well, if the earth is moving so fast, why can't you just go up in a helicopter hover a bit, wait for the earth to move underneath you, then go back down again? Right. It's just completely backwards physics because you're already moving. So you'd have to slow down to zero, which is the same as speeding up relatively speaking. So the point is that anyone can make misconceptions about physics like that. Yeah. And it's easy to get sucked into that. And it's actually quite hard to break them. Even for this reasonable guy who was like, you know, a video game programmer who presumably knew something about physics. He was convinced that Matt was going to fall out of the back of the truck. And quite possibly died, but he still let him do the experiment. Well, let's end it on that because this is literally hurting my brain. Yeah. But what you're doing is very important. And I really want to thank you. Your website is very important. It's very important for people who are curious and concerned and don't understand the physics and the logic and the science behind it all. But I've sent your site to many, many people that believed or don't believe and we're trying to figure out a way to explain it. So thank you. Thank you. Thanks for being our attention. All right, folks. That's it for the week. See ya.