Joe Roman reagan. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. He just said something that's like very important. Can't be dogmatic when you talk about vaccines. Or about anything. Yes, it is good to keep an open mind, isn't it? And be flexible and look at a 360 degree view of things rather than your tunnel vision and what you're indoctrinated into, isn't it? Yeah, and especially if you know that that indoctrination has been on purpose and profitable. And you know, one of the great things about your book is first of all, your book's called Dissolving Illusions. I know I've talked about on the podcast a bunch of times, but you also highlight a lot of things that we know are beneficial that somehow or another get lumped into nonsense. Like even cinnamon. Yeah, cinnamon is a powerful herb actually. And it's known to be helpful in glucose handling for a lot of diabetics taking it in capsule form now. I noticed at the end of my nephrology career that a lot of my own patients were taking cinnamon capsules. But it's also has a lot of vitamin C in it. And I think that was probably one of the keys. A lot of those old remedies that we wrote about the magic and then probably was the vitamin C in them. I dismissed all that stuff as total nonsense. I was like, all that's hippie nonsense like at canaisha like get out of here. It's hippie nonsense. Garlic, come on, get out of here. Then the more I've read things, especially like garlic is incredible for staff infections for some reason. It is. And it doesn't be developed drug resistance like a lot of the drugs that are engineered for it. Yeah, the hippie seem to have got it right, I think. Well, it just that whole idea of natural remedies is so just universally dismissed by non-silly people. When you say natural remedies, that's great. If you have a heart attack, go to a doctor's stupid. That's generally people's appeal to authority. Right. But the doctors should be recommending those things too. Like they're good too. Like vitamin D, super important. Vitamin A, super important. And one of the things that you talked about in the book is that I think this is really important. When you're talking about the measles vaccine, you were saying that either if you get an infection with measles, just a natural infection or if you get the vaccine, you're still going to get depleted of vitamin A. Like if you get vaccinated for the measles, you should be taking vitamin A as well. Your body's going to get depleted just by getting that shot. They don't tell you that. No, they don't tell you anything. Just Tylenol, which actually makes the vaccine not work as well in addition to causing all kinds of immunological disturbances at the time that you're supposed to be up regulating your immune system against this dreaded disease. Yeah. But one of the things about the recommended by the white coats and the authorities is that the public believes that so many drugs and remedies are standardized, that the conventional medical system gives out. And when you go to actually look at them, and this includes vaccines, even though they're standardized, meaning that the manufacturers are told what the regulation should be in terms of production. When people go and look at them, they find it's anything but standardized. It's very variable, which is why we see such variability in the results. When people receive them, that's only one reason why there's so much variability. And do you think it's the immunity to any legal consequences that has allowed them to sort of operate like this? Well, we certainly saw an explosion of their creativity since 1986. So actually in 1986, you're referring to the National Child Vaccine Injury Act that was passed in 1986. But before 1986, we had 1976, which was the Swine Flu vaccine fiasco. And that was a situation where there was so much injury that the vaccine-producing companies were no longer able to get insurance. And so they went to the government, and they said, we need you to indemnify us, and they did. And so the government absorbed all the lawsuit cases that happened as a result of the gamma-array that happened from then. And so that kind of set a precedent for 1986. So back then, vaccines were just kind of pieces of my probe or maybe a live attenuated virus. And then they would put it background of all kinds of hard things inside of it and tell you it was just a clear, beautiful, pure solution. But that's beside the point. So then 1986 comes along, because there's so many lawsuits happening because of the theory of pertussis tetanus vaccine that, again, the vaccine companies couldn't continue to go on the way they were, because they were being sued so much. So then this horrible act was passed, which to some people seemed like a good idea. And this is always how it goes. Is we're going to make you this promise. Yes, yes, yes. We're going to cover all the lawsuits now out of taxes. But it's going to be OK because we're going to pay out these lawsuits. And you're going to be fine. If your kid takes one for the team, you're going to be OK. And what happens is after time, after they get their foot in the door, they narrow down the, they basically have a kangaroo court that decides if you're eligible. And so the qualification tables got narrowed down, because in the beginning, they were paying out so much of this. So not only did it make the vaccine companies very, very wealthy and indemnify, but as you alluded to just a minute ago, the creativity of the vaccine companies expanded. So after that, they could add different, what do we call, adjuvants, things that stimulate the immune system. So the vaccine works better. Then they start, that's why we're able to be in a messenger RNA vaccine situation today, which that wouldn't have happened if it weren't for this indemnification, that the vaccine trials have always been a bit of a joke. But they're even more of a joke today than they were in the beginning. We've never seen a vaccinated unvaccinated study that is accepted by the powers that be as good enough. The vaccinated unvaccinated unvaccinated studies that they have, they use another vaccine for you probably know that. So if you're testing a measles vaccine, you could test it against a diphtheria vaccine or a flu shot vaccine is tested against a hepatitis A vaccine. There's no saline placebo, because the few studies that exist with saline placebo show how bad the vaccine actually is and how it makes you not only not respond to the disease when it comes around, but more susceptible to it in many cases. Have there been any instances where vaccines have been helpful? The question of the century, isn't it? OK, now we have to back up a minute because I had that same question and I had to go dig deep. All the questions you have in your head right now, I had them to at one point. So here I am, a medical doctor working in the field, believing it pretty much everything I was told, giving hundreds of not thousands of vaccines out to my patients, hepatitis B vaccines in particular, flu shots for sure. I was a nephrologist, kidney specialist, and dialysis, et cetera. And initially, we all kind of have an aversion to needles. I think it's a natural human, if we're just some of our kids, we don't, no one's going, oh, I want to go get my vaccines. We're like, you know, OK, fine, sore arm, you get over it. Most of us were lucky enough to get over it. So by the time the first instance of a problem occurred in front of my eyes, I was already a fully seasoned professor of medicine, working in a tertiary care medical center. And so it's been a bit of a process because for me, it was the influenza vaccines in 2008, 2009 that showed me without a doubt that vaccines can and do cause kidney failure and put people on dialysis that that does happen. It can cause hypertension. So we're not told to take a vaccine history in medical school. We're not told to even look there. It's not even part of, especially in adults. But when I did start looking there, I started to see more and more associations. Let's just put it that way. And so first I had to go down the flu vaccine bunny trail. And every time I went down that flu vaccine bunny trail, I guess what I was asked. What about polio? So I thought, all right, even though this has absolutely zero to do with polio because I'm watching people crap out in front of me after influenza vaccines, let's see about polio. Because I knew very little about polio, just like most people walking around out there do, that was invented by this guy named Jonas Salk and it saved humanity. We don't see this little crippled kids anymore. We don't have iron lungs anymore. Yay. Well, I would have to say that the polio bunny trail was the darkest one of all. And so after polio then became smallpox. And I thought, you know, we still have people walking the earth that have experienced the polio years. So I kind of like to stick to polio because most of the smallpox, you know, people that would have been familiar with it are off the planet. But there's still some doctors around that will talk about smallpox. The guy named Thomas Mack, who's probably close to 90, who was kind of of ground zero in the 1940s and knows a lot about it and still says, we shouldn't be vaccinated for smallpox today. So then there was that and then everyone in their dog was talking about autism and I didn't really want to have anything to do with autism because I was an adult doctor. I think we should break down step by step. Like what about polio? Yeah. Everything starts with good health. That's why AG1 is a great addition to any morning routine and why I've partnered with them for so long. One scoop once a day, simple research backed and designed to support your whole body health. And it actually tastes great. You can forget juggling multiple pills and supplements. AG1 is a more in one solution that combines a multibidivin, superior B complex, a blend of superfoods and more. And more importantly, AG1 prioritizes using nutrients that are already in their bioactive form. So your body can use them easily. Just mix it with cold water and your set. No hassle, no guesswork. It's never too late to create a new healthy habit for 2025. So try AG1 for yourself. And right now, AG1 is offering new customers a free $76 gift when you subscribe. You'll get a welcome kit, a bottle of D3 K2 and five free travel packs in your first box. So make sure you check out drink AG1.com slash Joe Rogan. Check it out because you said polio once once we've breached that because that's the big one. Right. This is the one that everybody points to. We don't have a couple of kids. Yeah. What when you look at the historical timeline of polio, what do you think caused it to go to essentially not be a problem anymore? Okay. You don't think vaccinations had anything to do with that. Well, I also, it's not what I think. because that's the thing. Like, look, when I got into this, I did say, oh, you know, I want to argue that vaccines are great. I said, look, I don't care. I didn't have skin in the game. I didn't have vaccine injured kids. I couldn't have cared less about it and essentially accepted. It was something in front of me and didn't make sense. So I thought wherever the truth falls, that's what I'm going to talk about. So what I say is that I what what the facts line up to show you is that polio is still here. It's still alive and well. polio is called different things today. Whereas back in the 1940s, 1950s, the criteria for diagnosing polio were completely different to the year that the vaccine was introduced. The playing field, the goal post, everything was changed. So that despite the fact that there was more paralytic polio in the years after that vaccine was introduced, they were able to show a complete cascading drop of paralytic polio simply because of the way they changed the definitions of what polio is and what could cause it and they started testing for the virus or before they would never test for the virus. And when they started testing for the virus later, what they would find that people had giombre asymptom, they didn't have virus or they had cocksacki virus or echo virus or they were lead poisoned or mercury poisoned, which was the mercury and lead were the meeting treatments of the day, including bloodletting. They were telling people to take your cigarette and put a little bit of arsenic in there. That's good for your lungs. Yeah. They were literally blowing smoke up people's butts like that's where the term comes from because if you want to Google that now, you'll see that there's an instrument that doesn't. Yeah. So, yeah, the polio story, where to even begin. And so there's about 70 pages. And so that became my obsession. So when people said what about polio and I started digging this up, I went deep into it. Did you dive into pesticides? Yes. Yes. Because the tonnage of production of DDT absolutely mirrored the diagnosis for polio in the days and the countries that still make DDT today is where we're still seeing this paralytic polio situation happen. And also weren't the first cases? Did they break out in a rural community? The first case is a polio. Yes. Yeah, it's paralytic polio. Yes, it was out in the countryside. Well, that was probably more because of the sheep and cow dipping. So arsenic, you'd have to look at arsenic, you have to look at the mercurials, you have to look at the calcium, arsenic, lead arsenic sprays that were put on trees. But what you're talking about, particularly, they would call the cow disease. They would go out in the family. When you would go to the house and say, all the kids have the cow disease, what the cows had before. Well, what were they doing? They would have this trench as you talked to farmers, even today. Oh, yeah. We had trenches. We would just walk them straight through. And I'd be soaked with the stuff by the end of the day. Oh, my God. Yeah. So they're basically soaking and bathing in arsenic, which is great for killing fleas and ticks. Oh. Really great for keeping your nervous system happy because the fact of the matter is, and this, again, I've got medical references. Everything I can't get away with making stuff up. Okay. I have to put a reference for everything, but arsenic causes the exact same spinal pathology that, and fevers and everything. It literally mimics what they were calling polio and a polio virus back in the day. I read this crazy statistic and I still can't believe it's real, that 95 to 99% of all polio is asymptomatic. That's exactly right. So polio virus is what we call a commensal. Just like you have staff on your skin and strep on your skin and it actually serves a purpose. It keeps other microbes and checks, long as you don't get a cut and have not a good immune system to deal from the inside out. So polio, the reason I can say that polio is a commensal is because, again, there are medical studies that showed that people who dared to get on the edge of some of these wild native tribes down in South America or elsewhere. But in particular, I'm talking about South American tribe called the Javante Indians. So the Indian Health Service got to the edge of it and bargained that they would get some stool and some blood from the tribes so that they could test it for polio. What they found was 98 to 99% of every person they tested and it was hundreds of people had evidence of immunity to all three strains of polio. And they said to them, well, where are your crippled children? Where is your short legs? Where are the people that died of respiratory failure? And they were like, we don't have any of that problem. So it was well done. Could it possibly be that whatever you're calling polio evolved and became less powerful over time and more contagious? Does that does happen when some viruses, right? Most viruses in nature don't become more problematic as they go through the human system. They become less problematic. Remember the whole COVID thing. In the beginning, people were getting super, super sick. It wasn't as contagious but it was more virulent. And as it attenuated into the human bodies, it sort of filled, it kind of fizzled out a bit and then we got the Amachron which was less, it was more spreadable but it was much less pathological. And that's the natural process that happens. So when you're going to have problems, real problems with microbes, they're usually going to be reverse attenuated, meaning made more lethal in a lab and then they're introduced into the population. And look, I'm not making this up either 1916, Upper East Side Manhattan. There was a Rockefeller lab that their specific stated goal was to try to create the most pathological neuropathological strain of polio possible. And they did that by taking monkey brains and human spinal serum and injecting it into monkeys. And there was a big problem with that which was released into the public by accident. And the world experienced the worst polio epidemic on record, 25% mortality that's unheard of, really freaked the public out. But as it, as it cut, you can see the epicenter as it fanned out. And as it fanned out and as time went on, never heard of it again, it attenuates as it moves through the body because it's a normal human commensal that goes back to its normal state when it's in a human. And that's generally what happens. If you have a highly lethal virus and it kills a lot of people, those people are dead, they can't spread anything. So that's kind of a different story if you want to talk about hontovirus or something like that. As far as polio goes, no, polio was only made more lethal by the stupid things that humans did around it. So make it more invasive into the body. Just like you can go do stupid things and end up with herpes outbreaks and, you know, staff outbreaks. So the idea of virus is a normal commensal, it used to be until we obliterated it with oral vaccines and replaced it with vaccine strain. But the wild strains are normal human commensals. So there's vaccine strain polio that just comes from a vaccine and is transmissible? Absolutely. Today, it would be the oral polio vaccines because they're the live strains and they're still giving them pulse fashion all throughout India. They did a campaign a few years back in Israel and they always say that a nomad came and, you know, pooped in the sewage system and they find it in the sewage system and they don't want an outbreak to happen so they treat everybody. So that's today the most common reason to see polio, my lightest disease from a virus, if you test for a virus, they'll usually find the vaccine virus. And that's why today we don't remember when we were kids because we're about the same age, I think. They would give us the sugar cube. Maybe you didn't, but I did. I got the sugar cube and that was the live vaccine. Well, they stopped doing that because after a while, the only cases of polio and it became so obvious that the only cases of polio we were seeing related to a virus when they tested for polio virus were vaccine strains. Then they started injecting us again. But the early injections caused more paralytic polio than it prevented. And that's the part that people don't understand when they say, what about polio? Because they like you just go, well, there's no more iron lungs, there's no more crippling, there's no more these little poor little kids walking around their, their cast. Well, that's, that's not true because the iron lung is now called a ventilator. So that's out the window. Transverse, my lightest, which there are about 1300 cases, I think it's a month diagnosed in one particular, I put a quote, put a quote in here on that, but transverse, my lightest is actually something that would have absolutely, it follows the same pathology as polio. It would have been called polio back in the day. So we still have polio that we had in 1953 because in 1953 all you had to have to be diagnosed as polio, any more good diagnosis, just one examination with one set of muscles being paralyzed. There was no time frame on it. There was no testing done on it. And then it was considered a public service to do it because then you were eligible for funding. So what do they call it again? Can you say that word again? My lightest. My light, polio, my lightest is the definition of the actual pathology. So it basically means inflammation of the gray matter of your spinal cord. That's what polio and Greek, polio, my lightest. It means gray matter inflammation, polio, my lightest. Polio, my lightest is what happens in the body. Okay, if you want to talk about what causes it, then okay, maybe in some cases a polio virus causes it. And all the other things we just mentioned, arsenic, lead arsenic, calcium, arsenic injections, tonsillectomies were huge cause of some of the worst cases of polio, my lightest. And in fact, injections and tonsillectomies and unnecessary surgeries were put on hold during the years where the epidemics were the worst. So that's just proof that even the surgeons knew that. Why does it affect it? Okay, so if you happen to have polio, my lightest circulating in your body that's not just sitting in your intestines and say it made its way into your body because we can. Things can go from your intestines into your body. And you happen to have it close to a nerve that's up, say around your throat and then you go and take a tonsils out. Then what you've done is you've given that access to the blood compartment, the lymph compartment and the brain stem, which is right there, local. So those are the people that would get what was called ball bar polio, which is the ones that put you on a ventilator. And it's highly lethal. It's the worst kind of polio to get ball bar polio. And it was very well known to have been coincident with tonsillectomies. Not only that, but tonsillectomies changed the structure and antibodies and the immunity that occurred in the throat and changed it for the worst, not for the better. Do you think they're unnecessary? Or is there some times when people have to get their tonsils removed or is it just a nonsense practice? Okay. Again, it's not just a cut and dry answer because let's just say that anyone who's ever brought their child to me because the tonsils were touching or they were snoring has not had to have a tonsillectomy. Now, does that mean that a tonsillectomy won't solve that problem where you're snoring? And you know, you kids maybe not oxygenated? No, if you let it go that long, probably you're going to need a tonsillectomy. But I've seen so many cases reverse. It's a very easy thing to do. But as doctors were not taught about all the things that you were talking about earlier, the natural remedies, but just simply gargling with a solution of sodium, a score bait, vitamin C can make a huge difference because tonsils are like porous golf balls if you want to think of them that way. They've got pits in them. And so food you eat and bacteria and pus can build up. But if you just start rinsing the outsides of them and start nourishing the body from the inside and getting rid of things that the kid might be allergic to, which almost every kid's going to eat if your parent doesn't know better, it can make a remarkable difference in these kids that have these huge tonsils. So I think that a lot, I think everything else should be done first before taking out the tonsils if there's time because I'd say 95 to 99% of the time you can prevent that child from needing their tonsils removed. Before we go to a smallpox, I want to talk about this because he just brought it up. One of the things that Brett Weinstein has explained to me is that aluminum is when the concept is that giving someone a shot with aluminum in it and triggering an immune response, if they're eating certain foods during that time, they can then develop an allergy to those foods like certain people with peanuts and various things like that. It used to be very common for people to eat within a bunch of people developed like pretty severe food allergies. And he makes this connection that he believes he is this reasonable connection to say that there's something. Absolutely, 100%. And it's not just something he's dreamed up. Again, provable medical literature in the book, dissolving illusions, the physiology, the pathologies known. It's very well known that the vaccines that have aluminum in them skew the immune system. If you want to break it down, it's really simply. You have your TH1 arm and your TH2 arm. Your TH1 arm is a really important one. Those are your T cells. Your lymphocytes, the cells chew up any garbage that's going around. That's the part you want activated in any infection you have, whether it's COVID or measles or smallpox or whatever. Then you have your TH2 arm, which is they're mostly to deal with parasites and things like that. It's mostly an antibody arm of immunity. That's when the vaccinologists are obsessed with, making sure there's enough antibody. The vaccines that have aluminum in them, as opposed to the live attenuated vaccines, which don't have aluminum. All the other ones do. So your DTAP is going to have aluminum in them. All your killed vaccines are going to have aluminum in them. And that is very well known to trigger that TH2 response, which is the allergic response, which can set up your body for autoimmunity. So part of the purpose of breastfeeding, which is part of the blueprint for humanity and every other mammal, is that the mother is able to introduce antigens in the world to her baby through her own breast and things that she's been eating and breathing in. And then the baby's able to develop tolerance. So while vaccine scientists are obsessed with getting antibodies and ramping up an infant's inadequate immune system, the fact of the matter is that it's more important to learn what not to react to when your immune system's developing, rather than to becoming defensive against every microbe that could get you. So that's kind of the paradox there and one of the battlegrounds for immunology within immunology and for those of us out here that are going, what are you doing here? Anyway, you were also talking to your book about the importance of breast milk and the amount of nutrition that's in breast milk for a child and what it does for a child. And the differences in their immune system, the differences in a lot of different aspects of their development, which is pretty fascinating. And most people kind of just assume it's food. It's just food, but it's a lot more than that. It's so much more than that. And I was actually quite startled when I really went down that rabbit hole to see. Not only, I mean, it is food. It's excellent nutrition with short chain fatty acids and sugars that the baby needs and actually trains your gut to be healthy in the long run as an adult, which trains your immune system as well. But what that mother is putting through her breast milk, things like something called hamlet, H-A-M-L-E-T, which stands for human alphylactal, human-made lethal to tumors. And this is a substance. This is a protein. It's like a transformer protein that can literally turn into a cancer-busting molecule that is being used by the oncology industry. And when it's not in that form, it's a powerful protein that fights off, pertusses, all kinds of pneumococcal bacteria. And when it's not doing that, it's food. Okay, so it's got so many different purposes. stem cells are coming through that mother's milk. Activated T cells. Activated T cells have another substance in them that is kind of hijacked by the oncology industry. And that is when they're immunosuppressing kids for leukemia or whatever. And they come in contact with chickenpox. What they can do is get somebody like me who's immune to chickenpox naturally and take my memory T cells that remember that. And there's a substance in there called dializable leukocyte extract. When you put that into another child, even if whether they eat it or inject it into them, it transfers cellular that T-H1 important arm of immunity. I just told you it transfers it onto them and protects them for a long time. So that's kind of in the old days when mothers had measles in the old days and normally and they wrote a past as powerful immunity through that DLE factor as well as all these other things, including preformed immune globulins. I mentioned something like 80,000 stem cells. It's just incredible. And we still have only hit the tip of the iceberg in terms of what we know about breast milk. But breast milk also, it's been proven again that if you are going to vaccinate your baby, if you're breastfeeding, the vaccine will bring that baby more into a T-H1. If you're not breastfeeding and you're giving formula, that baby is going to move more into a T-H2 in response to that vaccine. If most women understood the powers of breast milk, they would do everything possible to be able to do it. I think you make a very compelling point for that. I think it's arrogant that we could assume that we could replace something with a, I mean, we have a red the ingredients of formula. But how could that be good? Yeah. Paracites. We have parasites that have been parasites upon humanity for such a long time. And that's what happens is that something is discovered. And for some people, maybe it can be a good idea, but then the parasites take it and want to, so when it came to breastfeeding, it was, you don't have to do that. You don't have to bother yourself like that. You don't have to pull your boobs out in public. You don't have to become a dairy cow. Just strap them down. The milk will stop. And then you can start putting this wonderful. When I was a kid, I was fed soy milk and a warm plastic bag. That was the fad then grown up. So the formula industry is a huge money maker. And some women do prefer it. Fortunately 75% of women in the USA today do initiate breastfeeding. So that's very much better than the polio days when almost nobody was breastfeeding. And they were using milk in the infant formula that had been contaminated by what the cows were eating. Oh my God. And so that was another part of the polio story that's not been told. So the cows were all eating these pesticides. Yes. And herbicides. Yes. And the cows were getting sick with it. And then these people were drinking the milk from that cow and getting sick as well. Well, the cows wouldn't have been getting necessarily getting sick from it, but it would be concentrating in their milk. And so the milk would have been expressed. getting sick as well. Well, the cows wouldn't have been getting necessarily getting sick from it, but it would be concentrating in their milk. And so the milk would have been expressed. But what you just brought me back to another place. Cows were also used during the smallpox era and what you're saying is true about that. So they would basically take what they thought was, sorry, it's just so dark that I sometimes you have to laugh. But they would take pus from other animals, scratch it into the belly of a cow, then take the pus off of the big pimples that would form on the belly of a cow. The cow could become very sick and yet that's cow could still be butchered up at the butcher shop. The butcher would get sick with pemphagus or some hand and mouth disease or things that the cows normally catch. And so those cows could still be used to produce meat in those cases. I don't know that it was used to produce milk. I don't think that would have, I don't know. But I know it was used to produce meat because the butchers were getting sick and the people that were eating them, the meat were getting sick. And certainly the people that took the vaccines that had certain who knows what in them because it was shown. Like into the 1970s, 80s and even recently I have a reference after the year 2000 that there was more bacteria and fungus in the smallpox vaccines than there was smallpox virus. So it was because they had this thing called pure lymph which was pus that came out of the horse of a horse's foot or a donkey's pus skin or a cadaver of a human or a cow's ulcerating utters and scraped into glycerin and called pure lymph and marketed all over the world as a, this is the joke, this was our success. This is the one vaccine that eliminated eradicated a disease. Can you believe that fairy tale? I'll tell you another one. Like it doesn't get crazy. This is our success. This vaccine that I have described in great detail with what was in it and what people saw under microscopes and then later tested genetically was what was called a quasi species. Meaning they don't even after a while it became its own thing. It wasn't from a horse anymore. It wasn't from a human anymore. They called it humanized horsepox when they genetically characterized the drive-ax and then ordered that every drive-ax specimen on the planet be destroyed. I think that was around 2009. Why did they do that? Good question. I don't know. Hiding the evidence possibly but they now have a new vaccine which doesn't work. But they wanted to bring this one back when I was in my peak of my career in 2003. I got a letter on my desk stating that they needed people to get vaccinated for smallpox so that those other people that were getting vaccinated would have somebody that could treat them that would be immune to smallpox. Because it's well known that if you get a smallpox vaccine and you get these horrible scabs that you're going to spread smallpox and you're going to have a horrible itchy time of it. The secondary infection you will need a doctor at some point. Well it turns out that the trials that they did on super healthy people soldiers that were in top shape were so bad in terms of cardiac disease and other diseases that the government put it on hold for a second. So no no we can't do this. Meanwhile guess what? They were using the same vaccine in the 1700s and 1800s. Late 1700s all through the 1800s into the 1900s. They would sometimes you probably saw the picture of the child's arm considered a good take five huge ulcers on the arm with sanitation being what it was. No antibiotics. Can you imagine having your baby have five scars on its arm ulcerating from these things having fevers sometimes the arms became the chronic sometimes the disease spread all over the place and there was nothing but to give them except blood letting recurials and our Senicles and heating them up in a dark room with no sunlight. That was the treatment for smallpox. So you tell me why smallpox was so lethal. This episode is brought to you by Farmer's Dog. It doesn't matter how old your dog is it's always a great time to start investing in their health and happiness and thankfully the farmer's dog makes it easier than ever to feed your dog a healthy diet of real meat and veggies. Dogs prefer their food even picky dogs and owners prefer their service. If you have a question about your dog your plan your delivery or anything else they have 24 seven customer service that connects you to real humans who are genuinely interested in providing the best experience possible for you and your dog. They give you detailed instructions on how to transition your dog to fresh food and even pre portion it for your dog specific needs feeding your dog healthy human grade food shouldn't be complicated and with the farmer's dog it isn't the entire experience from box to bowl is a breeze. So try the farmer's dog today and give healthy freshly made food a try you can get 50% off your first box of food plus free shipping just go to the farmers dog dot com slash Rogan tap the banner or visit this episodes page to learn more offer available for new customers only. Well what's fascinating also is that most people aren't aware of the just the general public health conditions during the time at the smallpox outbreak. That's right. And the way the way people lived is almost unheard of you wouldn't you wouldn't be able to imagine just the smell of human feces everywhere. The streets were filled without houses there was animal shit in the streets it was no sanitation there's no running water it's a disaster it's a disaster and there's no good food. So you got malnutrition you're exposed to numerous pathogens and just waste you probably have fecal matter on everything it's probably unavoidable attracts in your house it's everywhere you go. It's your drinking water yeah drinking water was the pet you would skim the top off drinking water back then and we know that all infections make make any primary infection worse you know if you have measles you get a co infection makes it worse COVID with a coin for anything makes it worse to get up with you know pneumonia's and. Plus pockets and your lungs so yeah thank you for that description I don't think I could have done it much better myself but that's that's the that was normal it's go watch gangs of New York like that's that's obviously a drama and you know it's probably not completely accurate because from my bed it's pretty close. Yeah it's pretty close down people live back then yeah the slums like you can you can actually like in here it's not all medical articles articles quoted. Some of the quotes that we use our historical quotes from you know anthropologists that would go through the slums in New York you know the Ellis Island was just bringing people in bringing people in these they would sometimes have 20 people in one room with no privy. Dark you know like you say some of the end that the sewage would run underneath the house so the smell of it would be coming up through the whole time and then you have them working 16 hours a day at the age of anything upwards of four to five years old could be sent to either coal mines or canneries. To bring money in for the families to barely survive so people weren't being paid very well but you just said smallpox being what it was but what people don't realize is that in the 1600s late 1680s doctors were. describing smallpox as one of the easiest diseases to treat if you simply just supported the human again quoted. That and then what happened is the industrial revolution and people were taken with the land enclosure acts out from the farms and brought into cities which didn't have the pigs basically with garbage men back then. So the pigs ran wild thank god because if they didn't it would have been even worse horses where you cars so the horse were dumping everywhere. You know some people just they said there was a foot of horse manure to get through to walk across the street. So it was it was horrible and pretty much every way you can think of and then the human oppression on top of it in terms of the poverty that was there and the wealthy elite at the top kind of you know living the good life but it was starting to filter up to them at some point which is why. It was actually individual people that sponsored the first public drinking fountains and things like that was probably partly to save themselves. Because if you can if you can stop disease from running running rampant through society look they still had to go into the cities to get things right. It even you sent your servant into the city a servant could bring you home something lovely from the city. Yeah. This is not the picture that was painted when we were children of what society was like. No we were told that this vaccine was so important and it was so effective that we don't need it anymore. I actually ended up with one when I was very young. I think what we're talking about when we're saying the conditions that these conditions aren't known to most people and that these conditions coincide with these diseases. And it's probably not just a correlation. So the conditions correlate with the diseases and the conditions also correlate with the death rates. Okay. And so there were many of the diseases that were talking about say just diarrhea. Do you know diarrhea killed more people in the Civil War than bullets and lots of other wars diarrhea. Dyrate can be caused by lots of things. Nothing that we vaccinate for essentially. Well I mean today there's road of virus but that wasn't a thing then it was more you know typhus and things like that. So and call it. I think I have to get it from water. Yeah that's what that would have been because they would be out you know in the in the in the bush or the trenches you know drinking what they could. So redirect me again we're just talking about the okay. The diseases that there were never any vaccines for we see the death rate come down at the same exact avalanche as the diseases that we did vaccinate for. And in some cases there's a little blip when the vaccine comes up and things get worse for a bit and then come back down. So again the point of the book was just interpreting the data that's existed for a really long time vital statistics throughout the world as to the decline in death rate. In some cases the disease rates went down too but the most important thing was the death rate because that's what people you maybe could die you have to have a vaccine right it's not your baby could have a rash. You know so different diseases have different severities and and different solutions and different ways to treat them so that they never have to present to a hospital. But like you said you know back in those days you know there wasn't the the pharmacies basically had your materials are Santa Claus if you were lucky some homeopathics. That was pretty much medicine back then until aspirin was invented which was probably one of the reasons why the 1918 flu looked as bad as it did because they were giving people up to 10 grams of aspirin a day which can cause pulmonary edema and a healthy person. So what was this logic behind the arsenic and the materials like how did that become an approach that they use for medicine. Well I don't know actually don't know the answer to why they started doing that. Those are two really bad things. Well I'll tell you how they prescribed it is they would say give one grain until emesis occurs that means throwing up so give it until a person throws up because back then they believe that if they could get you to throw up they thought if bringing stuff out of your body was good blood letting throwing up and diarrhea. And so that's how that was the threshold for giving a lot of these drugs so they thought instead you know how can you get someone to have diarrhea as a doctor okay well we can give them materials and our chemicals that will do the trick and so they thought that they could purge the body. I think the medicine past present and future. Yeah. Okay paradoxically is therapeutic agent that has been used since ancient times for the treatment of multiple diseases. So does it actually cure some stuff in small doses. Well what is the cure of the dead patient or patient with neuropathy you haven't really cured anyone had right. Well isn't it dose dependent right it says arsenic trioxide the active ingredient in the traditional Chinese medicine was shown to produce dramatic remission of acute pulp you could say that word. Promilocytic leukemia. Thank you. Similar to the fact that vitamin A could do it okay. Right trans retinolic acid so retinolic acid which is vitamin A. Yeah. Okay that's interesting. I would say vitamin A is not a risky. I'd say it's less risky for vitamin A than arsenic. But is it a different type of arsenic? Slightly different kind of arsenic or a lower dose of arsenic is that. They measured things in grains back then so I guess that's probably like maybe like a milligram something like that. But the Chinese medicine is probably the root of it right why they thought it was medicine. Could be. But maybe they use the wrong arsenic or that's possible. I guess you start trying the things that you have right. Mercury is a crazy one though. Haven't they known that's poison forever? Like isn't that quick silver though? Isn't it the same thing or no? I don't know. It's a fascinating metal because it's liquid metal a lot of people played with it when they were kids. I know some of the smartest people I know is talk about how they played with the mercury ball when they were little. Yikes. And it's in thermometers obviously it works quite well there's a use for mercury. But the reason that it's put into the it was actually in the MMR vaccines and some of the flu vaccines is because it's an antimicrobial. They'll kill everything so maybe that was part of that because it will kill everything will kill the microbes in a petri dish. So in order to because this is one of the realities of vaccine manufacture which I want your audience to understand on is that vaccines while it might look like just a clear liquid. In order to make a vaccine you have to have either a cow that you put ulcers on and scrape the pus off or you can evolve it as it had evolved to maybe getting some tumor cells that came out of a cocker's manual's kidney or monkey balls or or monkey kidneys and you plate those cells out and then you inoculate it with what you want to grow to put in your vaccine later. In order to keep those cells alive you have to put animal blood on it you have to put different nutrients on top of it. You have to put antibiotics, kennamycin, things like that related to the COVID here mercury. So in the end you can kill you can make sure when you have your final product that if you put a little bit of mercury in there that it's less likely for any of the fungus or the spores or the bacteria or the the adventitious viruses that you didn't know about that were there before will be in your final product. Wonderful. So you have a product now that you can be not completely sure has any of these deadly microbes but now has mercury which the only places it's actually okay to have on the planet mercury is in vaccines. Your tooth or toxic landfill so if you were to drop a vaccine a vaccine clinic onto the floor the hazmat guys will come in you're not allowed to just pick it up if it's got if it's a mercury containing vaccine. The hazmat people have to come and take that away yet we're okay to take you know set a portion of that vial and injected into you know child a three month old child. How does that work? It doesn't sound logical and then there was also the issue with the different types of mercury right there was is it methyl and ethyl the two different. Apparently ethyl is good and methyl is bad according to Paul Offett, well senior vaccine scientist but the fact of the matter is once once mercury is methylated and like fish fish can methylate mercury and they can get rid of it. Once we demethylate mercury it's it's in us until you do something like something called chelation where you can put a chemical into the body that can grab onto it and pull it out through your urine otherwise you're stuck with it. So in my opinion all mercury is bad shouldn't be put into human shouldn't be in our food sources shouldn't be in our environment except for in the net look you can even find uranium in nature right it's what people do to it to concentrate it and how they use it that becomes a problem. Wasn't the issue that one of them I don't know what's methyl or ethyl mercury leaves the body quicker. Yes it's ethyl mercury that leaves the body quicker because methyl is a it's a chemical that gets put onto it naturally and apparently I'm not an expert on mercury poisoning but apparently methyl mercury we don't have the ability to excrete but ethyl mercury we do. Yeah. Wasn't there also an issue that it crosses the blood bank brain barrier. Well anytime there's inflammation anything can cross the blood brain barrier. With the it's the aluminum that we really know crosses the blood brain barrier and that's still in vaccines today and yeah anyway we get into blood brain barrier if you want to that's a whole other story. But yeah so mercury obviously it can get into the brain it's it's it's found in the brain it can get into you know your adrenals and your other glands and important areas of your body and even the thing is even at such low levels can cause problems no neuro toxin. There's no has no place for circulating or being deposited in the human body in any form. But isn't it fascinating that they've done such a good job promoting this that people are going to get outraged at what you're saying. They've done such a good job. My life. And you've got a lot of courage I don't want to commend you for that because writing that book and being here talk about it takes a lot of courage. And it's from regular people who want to believe the vaccine they're scarier than anybody the people that are just rabid. Vaxxers and they want they they stand for science like they're the warriors for science and they get very aggressive about it and they don't even want to breach the subject they don't even want to look at it. Because the more you look at it if you're a logical rational person without like a deep seated ideology attached to vaccines and you just look that the reality of it you just go what what is this. Yeah how did you trick people in doing jecting. How many a year now for kids what is it in the seventies we're in the set I believe we're in the seventies that's insane yeah that's and then you want to demonize anybody who says anything about vaccine side facts you're the. Craziest of cooks they come down you with the hardest publicity campaign it's. So transparent you see it coming a mile away and you're still shocked by how blatant it is. And no one wants to look at the actual issue itself and no one wants to say like well is she right. If you read your book you issue right. If you're right and I think you're right like we've been lied to. And we've been tricked into thinking that this is all settled science. And that's what's infuriating it's not that it's anti science it's like this is not science what you guys are doing it's not science you've subverted you've. You've perverted that notion. And you've you've done it an amazing way I mean hats off to you what they've done in terms of like brainwashing people to believe that all this is. It's not just necessary but it saves millions of lives in anybody that is against it in any way shape or form is a quack and you should be de platformed and never talked about again and. Like public society and cocktail parties you'll be shunned. Yeah well the way they were able to get away with it is 226 years worth of propaganda because the fact of the matter is that ever since the beginning of the smallpox vaccines there have been vaccine deaths. The reason and look we we've added I brought you a special copy this is a limited edition in the 10th anniversary edition we added 200 pages we added a chapter called the white plague. The white plague is also tuberculosis tuberculosis was a side effect of the smallpox vaccine tuberculosis rates were rampant and in fact the inventor of the smallpox vaccine. His child died of tuberculosis and so did his to test subjects that he used. And it was a well known to follow smallpox lots of doctors talked about it but in about two or three years after the vaccine was accepted in England. You hear doctors speaking out about it cursing the day they ever agreed to do it to people to children to anybody. And so what happened is that the government came down harder and started making it mandatory and would take your furniture away and started intimidating the doctors and that's an age old thing as well. And I experienced it in any doctor that's ever stepped out of of line and said something bad about vaccines will either be intimidated or worse. So 220 years of prop to a year's a propaganda and so I'm just going to give you one example and I'll give you a copy of this to have and you can put it up later if you want. But in 1984 because there was so much so much going on in terms of the public learning about the problems with the diptheria tetanus pertussis vaccine and the polio vaccines that a federal register was issued by the government and went to all health departments in the United States which is supposed to just kept there and never circulated. And it said, quote, any doubts whether or not well founded about the safety of the vaccination program must not be allowed to exist. That's literally what it said it's straight out of. George or Lenin. So you had that then you have the changing of the goal post and the app outright lies within scientism because it's not science. It's a religion that that's calls itself science and we still are a victim of that today. Most science today is sponsored by the very people that are going to profit from it and I think even look even Jenner who invented the smallpox fancy never did a scientific study. He never did a controlled study. He never did non vaccinated people, vaccinated people and then exposed them to smallpox and in a large enough group. He would cowpox them and then expose them to smallpox and it was well known that smallpox followed cowpox. So it's just been look again. I never expected to be here. I just wanted to be healer. I just wanted to be a doctor. I wanted to be a nephrologist and teach medical students and make the world a better place for people. That's all I ever wanted. This is a nightmare for me actually to while I've met some incredible people and I've had a really good life and I have no regrets and I would do it all again. No doctor wants to be put in a position where their integrity is doubted, their sanity is doubted. And if you want to pull up a page called it is called rational wiki I think maybe. I'm considered as a Sith Lord. I didn't know what a Sith Lord was back then. I had to actually look it up some like Darth Vader. So it was a bit of a compliment but on the other hand most doctors can't tolerate being called quacks or having the reputation destroyed. I went from treating the CEO of actually the head of the laboratory at my hospital for hypertension to be coming. Somebody that was doubted on every levels after a while because of one thing that I said which was can we stop giving vaccines to my sick patients, to people who are having chemotherapy while they're having chemotherapy to my patient before I've even seen them on the ward. Can we just hold this up and give it to them on the day of discharge? That was my request in the beginning. That's how this all landed here and had they not tried to intimidate me, doubt me and pushed me to research and show that what I saw was actually real. I would still be lockstep working as a regular doctor because there were some good things about it. So, look, even if you look at what happened with COVID, let's just look at that. Like how did they pass this off? Look at the media today. Do you know that they're giving COVID vaccines to six month old children now? We know how bad is. We know that it ruins stem cells and pregnant women. They don't give stem cells to their babies. The industry is upset because the placentas no longer have stem cells and they used to use those stem cells and research and cosmetics, etc. They're getting them anymore because what the COVID shots did to the placentas and those infants. That's not being talked about in the media. Nothing bad about the shots being talked about when we have Kevin McCurnd and all these people looking at it. There's S-V-40 in it. There was a staphylococcal endotoxin gene. There were two snake genes in there. You know, it's a definite gain of function. Nope. We got to put it on the vaccine. The baby vaccine schedule. Because any doubts whether or not well funded about the vaccination must not be allowed to exist. That's why. That sounds like a religion. It sounds like a crazy cult that the whole world's been sucked into. Giving a COVID shot to a baby today is insane. Three of them. They get three by the certain. You'd have to look up the schedule. But I believe it starts at six months and they get three of them kind of boom, boom. Are those just really recommending this? It's on the... Look, there's a group of people called ACIP. The doctors, usually with vaccine interests and their bank accounts. That makes the recommendations for the vaccines. And they have recommended that six-month-old. So if your doctor is following the ACIP program, you have to be offered that vaccine. And now that doctor, this is another part of the story. Is that doctor's likely to lose $250,000 a year if they don't do that? Because there's incentive given to hospitals and doctors, which is what naively I was on the other end of when I woke up in 2008 and said, wait a minute, why are we doing this stuff to my sick and flamed patients? You're giving them more inflammation. It's because the hospital would lose something like $40,000 if they didn't give a vaccine within the first 24 hours of admission. Oh, my God. And they would get $40,000. It was all a money game. And that's really the bottom line of it. And I didn't know that until a nurse years ago, who was a high-level administration. She said, Suzanne, this is why they did that to you. Well, wow, okay. Well, at least it makes sense now. Nobody wants to think of it as a business. Nobody wants to think you're making business decisions at the expense of someone's health. And possibly whether or not they make it. Like, what are you doing? Well, that's been the case since basically the medical profession was infiltrated in the early 1900s by high-level interests that didn't want us thinking for ourselves and carrying on with the natural cures that actually work, carrying on with normal midwifery. There was just so many changes that happened as a result of best practice medicine not to mention, you know, the forming of the AMA by a couple of real quacks. That's a really good story. And the AMA would give their stamp of approval. So say you created an infant formula. Well, they would say AMA approved and you're infant formula would sell even better. Remember when doctors smoked camels, because camels were better. Those are the case. And this is also the time when this coincides with when Rockefeller was designing the school system, right? Well, first Rockefeller, I think oil was one of their primary investments. So that's the farm investments. That's right. Oh, so he went to school. No, but he did both, right? He was a part of both. So he was a part of the reason why natural cures are so easily dismissed and why so dismissed. Because Rockefeller put the entire medical establishment on oil based. So all pharmaceutical drugs that are made by using oil. Yeah. And he did it because he sold oil. You know, one of the ironing kind of works. Yeah. Yeah. Like I got I got rid of a really bad case of mange in a dog by kerosene, but in kerosene diluted in olive oil. And they'd been through everything. They could not get rid of this mange on this beautiful dog. Oh, wow. It's crazy. It's crazy. It's so dog. And yeah, so it's horrible for dogs. Really bad. But one spray was done. And dogs that I picked up. Yeah, it's a bit of careful around the like, you know, flames and stuff. I had a dog that I picked up off the street and took her in and she had horrible mange, but it all went away with just food. I just gave her healthy food. No, it can't joke. Come on. You had to have an expert help you. No, kerosene. No, nothing. Just love food. That was an argument I had in a hallway once with the senior. chief of medicine. He was like, he would always say so. How are you today? Normally be like, good. You know, super, super. I said, by the way, I'm having real trouble with, you know, the H1N1 vaccine. My patient's getting kidney failure after getting it. He turned dark on me. I never saw him dark before. And he said, no, they just didn't have time to take effect. And of course, then I heard every kind of sound bite in the book from him, which I didn't know or sound bites at the time. And then he said, well, what do you think has happened with meningitis and these college kids? I'm like, oh, come on, that's a total no brainer. Their nutrition goes down the tubes when they leave home. They're smoking. They're staying up all night long. They're hanging out with their pals. They're doing everything they couldn't do when they were at home. Oh, you got to be kidding me. So you think it's their food that's causing problems. And I was like, well, what medical school did you go to? Like, I was actually taught that nutrition matters and how it matters and why it matters. But that's been almost completely through. Like, if you're, if you want a sneak of vitamin C into somebody's hospital room, you know the best way to do it, don't bring in jar vitamin C because they will stop that at the door. You get yourself a McDonald's milkshake or a burger and you just dump that milkshake out and you put something else in there, smoothies with some vitamin C and they will say, off you go, that's perfectly fine. That's going to be great for this person, this child. That's how you can get it in because they think that McDonald's is wonderful. In fact, McDonald's are kind of situated proximal to a lot of hospitals and then McDonald's McDonald's houses are there and everything else. But bring in a homey a pass. They think that McDonald's is wonderful. In fact McDonald's are kind of situated proximal to a lot of hospitals and McDonald's, Ronald McDonald's houses are there and everything else. But bring in a homeopathic or magnesium or vitamin C and you've got to get permission for it and go through so much red tape and a lot of time you'll be told, no, you can't give it because oh, you'll cause bowel in the crocus, you'll cause diarrhea, you'll cause kidney stones, everything in the book that doesn't actually happen with vitamin C. It's what most, look, they've measured vitamin C levels on people that enter hospitals and pretty much everybody's deficient or on the border of deficient when they enter and pretty much everybody when they leave has got borderline scurvy. I've not full, full scurvy. Fortunately they go home and start doing other things and can rebuild some of their vitamin C scores. But there is a lot of subclinical scurvy walking around out there and those are the people that are going to do the worst with the vaccine and then they're going to do the worst with the worst. Subclinical scurvy in modern society just from poor diet. Well, you know, it's not just the poor diet so any kind of stress will consume vitamin C. A cigarette will consume 75 milligrams of vitamin C and they tell you that you only need 190 milligrams a day. That's the FDA requirement. Wow. So you just have a few cigarettes and you've depleted your stores. So we don't make our own vitamin C as humans. and guinea pigs, you know, that's we don't do that. And so we have to consume it. And we're relying upon our fruits and vegetables or supplements to do or if you eat organ meat, you can eat the adrenals that are loaded with it. But aside from that, it's your fruits and vegetables that are going to give it to you. So if you're under a lot of stress or you're taking medication or you have a lot of inflammation or arthritis, whatever, that's going to consume vitamin C because vitamin C is an antioxidant as well as an antiviral and good for your nervous system. So yeah, most people are walking around skimming the edge. If you have, you can see kind of a red line on some people's gums. They're probably vitamin C deficient. If your gums are bleeding a lot, when you've lost, you probably need some vitamin C. And you know, you could have an infection too. But we'll deal to the infection as well as the integrity and the collagen inside of your bones and your soft tissues. I mean, it's like one of those things that's so important should be given upon admission to every hospital. And what's really crazy is if you're one of those people that thinks that all you need is a balanced diet and you're eating like a piece of chicken and some lettuce. Like that, there's no vitamin C in any of that. Or not enough. Probably not enough. Yeah, not enough. You just won't do it. If you're not consuming some sort of liposomal vitamin C supplement, if you're not taking something on top of that, you're probably not at an optimal level to survive anything. Which is also it's like part of why we have so many metabolic diseases. We have bad metabolic health. We have metabolic diseases. Like they should be super obvious. Like, oh, everyone's like really unhealthy. It doesn't have any nutrients in their system. And they're all getting really sick from all these different things. Yeah. But everyone's like, no, you need medicine. You need a shot. You need this. You need that. You need to get on this. You need to get off that and get back on this. And you're a hippie. If you want to just eat kiwi fruits and get your vitamin C from that or have oranges or broccoli, oh my gosh, broccoli makes you a total hippie or kale. You get about it. That's. Now, see, we have a different kind of malnutrition today than we described in the book. Back then, it was people were toxic from basically drinking poop water and being worked to death and having diseases all around them. And so they were protein calorie malnutrition as well as vitamin as well. Today, we have kind of this nutrition, like DYS nutrition, and that everyone's fat. So they don't really look malnourished. Pretty much, you go on a cruise or you go to the beach. You even see what big bellies now. Big bellies, the thing. What was that? I said, go to Burke Crushers' house. Who was that? It was my friend. OK, I'm going to hate that you don't know who you are. But today, we've got inflamed guts from glyphosate and the wheat that's been altered to make us inflamed and then just the chemicals that are added to our food and the vitamins that actually don't help us and set us back that are fortifying our bread and milk and lack the vitamin D. So we have a different kind of a problem but essentially causing the same bodily dysfunction. Yeah, the wheat thing I used to think was nonsense until I ate pasta and bread and Italy. And I was like, OK, why do I feel so much better? Why do I not feel like I just ate poison? Because I love pizza. Oh, yeah, I love it. I love lasagna. Oh, I love it. I love it. It's so good. But after it's over, I'm incapacitated for an hour or two, for a two-hour period, you're just like a shadow of yourself. Just, oh. Yeah. You think, oh, maybe it's just the high carbs, but you just proved that it wasn't because in Italy, you were OK with it. I ate a whole pizza in Italy and I was waiting for it. I was like, I'm going to eat this margarita pizza. It's so good that they made it in brick oven. I was like, this is so good. I'm eating the whole pizza. I don't care. I don't care what it's going to feel like afterwards. I ate that whole pizza. And then I was like, where is it? Is it coming? Waiting for the day. Never came. Never came. I felt normal. I felt like I just ate food. I was like, this is nuts. Like, no crash. Yeah. The bread and scanno, the maybes, the same. That's what people used to eat. People don't know that. What's that? I said that's what people used to eat. It is like real food. Well, the people they need to understand, like what they did was, and this is according to a manard from tooled. You know, manard Keenan, the lead singer of tool. He actually runs a farm. He has vineyards. And he has like, like he's cadusious. This is wine label. And he's like, really good at growing things. And because he has a restaurant, he was explaining to me that what they did is they just engineered it to have higher yield. So they put more, it's got more complex gluten in it. So it's not the normal organic wheat that grows in Italy, where they don't have genetically modified crops. Right. So you can still get that flour, and you can still get that pasta from Italy. And it's much more consumable. Yeah. But the American stuff is just, it's just, your body's like, what is this? It just comes in like sludge. It feels like I eat glue. That's what always feels like. Yeah. And it's over. And it's really good sourdough bread. That doesn't seem to have that. Yeah. Yeah. Like I'm not gluten sensitive, but I definitely feel more awake when I don't have it. Yeah. It's not. Good on holiday or when you want to go to the linchies. No, I know. It's so delicious. But this is also a problem. And this goes back to when our Jane Reynolds was going through all their stuff with the lawsuits that were coming from people realizing, oh, my god, cigarettes give you cancer. They're not good to smoke if you have emphysema. I thought they were good for you. That's a Marsnik and it'd be great. There was a movie. And I forget what movie it was. And thank you for smoking. Well, there's that. There was a movie where Leonardo DiCaprio was young. And he was sick. And his doctor was prescribing cigarettes to him. And like the mother was saying, did you smoke your cigarettes? That's the doctor told you. You're not smoking. Like you need to keep up your health. Well, you know, there's something to that. Because you know about the nicotinic receptors. And you know, the smokers got less COVID than the rest of us. And I did hear about that. I did hear about that. Well, also, it doesn't nicotine kill COVID. Like people were saying that nicotine, no, so that's what it is. That's how it kills it. What happens? So the spike of COVID, just the evil part of COVID, has all these horrible lab engineered proteins encoded into them. And two of them are snake talks and proteins that bind onto your nicotinic receptors. So if you can smoke nicotine or take nicotine gum, then you're going to block those receptors up. So you can trade off some of the stuff that's from the spot. What about nicotine pouches? Yes. Like that would probably. If you're having long COVID or any kind of post-COVID syndrome, that's related to the nicotinic receptors, you only know by trying it. But listen, I always say start small. Don't go out and be a hero and take a whole dose at once. Start with a quarter of whatever it says and wait and see what happens. Yeah. Because nicotine's a powerful drug. Try it cigar. Pick up the cigar. Yeah, there you go. It's a wonderful habit. Yeah, that was an uncomfortable thing in the beginning of COVID that they were saying that for some reason smokers seem to be having a much easier go of it. Like what? I have a respiratory disease where smokers are statistically speaking getting less COVID. Yeah, well, I mean, I've been around. I did a tour one time. And they were too heavy, heavy smokers on the bus with me. And they were the only two people that didn't come down with whatever fluid with all the rest of us got. Not even that fluid could even live in their throats. It's kind of a big sense if you think about it. Well, it changes the polarity of your mucus membranes, the charge of the cells on your mucus membranes. And that's probably part of why even the viruses can't adhere properly. We're not encouraging cigarettes. No, we're not at all. But we are saying it's a powerful thing. But it should be non-cured and naturally cured. Oh, like American spirits. Yes. Like those kind of deals. I get all my smoking friends to convert to that brand. Does that help? Totally help. Come on, are you kidding me? You know how many horrible carcinogens there are? You know, back in the native days when they were smoking and people were smoking natural cigarettes was almost unheard of for them to develop lung cancer with a natural tobacco. American spirit cigarettes are not healthier. They're absolutely wrong. It is. The market is natural and additive free, which may lead people to believe that they are safe for option. However, there's no scientific evidence to support this claim. They may even have higher levels of nicotine than some other brands. But the nicotine's not the problem. So that's exactly right. Just by them saying that there, that leads me to think that this might be propaganda. Because saying that nicotine is not the problem, that that's or rather saying that they have might have more nicotine. Oh, I'm just saying that. But I understand, but AI should understand that nicotine is. I know, I know he does. I'm just saying, AI doesn't make sense. What doesn't make sense is that it's saying they might have more nicotine, but that doesn't matter. They're not addressing natural questions. They're not just getting tired of the same times when I have to go through it. Oh, no, no, no, I'm not saying to you. I'm just saying to them, like what they're writing seems to kind of be silly. Marketing of American spirits as natural can create a false sense of healthiness, which may make it more difficult for people to quit smoking. I think smoking companies wrote this. I think the other companies fed this information. Well, the packages have the people wrote that. They're all spitting up blood on the packages and stuff. Oh, in England, you get that. No, they have it now. Oh, they have it in America. They're not having it in England. They're not having it in England. You go to England and they have photos of people like rock, that's right. That's right for us all. But it's moved to the rest of it. I know it's hilarious. It's like, and they still buy it. I mean, smoke. Well, the interesting thing is, and I'm glad you brought this up, is just cancer in general. There's things that cause cancer that they're just everywhere. And there's a lot of things in the environment can cause cancer. But sometimes things get into medications that can cause cancer. And what is SV40? I just wrote that in SV40 while you were talking. And I'm just going to give you an example of what you're saying is correct. The fact of the matter is, is that all cancers in humanity have gone up since the inception of vaccination. In my opinion, my educated opinion is that our lifespan should be 120 years. And I think with the knowledge that we have and the wealth that we have on this planet, ingenuity we have on this planet, we should be able to be touching the 120-year mark more commonly than we do. So when vaccines started coming into humanity, we started introducing animal disease into humanity through the skin. And then we started doing intermuscular injections after the hypodermic needle was created. And then you started having deeper injections of animal disease and of chemicals and mercuries and things like that. So a long-comes polio research. And the polio vaccine, even to this day, is made on African green monkey kidney cells. Now the African green monkey kidneys early on were basically taken out of their wild habitat in India and millions of monkeys were brought to the USA for use. Unbeknownst to them and discovered by a scientist named Dr. Bernice Eddy is that there was a cancer-causing entity inside of the substrate that they were using to make the vaccine on the petri dishes. And that entity was semi-envirus-40, SV-40, and called SV-40 because before there were 39 others discovered before it, now we're up over 100. So that information was suppressed heavily. Bernice Eddy was offered a ticket to wherever she wanted to go and as much money she wanted and she said, no, I'm staying long story short as they just kept taking her away from her work and distracting her. And there was another doctor, Jay Anthony Morris as well. Anyway, so the SV-40 was around. Then Maurice Hillman validated it later and said it came from the African green monkey kidneys. Now it's benign in the African green monkey, SV-40. It has not been known in human beings. In human beings, it was called the Perfect War Machine by Dr. Michelle Carboni who was one of the primary researchers looking at the carcinogenic potential of semi-envirus-40. So semi-envirus-40 would have been in the live polyo vaccines because there was nothing to kill it, but it was most likely also in the killed and African green monkey cells are actually still a listed ingredient on vaccines. So you can go ahead and look that up. It's a fact. So how this affects me is that I'm a kidney specialist and I looked at the curve of kidney cancers that have gone up since the inception of polyo vaccines and SV-40 introduction. So what this virus does, it enhances two cancer promoting genes and it inhibits two cancer suppressors. That's why it's called the Perfect War Machine. So that was in the vaccines that were injected. And so the bad news is that we don't need vaccines to give it to us anymore because we're going to give it to each other forever and it's never going anywhere. That was introduced to humanity like a lot of other diseases were through vaccination. We can give it to our kids. We can give it to each other. It comes out in the urine. And so it lives in the green monkey kidneys. It lives in our kidneys. As a kidney specialist, there are a lot of mysterious diseases. Low and behold, there was some research into some of them. And the research was just put, this is the other thing. The research that's really important just gets killed. The funding gets killed. In terms of SV-40 kidney cancers, there's no doubt that the rate of kidney cancer has gone up alongside with the infection rate of humanity for SV-40 as well as diseases like glomerulonephritis, which they do find the pathogen genetic material inside. And even in the old days, they found it in the tumors, but not the surrounding areas. So that just tells you that it was as stimulant for the tumor cells to just start propagating. So that's just one of the things. That's just one of many, many of the obvious ones. And even though it's been well defined in the medical literature, you will see still see that they only admit that it causes mesotheliomas and one other thing. Not that it causes all the other things that it does, that it's been shown to cause in the other medical literature that got its funding revoked. So SV-40 is now contagious amongst people. Absolutely. Yeah. So probably both have it. Most of us probably have had it one time or other. Whether it's lying dormant in our kidneys, it depends on everything depends on your background immunity, which depends on what you're doing for fun and not fun and how you're eating and how much you're sleeping et cetera, how much sun you're getting, sweating, getting rid of a lot of stuff. It's really good to sweat. It's just such a disturbing thought that this was introduced to people through vaccines and now spreading. And what's the worst health impact that it could have if it spreads to you and not through a vaccine? If you didn't get it through this vaccine and you just get it from another person. Oh, it's the same thing. It's not going to make much difference in terms. It'll gravitate to your kidneys. Obviously it probably goes to lung as well. Brain tumors were a big problem with it back in the polio days. Dr. Michelle Carbone was looking at the brain tumors with that. There's a really good book called The Virus in the Vaccine by Bookchin and Schumacher. It's an incredible book that details everything about those years. The scientists involved the suppression, the oppression, the lies, the skull duggery. Then they would bring in the scientists who had no experience in actually detecting SV40 and Lone Beholdi couldn't find it. And he was the one that got to make the ultimate statement in whether SV40 causes human disease or not. And just how could they keep injecting that into people if they know this? Oh, and the stocks that contained SV40 were still basically being used by the vaccine manufacturers up into the 1990s and probably beyond. Because there's two different kinds of SV40. You're making me remember a whole bunch of things that I thought I forgot. But there's the fast dividing and there's the slow dividing. There's two different kinds of strains of it. And the original test, though, when they made a vaccine, they would test it for 14 days looking for SV40. If it didn't have it off you went, your vaccine was good to go. But the problem is there was a slower dividing SV40 that remained in the vaccines that were injected and probably in the stocks that are, the stock is basically like your mother tincture or whatever. It's what you use to kind of inoculate all the new batches over time. And so the stocks were found. Again, quote, Dr. Terni Stanley cops, quote in the book about the SV40 still being in the stock up in through the 1990s. And you know, God only knows if it's still, if there's still using those same stocks, I don't know, because I haven't gone into the more modern times of SV40. But yeah, we all have it. And there's no doubt in my mind that it's just like another one of the things that the parasites have finally pretty much put into us to set us back. Demons. It's like real world demons. It's so crazy that someone would know this and still have this as an ingredient in a vaccine. Well, they'll say that it was just an unfortunate set of events that happened because they took wild monkeys from India. See, I could work for them. That's their excuse. And they say, we cleaned it up. We started our own monkey colonies and we started breeding our own monkey colonies that were now found to be free of SV40. The only problem with that is that, as I said, they had already inoculated humanity. And it's with a virus that can be spread vertically and horizontally as the scientists would describe, meaning we've all given it to each other. I think there are going to be very few people walking around today that haven't been introduced to it. Have there ever been a comparison of pre-cancer rates pre-SV40 and post-SV40? Yeah, that's what I'm talking about. That's what I did is I, I'm one of my videos I did that and looked at the cancer rates since they were, you know, so again, what they'll say is, well, we just didn't look at the rates beforehand, but the rates were quite low before, you can know what the surgical or the nephrectimies were. So it's kind of an easy thing to look at because that's the treatment for kidney cancer. You take the kidney out because you got another kidney and it's a slow-growing tumor, even though it can metastasize. But anyway, I did look at the, the rate has skyrocketed for kidney cancers. Pretty much everybody knows somebody who had a kidney cancer. And that was not common. And also these protein losing diseases, which is, again, it's not controversial. It was documented when they looked at the, the areas that were affected in the kidney, which with these horrible disease that makes people lose the proteins that need to stay in their blood and their body out into their urine that the SV40 was related to that. It's called focal and segmental glomerular sclerosis. And it's a real problematic disease in children and adults. Ultimately, you have to go on horrible chemotherapy drugs that ruin your immune system and then transplantation if you can't stay on top of it. Big money maker. Now, do I think that that was the purpose? Look, I don't know what was in the hearts and minds. I don't know what was accidental and what wasn't. But I do know that there was intentional suppression of the truth, any doubts whether or not well-funded must not be allowed to exist. That is a fact and it's always been that way. And there have been scientists and doctors talking about that since the beginning of vaccination. It's just too horrible to believe for most people, I think. And then also it goes against religious dogma, especially with people that are firmly on the left, trusting the science and trusting the experts. Those are two things at the front. It's kind of a child-like situation that humanity, in most of humanity, is in, is that I think most people are good and they want to believe everybody else is good. And they want to believe that the government is looking out for them. And it's a kind of horrifying imagine if it was true that your government actually wasn't looking out for you. And that might be one of the causes of your decreasing lifespan. Imagine that if the government might not care so much if your baby ends up with no stem cells or your baby gets cancer or autism, which will be outraped. And I mean, look at autism. Hello. Like, do we have any, I think we're going to start with that. But that was another thing where there was no doubt whether or not well-funded allowed to exist, what came to autism. And every autistic parent, parent of an autistic child, will tell you this. Everyone that's tried to lobby and get to the truth with autism will tell you that the brick walls and the plexiglass and the lead walls that went down were intense and still are intense. And the lying studies that they used to uphold vaccines don't cause autism are so easy to dismantle. But you know, Joe, the lie gets around the earth three times before the truth has a chance to get out of bed. And that's pretty much what happens when the media is owned. And you're like one of the cracks in the matrix here, quite frankly. I think for a lot of people, it's too horrible to believe, especially if they have an autistic child that this was caused by a vaccine. I know a guy who told me that he believes the vaccine had an impact on his child having autism. And then later was shaming people for not taking the COVID vaccine. That's how strong the impulse is. And that's how good the propaganda was. And that's how cowardly a lot of people are when it comes to fighting against a narrative. They get very scared of being socially ostracized. And they just they can't speak their mind. They can't tell the truth. And they'll whisper it to maybe this one guy that their friends with like, hey, you know, I don't want to take it, man. But I have to work like, yeah, I don't trust them either. But you know, don't tell anybody I said that. You don't want anybody thinking you're on the bad side. And we also have the propaganda on television. There's some amazing montages that people put together lately of people saying horrible things about the vaccinated people, unvaccinated people, horrible things, saying that it's it may be ghoulish to laugh when unvaccinated people die. But it might be necessary. Like what? You have to take one for the team. It was just the weirdest propaganda campaign and people were doing the job of the man. It wasn't the man forcing the people to do this thing. It was people doing the job of the man and going after the people that hadn't stepped in line. And I think for a lot of people, it's like they felt terrible that they had to do it. But if they did it, now I'm righteous. Now I'm on the good side. Why don't you do it too, man? I fucking did it. You should do it too. You're fucking selfish. You get a lot of that. You get a lot of people who they know they made a mistake and they want you to make that mistake, too. You know? Yeah, it would be good to know what really goes through their heads. I think COVID was, again, it was unique. But when you talk to parents who have autistic children, the vast majority of them not only know absolutely without a doubt that their child became autistic, usually within 24 to 48 hours after a certain vaccine. But that every doctor told them it wasn't the case. And then they go digging deep into the scientific literature and learn how to sometimes resuscitate that child's brain or detox them and then recover them. And then they're actually beaten up even worse for doing that. Because because they're just neurodiverse, there's nothing wrong with your child. They're just quirky. No, your child banging its head against the wall, walking around with a baby bottle and a diaper at the age of 18. Your big hairy son doing that. That is not neurodiverse quirkiness. That is a serious pathological disease that probably could have been dealt to at the time and should have been prevented, should have never happened. So most parents that have that situation are on fire. It's a minority that will say have the situation that you have right now. Most of them that's a wake up call, which is why they get beat up and suppressed even worse than I do. But when it comes to COVID, the psychological campaign, I think, was very effective in that people that I would have never imagined took the jab. Like friends of mine who in a million years would have bet my life that they would say no to it ended up getting it. Didn't want it. We're really upset about it later. But nonetheless did it. They read your book. Yes. I see I didn't lose any friends during COVID, because I had already lost them back in 2009. My family and friends were solid. My tribe is here. But I still love this person. And she's really upset about it. But it just shows you that the psychological campaign to get into that person's brain was really into it. But I don't know about you. But I never had it doubt. I never, I was like, well, you're going to shut me down, shut me down. You just thought me from traveling, go ahead, stop me from traveling. I hadn't read your book yet. And I was all gung ho to get the vaccine. And the UFC had allocated 150-something vaccines for all their employees. We were doing shows during the pandemic. So I showed up in Vegas, asked for the shot. They said I couldn't do it. I had to do it on Monday at the clinic. I couldn't do it at the UFC. I was like, OK, fine. And they said, can you come back in two weeks and do it during the next UFC fight? I said, fine, I'll do it then. During that time, it got pulled from the market for blood clots. Which one, which jab was Johnson Johnson? OK. And then two people I knew who got it at strokes. OK. And that two weeks. Yes. Well, you got a few angels, don't you? Yeah. And I was like, hold on. And then my whole family got it. There was like a bunch of things that happened. My whole family got it and everybody was fine. And I didn't get it. And I was trying to get it. Like I had sex with my wife. I hugged my kids. You didn't get COVID. No, I didn't get it. I didn't get the jab either. No. Yeah. No. But I didn't get it first time around. I was like, this is crazy. There was two days when I went to the gym. Because I was trying to get it. And which sounds horrible. But I was like, I did not get it. I just wanted to get over it. Yeah. My kids got over it so fast. My one daughter was one day. She had kind of a headache. And she tested for COVID. And she thought it was hilarious. She started laughing. And she was like, oh my god. But we had already told them it's not dangerous for kids. Don't worry about it at all. Because there was a lot of kids that were talking about getting vaccinated. And you were not getting it. For them, I was like, no way. I'll do it if I have to work. What did you say no way? Like, what did you think about it that you didn't even want your child to get it? Just in case you're not necessary. So no need to risk it. Totally unnecessary. They got COVID. They got over it like that before the vaccine. But before the vaccine. Before the vaccine. But this is before the vaccine. So after that, I was like, there's no way. Because there was pressure from their friends to get vaccinated. I was like, you're not getting vaccinated. You have seven times better immunity than someone who gets vaccinated, which is proof. And this is just antibodies, right? Which, and you enlightened me in your book to the fact that there's cellular immunity that's different than just antibodies. Anybody says one type of immunity to things, right? That's right. So I was... It's like TH2's plant that we were talking about. For me, with my kids, it's like they're vaccinated. But we did it on a delayed schedule because that's what my doctor recommended. And we had a really good pediatrician. And it worked out great. They're fine. But I was a little worried. I thought it was quack-like to be worried. Like this is science. Like that. Where about what? Vaccines could do to the kids. You're the regular ones. Absolutely. And the schedule, the way they wanted to just bang them up. Like real quick. And with weird ones, like the hepatitis B one, that one was like, when I hear that, I'm like, what are you talking about? You're going to give it for a sexually transmitted disease, a vaccine when they're a baby. One day old baby. That's crazy. And also, is there immune system even working right? I mean, will it even accept this and turn it into an antibody? Have you approved that? You're just jabbing kids? I have proven that the infant will make antibody. And that's all they ever have to prove. What they don't ever want to prove is that when you give, let's say your child had gotten a COVID vaccine, there's something called original antigenic sin. They change the term to linked up, it hopes depression. It happens with flu shots. It happens with lots of different vaccines because if you program your body to attack the strain of vaccine that you're a virus rather, that you are injecting against. And then a different strain comes along. It actually has negative efficacy. You're one that's more likely to succumb to terrible problems from the infection than because of your vaccine rather than actually protecting you. And that's been a well-known look. Anthony Fauci writes about it. Morin's and Fauci wrote a paper basically admitting everything. I think about it. of your vaccine rather than actually protecting you. And that's been a well-known look. Anthony Fauci writes about it. Morin's and Fauci wrote a paper basically admitting everything. I think it was in 2023 or 2024 about these shots. And he said the COVID shots are exactly the same as the flu shots. Despite that, despite Fauci and Morin's talking about how these shots would never have been licensed if they were held to the same standards of DPT, etc. etc. that they don't provide lung immunity. They only provide blood immunity. Negative efficacy. Their conclusion at the end of it is that we must make better vaccines more effective vaccines to add to the already existing vaccine program. It's not that we shouldn't do this. It's not that we should pull this off the market. That's always the logic. Again, they are not, they never will admit to any problem with vaccines to take it off the market. It's always adding to it, not removing a vaccine. Okay, you think it was bad? Let's start six months now. Six-month-old babies with parents that are just like you back in the day going, okay, if you really think it's necessary because, oh, Granny doesn't want to catch COVID, we're going to do it. Yeah, that was the logic. Well, worry about Granny. But, you know, this is a great barrington declaration, right? Where those guys were like, why don't we take the people that are vulnerable and isolate them and treat them and care for them and not worry so much about everybody else and not shut society down because it's going to have profound impacts. And they were called coocs. That's what's crazy. It's like during the censorship was so rampant that prominent scientists and physicians were removed from the social conversation because they disagreed. That's always been a case though. That's always been a case though. It's just, but what is happening on social media and it's so transparent. These people are getting removed from Twitter. You're like, this is wild. Did you find out that the government's involved? The government contacted them and asked them to take things down. You're like, what are you saying? Like, this is nuts. Medical papers were retracted. I mean, there's this one guy named Pradhan, PRADHAN, who he showed that there is a GP120 protein on the spike. And he said it was an uncanny similarity to the GP120 in HIV and that there was no way that that would have come out of nowhere and showed up in the 2019 COVID epidemic. And he showed genetically how that just couldn't possibly happen. A flurry of emails went through the CDC and to NIAD and to Fauci and within six days of that paper being a preprint it was removed. Six days. And what we've got, we've got access from the Freedom of Information Act to some of those emails that are heavily redacted. But that was the series of events that happened with that because any doubts whether or not well founded. All the things you said about the COVID vaccine, I'm sure are correct and true. But isn't it also different than the vaccine that they used in the test? Yes. The vaccine that was produced for the general public, I believe at least when it comes to Pfizer, they used magnetic beads for purification, which was totally different to what they did for the one they gave to us. And they produced it using, I can't remember exactly how they produced it, but they didn't use plasmids and they didn't use all the different components that were given to us. I have a slide on that somewhere that I could show you about. There were two aspects of the test vaccine that were very different to the, was both the production, how they produced it and how they quote purified it. And what's the significance of the differences? Like did they do it to be money? Oh, well there was no, they just didn't have the plasmid. They wouldn't have had the lipopolysaccharide with the DNA from the E-coli that was in there that they told would never get past our deltoid muscle and would be disintegrated. Well, lipopolysaccharide actually is a transit protein that can bring everything right through through your cells into your, our cells are made of, it's like a lipid on the outside. So that was the whole purpose was to shuttle this into your cells. Not only that, but the vaccine produced that the plasmid part of the vaccine that's injected into you, the messenger RNA has a substitution for something called uridine, they call it pseudo-uridine. And pseudo-uridine was put in there because they didn't want the immune system to destroy the vaccine too quickly. They wanted it to really be able to take hold of your body so you could have a strong response. Well, that's one of the reasons why vaccinated people had such, you know, horrible time with actual coronavirus when it did come. And one of the reasons why you didn't, you maybe you were exposed and you don't, I don't know if you've had an antibody level tested. But again, that's another long history thing is people who don't get sick while everyone else is, have been accused of witchcraft and sorcerers in the past and sometimes hunted down and killed. Yeah. At the times of smallpox, the groups of people that were into cleanliness and that was a real problem for them. I did do nasal swabs to see if I had any, any bodies. I did do that and I didn't. Well, that won't tell you antibodies. That's just, that's a PC out. That would be your PCR test or your rapid, which one did you do the one that hosted the rapid antigen test? But that's only going to tell you if you've got active in your nose, what you want to know is if you're immune system. Again, there's a good use for antibodies sometimes. It's not to see, it's not, not, not the end all and be all in terms of your immunity. But it will show that you have had an experience inside of your body with COVID and so that was bizarre to me was that there was this, there was this narrative that you were going to get it no matter what. And that's why we stopped it from you getting it. Yeah. Well, this is before the vaccine was even around. There was this, this is talk that there's no way to not get it. Like if it's around you, it's so contagious, you're going to get it. And that's why I was shocked that I didn't get it when my whole family got it. Like I said, I didn't, I isolated all. I did on purpose. And I had two days in the gym where I was sluggish. And so I was like, I feel kind of tired today, but a weird tired. So I'm just going to go through the motions. I just like really light work out. And the next day I felt the same thing like, yeah, another light workout. Let's just take it easy. No need to push it. Just got to break a little sweat. Never stressed myself. And then the next day I felt great. I felt 100% like I started working. I was like, oh, I felt good. And then I was fine. And I was like, okay, I guess I didn't get it. And then everyone in my family recovered. And then I went from there to a couple months later, I was doing this gig in Florida. And I was up with my friend John Schoeman, who's a pool. He makes pool queues, shout out to John, good friend of mine. And we were playing pool to like five o'clock in the morning. And I had like five margaritas. And we're having a good old time and laughing a lot. And then that night I was like, oh, I don't feel so good. But it was alcohol and no sleep and playing pool. And you know, and big shows, giant arenas and flying on jets and being tired all the time. That's what it was. And then I got sick. But even then, it was like a couple days. How close was that to the time? And you just said you felt a little tired in the gym that day? Few months. Okay, a few months. Yeah, it was a few months. Because by that time, the vaccine had been out. And this was, I guess, the Delta, which was everybody was like, this was just a bad one. The Delta's not a bad one. It's supposed to be fearful, you know. Yeah. It was a shocking time for me. Because before that, I never would have guessed in a million years that I would be even questioning other vaccines. I would have never guessed that. I would have told you that vaccines are one of the most important inventions in human history. And it saved us from polio. It saved us with smallpox. I would have been that guy. Ranting off all those statistics. I would have told you that. But then I read your book. I read, sorry. Sorry. I read Robert F. Kennedy's book. I read your book. And I started reading Turtles All the Way Down, which is really interesting because they wrote another book called Turtles All the Way Down. And someone else published it that has almost identical cover. And that book is a pro vaccine book. Like they literally hijacked. They're like, what do we do? Oh, this is what we do. We fucking confuse the shit out of people. Make one with the exact same cover. Exact same cover. Exact same name. Wow. And they made it a pro vaccine book. It's kind of wild. I mean, it's really kind of ingenious. Like what a great way to like flood the market with bullshit. And the RFK junior book was bananas. I mean, people told me to read it. And my initial and the fact that my initial thought was, that's that guy that's like that anti-vaccine cooc. That's what I thought. And I've apologized to him for that. When I talked to him on the podcast, I said to him, I said, I seek, I succumbed. Like everybody else did. To the casual narrative. Was the casual narrative. Oh, that RFK guy's a cooc. Tox weird. Got a weird voice. ruining the world's immunity. Well, I had the same thing. Like when I was first waking up, I had a friend who had unvaccinated kids that were part of a Steiner school. And they were like mutant freaks to me. Because they'd never been on an antibiotic. They were like bright and happy and interactive and talented. And at one point, one of them was playing with a hammer and nail. And I said to her mother, I was like, you've got to be careful. Because she has never tetanus vaccine. And someone in the room said, well, Suzanne, what do you know about tetanus? And like in my head, I'm a full-fledged doctor at this point. I thought, I don't know anything about this. And outside, I said, I know you don't want to get it. And I know it'll cause lock jaw. And then I started reading about tetanus. And I had to go back and apologize. And then I did a big video out on tetanus and the actual truth about the tetanus vaccines and actual tetanus. Which, that's even harder for most people. Like most people who don't want to vaccinate their kids, they'll vaccinate for tetanus if they can get a single shot. And second, only to polio. Everybody's got their two vaccines that they're their two diseases. They're afraid of for the kid that makes them feel like they're at least doing something. Well, the polio one always gets thrown in my face. Yeah. They take it all the time. What about polio? Yeah. And I just go, I don't have the time to do this. Thank you. I just explained to someone the whole DDT connection and the fact that livestock was getting polio. Like this is the thing. Like polio dogs don't get polio. They don't get human derived polio. It doesn't cross species. But they were getting paralytic polio symptoms. Because they were getting poisoned by DDT. That was a big part of the whole thing that was very confusing. Well, they started killing dogs. In New York, in that instance, I told you about where the vaccine, the gain of function, strain escaped. People were throwing their cats out the window. Some 20,000 cats in New York City were killed during that time. Because there was a belief that cats spread the disease. Oh my god. Jesus Christ. That's so crazy. And it was all a mutant man-made virus. The man-made virus thing is wound up wound up wound up. It wound up. It was basically a natural virus that got kind of wound up by a man-made to the final form. That's just crazy that that's a thing that we do. Because if this gain of function research was so important, when you have a cure like ready, like if it's studying this for so long, but it didn't really cure it, right? How? I mean, wouldn't you have something that like stops at dead in its trans disease? Our lab is a cure. Look, I was living in a country where the government said there's no cure for COVID. There is no treatment for it. And there is no prevention for it except the vaccine. And lo and behold, we found out that there was a contract between the government and the pharmaceutical industry to have the emergency use of the vaccine trial on the population. Only under the condition that there's that's why the treatments were shut down. Right. Yeah. Because emergency use, there has to be no other treatment available if you have either a mectin or if you have zinc and all the other things that we use with success. There were so many people that I treated that should have been dead. I gave COVID to a 95-year-old woman who had chronic lung disease called bronchiectasis. She should have been the low-hanging fruit. I was starting to feel a little bit unhappy one day. It was just sluggish like you mentioned. And when I was done seeing her, she said, I just want to give you a hug and she came over and I was going, oh, no. And after about three days, I was like, I've definitely got it. I tested and I rang her daughter. And I said, I've got to tell you, I was exposed. Margie was exposed to blah, blah, blah. And she's like, yeah, mom's not feeling so good right now. And then two weeks later, I've got to call back again. I've got to make sure this lady's OK. She said, oh, no, mom's out. The hairdresser getting her hair done. Two weeks later, I still wasn't recovered two weeks later. She was out being her. Care done. Well, she is longer. I'm probably used to. I don't know if she did. Can't remember that detail. But there was my senior partner had leukemia. He should have been absolutely dead. Well, not on my watch. He wasn't going to be dead. So he'd survived the entire thing and died like two years later of something else. So yeah. The most shocking aspect of getting attacked and like all the CNN stuff to me was that no one had any interest in why recovered so quickly. Because if this is supposed to be this death sentence, then there's no treatment. And then I'm a guy in my 50s. And I got over it quick. And then no one cared at all about that. All they wanted to do is mock this idea that I was taking veterinary medicine, which I wasn't. But it was just the fact that they used that term, horse dewormer, on every TV show. Like, wow, it's wild to watch the machine. It's uniquely wild when it's coming after you. And you know, like, but this is like such a dumb checker's play. I'm like, this is so stupid. I'm still doing my podcast. You fucking idiots. And like, everyone's going to know that you put a green filter over my face. I'm going to show everybody that. You think you're just going to get away with that? No, you're going to like lose all of your credibility idiots. It was just so fascinating to watch. Like this distorted understanding of like what America is willing to believe or the world is willing to believe. Like, you're only preaching to the converted. The super hardcore, closed-minded, converted people. Everyone else knows you guys are a joke now. And that's the good part of getting through COVID. The good part of this enormous gas lighting experience that we all just went through, where people are finally, after four years, apologizing to friends, you know, for calling them a playground. You know, like, literally, they got down to that. where friends couldn't be friends with people anymore because they weren't vaccinated. And people are kind of like realizing like, oh my God. Not only did I get COVID more than anybody else, because I got three shots. Like, I had a friend telling this. He goes, I got COVID more than everyone I know. And I had all three shots. He's like, I got COVID eight fucking times. And we were like, how many times did you get it? And everybody that got it naturally was like, I don't want it. Maybe I got it. I got it twice. But the second time I got it was literally a sniffy nose. Just literally a sniffy nose. And I was joking because we used to test everyone, including the guests. Everyone came here. We tested for COVID. And I was joking. I'm like, maybe this is it. Maybe I got it again. And she's like, you actually got it. I was like, no way. This is COVID. And it never got worse. It stopped right there. It was, that was it one day. One day of a sniffy nose. And then a couple days later I said, all right, let's try and get tested again. See if we can still do another podcast. And that was good. But I had a cancel. I have to have a healthy immune system. You know, I'm not. But the fact that that's the thing. It's like there's real science behind all the things you talk about in your book in terms of like the nutritional aspects of healthy foods being an important factor in your immune system. Healthy, we were talking about juices and vegetable juices and all the different times that it's helped people overcome certain diseases. And vitamin A and cod liver oil, which also has vitamin A, which was always prescribed to people that were sick. All these things are, this is real science. Like there's real science and nutritional supplementation and the effects that it has on the immune system. And there's real science in nutritional deficiencies and what a negative impact it has. This is all real. And if they truly cared about you, they would be telling you about that as a primary way of defending your body against disease. And against all sorts of things that could go wrong. All sorts of things. Like get fit, eat healthy, and you're above everything. Take supplements, you're above everything. Like you're in the top 1% of people that are going to do great in life when it comes to getting sick. Just that. And because most people don't do that. So you have like what percentage of people like really eat healthy and really try to exercise on a regular basis? Is it even 10? Is it even 10% of us? It depends. I get maybe what state you live in. Let's just have a guess nationwide and see if there's a chart. See if there's a statistic. Let's guess what percentage of people eat healthy, take vitamins, and exercise regularly? I say 10%. What do you think? Yeah, it could be. Because you still have your teenagers and your young, you need college students that are in sports and things like that. A lot of older people are. They would work. Yeah, but a lot of people, like even though they have a hard job, they still realize like, I got to go to the gym for work and just get it in. Because if I don't, I won't have any energy. I'm better off this way. I know it talks, but just do it. There's like people that have enough discipline to do that. So I would give it, I think it's one out of 10. That's what I think. What do we got, Jamie? This is impossible. Yeah, it's a little impossible. What about AI? Run that shit through tragedy. Well, I'm just, how are you going to get the answers? My point, not like, I'm going to find out. What's the most important of Americans? We're honestly out of the question and a poll that they're, you know. Well, let's ask chat, GP, just for a good. I'm my point, chat, GP, T has to find the answer somewhere. Right. Bill, let's see what she says. Well, okay. Well, hold on. Let's just for fun, T's. Let's just say, I know, right out of the gate, the answer is that 86% people take vitamins and supplements, which is four and five American adults. Is that real? That's good. If that's true, that's really good. I wouldn't think that's true though. I don't buy that. That's what I'm trying to say. Yeah, I don't buy that. That's written by a supplement company. Yeah, and what supplements and how, you know, sometimes you can overdo. You do a hair mineral analysis on people. And sometimes you find things that are, you know, pretty shocking in terms of that came from supplements. You know, you can overdo it with even selenium. Sure. You can end up with big problems. There's also a problem with cross-contamination. One of the things that we found out when we were selling alpha brain is that in the beginning, when we would hire a lab to make the formula for us, like, so you have like a list of ingredients. And then they put together this thing, which is a new tropic. We'd find stuff in there that we didn't have in there. And it was from their bins. So they didn't clean their bins. So it's like, why is vitamin B12 in this? Like, why is this in that? Why is that in it? It's just because it's the same factor, manufacturing place where they make all kinds of stuff. Createine and all kinds of stuff. I've got the answer, but it says less than 10%. OK, likely less than 10%. OK, if you're talking about people consistently do all three, it drops significantly. Less than 10%, maybe you're closer to 3% to 5%, depending on how strict your definition of healthy is. Yeah. That's a question. That's what I was, that was a good guess. We're talking about adults here, presumably. But one of the facts is that the foundation that your immune system is created and developed in is probably, if not as more important than that. And that is being born the, the, the general birth versus the C section, not putting down people have had C section. I'm just saying the science, the science shows that there is a distinct difference in C section babies, immune systems versus non C section. There's a distinct difference in breast fed babies versus non breast fed. And there's a distinct difference in babies whose mothers have a healthy diet and breastfeed versus mothers who don't have a healthy diet and breastfeed. So that foundation actually makes your gut grow normally, which is a large part of your immune system. colonizes your gut because the bacteria from your mother's gut goes into your gut, goes in from her gut through her lymph system into her breast and then to your gut. And so all that foundational stuff is something not to be ignored because it's going to make you deal with diseases better. And if you have to get vaccinated, it's going to make you deal with vaccines better even as a child. Not that I'm in favor of that, but I'm just saying if you want to set things up as, you know, solidly as possible to be able to take that insult, the problem is we don't know 20, 30, 40 years later what the associations are between, you know, bone disease, skin diseases, cancers, autoimmune diseases. We have some clues. I have some clues that nobody wants to look at, but we've got this long-term problem that nobody looks at. Long-term effects of lifestyle, a vaccination of even SV40. There was one study that started tracking 1000 SV40 people that they knew were infected with SV40 looking for diseases later in life. And they stopped it after 19 years again, axed. When they still had over 700 people left in the study because they said too much time had gone by, well, the fact of the matter is that's when the study should have started 17 to 20 years later is when they still just started looking at that point, not one year, two years. But, you know, most vaccine trials and drugs trials, they don't, they don't, vaccine trials, it's like two weeks is the almost a miracle for someone to follow out that long. Forget about looking months or years later. Doesn't happen. When you first decided to write this book, how much apprehension did you have? Zero. Zero. You were just fully convicted to get this idea out. Well, you know, it was a bit of a process if you want to know it. Yeah, sure. Yeah. So what first happened is that I kept getting challenged while I was, I stayed on for two years as an astrologist in my hospital. So I wasn't kicked out. I left because like my soul just couldn't hang out there anymore. And so during that time, even though I was kind of ostracized behind my back, everybody still respected me as an astrologist. But I still had to go. And in that, in that time, I started doing public appearances, like I went on the Gary Noll show and started doing things like that, just talking about smallpox and polio, because those were my focus, because everyone's saying, what about smallpox? What about polio? And then when I started finding out, I just, I became obsessed with it. It was so interesting. So I was morbidly fascinated by the whole thing and, and about how everything I found was absolutely contrary to what the mainstream dogma is. And what I had was a mountain, you know, pile high to the ceiling, and they had sound bites. They had nothing to fight back with me on, nothing. So this guy named Roman Bistrianic heard me on the radio show, and he run my office. And after his third call, I was like, I guess I better call this guy back. And he had this idea for a book. And he had done all the charts and the graphics and started writing the narrative around that of what the historical document showed. And then I came in as kind of the medical person that was obsessed with polio and smallpox and happened to know quite a bit about pertussis. So we started writing the book together. And there's probably about, there's got to be, if you were to take a full time job 20 years, at least 20 years. But for me, it was condensed because I became obsessed after I quit my job. All I did, I basically had no money. I lived in a tent with a pop-up camper that was my office. And I was like crazy Ted Kuzinski obsessed with polio in my tent. Wow. So no, I didn't have apprehension. I was like this information. It's been so, the US polio surveillance unit charts were supposed to be available in libraries. Low and behold, every library I went to to find them, I was told they're not here. There's only one library, the AMA library, and you have to have special, high security clearance to look at them. Well, I won't say how, but I got a hold of them. And what those documents show is that it wasn't just cutter laboratories that had a problem with live polio. It wasn't just why, if all the vaccine, we didn't talk about this, but all the vaccine companies had a problem with live virus and their injectable vaccines during socks year. So 1954, 1955, up to 1959, they all were producing vaccine with live virus in it because Salk wouldn't listen to the scientists abroad who were saying his inactivation curve was where the sun doesn't shine. So that beginning of that and just tracking all that down and asking the questions at US, where did polio go? What was really causing the paralysis? Why don't we see it today? Like I had to answer all those questions. And every question I answered, it was so satisfying that I just wanted to go on to the next question. And so there was never any hesitation because I just, actually, I was so single minded that I didn't think about, you know, the threats that could happen as a result of that. And it wasn't until the after the book was out that the threats happened and I'm still here. And look, I figure if anybody wants to do me and now, the timing is really bad because this pretty much out there now. It's been out there for a while. The Jonas Salk thing was also wild. I thought Jonas Salk was this genius that created this incredible virus to save humanity. Yeah, so did I. So many of our childhood fables turn out not to be true, but that was a big one. And it's still hard for a lot of people to believe. But I just think it's like anything, like if you're open to different information and I always say, look, I am, I may, I can make mistakes. I'm not infallible. Someone has actually found a mistake in the book actually went and corrected it. Like that's a difference between me and these other people is that if I'm in a mistake, I want to know about it and I will go and make it right. And I will publicly admit that I made a mistake, but I will say that 99.9% of what in this book, what's in this book is true, factual, and provable. And because I've done the research, but it's a hard thing to do, what doctor's going to quit their job, I was lucky. I didn't have kids. I didn't have medical royalty ancestors who would have been disappointed in me. I came from nothing. I wasn't afraid to go back to nothing. And so that's why I was willing to live in a tent until this thing was done and published in 2013. So how long did it take you? I started working on it. Roman had been working on it for years. He had been going to libraries because his kids got hit hard by an ex-wife who jabbed them. He didn't know about it and they got really sick. And then he started looking at old graphs and going, oh, that doesn't make sense. So he got obsessed in his own way with the numbers. He's the numbers guy. And so he had been working on it. And then the two of us together worked on it, probably from 2009 to 2013. And then it was published in 2013. We couldn't find a publisher. Even the alternative publishers didn't want anything to do with it. So we self-published. And then after it was successful, guess who wanted to send the publisher book? And I was like, nope, sorry. We're going to carry on the way we are. Oh, but you're going to get such more credibility, it's like unlikely. That's funny. We did OK. If you give us money, you'll get credit billing. If you give us money, you're successful business that you've worked on for five years or four years. Look, if you $1 book, that would be sweet. A great deal. And then I'll have a prestige behind my name. Yeah, I've been published by a real company. One was last time you looked at a book and said, let me check who published this. Exactly. Maybe make sure somebody recommended this book. So published. It's all mine. You never heard of this publisher. This is outrageous. What's that there for Bit and Science? Oh, Jock Valet. OK. Jock Valet is probably the most interesting UFO researcher that I've ever talked to. He's the guy that was, you remember the French scientist? You remember the closing counters of the third time? Did you see that movie? The long time ago. Long time ago. Do you remember there's a French scientist on the grounds courting with the army and explaining to everybody what's going on? OK. That French scientist has modeled after this guy. This guy's been following UFOs. It's like the 50s of the 60s. Do you see the 50s? Like a long time. He's an older gentleman. But he's fascinating. OK. And he's very rational. When he talks about it, he is very objective in what's nonsense and what's true and what we can't explain. It's a fascinating subject. I think similar threads would run through his experience definitely for sure. Oh, sure. For sure. For sure. For the longest time, it was a ridiculed subject. It didn't have the same societal impact as being a vaccine skeptic or an anti-vaxxer. With that pejorative, they've done an incredible job of scaring people into just falling in line. Because if you question it, and someone's head, oh, did you know he's an anti-vaxxer? That's enough. That's it. That's all you need to hear. And you're going to get after this podcast. And I've already got it. You're going to get it big time. I've gotten it already. You know. You know. You'll start picking apart my facts and the want to come on and dismantle. This is what always happens. I come in first. I tell my story. And then they bring in the experts who are able to take without me being in the room, of course, because I can't be able to defend myself and then let the public believe that everything I said was just one big sack of lies. Well, there'll definitely be the usual suspects that'll be doing that. But has anyone ever tried to sit down with you and have a conversation publicly about this and refute it? Not that I can recall. No one's offered. Yeah. I have to say I'm not that interested in doing that, because I just feel like debate is it's an actual skill to be a debater. People study debate and people get really good at it. And I'm not a debater. Like if somebody wanted to debate me in writing, I'll be happy to do that. to be a debater. People, people study debate and people get really good at it. I'm not a debater. Like I put, if somebody wanted to debate me in writing, I would be happy to do that. Because then I could sit there and take my time, go through the references that I needed rather than having to, you know. Right. That makes sense. You know, I have to be ready. You know, at me without having a shield. Right. And there's an anxiety aspect to that. And like, you know, there's a lot of adrenaline and emotions. And yeah, it's a skill. But I would do it only if we had a topic that was, you know, basically agreed upon beforehand that we could both upscale on and use what we know as, as at the bait point. But it usually just becomes character assassination. It does. Yeah. It does. It's super unfortunate. And it's really transparent when it's something about a serious subject. Like, why do you have to attack someone's who they are, make it, ridicule them instead of just refuting the facts or laying out your case. It just doesn't make sense that anybody who's right would do that. That's not what you do when you're right. That's where you do when you're trying to ridicule people. And you usually try to ridicule people because you need an edge. You know, it's like a bully. They're like, if you see fighters like like a UFC fighter in his prime, like Anderson Silva is one of the greatest of all time. If someone like God in his face and tried to intimidate him, it would be kind of hilarious because he was the best fighter in the world. Right. So he wouldn't even have to do it back. He could just smile at you. And that's sort of the same here. When you're ridiculing someone, like right off the bat, a bunch of, you know, ad hominums about that person, you're trying to diminish that person to set up your argument as being superior because you're a superior intellect. And you're doing that because you don't feel like you're on level playing field. And so you want to try to do something to push them off, make fun of them in some sort of, instead of just like laying out your version of what reality is, lay out your version if you're so strong. If you're so correct, it should be super easy to do. Well, just like in sports, it's the same here. It's like cheating as for losers. You know, if you're a winner, you're not, you don't have to cheat. And that's the same with them. Like, if their product is so wonderful that everybody needs it so badly, then why is there such, is they what they say is that we're too stupid to understand how they're saving our lives and how they're, this is one of the big arguments that we really ought to touch on is that they say that our lifespan has improved as a result of medical interventions. When what we show in here, what other scientists have shown is that it's about 3.5% of the contribution from medicine goes into our extended lifespan, 3.5% based on antibiotics, vaccines, etc. The rest of it was all about the revolution, the health revolution, the clean water, the shelter, the electricity, the child labor laws, you know, ending. So, you know, the magic of medicine is not what people think. And it really traps, it really traps a lot of people. Like, I think there's a value to the medical field in terms of surgery and certain drugs. And if you have an organ failure, like, absolutely. But why not? Like, my Hippocratic oath said that I should consult, you know, any consultant that will help my patient and keep the well-being of my patient stable. Well, to me, that includes, you know, using every therapy that is as the most benign therapies possible first, the ones that work along with the blueprint of a human body that go along with the theory of health rather than pounding down disease. You're always going to get a better result that way. Assuming you've got time and, you know, you haven't waited till the last minute. We certainly will get a better result if you do get the disease that way. Like, the idea that you could just ignore everything but of medication is so silly. And it doesn't, the only reason why you would do that is if that's the only way you made your money. And that's really, especially if you're in the vaccine business and you're, you have an enormous ad budget and your sponsor and all the television networks. Well, that's the big thing. And the other thing is people trust what they see on the television. You know, CNN, CNN was my go-to thing for the month. Yeah. And now I look at it and I think, oh, my goodness. You know what cracked it for me is when they publicly villainized Andy Wakefield. And I actually knew the story behind Andy Wakefield at the time. What was that story? The story behind him is that, you know, he was, he was the doctor, he'll hear he was publicly shamed. His license was removed. He published an article about what he called toxic nodular enterocolitis in children with autism. He was a gastroenterologist, a very high level, very well respected, decorated gastroenterologist. And he published this paper which remained in a journal for 12 years. And all it said at the end was further research needs to be done in order to see if there is any real connection between the MMR vaccine, autism, and toxic nodular enterocolitis. These kids suffer with horrible bowel disease. It's not just brain disease. And so he was about to publish another paper showing that in this certain type of monkeys that were vaccinated against hepatitis B lost a lot of their reflexes and had problems. And it was on the eve of the publication of that paper that his original paper was revoked. And ever since then, he has been the poster child for vaccine nonsense for anti-vax, crazy people. And in fact, every time I've done anything, his name, funny that I brought his name up. I love him. He's a great guy. But his name would always come up. Well, you're a friend of Andy Wakefield. Or though Andy Wakefield, because autism and vaccines has been debunked because Andy Wakefield lied. He didn't lie. All he said is I did biopsies. I saw this. And this is possibly a connection. And since then, other scientists have come in, done the same thing. Biopsies, then they looked at whether the vaccine virus was in that biopsy. And it was. It wasn't a wild virus. It was the vaccine virus in that area, not the surrounding area. So there is a relationship between gut disease and my more vaccine retained, you know, virus that hasn't been processed properly because it didn't come into your body properly. And disease, brain disease. So that's a fact. But CNN did a hit job on Andy Wakefield. And I remember going, huh, well, what's going on here? Because I know I know what happened with that whole situation. Now, CNN is saying this. And that was kind of when, you know, the windscreen cracked for me. And I just had to start questioning anything. And then you've got, you know, the doctors that go on there, there are a couple doctors. I think you interviewed one of them. Didn't you? Sanjay Gupta. Yeah, you know, there was a guy before him. And some of the stuff he said was pretty unbelievable. That's what the public is going to hear. You know, your best chances of dealing with this is to just get the vaccine. You don't want to get shingles. Get that vaccine. Never mind the whole other truth around that because, like you say, it's the advertisers. But it's bigger than that. Does the shingles vaccine work? Well, what do you think about giving yourself a vaccine for something you already have? Like you think about it. Like chickenpox is a disease that we all got as kids. You got it as a kid probably. You're kind of super human though. You didn't even get COVID. I got it. I got it eventually. Yeah. So I got it eventually. It broke you down. But I got chickenpox really bad. And then I got chickenpox. And I was like, yeah, there you go. So back in the old days, we would all get chickenpox and then we'd be exposed to other kids that had chickenpox. We'd go over kids' houses if they had chickenpox. Yeah. People do. They still do that. I didn't have to. I got it somehow. I don't know how I got it probably from my brother. And so you have this dormant. This virus lays dormant in your body until your immune system breaks down. So, but part of it is not just your immune system break nets. The fact that all these kids are now vaccinated and the circulation of the disease, see some vaccines work in terms of they stop the circulation of the disease. But at a detriment to us. So it's been a detriment for measles and it's been a detriment for chickenpox. So chickenpox we used to get continuously didn't have a cat. Adult student get shingles. It was very rare for adult to get shingles before the chickenpox vaccine came out extremely rare. But since then the rate of shingles and adults and children has skyrocketed because we're no longer getting our boosters being exposed to the circulating microbes. So now the solution to that is to give adults four times the dose of the childhood chickenpox in an injectable vaccine against something that they already have. And so the theory is that you're going to ramp up your antibodies and then you're going to be able to do battle if your viruses come out again. The only problem with that is that the problem is the immune system. If you get AIDS or you're on chemotherapy, your chances of that happening are really high. And yeah, does the vaccine work or not? I don't know. But I just don't think it's just to me just completely strange concept to inject myself with something that I already have along with all the other recipients and compounds that go in a vaccine that nobody wants to talk about either. So can you explain how a vaccine is manufactured? Like how could they not know all the different stuff that's in it? Like let's talk about like how the SV40 got in there. So you need something alive. You need some sort of tissue from a living creature in order to grow these things. Well, in terms of the COVID vaccine, you just needed to pile crap actually because it's made on E. coli cells and that's where you find E. coli. So with a lot of the other vaccines, you do need living like for tetanus, you need rotten meat. Okay, that's how the tetanus vaccines made with rotten meat. You were talking about tetanus earlier and you kind of glossed over but you didn't finish up. You were saying that tetanus itself, you started like googling and like reading about tetanus itself. Yeah. Yeah, big wake up call with tetanus. So you know what we see, if anyone's worried about tetanus, what we're shown is a picture of a soldier from like the 1800s with his, what he's naked and his art, his back is art. If you just google tetanus right now and you look for images, you'll get this image. And so that's what we're told will happen if we get tetanus. It's a sure thing. You're just going to get tetanus. You're going to die. Well, the fact of the matter is that when I started doing my deep dive in World War I, look, it was fought in the trenches with horses. That's where you get tetanus from ruminant animals, lives in their gut and it goes in the soil and it's just a spore. Doesn't do anything until it gets into an area that doesn't have oxygen. So you get a cut, you get a certain close, you up real nice without cleaning it out properly and you're a set up for tetanus, which will transform from a a spore to a different kind of a microom and start releasing a toxin that can, it first starts as numbness, usually in that limb. It's the extreme case is in that soldier who would have been malnourished, stressed out, probably vaccinated for smallpox before he hit the fields and exposed to enormous amounts of tetanus, probably gunshot wound or a slice somewhere and then sewn up. So yeah, his nervous system could have had a real big dose of toxin and nobody did anything that's the worst case scenario. You don't want that to happen. But in today's, today I've treated tetanus, let's just put it that way. I've treated several cases of tetanus. One of the cases was a neurologically diagnosed tetanus. So tetanus is treatable. You can get on it early, rabbit studies have shown that if you give vitamin C, if you have a good high vitamin C level before you put glass with tetanus spores on it inside the skin of a rabbit that you can prevent the tetanus from happening. Even if you give the vitamin C at the time of the injury, you can prevent it from happening. If you give it after the event, the death rate goes down to very, very low if not zero. So vitamin C is a main factor, but the biggest factor is cleaning a wound and keeping the wound open if you think it's a dirty wound. It's not to close it straight up, which is why nails, you say stepping on a nail is the classic because rust can kind of hold the old spores inside of it. You step on the nail, you get inoculated, and then you wait for it to heal over. You have to open that wound if that's going to happen. But tetanus has been, there was a whole series of reports on instances where the cotton that was made for menstrual pads, for women postpartum was impregnated with tetanus and they got horrible cases of tetanus just from using those menstrual pads. So the hospital systems have also been responsible. The biggest thing is that being vaccinated for tetanus is not necessarily security against not getting tetanus. Now, my telling people not to go get vaccinated or not, no, I'm not. I'm just saying there's so much, every vaccine, there's so much more to the story that should be considered, you can have different strains of tetanus. And if you're living on a field that has room and animals, whether you like it or not, you're going to be eating whatever's down in that field and you're going to be inoculated and have antibody and probably cell mediated immunity against it. So you'll already have some immunity to that. So worst case scenarios, you have no immunity, you go get a dirty wound and you don't get any competent medical care for it. Yeah, you can end up having a problem with tetanus, whether you're not going to have lock jaw and an arch back and die unlikely today for that to happen. But most tetanus that happens is delayed onset. So the earlier symptoms come on, the worst the tetanus is going to be. If it comes on later, generally, the better you're going to do, treated with high doses of magnesium, high doses of vitamin C, local wound care, that's the best thing that you can do up to you. If you want to go get jabbed for tetanus after you learn everything about it, everything's on my Odyssey channel, by the way. That's where I got canceled out of YouTube for talking about vitamin C for all of all things. So everything's now on Odyssey. All my videos are on Odyssey. And I do do one that's just on tetanus. And again, medical reference after medical reference, I don't make this stuff up. I just report what I read. Yeah. It's crazy that they just kick you off YouTube for reporting studies. Yep. Yet you can have like pornography and murder and all kinds of other stuff on there. It's pretty horrifying some of the things that flash across like, I wish I can't unsee that now. Have you ever posted your stuff on X? Yes, lots of stuff on X. Yeah. So most of this stuff is available there. Well, I got canceled out of Twitter when it was Twitter and I could not make another account. It's like they knew where I was. They were able to even always use different phone numbers and different emails. I could not restore an account. They got your IP. Yeah. Maybe that's what I used to I use VPN as well. Couldn't do it. Really? Then I would get in the count set up and then they would say you went against standards and cancel it. So anyway, they must put a cookie on your phone or something. Maybe you try a new phone. Try to computer too. Wow. But I did finally get get an account. I was able to open an account and get a blue check mark, but I've only got look up. Don't have that many followers. I mean, I went from having over 95,000 having nothing and now rebuild that's they love that. They love to let us build ourselves up and chop us down and make us rebuild. What is your account will help you out? It's DR. It's Dr. Suzanne H. Seven, DR S. U. Z. A. N. N. E. H. Seven. Yeah. And I only look, I don't post my opinions about different things in the world and dog and cat pictures like I post stuff about vaccines. You know, I like to stay in lane as best as I can. So for you, was the COVID pandemic was that like a big wake up call for people to start reading your book? We've had pretty good sales like Roman keeps because he does all the accounting and he says we just have a good amount of steady sales and what's in a while we'll see it. Like every time you mentioned the bucket, we had a little blip on it during COVID. Every time Bill Gates comes down says something stupid, we have a big surge in our sales. So they actually help us when they say with their, you know, we're we're going to if we vaccinated enough people, we can help depopulate. It's like, okay, and for whatever reason, our book sales go up. When you start talking about vaccine to liars and vaccine skeptics, when whenever they started doing that and the way the language that they would use was like when the president was saying our patients is wearing thin, we've been patient with you, but our patients is wearing thin and the White House prints this thing that if you're vaccinated, you did your job. But for those unvaccinated, you're looking looking forward to a, what did they say a winter of dark winter? Daphne disease? Like what? You know, dark winter was a tabletop exercise. Do you know about tabletop exercises? I do, but what does dark winter? So dark winter was one of the explained tabletop exercises. That involves smallpox. Well, there are lots of them, but Johns Hopkins does, I have a whole PowerPoint on this too, but Johns Hopkins conducts a lot of them. They involve fictional scenarios where, you know, there could be pandemics and terroristic depositions of toxins and chemicals and microbes that were manipulated in a lab. And then who in this, in our society is going to respond and how they're going to respond like the CDC and DARPA and the news outlets are always up, most importance as the news outlets and the messaging that goes to outlets and these tabletop exercises. But dark winter was one that was a tabletop exercise after the World Trade Center is thing when we were pointing our fingers at a rock and weapons of mass destruction and a Russian scientist that, you know, had weaponized smallpox and brought it to a rack which they never found, by the way. But because of that, that's why I was asked to get vaccinated for smallpox in 2003 was that dark winter, hold that dark winter thing that was going on. Thank God there were a few people on the CDC and consultants, old guys, the old guys with integrity that like knew the deal from the old days were saying, wait a minute, smallpox is not easily transmitted. So that's a no no. So even if there is a terroristic smallpox drop, it's not going to be easily, easily transmitted. It's treatable, not high, and the vaccine doesn't necessarily prevent it. And so that was kind of one of the things that stalled it all out, but then they did the study on the Marines because they, the part of the exercises are we must do tests for the new vaccine, they use the old vaccine, the drive-acts. And there were lots of problems with those military people. And then I was asked to sign a 63 page informed consent, basically, saying that I understood all the problems that could happen to me that I didn't have little kids in my life, that I wasn't going to be able to spread it. I would isolate after I got the vaccine. So they were ultra careful about this one because they knew they were dealing with something that could be get a very bad reputation. The reason they ultimately canceled it is because any doubts whether or not well funding must not be allowed to exist because if we were saying, oh my gosh, we have this terrible smallpox vaccine. How did they do it back then? We have the same vaccine and people are getting really sick and dying and having cardio myopathies. That's a problem. And so that's why the truth gets locked down over COVID. We know, look, you've seen the athlete's dropping dead. You know about the cardio myopathies and the pulmonary emboli and all that kind of thing. Nobody's talking about the stem cells that the newborn babies are born without. Nobody's talking about the fact that there are now death dualers to deliver dead babies. Like that wasn't even a thing before. But I've got a friend that's a midwife who tells me that they are now creating a new field which are midwives that only deliver dead babies. They didn't need that before. COVID was an absolute nightmare in terms of obstetric gynecology, labor and delivery. A lot of midwives that got done and because they didn't get vaccinated, they don't even want to go back now that they can go back because they don't want to have their good reputations of 100% of normal births dealing with what's being dealt with today in terms of the birth problems that are happening because of the actual vaccine itself. Because look, if it causes problems and blood clots in our circulation, what do you think it's going to do to a placenta that is pretty much all blood vessel. That's all it is. It's like a big blood vessel sandwich is what it is. There was no studies that showed that it was safe to give to pregnant women, but yet they were saying that. Look, every influenza vaccine package insert says it's never been tested for carcinogenicity or mutagenicity in pregnant women. Yet it's recommended every year for every pregnant woman and every time they get pregnant or not. It's recommended the same with the pertussis vaccine, give it to pregnant women. Never mind that it changes the immune reactivity of the infant. Nobody talks about these things. This is what I say when, you know, it's like the truth is so much more complicated than the soundbite lie. The soundbite lie is what gets around the world three times. Besides the settled. Science is settled. There's no debate needed because the likes of me are so crazy and you know whacked out and you know what I'm trying to destroy the good order of the general public. Blood is on your hands. Oh, that's a good one. I always love that one. Yeah, that's a fun one. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. See if you can pull up rational, wicky and Humphries. You'll enjoy this. I want to see the image of the guy with tetanus. Did you find that? Can I just see one? I want to see what looks like when you're locked. It's an old painting. Well, the one I saw was like, hey, I'm so can I ask you when you've treated people that have tetanus and didn't have the tetanus shot or did they get tetanus and they have the tetanus shot? Well, the one that had the worst tetanus had Ted lock John had the tetanus shot. Put in painting, put in artwork or whatever. Look at that dead guy. But go up to that dead guy. Yeah, right there. That's not real. I mean, it looks real. Does it? Not to me, bro. Could be. Could be. But look at he's clearly been in the hospital for a really long time. Probably got hospital choir tetanus. Okay, you know, right. That's what's that image right there. What makes you think that that's fake? It's very blurry. Yeah, that is weird. That part there looks at that. It does look fake. Oh, yeah, it's probably a bunch of Nazi tattoos. But if you put in painting, painting soldier tetanus, that then it will come up. Is that it right there? There it is. First one right there. Very famous. That's what's on the Wikipedia page as well. So this is that you don't want that to happen. If you do get tetanus and there is no antibiotics, this is surely what will happen to you. Now today, how would you treat someone who got tetanus? Well, there are antibiotics, you know, that you, but mostly it's supportive care. Until, you know, your therapy starts to work. So some people end up if it's not dealt to in time, you can end up ventilated. But again, that's, it's a theoretical problem. But if you get on it in time, that's not certainly not been my experience. And so the ones that I've treated that haven't been vaccinated have had the easiest mildest cases. But so you're pointing out that's not done a large randomized controlled study. But what's really important here is what you're saying is that even if you get the tetanus shot, if you step on a nail, like you could still get tetanus. Look, one of the tetanus, in order to make tetanus immune globulin, which is another option when say you have a cut and your magic tetanus shot doesn't work right away, then you can get an immune globulin injection that came from somebody who has had tetanus. Usually these are people who have actually had tetanus, not who have been back. And one of the donors that's in the literature that I use is somebody who has had natural tetanus despite having several, several vaccines. So no, the tetanus vaccine is not a guarantee against. It's like a severe tetanus. Yeah. That's right before you die. They call it severe. Yeah. But instead of call, it's because of my machella. So this is the kind of the dead baby equivalent of, you know, that they use for tetanus. So this was a soldier, I believe, during a very long time ago and he was, don't even show you his wound. He's probably stepped on something. It can happen. Not saying it can't. But again, our parents given well-rounded information. No, they're not. They're not told that there are actually things you can do to prevent tetanus. Shouldn't they at least be told how to clean out a wound? Right. And not to let anybody sew it up. And secondary healing is a thing like some people get open heart surgery and because they get I've seen this happen. They just leave everything open and let it fill in on its own. He ended up with a big scar, but they're still alive because the infection was able to heal from the inside out or whether the wound was able to heal from the inside out. Well, you don't want to happen as a wound to heal from the outside because then you're locking in dead tissue, which is a perfect setup. Tetanus loves dead tissue. Which is why they use dead rot and meat to grow the vaccine. Who are you? Toxicoid. What is it like to have your entire view of medical history? Do a 180? Like what is it like to be a practicing doctor and someone who never would have imagined this until you faced these forces. It's not exciting actually because during my medical residency, like towards the end of it, I was like, I just thought one day, I'm not a healer. I don't know how to heal anything. I'm just prolonging people's lives, treating their diseases with drugs. Like I'm a glorified pharmaceutical technician. I realized that one day and I was like, I'm not a surgeon, I can't do surgery. So I write prescriptions. I do diagnoses and I write prescriptions. So I decided to go into a field where people really needed prescriptions. Like if you don't have kidney function, you're on dialysis. Like that's one of the glories of medicine. Like you can prolong people's lives. I really enjoyed that. But then after I left completely and started studying real physiology beyond what I learned in medicine. Like I'm learning a lot of the stuff you're learning too. You know, the new tropics and all that stuff that you talk about, well I'm learning about that that we're, I love it actually. It's exciting. I've been liberated from a prison essentially, from a stupid prison where my brain was locked down and I was told what to do and how to do it and then watching the results. It would be one thing of the results were good, okay? But the results aren't good. Like we treat symptoms. We treat hypertension. Hypertension is a symptom. It's not a disease. Hypertension can come from lots of different things. That's just one case and point. So I really love being able to now have the freedom to look at the full human being and their physiology and look at them as an electromagnetic entity that has some chemicals and vitamins and help them direct their body back towards the blueprint that it was designed upon. And that's to me what real healing and real medicine is about. It's not about being anti-antibiotic, anti-this anti-that. It's like how about pro-life? How about we get your, you know, you're going out working every day. That's great because you know why you're getting your blood and your lymph flowing and your sweating. You sweat, you know, aluminum comes out and your sweat. Toxic metals come out and your sweat. You create salt levels and your blood that stimulates your skin immune system, which is a separate entity. Like I didn't know any of this when I was a conventionally practicing doctor. Just even say, like I wanted to detoxify mercury out of my patients in order to lower their blood pressure and I was told that that was not allowed. We're not like well then I don't want to do this anymore because I know from a hair mineral analysis and from a chelation test that that person is burdened with aluminum and mercury and I know that those both of those things can raise blood pressure. So why wouldn't we want to remove that? The same reason we're not allowed to say vaccines, you know what a multi-billion dollar industry blood pressure treatment is and cholesterol treatment is? Forget about it. Yeah, I mean I saw malignant hypertension after it happened after tetanus shot and adult patient of mine. So that was another one, you know, thing that woke me up and I was like, well gosh that's weird and then I you'd look up, you see there's other case reports and then you're told well case reports don't mean anything. You need randomized controlled studies. Yeah, so it's like there's frustration at every corner but I love doing what I do now and I love, I love the fact, look it was all it's all great. Like I wouldn't change anything in my life just put it that way and I'm really glad I have the background of conventional medicine but that's like background of conventional medicine is like year one and really learning about healing and life. It's just it's the very basics and doctors still need to keep learning but most conventional doctors are mandated to keep learning but they can't, they're told where they can read to get their credits every year. You can only get your credits from reading this and answering the questions like a good little doggy every year which I still have to do. But beyond that when I have my own spare time, you know, like I've learned ozone therapy, I've learned how to use vitamin C, I've learned how to look at the body electromagnetically and use biorezinence and there's just so much stuff you can do that really helps people and keeps them out of a whole bunch of trouble that they would have gotten into if they went and took allergy medicines and got their tonsils out or kept on their blood pressure medications and let the inflammation go wild in their body and didn't know anything about how to dampen. Look, most disease comes from inflammation, you know, cholesterol's trying to save you. It's not trying to kill you. The cholesterol is a response to inflammation. It's like your fever is trying to save your life. It's like everything in medicine is about dampening down the symptoms that are trying to save your life. You know, so it's like I look at it I think I can't believe I ever actually agreed upon that. Well, it took a lot of courage to step out of line and speak your mind and I'm really glad you did because I hope more will realize that this is what a doctor is supposed to do and you're not supposed to be a spokesperson for an industry that's pretty sociopathic, you know, which makes some, you know, great strides. Look, there's a lot of amazing orthopedic surgeons and eye surgeons and neurosurge. There's a lot of amazing work being done by medicine, but then there's also the pharmaceutical drug company which when attached to that and to the money people, they want to make more money every time they can. Every quarter they want to have a bigger quarter, they want a bigger house, they want a bigger jet and they just keep going and the way to get money is to get you to take their stuff. It's not to heal you. The way they really make money is to convince you that you're sick. And if that wasn't the case, we would have more medical freedom than we have, right? Right. Because we would have choices, we would have options, we wouldn't be told what we have to do to protect the public. You shouldn't be shamed for getting better from some other way. That wouldn't be a thing. I know. That wouldn't be a thing. Pretty crazy, isn't it? Yeah, it's pretty weird. Well, thank you very much for doing what you do and for writing that book because it was a real eye opener for me. You know, I had no idea. I had no idea of the history of these things. I had no idea the correlations between like when the vaccine was induced and what when the death rates had already dropped down. I didn't know all that stuff until I read the book. You gave me the book. I do not remember. I don't remember. Somebody recommended it. Okay. And you were Death rates had already dropped down. I didn't know all that stuff. I read the book. I do not remember. I don't remember. Somebody recommended it. Okay. And you read it. Cheers to you. Well, it's a page-turner. You know, it's I listened to it in my car too and I listened to it in the sauna. It's one of those books that you kind of have to go over it a couple of times just to sort of digest it and go, wait a minute. Wait a minute. Wait. Wait. Hold on. Apple side of vinegar. They were using to stop people from getting smallpox. Like, what the fuck is that? How is that real? Like, the doctors were saying that they were treating people with smallpox and they didn't worry about getting it because they were consuming apple side of vinegar multiple times a day. It actually worked. That's what the reports showed. Even today apple side of vinegar. You know, it's had a big resurgence in terms of keeping your gut pH nice and low so that you can digest your food better, which has downstream effects to everything. But it's also a fermented product. You know, it's got a lot of benefits. Not just that, but even on the skin. It's like really great to put on chickenpox and probably smallpox as well. If I may just direct people to dissolving illusions.com because if you just go to Amazon, you're not going to. There's two different versions of the book. There's the original one that you read and then there's the 10th anniversary version that has 200 extra pages. And we delineate early on with the new what the new pages what the new chapters are so you don't have to go read the old stuff if you don't want to the new to enter pages cover. It covers tuberculosis. It covers all one of this one of the chapters I really love. It's it's toxic medicine of the past all the different crazy treatments that I was telling you about. And then I added a whole bunch of the Hooping cough because more information came out after 2013. So we added that in and then we published a second book, which is all full of doctor quotes from 200 years. So why are you the only one? It's like, well, I'm actually not the only one. It's like back then. This was what was recorded from doctors and public health officials, which is probably 1% of what actually was said. And then we have hard to find vaccination tragedies. Royal Commission on vaccination timeline. And then we have rare documents at the back that has like the encyclopedia Britannica where they hired a very highly decorated, well known, highly respected doctor to write a chapter on smallpox. and at the end when he did what I did and basically looked at all the facts, he decimated the vaccine completely. So that you can't really find that very easily anymore. So this one is called the companion book to dissolving illusions. But if you can see all the versions and all we've been translated into eight languages or about to be translated into Chinese. But the best resources dissolving illusions.com and it will show you what your options for purchase and where you can purchase the different books if you want to. And alternative press, we have an alternative press for those people that don't want to do Amazon. So yeah, and all the different languages and the different versions are on there. Alright. Thank you again. Thank you very much. I appreciate it. Thank you. My pleasure. Bye everybody.