Keep it together, folks. Keep it together. It's so hard to keep it together. We just gotta keep it together. It's so important to keep it together. I know it's hard. It's fucked to keep it together. But keep it together. Before we get started, we got some shows coming up. Brian Redbann and Tony Hinchcliffe are making the way to Toronto. Be careful up there, you fucks. Because that's Canada, all right? It's not America. You gotta be respectful. Don't go up there, throwing your fucking waste products in the street. Be kind, be gentle. Canadians are awesome. You're gonna love Toronto. Toronto's very different than Vancouver. Yeah, I think. Well, they're both awesome. Canada's one of my favorite places to perform. I'm doing Winnipeg this weekend. Oh, it's awesome. It's fucking, they're so fun. They're like just regular American crowds, they're really good American crowd. Jazz that up like 5%. That's a really good Canadian crowd. They're super enthusiastic. They're awesome. And that place that you're going to in Toronto, they may or may not smoke marijuana while the show was going on. The underground cafe. And you may or may not not be able to see people in the audience, because you're performing in the fucking clouds. I heard the roof. I think it was Esther or somebody went there and they don't smoke weed. And they said that they got so stone that they must have that panic attack while just doing comedy there. No doubt. Absolutely. No doubt, 100%. There was no air left in that room. You were only breathing weed. Wow. It was insane. I'd never been so high in my life. There was no where else to go. I'd hit the back of the high wall. Like, oh, here we are. It's like, this is the wall. This is the 300 footer. I'm not going to, I'm not going to do good. This is going to be scary for me. I'm not going to be fine. Just don't get too high before you go up there. That's the thing. Just don't get too high before you go up there. Or do it, get high like really early in the day. So you're comfortable around like 5, 6 o'clock. You better build up your tolerance. Yeah. Go over your notes. Or just do a stoneness set everywhere. I'm just making words. They're great. They're great. You're doing three days up there? Yeah, 11 to 12. July 11th, 12 from 13th. It's a great spot. The people that run it are super cool. All that stuff about weed, I made that up. Okay, that's not even going on down there. I don't worry about it. But you're going to love it. And Tony Hinchla, for you taking with you, is fucking hilarious. Really funny, dude. He's really coming up. We started that new podcast with him. The Hinch Pift Notes. And man, we've only done two episodes. But I really see this becoming big. It's like, it's like American Idol for Open Makers. Yeah, you're doing some weird shit with him. Tell me what exactly what you're doing. What we do is we have a show and whoever does the comedy store has this sign up sheet where every Sunday or Monday, you sign up to try to do three minutes on stage. And there's tons of people that pay $20 parking. They try to just get their three minutes of stand up in. And they don't get on. So we take those people, like the people that didn't make the stand up. We let them sign up on this list. And then they get to do one minute in front of me, Tony, and whoever the special guest for the week is. And then we pretty much either do this thing called Tagged or Faggot, but spelled with a pH. But we changed it to value. That's really rude. No, but we stopped for your very first time in the comedy you tagged with the pH, AG. I think that's a good thing. But we changed the career. I think, let me first of all guess, you named that. Right. You can't. And second of all, you didn't run it by any gay friends. No. No, but we changed it this week to bag it just because everyone got nervous. So it's unnecessary. In this day and age, Faggot's unnecessary. It's too bad because it was awesome. We got to let that go. You know why? We got to let it go. We got to let it go in unity to our gay friends. Because we don't really give a fuck of someone's gay. I mean, we really don't. So like if you're saying something homophobic just because it's cute and fun to do, if you really don't care if someone's gay, it's like you're doing yourself a little bit of the service. You get lumped in with something that you don't agree with. It's absolutely a poop joke. It's like a cheesy dumb joke. You would say in high school. So we changed it to Baggot. But last night, what we do is we pretty much sit there and they do their joke. And we either help them. Like that's a good joke. You hear some tags for it. We try to tag it up for them. Or we just tell them to bag it and get the fuck out of area. And we kind of almost do it in a roast kind of way. But last night, we were there. And this guy came up. He was dressed up as Iron Man. And he just came up to us and goes, I'm a huge, does squad fan? And I wanted to come here and hang out with you guys. So he's our new security guy. The guy that gets the people off stage. This guy? Yes. It's one of a fucking outfit. First of all, he's like part Iron Man, part Captain America. Yeah, look. He has a microphone thing in it. I will leave that squad in the battle against anyone who is threatened our way of life. Oh my god. It was so ridiculous having him on board because he ended up being really funny too. So like he would like give Chime in on some of the comics. But it's the first episode drops this week on iTunes. OK, and go to get deskwad.tv. And you can find the how to get tickets for the Toronto gig. Yeah. We're also brought to you by hover. You go to hover.com forward slash Rogan. You will save 10% off your domain name registrations. Hover is a company, the domain name registration company. It's owned by the same people that own Ting. And they sort of take the same approach. Try not to rip people off. Try to provide a very good service. Try to make it easy to use. And hover is super easy. I've used it myself to register websites. And their user interface is very intuitive. It's super easy. I'm not that technical when it comes to the internet. I'm not that proficient. I fuck up a lot of things. I'm always calling Brian. It's like, what am I doing? What's wrong? Like, what's wrong with my fucking phone? What's wrong with the? I don't know that much. So if I can do it and do it easily, it's not hard to do. And they offer three things. Like free who is domain name privacy so that if you have some disgusting website, if you're some sick freak that likes to beat off on feet, this is not wrong with that, man. As long as, look, some people like it I bet. I bet they do. Some people don't need to make it bad. People like fat bones through their noses and people like all kinds of crazy shit. People like tattooing their face. People like crazy shit, okay? You can't hate. But I don't think I should have to know who owns that website. And I don't think people should have to know that you're a closet freak. So you can have who is domain name privacy for free with hover. So cool company. Go check it out. hover.com forward slash Rogan. Save yourself some money bitch. That's my son. Boom, son, go to hover. We're also brought to you by on it.com. And what a shock because the fucking CEO of on it is here today, ladies and gentlemen, international world traveler, psychedelic explorer. Huge cock. That's what I hear. Well, easy, easy there. No need, huge is a rude word. Except when I do a bogeh, of course. There's a lot of strength to the density of Pluto and a small diamond. But it's T plus in his dick hole. How dare you. I don't think that would be effective. Maybe it would. Imagine if you found that was the best way to do it. Just pack it in there like a musket. It tastes like watermelon. If you get it, because there's some drugs that people do take annually and they actually enjoy it. Like there's a girl named NeuroSoup. And she did a piece on YouTube where she was talking about, it's got like a billion hits. Because she's talking about taking DMT annually. That she took DMT and she put it in her ass. And she was one that was in that vice story that Hamilton Morris vice story where he was talking about how her boyfriend was this gigantic cocaine dealer. Oh, that's right. And ecstasy dealer. What was that? Your Hamilton Morris, originally? Yeah, that was my. That's his real voice, man. Don't hate. But this chick had this greatly detailed video about her putting DMT in her ass. And it was just fucking super intense ride with a devil. Yeah. I want time to watch somebody. It was already near bloodstream, apparently. I was not. I was not an electronic music conference. And I do not endorse or recommend this behavior whatsoever. But I watched the girl who said she couldn't get high from ecstasy anymore. She takes one and she puts one in her mouth and goes under a little tutu and puts one in her ass at the same time. And he was like, I hope this works. Oh my God. I hope this works. Did she at least break it up before she put in her ass? No, she crunched down with her butt and tried to slowly massage it into a dissolving out or dissolving it with the natural juice. And why, yeah, why wouldn't she start with your vagina first? Because it's definitely easier to get juicy in there. Imagine if you just found out that you're asshole is like the best thing ever for cracking walnuts. Like you like, there's no way. My ass has no strength. There's no, but really you put a walnut in there and it just destroys it. And you're like, wow. Have you ever tried to squeeze on your finger? No. No, no, stick things in my ass. But a doctor did once. I had a test once and a doctor looked up and my ass was finger. I'm like, wow. All right. I've done a Kalani. And that's a little frightening. Yeah, that seems like a bad idea. Okay. He's going to stick a pump up your stomach and you're going to shoot water in there and clean yourself out, including all the good stuff. Like there's a whole civilization going on inside your stomach. It's true. And you're going to blast water through your your shithole and then they're going to examine your poop. And you're going to discuss what your diet is. Oh, you get to watch it go through the tube. But I just see salad. But you said it's like excavating. It's like archaeology. You know, you see stratosphere like layers of the earth. Dude, different meals past years past. You know, you got the red layer brown layer. The crazy, like it shakes off. It breaks off. Just different parts that you see from not just your last meal, but many meals before. I don't know how often you need to do it, but that's what I saw going through the tube. So did you feel good out? You did it. The very first one I did, I've done like a three or so the very first one. Today, I love just talking. Three more. And I just clean it. It's a good excuse. I mean, at the very first one, I did felt like a slight religious experience. Like felt amazing. Like I walked out of there like feeling light and like I was cleanse. And the other ones were mostly just uncomfortable. And I didn't really notice very much reward. Leading me to believe that colonics are good like once every five to 10 years or so. Just to kind of in case there's some shit hiding out and some nooks and crannies, because the digestive tract has all these little spots and nooks and crannies and little areas where waste can collect and start actually really rotting and coming septic. So it's good to get that out of there every once in a while. Did you see that's my theory. Did you see bullshit on it? Penn and Teller's bullshit? Well, they said no, what they said. They pretty much just went to all these doctors and like and you know, they got this guy on Craigslist that was broke and they that gave me like $300 to do it and let them film it. Oh my God. Oh my God. And then this poor guy, you know, and it's the thing they went all the doctors and their doctors are like, that's it does not have. It's like it's like it's something. I don't think. I don't think you can tell it does nothing. That's absolutely there's something to be not paying attention. And they let you watch it. Maybe that's the next honor product. We'll go with on it on a colonics. Just colonics and douche bags. A packable literal douche bags. Apparently a lot. There's people that will take Epsom salts and they drink it and they glass like a couple tablespoons. Yeah. Does that go through you like a rocket fuel? That's what I've heard. I've heard it's just really uncomfortable. Gascy uncomfortable. Very diuretic. Don't recommend that either. But is it to have a benefit? Is there something clean? Clean your shit hole? Oh, yeah. I mean, if you're doing a cleanse, right? And you need to you need to open up the channels of your healthy people. Do you want to cleanse? Just chances are you're a douche bag. If you're one of those fucking guys, you're cleansing. You're cleansing. You're cleansing. I'm getting very feminine. Cleansing. Yes. But if you are doing some kind of fast or some kind of protocol where you are trying to detoxify your body, it's good to open up the channels of elimination. One of the channels of elimination is shit. So it's good to actually, because you will get kind of constipated because you're not feeding your body with a bunch of food. So it's good to actually push that out. But usually better than Epsom salt is going to be oxygenated magnesium. There's a couple brands like Mago 7 and that ozonated magnesium. There's a couple different types, but it'll actually help really push that through with kind of a good help. Do Epsom salts contain magnesium? It does, right? Maybe that is the mechanism for Epsom salt too. Yeah, because one of the benefits of the tank is that you absorb Epsom salt through your skin. Sun, the fact that you don't have a tank, we've got to get you on that shit. That's the point. That's preposterous. Agreed. Magnesium is like the thing that we all need, but none of us really get enough of... Yeah, magnesium is a big tank. Zank and magnesium. Yeah, a lot of minerals, actually. Remember that guy that was around dead doctors don't lie? And he was explaining like chelated minerals and he was saying that mineral deficiencies, the reason for all these issues and farm animals that we fixed a long time ago, because we just give them mineral-rich diets and we add minerals to their food, but we don't add minerals to people's food. He's like, do you know, few people take mineral supplements? And he was like talking about all these different deficiencies. Calcium, creating osteoporosis. And it was pretty fucking crazy. It's pretty convincing because there's not much mineral in the soil. I mean, they're replanting over and over again in the same fields and that's where our vegetables are coming from. Constantly replanting. So the minerals in the soil are mostly from the fertilizer, what they're actually putting in. Well, they're not necessarily putting in complete full spectrum balanced minerals back in the soil. So the lot of the food we eat don't have the mineral content that we originally had if you were farming in a really sustainable way and rotating around, getting new soil, things like that. Solution, though, easiest one is the Himalayan salt. 84 trace minerals right there in the salt. And that's one of the reasons why salt was so prized back in ancient times is that that's the best source for your mineral. The easiest source at least. There's a lot of good sources. But this is a really good reason for getting Himalayan salt, right? Because that's like it's salt that hasn't reached any. There's been no pollution on it. Yeah, it's like 100 million years old. So all of the pollution that's in the world now, everything that's in the air, everything that's in the water and the fish and all that shit, that wasn't around back a hundred million years ago. Just teredactyls and some ancestors roaming around on the ground. So there was nothing to pollute to salt deposits at all. in the oil spills, none of that. So it's a very pristine deposit. Would you put like a little in your water in the morning? Yeah, I do it intermittently. I actually like it at night. And I had a pretty dramatic incident where I, for like a week, I started going through. I was taking very demineralized water, like highly filtered water, just because it's a water filter that I have. So then I was starting to hear my pulse in my ears when I would go to sleep. And I was having trouble sleeping. And they're like, well, it could be a mineral deficiency for your adrenal glands. And I was like, OK, like, take a bunch of salt before you go to bed, Himalayan salt before you go to bed. I did that and made it dramatic difference. So now for me, I take more salt at night before I go to bed. And I sleep a lot better. And I don't get that. It wasn't so much that I was, it just I could hear my pulse in my ears. And I felt like mineral deficiency would cause that. Did they explain the mechanism, how's the mineral deficiency? The adrenal glands need, you know, need the minerals to function at an optimal level. Like most of the systems in our body. So all kinds of systems need the minerals. Minerals are kind of the foundation of what makes us up, makes everything run really well. So were you drinking distilled waters? I highly highly distilled water. Oh, oh. Like, it's called Kangenwater. It's just not just filtered, but like, completely mineral devoid water at my house. You know, and I was eating good vegetables and stuff. But the vegetables don't have all of those minerals. And I was, I would occasionally sprinkle salt on my food, but I wasn't really paying attention to my salt intake, you know, and then I tried to regiment it and actually supplementally take it and it made a huge impact for me. Wow. Yeah, because you have to be careful with that. I mean, all these water systems, I mean, this is a fancy water system. I'm not endorsing it by any means. It's just good to take everything out, but it takes too much out. You have absolutely no minerals and electrolytes in your water if you're using one of these highly filtered systems. So adding a pinch of that salt back in is going to be important. That's just your body runs on. That's interesting. What about like spring water? Is that the best water to get a deep into your body? Like there's a difference between spring water and like what is it? It's just you know, spring water like the sony and all those like those are filtered waters, right? So that's, they're basically taking water from anywhere. It can be as dirty as can be. And they're just running it through adequate filters to take the bad shit out of it. And that's distilled. That's filtered water. Now spring water is actually filtered either through the ground, which is the best way to do it like a volcanic system where the water naturally filters through the lava. Yeah. And that's going to collect all the minerals through the earth that you really need. And that's going to be the best way to do it. Yeah. My friend's place in Colorado has a well. Yeah. And she gets it like right from the well. It's incredible. It's like spring water. Totally. So like you have free spring water. So you probably need half the Himalayan salt or a quarter. Maybe you don't need any. I don't even know how rich that water is. But you'll need way less than if you're constantly drinking filtered to still water. Yeah. They pull water right now to the fucking ground up there. It's nuts. I mean, that's where they're getting the water. They're getting free spring water. Just pulling it out of the ground. It's like drink, try drinking some water here. Yeah. You know, try, try going through studio city, digging a fucking hole in the ground and find a, not going to be good. Suck it out with a straw. You're dead. Even some places out in the hill country in Texas, we have wells and you bring it out. It smells like eggs. I mean, it's a little softer. So it's different. And there's no way you're going to stomach drinking that. That's so nasty. In Himalayan salt that you have on it.com is juprove too. So it's what? Juprove. Juprove? It doesn't mean kosher, baby. Oh, it's kosher. Is that what they call it? Do you know what that means? Does that mean that I think a rabbi has the blessed? I don't know. I think it has to be. And not for parameters like, not like, be. Like, you can't rub his balls on it. You know, none of that. Yeah. He has to know that the process has been observed. Yeah. They have like real strict rules. I think like, what's slaughtering animals especially. Yeah. Very specific rules. But what's kosher? What's not, but you know what's not kosher? Bacon. So kosher's stupid. Yeah. Okay. That's ridiculous. Okay. If you don't like bacon, you can go fuck yourself for real. I was thinking about that. And I kind of feel like the Jews are pretty cool with masturbation and pretty cool with sex. I feel like they had to pick something that they could they could outlaw and say, for bidding. Yeah. And they were just, I got bacon. We could live without that shit. Well, when jerk off all day, we'll fuck whoever we want. But bacon, we're going to outlaw that. So people take our religion seriously. Dirty salt. You think how much trickinosis pigs have? Pigs, the thing about pigs is that there's their omnifores and they they're oftentimes a scavenger's. So they'll eat like wormy food, man. And you can get all kinds of horrible diseases if you don't cook their meat. Yeah. Or back when they did a shitty job of cooking meat and they didn't know what the fuck worms were, they would eat that stuff and get really sick and possibly even die. Bacon back then was like Rod Dog or Joe in Africa. Yeah. I mean dangerous pigs would just be wandering at your own risk. Yeah. But it's tempting, you know, because it's delicious. Yeah. They didn't know what the fuck they were doing. And those pigs are wild tubes eatin' fucking cadavers and shit. Yeah. But wild pigs are dirty, Frank. Singred of evidence. Yeah. Like that movie snatch, right? We talked about that. This is not even a commercial. But then it's not on it. Himalayan salt. Yeah, go get some. If you haven't been to the fitness section on it, we got pretty much anything you need for a serious rigorous strength and conditioning program. We provide it all. When we talk about stuff for functional strength, weight vest, battle ropes, kettlebells, heel maces and steel clubs, both of them which are excellent for developing like all full body movement and the kind of strength that you could really translate into any athletic endeavor. Or murder. Well, if you're, you know, I guess you can be a really slow shot. The steel mason club. And you're really strong. We also have jump ropes now, pull up our, well medicine, gym, to full home gym. And really functional stuff. Yeah. And two of the best DVDs, we eventually will make our own DVD. We promise you this. We promise you this. But for now, the extreme kettlebell cardio DVD one and two by the fabulous Keith Weber, it's tough to keep those fucking things in office, right? We actually took over production. So we got us covered. You can hammer us with those things now. We're not waiting for old Keith and Napa. Oh, that's good. You can send them to us. You finally worked it out, right? We worked it out. It's impossible to get those DVDs. No, it was. Well, international incident, every time we had to try and get them. Oh, you happy Keith. Keith is happy. Oh, he's happy. Hey, he deserves it. You're not. That is a badass workout. Both of them. They're ruthless. So if you've never done any kettlebells before, really, I urge you to start slow. Start slow. And if you can hire a trainer to someone who's kettlebell certified to just go over the movements with you, you can work out at home. You can totally get, I do kettlebell workouts at home all the time. But the first couple times you're doing it, it would be really smart if you're paid very close attention to technique and very close attention to your form and make sure you don't hurt yourself. We don't want you hurting yourself. We have a bunch of videos up from the IKFF, which is one of our really cool new partners. They're one of the biggest sanctioning bodies for kettlebell sport here in the US and two of their top athletes are on the side as well, giving some instructional tips. Where's that? If you try to find that on YouTube, or you can go to, you should be able to navigate to it from the kettlebells themselves, not the DVD. But if you go to the YouTube page, you can definitely check that out and Ken Blackburn, Mitch Blackburn, while then Sun Mitch is like 165 pounds and set the American record for the clean impressed, double clean impressed with 72 pounds. Yeah, and you can tell me what you just do. You did it like 65 times in 10 minutes. Stop putting them down. Double on that. He's like 165 pounds, 19 year old kid. You can see him on the honor roll actually if you look up. That is much black. That's something we'll just show you. What you do. Yeah, it is. I mean, and it's formed. These guys are form is impeccable. Yeah, they have to. They're not wasting any energy at all. It was cool to watch them, cool to learn from. You know what's really fascinating about a lot of these guys is they don't look like, they're not like bodybuilder looking guys. It's like they have this incredible strength for the amount of mass that they carry around. Like you were saying this guy has 160 pounds? Yeah, 165 pounds. Jesus Christ. I know. That's a tiny little fella. There's the guy right there. The fact that a guy that weighs 160 fucking pounds can throw two 72 pound kettlebells around like that, he was ripping the 90s up and snatching the 90s. That's insane. Whatever. That's insane. Oh, good. What do you want me to do? Okay. Oh, do you got some shock here? You would have, you would struggle with a 35 pounder. Trust me. It's hard. The first time you do it, it's real awkward. But what it develops, I am a fucking huge proponent of kettlebells. What it gives me is like real functional strength, like functional strength that just directly translates to jujitsu. I noticed a big difference in my rolling when I got really heavy with kettlebells. Because it transferred my workouts from, oh, today I'm going to bench. Tomorrow we're going to do squats. You know that, that gets you stronger. But there was something different about doing it all together. When you were doing like, you know, like alternating cleans and clean press squats and these crazy full body exercises, like you didn't just get stronger. You also got more fit. You also got like more endurance. You also got like translatable explosive energy. Some of those other main lifts like bench and squat, they're really good for getting you bigger in particular. Yeah. And longer in certain finite ways. But if you're talking about general functional strength, kettlebell is the clubs, the battle ropes, the mixes, that's really going to get the job done. And it gives you a balanced strength. And look, if you want to get, I mean, like a lot of people, like there's dudes that can squat, 225 pounds easy. Like I've met a lot of guys who can do that. But how many guys could do that with two 120 pound kettlebells? Right. How many you really can do that? You can clean and squat to 120 pound kettlebells. You probably can't. You know, you're going to wobble all over the place. You're dealing with this weird thing that you have to kind of control and balance with. You got to learn how to hold onto them correctly. You got to build this weird kind of functional strength. We are swinging these fucking cannon balls around and catching them on your forearm without snapping your arm. Yep. It's Manly Shit folks. Go to honor.com. Oh, N N IT. Use a code name broken and you will save 10% off any in all supplements. Did somebody fart? Seriously. I didn't. Any natural dick pills coming soon? No, that was back in my old business. You know, the natural, the dick pills. We had those rock hard weekends, but we found out that the whole game in a lot of those pills is you just sneak a little via granted and then you get popped and then you sneak a little seeallis in it and then you get popped. And then your third version is just pretty garbage. I mean, once you get used to the paradigm of what those drugs can do, just forget it. I mean, you can take all the herbs you want and it's not going to really move the needle so to speak. But, you know, I mean, you can help support the systems in general like with T plus. But as far as dick pills themselves forget it. So there's sizes of fucking jokes. There's no, there's no like ant boners or anything that you could put in there that just stuff. No, that's tough. They're calling ant boners is just fire aggro bro. A lot of the ones in the gas station actually work because they're putting like Chinese biagra in there. So it's like you think they're, they're a real piece of shit, but you look at some terrible label on the gas station. It's like, I don't know, phasored laser hard five and you're like, what the hell is that? But if you take it, it's like a little bit of Chinese biagra. It's great. It's ridiculous. He's so ridiculous. Like why wouldn't you take the real pharmaceutical drug when you know what it is? He's like, let's just hope this one works because some are more powerful than others. This is an anthrax. So you like lose all responsibility for what happens. Yeah, based on the luck of the draw. It's kind of luck of the draw, but there's, I found a couple of them that like you really take and it's the most your best boner ever. Yeah, but oh, that's hilarious. But it's last seven days. Well, it's the smallest one. Hey, listen, don't die. Please don't die. Yeah. I'm at dot com. Oh, and I T use code name broken save yourself 10% off any and all supplements. Brian. Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast. My night. Oh, that one's not. But hey, you never known to try. Yeah. Kind of like he did. I tried. Exactly. This motherfucker in his dick fell. Do you believe this guy? I took two different brands last week. Why not? Do you do a doctor and tell him your dick is broke? Because it's not broke. You give you amazing drugs. I'm not saying that it's broke. Yeah, but don't tell the doctor. It's broke. I still like does he rub it? I'm going to go like you're lying. Sucks your cock for five minutes. And if you can say the dead puppies for five minutes, then he'll give you the pills. Yeah, they can't say no, can they? There's no way for them to test. Of course they can. No, they don't want to say that you're prostate with a large, electric finger death grip. And then if you get hard, they don't want you to feel. I'm there. They can't. Obviously. I mean, do you just, they're going to take your word for it. Why would you say that you can't get hard? If you could get hard, well, you wouldn't lie about that. What you have? They don't know what it breaks their dick with that stuff. Do they? Can you possibly like break it so that you like you can't get a boner without it? You know how like some dudes that get addicted to those sinus sprays? You know, if you put sinus brain in the body. The biggest problem is the psychological addiction. You know, like the back when we were selling the rock hard that worked, back at flashlight because it had firegrass, the elephant, or whatever it had it. I don't know. But back when it worked, there was people who had taken, they'd get, you know, they start off with a girl, right? And they'd be hooking up with a girl and they'd be like, oh my God, you're a god among men and then they'd get that in the head. And then if they didn't have it, you know, they would start to panic and then their brain would start to take action. As soon as the brain gets activated and the sexual act, you're crazy. Isn't it crazy? Isn't it crazy how different you can get excited for one girl over another? There are some girls and we all know them in your life where when you're around them, it's just like instant flagpole. And then there's other girls where it's just, just for whatever reason, they can look just as pretty. They can be just as nice. They can be just as attractive. But there's some freak connection you have with certain people. I think it's very, really do you think so? Fair enough, yeah. I think so. I think it's great. attractive but there's some freak connection you have with certain smell. I think really do you think so? Fair amount. Yeah I think so. I think really what you're saying is kind of true like the juice. Yeah there's you. A juice. A juice. A juice. I'll juice. I'll juice. I'll juice. I never knew how to say that. It's how much beer is dropped. I know it on the other way where they've had like guys sleep in the same shirt for you know a few weeks or whatever and then they have girls smell the shirts and they'll be very attracted to one shirt and completely repulsed by another shirt just by smelling the actual pheromones in it. Well I would lose that one for sure. I fucking stink man. I could go down. I eat too much meat. It's all coming out my pores and shit. I don't know. I've smelled some of my clothes. My gint. The worst is jujitsu because you take your sweat so much and then you take your shit off and you throw it in your gym bag and then you throw your gym bag in a trunk where it cooks. Because it's 110 degrees in LA so you're driving around with your gym bag cooking in the trunk and then you pop that bitch open and unzip it and it's just like ammonia and funk and that's where there's a lot of skin diseases that people get from that stuff because they don't wash those things enough. And you're essentially you're rolling around in microbes and bacteria and shit. And the worst part is not when it's fresh. Like fresh sweat is not that bad. Same as fresh urine. You can drink your own fresh urine all the time. But you leave me I know. But if you leave a cup of that urine out for a day or so don't fucking drink that. That's poison. Because it's like a breeding ground for further bacteria. Same with your gym clothes. I would agree that it's sound advice. Don't drink this. I think I'm going to mean that's the next thing. But you uncle Aubrey says don't drink old piss. Here it on it. We don't recommend drinking your own sis when it's cold. Stir it. So I'm thinking of trying to do an aminene of mascara experience and I'm thinking I'm going to eat it and then drink my piss and see what's up. Yeah, that's what you're supposed to do. I would say no. Why do it? Yeah, I'm saying I'll do it. Why? I try once and then I gotta try it. I've tried everything else for real folks. This is a shamanic tradition. I know you listen to this. You know, like there's no one these guys are serious. No, the true shamanic tradition is it was explained to me by just got Jack Harrer. And he said that the idea is that you eat the drug, the plant. Mush. Which has a very different. It's not so silent. It's some other type of you're what you're shooting for as a mask. You should active compound is muskamol. And what it acts on a very different mechanism actually. Yeah. So the mechanism of action of aminene of mascara, it actually acts as a GABA agonist. So it's going to give you more of the neurotransmitter GABA. Whereas still a sibin, the mechanism of action that they're recently finding, which I learned a lot about at the MAPS conferences, mechanism of action of still a sibin is it's actually restricting blood flow to your default mode network part of your brain, which is your top down control mechanism in your brain, so that you're basically your mental cerebral filter that allows you to focus on the day to day mundane tasks, starts to go to sleep. And then happens to be the center of the controls, depression and a bunch of other things, which is why the clinical application is proving so important and impressive in all these people. But that's a totally different mechanism of action than aminene of mascara, which is basically flooding your brain with more GABA from what I understand. But the muskamol is a tricky beast. And it doesn't necessarily come out through your gut. However, once it gets processed through your kidneys and you piss it, it can be passed up to five times, they say, through different people. So like I could piss and then you could drink it, you could piss, give it to Brian, you could drink it and then Brian can give it to two other people and everybody will be highest fuck. Wow. What they say? How do they know? How would they know? Why would they find out? What are we doing with our lives? We're sitting around drinking each other's piss to get high. What do you see in fairies? Cocksucker. They're drinking piss and watching Pluto. You're supposed to be kind of like a little bit drunk and a little bit like a little bit high, like a psychedelic. I only had one experience and it didn't work. You didn't drink your own piss. You got to commit. You got to go in. You can't just put the tip in. You got to go balls deep. Wow. Is that how it works? You're supposed to just eat it and then drink your own piss and that's what gets you high. I mean, there's some ways that I think you can heat it and lightly bake it. I don't know. But I think the surefire way, if you really want to commit, is to eat it and drink your piss and then you can, you know, but you feel stupid if it's in work. It's just sitting there with piss mouth and not high. And just thinking, what kind of a loser am I? She just become a Republican. Okay, I should just go the other way and get single malt scotch and sneaking some Cuban cigars and just become an asshole. She had to rent in a movie. Wow. But if it works, it's about eating mushrooms and drinking piss, the fuck am I doing my life? You got a dirty garage. I was going to get to that, but I had to eat mushrooms and drink my own piss first. I'm going to fucking reel winter over here. I'm going to film it for all this averages. See what's up. Because it is perfectly legal in the US. I'm going to even scare you as not a scheduled substance. So the reward, if it works and it was awesome, it's pretty cool. Because we actually have something legal to do. Yeah. And you're just going to encourage people to do that? No, I don't think they're just, please, let me be the guinea pig here. I don't know. It could be terrible. But I'll let you know. You have to push the difference bad also. You have to have a picture sitting there just like all with pissy mouth and everything. Just self paid. Feeling the lowest but the low. I've never met anybody. He's had a good one. He's had a good, um, am needed mascara experience. Not, not, not that I can't remember anybody telling me about one. They've always said like, oh, it didn't work for me. Yeah. I met somebody who had a weird one and a not so good one. Bad odds. You just want to drink pee, bro. Weird and not so good. But there is piss drinking. So come on. Join the party. You know, there's such a tradition around it. Though, you know, that we get all drinking to this piss. By. Come on over here. Aubrey's got it all figured out. You just got to get a break. One guy pisses into you and then you pissing him. No, no, no, see. That's not how it's done. I forgot to bring cups. We all thought how it works. I just pissing your mouth and is that what we do it here? Straight from the spout. Look how the party we're doing here. The freshest way to get it pissing his ass off pissing your mouth. We're going to work this out. We're going to get highest fucks. You're going to take a peed. You would take a peed. That is exactly what it would be. He's trying to trick us. And when it's dumbled upon this fucking party, open up the tent door, what the fucks piss all over the place? Bunch of guys with the coccynans. We're just trying to get enlightenment. But imagine if it does work and you get someone really high and they love it. Then you can trick them constantly. There you go. I just touched on it. Here's my piss. You just get a bit drinking. Oh, my God. I don't feel it yet. But fight them and it's too much common to feel it yet. Yeah, let me piss them off. Why not taste like total prime egg care? Maybe some tea plus. Did you pack it like a musket? Did you pack the musket cock? Why is Dr. Laser wearing lipstick? We need to call Dr. Laser and ask him how many of those books behind them. He's red because it's driving us crazy. I picture Dr. Laser. He's got those old school books and nobody really reads. Yeah. Come on. He's, he's old. He's red. I don't know. That's the best way to answer. That's the best way to answer. That's the best way to answer. I don't know. I don't know. But he does have the brain surgery kit from Napoleon's field doctor, which is pretty cool. Yes. That's in his office. Yeah. They had a brain surgery kit, back then. Big saw. Like it looks more like woodworking equipment, but like really finely crafted made woodworking equipment. Things that like crack things, things that saw things. Oh, my God. It's pretty dense. And he actually uses it. Basically, he has his patients walk by it. And if they get queasy and they can't handle it, he's like, no, you're not the person for me. Because he's a, he's a tinkerer. I mean, he's going to go in there and actually cut your head and do some work. That's what is about the is. He's done like 3000 open skulls or surgeries or something like that. Oh, yeah. Yeah, he's, he's no G. He's cool. Holy shit. Did you imagine working at 3000 brains? Yeah. What an incredible power that must be to those guys like that they, they can fix someone's brain, you know, mechanically cut out your cancer and fix your brain. And then send you back to help live a healthy life. Yep. And he did. I met one of the guys that he did that for this guy is one of his patients and is pretty remarkable. We went through there. Did the brain surgery and then from, and that's actually how I met Dr. Lazar. As he did the brain surgery, then he took a bunch of the ingredients we have in Alpha Brain 2. And he recovered like way fast. This is of course just one story, but he recovered super fast. And that turned Dr. Lazar on to the potential for these herbs to work in conjunction with what he was doing on the brain. So that's how we kind of got, got hooked up. That's interesting. Did, did he ever talk to Roman Asky? No, he hasn't, but we talked about that a little bit. I think it's actually in the long interview that we have up there. But yeah, the, the brain damage issue is pretty, it's pretty serious. I don't think he's ever been hooked up with build up. Yeah. Well, Roman Asky, that's why he created that neural one. That was the first neutral pic that I'd heard of. We were on no name, no name in Alice or Alice in no name. Sarah, no name rather on Alice radio. Yeah. Anyway, and no name, African is real name. It was called of no name. How weird is that? It's called cool guy. Anyway, he was training with build Roman Asky. And build Roman Asky got him to start eating healthy and started giving him this neural one shit. Well, this is, it was like, it's a neutral pic, but it's also got like a little bit caffeine in it. Mm hmm. Very interesting stuff. And he developed it because of concussions. Yeah. Makes sense. You got to feed, feedback the brain when it's been deprived from being swollen, swollen and pushed up against your skull. Oh, exactly. How's that a, a neurological research center today? And one of the things that these people were telling me, whether they're, I was there for this silly TV show. There's people that take their kids there, like if the kids are involved in football, and they have football injuries. And they're talking about like these kids are like 15, 16 years old and just have these massive concussions. And the fathers are like, well, when can you get back in there? And the mother is like, is he going to be okay? Right. The mothers are concerned that their kid is getting really badly hurt and the fathers are, they want them to get back in there. It's weird. She, she was describing it to me like, you know, these situations that she's dealing with with these fathers and these kids. And she's like, it's really creepy. Because these kids don't know any better. And they're just running, they're, like, their dads like, want them to get back in there. Like, they get concussed. Like, do you understand what that is? Do you understand what getting shut off is running at each other, colliding heads? Do you know? Whoa. Man, in the brain, there's so much more we still have to learn about it. Did you happen to see that thing on 60 minutes where they're, they're people who are now able to control prosthetic limbs with their thoughts alone? Did you see that? So basically they hook up these, they hook up these arms. Now the first, the first version, prototype was they hook the arms up and they actually hardwire it somehow into the nerves. But it's still their thoughts that can allow them like they can shake hands with people. Just from like their brain telling this completely prosthetic arm to shake hands or like grab a ball that can tell if a ball is hard or a telephone ball is soft. Just from feedback, it's bilateral. So it's not only their squeezing, but their fingers can give signals to their brain and let them know if what they're squeezing is hard or soft. So it goes both ways. And then they figured out how to hook it up wirelessly so that they can actually control arms that are not even on them and they can make those arms move just with their thought. So on 60 minutes, like a week ago, I was fucking blown away. So like an avatar type of thing. Totally. Not that bad. But the first steps, like the big baby steps towards they fight doing it with wifi. Yeah. What is that? Do you remember that? It's the old experiments where they pretty much did show up. Oh, those rush. Oh, don't show me the dog head one. That shit ain't cool. I don't even know if that's real. Is that real? Yeah. That's real. I don't want to rush to real. Yeah, it was a cool segment on on 60 minutes. It's literally like probably two weeks ago. Wow. It's fucking freaky. Mm hmm. Pretty. The crazy part to me was the fact that they could it was giving them signals back from their fingers to their brain. That was that was what really blew my I mean, I guess the whole thing did. Just the fact that you think of this brain and thoughts as this kind of nebulous thing, but it's actually it is a signal. There is some kind of electrical signal that they can get a machine program, a machine to receive and respond based upon a thought, a willful action to do something. It can pick that out. I don't know how the hell that happens. Imagine if they can do that now, imagine what a thousand years from now is holding. We probably will be able to just lie in bed and send our robot out to do everything we need to do. Drive the car, you know, and we look through its eyes as it drives the car. We look through its eyes as it goes through the supermarket, picks up groceries. We're just sitting on beaten off, beaten off, pretending for this person. The robot wanders through the fucking town, does all your tasks come back home and you never leave the house. But imagine and then the application for sports. There's been a couple of movies like that, but you could go full. Let's say you created this kind of Android creature that you can control with your mind. You could go full gladiator style with net and try that. And just have the most brutal obviously be expensive because machines are expensive. Because we'd be crazy. It'd be crazy. It's bumper cars with a Ferrari. That's right. That's true. It just takes your fucking box of robot body. Torture people with it. Yeah, no, don't do that. But I bet you know what they would do. You know how people play the Sims? Yeah. I bet they would play like a real-life version of the Sims. Just let their human body go out there and interact with all these other robot bodies. You know, they take their body. They lie down and they look through the body or look through the eyes of this thing and then send it off like it's a little game. And you send your robot out and your robot goes and fucks other robots and parties and your robots and animals. He drinks and drives because he doesn't even live in the real world. He lives in this fucking crazy robot world. When we realized that's what's already happening. Where's the robot? It's me. I just turned us into a robot. I keep on thinking simulation theory to shit like your inner voice is actually you in the future like talking to yourself or something like that. Could it be, right? I think everybody knows especially when you're in pulse of fuck like I know you are. I am. And you've been too son. We all been a little impulsive. And there's always when you're about to do something and there's a voice goes, don't fucking do it, dude. You gotta listen to that voice. Always. That voice is always right. You know, there's like a weird rush on the other side too that tells you not to do it. It's going to feel good. You know, like when you're about to like you're about to yell at somebody and you know you shouldn't, right? You know, there's pretty much no reason everybody yells at you, right? But when you get this kind of like energy that comes up and it feels like it's going to be good to release it. Yup. What the fuck is that? That's you protecting yourself. Well, why does it feel good though? Feels good because sometimes people need to be shown that they're cons. It's like a revolutionary response. The only way people learn how to behave is by feedback. The way they learn how to be harmonious with their fellow brothers and sisters of the world is by feedback. And when you're not good at it and you get bad feedback all the time and you don't adjust, that's like a sign of mental illness or stupidity or a lack of education or lack of someone explaining or your own personal critical thinking involving the way the world works. But for most people, as you get older, you get way better at communicating because you've gone through this feedback loop several times and you sort of stabilize it and you know what people like and what they don't like and you know how to get things off on the right foot and how not to and it's like sort of easier to navigate. And the key there is as, you know, the key there is not to become completely enslaved by the feelings and thoughts and the kind of world around you and so that you're constantly living to please what the Toltex would call the dream, you know, the co-created world around you. So yes, don't be a dick, you know, learn not to hurt people but then at the same time don't judge yourself according to all of these opinions that are generally wrong. Anyways, people don't necessarily always want you to be your best. You know, so you got to find your inner path as well as adjust to guiding principles. It's a real problem for young people when they're dealing with haters, like the first haters in their life, you know, like could be someone who's at work with you or someone you go on a school with or whatever. But it might be like the first time you're like, or someone like actively hates on you and that shit can affect you. And I always say that it's like snake venom and that like having a little bit of hater is like good because you know how to deal with it. And then when you get a full blast of it, you're like bitch, I'm a mutant of that stupid shit, you know, like you've been bitten a few times, you understand it. Because people who don't have never been hated them before, like you see them get hated on it, like oh my goodness, just that wave of negativity that can erupt at any time on the internet. Absolutely. I felt that, you know, I felt that the first time obviously in sports or whatever you get these mild detractors, but you can always kind of see them. But then as soon as I stepped into the public eye, a lot of support, a lot of amazing people I've met and then a contingency of people who hate me just despise me. I was looking at him like why? What is the reason? Like I couldn't properly deal with it. I think there's a doubt to talk to many people I could and just kind of sort it out. So there's some people that are just going to be negative no matter what. But there's also it's fucked up thing, but there's a truth in that it's good to get your ass kicked. And it's good to get your ass kicked by the internet too. It's good. You know, it doesn't seem like it's good when it's happening. And it might be completely off base. But if it's right even a little bit, they're doing your service because they're pointing out holes in your game. Tighten up your game. Yeah, they're playing out holes in your game. And it might be it might be fair, but it might not be fair too. You got to deal with that too. But that's part of the game. That's part of you. And eventually, hopefully, we all hope for some form of personal sovereignty where no matter what anybody says about you or how anybody describes you, it's better way of putting it. You know who you are. And you're all right. And like all they're doing is exposing this need to detract from another person. Right. It's need to diminish another person. It's just a massive weakness. It is. And you know, we've all been guilty of a pressure. And along with that, it's also learning to take the praise not too seriously. Yes. You know, you can't get your tires lost. You've just dumped up and really buy into that whole thing. And you know, that'll lead you down a stray weird path of ego and beating off that kind of energy. That's no good either. Either detractors or too much praise. Just appreciate it for what it is. But really judge yourself by your own criteria. You know, you know, only you know, really, if you did your best, if you put out the maximum effort to try and achieve the result. And only you should be able to judge yourself. Yeah. Well, if you're if you're really objective, especially, and that's what we should all strive for, right? Like real objectivity. If you could really just fucking really look at what you're doing right or wrong. And what you're enjoying about your life, what you're not, how to get that bitch back on track. Sometimes it's hard to see yourself. There's to see other people, which is why a lot of the most fucked up people with the most fucked up lives always want to give you advice. Yeah. Who wants to give you more advice than someone who's life is a mess? You know, which got a do man. You got to get together with your girl and you got to work this out. Okay. I know you don't want to work this out, but you got to work this. And you're like, you really give an advice on relationships. You crazy fuck head. They say that most of the people who get degrees in psychology are the ones who are trying to work out their own problems the most vehemently. I mean, I don't know. That's just hearsay, but that's not a real maximum. Yeah. Yeah. I would think psychologists who do the weirdest shit when they beat off. You know, I mean, think what is a what is a sexual like one of those people that's like a sexual counselor? What do they beat off to? You know, do they got to be constantly analyzing it can't be that much fun. I don't. Yeah, right. Like how do they really totally cut loose? Yeah. You're constantly thinking about whether or not which did is good. But objectivity is a real challenge. And I think one of the tools that both me and you have found have been different ways to break through that kind of mental patterning that gets you in trouble. So the tank is a great way to do it. Yeah. There's different meditation techniques at a great ways. And sometimes for us really fix gold monkeys like myself and you and some other people when we just need something heavier to do it. And I think that's when you know, I've gone to Peru and done the ayahuasca or you can go so fully somewhere safe and do a heavy siloceibin trip or find some, you know, way to actually get that part of your mind to really be objective to kind of cut out all the bullshit and look at yourself with a true reflection. Yeah. And I feel like there's certain doors that get open when you have those experiences. And when those doors get open, it's like the whole world just takes a turn to the left. Like it's just not the same world anymore. It's just not. And that's scary for a lot of people man. It makes sense. But you got to really look at it objectively. And one of the things you got to look at is, do you really like the world the way it is? I really scared to take it a left turn into crazyville. Crazyville might not be that bad. Trust me. The other world is crazy enough. Take a little trip down to Leprechaun Lane and have a chat with the pixies and the other dimensions. It's not a bad idea. You got to know what the fuck is going on with your brain now. That's the problem. I would never tell anybody to do mushrooms or acid, even though I don't have. I would never tell anybody to do anything now today knowing what I know. Would never tell anybody to do any psychedelic because I don't know how to fuck their brain works. And then so having in something I always kind of reiterate, having a really good guide is and being someone who can not only ask you questions but kind of look you in the eye and analyze what you should or should not do. I mean, even the shamans down in Peru, part of the ceremony is before you get the ayahuasca, they kind of get a sense of view. Even if you can't speak the language, they get a sense of view. You can sense of crazy. Well, especially there, highly tuned to do that. And they look at you and say, some people get like a really little tiny third of a cup. And then they go on their way. Because that's all that the shamans know. That's all they can handle. That's all they're in for. And then other people, they'll fill that bitch to the brim and they'll come back for more if we want it. And then just drink that thick, thick, brown, bittery, fiery ayahuasca in the Islamic. You know what I've never understood about the ayahuasca thing? I'm going to have to do ayahuasca to learn this. The tobacco thing. Like what is it about the blowing tobacco smoke that activates some of the halosinogens? I think it has to do with your nicotinic receptors in your brain. So there's something, you know, the DMT, the tryptamine, like a stack. Like a stacking. I don't know. But you know, these receptors, and this is swimming a little deeper than I probably can go. But I think it has something, you know, nicotine acts on certain mental receptors. I think it's your nicotinic receptors. And then tryptamine acts on certain receptors. And somehow there's a synergy there. I haven't necessarily experienced that. But what I did experience, which is really weird. I have no very good explanation for this. But at the end of one particular ceremony, he smoked the tobacco, the shaman smoked the tobacco rystica, which is different than the tobacco that we smoke. It's a different species of plant entirely. So tobacco rystica, they smoked a big, hand rolled cigarette from that. And you like blew the smoke all over my body. I didn't feel anything at the moment. I was like, okay, well, I'm gonna smell like this burnt plant. Cool. That's good. But you really like took care and put it on certain points. And there's always some kind of purgative element to the ayahuasca. But that night, I was like, shitting and vomiting. Like I, like there was some evil in my body that was trying to escape. Like the most violent purge I've ever had in my life. It was, and it went on for hours. I don't know where stuff was coming out of my body. Right? And I've done ayahuasca many times. So I know what the normal purge is. Does it have outhouses? Or five times. Now that you have a little toilet in your place. Yeah, but sometimes a lot of water toilet depends. Sometimes no. Sometimes that's just a hole. And sometimes you do have running water depending on where you go. But a lot of times they don't have toilet lids because you're not supposed to sit there and really enjoy your supposed to just hover, blow it out, and then wipe and put it in a basket. That's kind of the general program. But put it in a basket. Yeah, because they can't keep them in the toilet paper around the system. Oh. But anyway, so there's some kind of cleansing aspect to it. It doesn't make any sense. The science, I don't know, I don't understand. But I know that they believe it's a cleansing ritual. And it certainly had that effect on me. Wow. Just blows it out. And that tobacco kicked it in. It kicked something something. And he blew a lot of smoke all of them. And then the next day, he sees me and he starts laughing as I'm walking, like walking by him. He just starts laughing and he asks me how was last night. And he's had someone with me who could help me translate. I was like, what the hell did you do to me? He's just laughing and laughing and just taps me on the back and just keeps on walking. Like he knew that's exactly what he was going to do. Wow. So he was doing that just to get you to get rid of all the shit inside of you and throw up and clean it all out. And then dose up. Yeah. And then the next night, wild dragon juice. Exactly. And the next night was the night that I went out and did the ride on that smoke. That makes sense. Wow. He cleaned your system out with some smoke. Yeah. So that they found DMT in the pineal gland of live rats. That's huge. Yeah. Huge. Yeah. This is Rick Strassman's Cottonwood Research Foundation. He just, I mean, this is something that they had speculated for the longest time. And I thought it was a fact. I thought that they had known it was a fact until Voodoo Chicken on my message board was, I think, the first guy to clue me into the fact that there's only like anecdotal evidence. He was like challenging Strassman on the message board. Because we know that the human body produces it. And then they, I guess they knew it was produced in the liver and the lungs. But this is the first time they can prove that at least in rodents, it's in the pineal gland of a live rat. Yeah. And I think when you, and when you're the way they, let's suppose it was the spirit mocha, right? Let's suppose that hypothesis is true. And it is some part of conducting the spirit from source into life and then back out. You know, let's say that there is some activation for that. It makes sense that they wouldn't find the active concentrations in the dead pineal glands because presumably its purpose was done there. But to see it there in live, in live, you know, and while it's living, I think is pretty cool. At least opens up that theory as a possible. One of the interesting things about taking the DMT was the shortness of the trip. And that's what the thing that people was coming on that one of the signs that this isn't, this isn't a deadly drug is how easy your body can get rid of it. Your body can get rid of it and bring you back to baseline at 15 minutes. Like you're on this voyage to another dimension. And then 15 minutes later your body is like, okay, not in the sea here. We're just going to clean this up folks. Yeah, what'd you call it? And just coming there with a broom and sweep up all the memories of what you just did. It seems like your body knows what to do with the shit. It obviously makes it. We know it makes it. We know that. But now we know that literally this third eye makes it. And that's fucking crazy because that's literally, I hate when I say literally because I shouldn't have said it that many times. That was my version of, uh, that literally, I should have said, uh, anyway, they've proven that at least in rodents, this sacred of all sacred glands, this gland that the Egyptians thought was the sea to the soul, this, this gland that Eastern mysticism had forever connected with an eye of enlightenment. That gland. was the sea to the soul, this gland that Eastern mysticism had forever connected with an eye of enlightenment, that that gland produces the most potent psychodont churug known to man. That's fucking bananas. Pretty wild. It's nuts. It's so many cross cultures too that have some kind of belief in that center of your, in that center of your foreb, where your pineal gland is. It's pretty unique. The shaman's down there. An interesting thing, I was reading Danieli Bieli's book about creating your own religion and the distinctions between religion and what we all both feel is like true spirituality. And some of it is, it's not people telling you that. It's feeling it. It's feeling that kind of activation or feeling what that feels like. And there's been times when I've been taking ayahuasca, where my most intense experiences come with a really intense buzzing energy that feels like not only that part of my head, but starting there, the energy feels like it peels off my soul scalp. Starting in my third eye, middle of my forehead region, all the way to them back in my head, what they would call the crown chakra. And I don't know too much about chakras, but I know that that's what I felt. From right here to the back of my head, it was like somebody peeled it off and it had an electric field and electric current over it. And when you get that feeling, you know, you're in for some fucking cool shit. That's when the cool shit happens. Like that is the precursor to the craziest experiences of your spiritual life. Yeah. Yeah. It's a language that you can only speak with people who have had some form of experience or something. Because there's a lot of people out there and it's not wrong with that. Nothing wrong with going through. I don't think there's anything wrong with going through your whole life. As long as you're enjoying it, why have a psychedelic experience? If you don't want to, if you don't feel compelled, I feel like if you feel compelled, give it a shot. But when you're having these conversations and you're talking about your chakra blowing open porting yourself to dimensions and this crazy flute tillas or a serpent flying above your head, I hear you. And I'm like, yeah, wow, I'm crying. Wow, fucking a like, I know that really happened. Because I've seen some crazy shit myself, not that it really happened, not that it's really a snake, but my point about that, when people always go, you know, if it's not real, okay, then you're doing something really infantile. Okay, you're taking something that's allowing you to go into fantasy land for a little while. Maybe or listen. What if I could prove that it takes you to another dimension? And in that other dimension, you will see things that you could not possibly have imagined and you will experience novelty and honesty and wisdom in love in the purest forms possible like they're joy, like they're waves hitting you where you're standing on the beach. If I could tell you that it was definitely taking you to another dimension, would you go then? I don't know. Maybe not. But here's what I know. Here's what I know for sure. If it took you to another dimension, you have that experience, or if you just had that experience in your head, you still have that experience. And it might as well have taken you to another dimension. It might as well because the same thing happened. You saw the same shit. You felt the same things. You experienced the same things. You saw it all. It might not have been real, but it might have been real too. It doesn't matter. You still experienced it exactly the same way as if it did take you to another planet. And you did ride around the wings of Saturn and you're underwear. I mean, it really does take you to that place. Yeah. So it might be real. It might take you to that place or it might be all happening in your mind. But either way, you experienced the exact same thing. And at last, and the results there that you get from it are actually, that was one of the cool things about going to the maps conference, which is the multi-disciplinary association of psychedelic studies they put on a conference in Oakland. And they had all of the top scientists from all these different fields of research come and present their findings. So there's been over 80 patients clinically dose with psilocybin. Most of them in palliative care, easing the anxiety of death towards the end of life. Amazing dramatic stories. You have psychiatrists in there who've been working in this field for 40 years seeing people. And they're the ones running these programs. And well, first of all, the funny part is it's a double blind trial, right? So on one case, someone is getting placebo, which is doing nothing. And in another case, they're getting a heroic dose of psilocybin. And the research is like, one of the problems with the study design is we pretty much know, because they're not supposed to know it's double blind. We pretty much know when someone's taken a bunch of psilocybin. It's not hard to tell when that's actually happened. But they're saying that what they're accomplishing in three hours would take on them three years to do back in the old paradigm. And they're reporting these findings and it's really encouraging. Obviously, the Johns Hopkins study was a great study. 94% of people who took the psilocybin said it was one of the top five most meaningful experiences of their life. I mean, really cool findings that are leading to a potential legalization of psilocybin for clinical use. And it shouldn't be just for clinical use. This is what's really fucked up. All these people that are having all these thoughts and all these positive experiences, like that this is discounted by our government. It shows that we're being run by a bunch of infants, like they should be experiencing it too. You should also do mushrooms as well. Sure. Yeah, Prowec was pretty requisite for political. It's such a silly little thing. It grows in cow shit. It looks ridiculous. It sounds ridiculous. It appears in fucking Mario Brothers, Donkey Kong, and shit. But it might be the thing that humanity really could count on right now. It might be if you could like, ensure across the board experiences, ensure that worldwide over a week's period of time, you change the world forever. And that's real. You really would. One gigantic world trip where like 30% of the population, the planet, does mushrooms one day. You want to talk about a strange world you would wake up to Monday morning? Oh, yeah. I mean, people would be hugging people in the streets. This is a thought I've had recently. What if all of the churches, instead of just bickering about their own dogmas and all this stuff, I mean, they're all trying to get at the same spirit. What if they were all churches of experience and across the ward, there was one basic church that you go to. And that church was a little bit of everything. In that church, there was Zen meditation in one area. There was float tanks in another area. There was lectures from people like Graham Hancock coming through there. There was yoga in one spot. And then there is different ceremonial areas where you could smoke peyote and do, you know, do a dance out in a sweat lodge or you could take mushrooms in a clinical, you know, like a really relaxed, you know, encouraging setting or you could do an ayahuasca ceremony with the local ayahuasca maestro. And all of that was available to you. So you look, maybe you didn't go every week or every Sunday. But when you needed to check in, there was your local church and you could just kind of talk to some people either listen, maybe do some light yoga or let's say you really needed to move yourself and then go in and pop into an ayahuasca ceremony or let's say you were feeling, you know, you got addicted to something accidentally. Oh, you could pop into the boga treatment ceremony. Yeah, through a Sunday, through Tuesday, in a real clinics like that, they were run by people really knew what they were doing. I could change the whole world. The whole thing, the whole paradigm shifts at that point I think. And it's there. It's like a real thing. That's what's crazy. It's not like something from a Dr. Seuss book, you know, that rhymes with, you know, morph, you know what I mean? Like, they took the morph on top of the orb and traveled to a farm. But I do, I am really encouraged by what my wife's maps is doing because they're playing by the rules. And you think that you get nowhere playing by the rules. But in some encouraging results, both for MDMA, for PTSD and these psilocybin studies, they're getting allowed to do the research to complete these phase one trials and actually test them on human subjects for the first time in a long time. And that's going to lead to, you know, bigger trials in the phase two trials in the phase three. And eventually there's going to get drug approvals for these. Now, why that is significant is at that point you have a massive amount of data. You have side effects studied. You have clinical use study. And if you can prove that there is an actual benefit to something, you know, it really weakens the argument for a criminalization. And then of course, there's going to be a lot of off label uses doctors who are like, look, this is really helpful, you know, just kind of like what's happened with medical marijuana a little bit. It's been medically legal, but pretty much that is a gateway to legalization. But they're following the steps along the the path that could potentially allow this to be legal. There's that path. And then there's the religious freedom path. And I think those are really the only two paths that are going to lead to fruitful and effective policy change. Religious freedom is a funny thing. It's just, I always feel like whenever someone gets together in a big giant group and there's a few people running it, check goes bad. It's just, it seems very rare that anybody can keep it together. You know, it always turns, I've been reading, I've been listening rather to Dan Carlin's hardcore history about Martin Luther and the rise of the anabaptists and in monster Germany. Whenever some new dude comes along and tries to change things and we're going to do it the right way is how God wanted it. It always goes bad. It always goes bad. Somebody gets in trouble and then they start just because they realize they can fuck all the teenage girls. And suddenly God tells them that that's what they need to do. And this guy died in 16 watts. Exactly. It's always the same. Yep. And they just chopped them apart with swords and shit and eventually got to hold them. You know what the other thing I've been kind of thinking about is too is you know you assume that like some of these ayahuasca shamans, the bougish shamans, different people, you would assume that by doing those psychedelic drugs they would have straightened themselves out. They would have straightened their morality out and they'd be all good people. But that's certainly not the case. They're a lot of examples of these people who are doing the medicine itself and are still completely morally corrupt individuals. And I was so weird. Yeah, it is weird. But I think ultimately the power of the mind, if you put your mind to it, can supersede the potential of the medicine itself. So if you decide to override it and just use the feeling, it's almost like taking mushrooms recreationally to watch a cartoon. You can kind of override the potential spiritual value of it and just focus on laughter and seeing colors explode on a screen. In the same way that you can do it with morality where you can take a bunch of ayahuasca and then use that override it still with your mind and just use it to you know practice whatever kind of power mechanism you want. So you got to make sure you get you know just because they do a bunch of ayahuasca or bogeur or whatever doesn't mean they're good. You got to find the people who are on that that true path of life. So you think what happens is probably these people grow up in this horrible area. You know third world country really impoverished and they probably find out about ayahuasca as a way to make money because there's an ayahuasca tourist trade. They'd even if they take it. Maybe when you just reach a certain amount of fucked up, there's no no pulling you back to civilization. You know maybe the way the human body is programmed to survive in horrible destitute situations. Really really disgusting violent situations. The human body sort of designed to be able to function those environments and those had a change and get whacky and crazy. You know those had a deal with war. It daps, daps and that becomes the new reality. That becomes every day to day living now. And it just it seems like when you go just a certain distance down the cut hole. You know it's like there's no pulling you back. It's true. Or perhaps in other cases I think it's happened. You know a lot of these traditions are taught grandfather to grandson and I think the grandchildren start off you know on a pretty good path. But then they get a taste of power. Then they realize everybody in their area if it's a tribe or if in their community looks up to them and they have absolute power over and you put that amount that mantle of power on people and you'll see cracks develop. You know you see it all over the place. People who are once good getting in power and exposing these inner demons, these inner weaknesses that they have and they choose instead of overcoming those they choose to just go with it. A lot of their downfall is chicks from America with yoga pants. Yeah. They come down there and I'm just trying to get spiritually clean. I'm just trying to open up my shockers and just big juicy ass and yoga pants. And she's in love with this dude because he makes the magic bro and he knows how to call the dragon. And she's in fucking see through yoga pants. Do you know they just fix those see through yoga pants? What are they doing? They should give them all out. That's the only fair thing to do. They should have shot the fuck up. That's what they should have done. You know what you were doing dirty freaks. Who what girl doesn't put those on in getting in front of a mirror? Oh my god. You can see everything. I can't wear these. Oh my god. You can't see everything. Should I wear these? What would you think I wasn't who are if I wore these? Oh my god. You can see it. Can you see everything? Can you am I being picky? They they talk themselves out of it. They know that their box is just hanging out there. And a lot of these dirty freaks would go to yoga class with nothing on just these yoga tights. And literally you could read their lips. You literally there's I said literally five times after I said I hate that I said literally you did fuck cunt cunt fuck them. Yeah the only thing that this company should do is just hand them out. They should just shut the fuck up. They should just go radio silent. Keep selling them and go radio silent. And they go are these the these yoga pants still see through. Just go. Yeah. Yeah. You look great. Yeah. There's a good for you. Go the dress rooms over there if you want to get changed. Or if they get sweaty you can see through them. Just so a nice bright dressing room. So none of those freaks can try foul. Just let them sort of look at your box in the mirror. That's a little showing off a little box. How's that gonna hurt anybody? It'd be good for everybody. Yeah. That's what I'm saying. Except shamans. They ain't used to those American yoga freaks. They're used to bunch of barefoot fishermen women. Yeah. It's true. I mean too much too much to bear. Yeah. It's milky white skin. A big juicy booty. You should get stretching out in the jungle floor. You should get yoga pants on it. And on it. Maybe we may be on all the ones from Louis limit. Or maybe invest in hyper color. I mean I bet that's pretty cheap nowadays. Put out alpha tights for guys to show their cocks. This would be the new alpha thing. Alpha tights. Everybody was like why do I have to wear it? Why do I have to wear underwear? I'm just gonna wear tights and do as you just wear tights everywhere. But they're see through tights where you could just really show your cocks. And that becomes a new thing. Look, I would believe that that would be the new thing before whatever believe that there'd be dudes willing to pull their pants down to their balls and then belt them in place there and have your underwear hang out. And that this would be like a super common practice. And that would be walking on the street. Let's see. 5 10 20 young men with their fucking pants pulled down below the crack of their ass. And I'm like what are you doing? Do you know a stupid this is? So I wouldn't believe that that would be possible and it is. So I believe that the the the cock tights would be the shit. Was it from you that we were talking about that that was part of prison culture? And yeah, they don't have belts. You can't have belts because you can choke someone down there. You can kill your sire. And so they would sag their pants for easy access for their for their daddy's to just bend them over. Well, they the booty master. Where's that guy's name? The one guy the booty bandit who was in that locked up show. You ever seen that show? No, you've never seen that. Brian, please pull that up. So yeah, this amazing internet connection now. The booty booty bandit from locked up or they also call them the most terrifying man on earth or something like that. But he was all talking about dudes that are sagging, you know, and they go to meet that sexy. He's like that sexy. Like you sag it from me. Yeah, find out. This is this guy's fucking terrifying. We met least juts. The booty warrior. A long time in the booty warrior. That's what it calls them. Very different kind of homosexuality. Yeah, he does. We have sexual desires. Right? So you got a bunch of men locked up at one place. All of it. All of it. All of that sexual desires. So what are they on? Don't let them have one. They don't have any somebody going to keep us moving in a business. The most memorable story that police told us. Look, that guy looks like the type of guy that he would lock in his cell. Why don't they just fuck to death? Why don't they just send like returns like flesh lights or returns? You know, it's a good first one. Just send it a person. My site did talk to the, you know, system and booty. They weren't they weren't down with it. Oh, my partner booty was more important than for me. No, no, he had the first half correct. The second half. It was more booty. I have a supporting. What's more important to drink a while. Wow. Oh, my goodness. That's enough. I've heard enough. The booty warrior, I was listening to, I was listening to my buddy Donald Schultz who was out actually in here. They were chasing down rhino poachers, which is a pretty crazy experience because they're going after these rhino poachers that are killing these rhinos just cutting off the horn selling them to China to make Chinese people's dicks bigger supposedly, which is really all it is. It's all, it's all, that's what they use it for. Yeah, that's the main thing they use it for is they grind it up and put it in dick pills in China. And it's really the same thing that's in your fingernails. Like it has no collagen. Yeah, it has no actual properties that are doing anything, but there's all big horn big dick. I don't know if I apologize about my. Well, I'll be there. I see you did there. But if you did the apologize, you have been fine. The problem is you didn't know. But whatever that paradigm there is one of the reasons for these rhinos going to kill. So he goes out there. It's crazy. They end up, they end up, you know, shooting this footage. And then as they're coming up on these poachers, they get shot at at wha, wha, wha, Zola video. You look up Donald Schultz, Ryan, I don't know what you can find it, but they get shot at by these poachers. And then you see him duck down like, oh, shit, and they're filming this. And then his people, his, his people pop up, he's from South Africa. His people pop up with like a case and just lay waste to where the poachers are. And the poachers have high powered rifles. These guys have like assault rifles, right? But they shot first at them. And it's a shoot to kill policy apparently. But then they roll up on the poachers. One of them's dead. One of them's wounded. It's this crazy kind of scenario, right? But the poachers are in leagues with the actual police in there. It's all their pain am off. It's all part of the money system. So as they were leaving, they get stopped by the police and they're looking for footage of, you know, kind of what went down. And they hid the footage and I think some parachute bags and something like that. And police are giving them hell and they go, you know, we're going to throw you in jail and you're going to come out different. And what they meant by that was that there's something called slow puncture where they put you in a cell with another do with HIV. And then he rapes you. And then they let you go after he rapes you enough times. And then you go home and you die of AIDS at home. And they call it slow puncture for people that they can't actually press charges on. Whoa. But they want to fuck you for life. And so they're threatened them with that. But they held the bluff firm, got the tapes out. And they've been trying to raise awareness to save the rhinos. But it's a fire. That's scary. It's scary. Slow puncture. Keep getting caught in an African prison son. Don't do it. Oh, don't do it. How fucking terrifying. And if you do, if you're about to get raped just fight for your goddamn life. That's it. I mean, there's no point going to war. Yeah, you go in a war to death the first day. And you're probably going to die. You may die most likely. Most likely. But go out on your shield son. Go out on your shield son. Don't go to Africa. That's another one. Imagine if Africa was the only place left. Imagine if there was some crazy fucking catastrophe. Most of the world got wiped out except the continent Africa. And we all hopped over there and boats from all over the world and battled it out for a chunk of a Congo. Carve your stake in Africa. The rest of the world just a waste. Just a giant waste land. A small Africa small population. All the people and influences and all the bullshit, all the corruption this fucked it up. There's a lot. That's fucked it up. And it's so fucked up in so many ways. It's like, how do you bring some Malia back? You know, how do you bring Liberia back? How do you how do you snap those back to the standards of, you know, European cities like London. I don't know. I mean, the corruption is so deep seated. There's that problem. And then there's the, you know, kind of Middle East fundamentalist. Sure. It's also like, you know, when he has any desire to go and use resources to help these poor people out. These people who live in Liberia or live in Somalia live in any of the really poor sections of Africa. Like they got a really shit roll of the, the dice, location wise. They, they, they were born an incredibly impoverished place. And it's like, there's got to be something that the rest of the world like, got to like, be honest about where these people are. The rest of the world's like, well, you know, they can pull themselves up by their bootstraps just like we did over here in Munich. But the infrastructure of some spots is like so much better to get born in those spots. I mean, when I was there in the slums, you know, you would see these shanties, these little shacks of basically sheet metal. And that's it sheet metal. And they kind of put it towards the ground just to keep a little sun off their head and a little bit of shade in the day. But they'd be on hills, right? And there's no septic system. So they'd be on hills. So the people at the top of the hill just be going in the bathroom in their huts. And the sewage would just slide through all of the rest of the places down and meet that. And, you know, disease was everywhere you see you. And it's a really intense, intense scenario. And generally a very good people. But one of the thing and very cool people there that you meet, but one of the problems is that there's the best way to get ahead in Africa right now, the way to get the most money is not start a business. Being on to renew or create something, it's to get a grant. So we have some of the like the brightest, smartest Africans instead of like trying to create businesses. And of course some of them do. But I noticed a lot of really the smartest people I meet were coming trying to write grants and just trying to get money instead of focusing on starting a business, building something from the grassroots. So it's almost like some of the help that we're providing is not really helping long term. It's just they're gaming it. You know, they're figuring out the game and trying to get the money that way. Well that is a fascinating aspect of that about Africa because that's the the Nigerian scammers. I mean they're so famous like the Nigerian scammers like everybody is heard about Nigerian scams. There's been so many of them and so many of them were the dudes just get so duped. Like it's always like a guy and they pretend that they're a girl. Get the gold out of. Yeah, get the gold. Dear sir. Easy it is to get gold anywhere. Everybody will buy gold. So if anybody comes to you and says, hey I just can't sell this gold man. They're full of shit. And the other one is they like to do the inheritance one. You know, you have to pay some legal fees. Just a few grand legal fees and the money's coming bro. It's a fucking go to the crazy thing you've ever seen. You never run out of money forever. Start buying a house. I mean you can use it. You don't even need to down payment. Just tell them about this and you'll just get money in the bank. Nigerian scammers. I guess they just got like super desperate rado. A bunch of smart dudes and then just hopped in and started figuring out how scam white people or they're not even Nigerian and somebody else just hopped on the fucking oh Nigerian scams are working. Let's do it. Right like they told you shit about Nigerian. They took it to the next level. They pretended to be Nigerian. But they're really like from Sweden or some shit. Like go ahead. I was just going to say speaking of Sweden or some shit. I was thinking of foreign countries where this guy can go that leaked this the NSA documents. Who's he's hiding? You know this whole story? They had more than other WikiLeaks kind of. Yeah exactly. Yeah. It's the one that showed us that the NSA has been following every phone call on Verizon. So in collecting metadata every transaction you have, every interaction that you've had. What do you think the ultimate end game is for that? I guess it's if anybody is a problem they can just go back to the records and fuck you up. Right? Is that the idea? Because they're not going to be able to pour through that data and just pick on people. Because someone said oh yeah I'm going to smoke some weed or whatever. I mean I really don't think that's the plan. I think it's just they have it. Yeah. Just in case they need a... I think yeah. That's the idea. It's not that they want to invade your privacy but that if you you turn out to be a creep they want it to be really easy to pull out any data on you. The problem is that's like so Orwellian and you're giving people this incredible power to peer into people's privacy and you know what do we lose in return for that? Well we really really lose all privacy because all privacy when you're interacting with unless you're talking in a closed room and even then like if you go into like foreign places like that that are like working on secret like you know embassies and stuff they won't only bring iPhones do you know why? Because you can't take a battery out of an iPhone and Amber Lyon taught us that. Like she's gone in like when she was working for CNN she'd do these like big-time interviews and she would have to get an Android phone so they could take the battery out because they won't don't want anybody... otherwise they can have that thing working remotely and they can spy on you. I mean all that technology is available they could just set your phone off while you're hanging it out in your office planning your dastardly attack on Gotham City you know with your fucking superhero friends or whatever and they can record it all. You know that would that would be less scary if every law in the US was perfectly just right you know there was only just laws you're allowed to experiment with your own consciousness you know whatever all of these other financials just might have to be cleaned up first but imagine that I mean all the shit that we're worried about what are what are we worried about we're worried about that smoke and weed I guess someone could fuck you up maybe if you're having if you're being unfaithful to your girlfriend but shouldn't be doing that shit anyways but you know that's something that it's still it's nobody's business but I mean if at least the laws were just then it wouldn't be such a pain in the ass but because we have all these unjust laws where we can be thrown in jail for an indefinite period of time you know well those two things carry for everybody those two things you brought up too should have absolutely nothing to do with the law in fidelity or marijuana or whatever whether there's nothing to do with the law law should be all about protecting people that's we protect people from violence protecting people from theft protecting people from injustice and ensuring a harmonious community and that you know that's really what it should be all the laws where you'd be pumped to see the cops yeah oh sweet the cops are here awesome they're gonna keep everything safe you know instead of me like I'm on a fuck or stop creeping well you know I've been really like I I said I'd listen to this Dan Carlin podcast I'm gonna listen to dozens of them over the last couple of weeks and it's it's amazing how good we have it today just compared to like the 1500s like the way the people were living just 500 plus years ago it's just it's total insanity total insanity we would we have been hell if we were forced to be back there it was such a short period of time ago it's like we without a doubt there's a lot of room for improvement in this society in this culture but we're seeing an awareness right in front of our eyes that I'm not even sure if we've totally understood the impact of it yet because what you're seeing with like this NSA leak thing and wickie leaks you're seeing this forced response in this grand global way like they have to respond to these things in a global way like the whole UK is there were writing articles about it in newspapers or writing articles about it Hong Kong the fact that this guy was on the run the FBI is looking for this is a worldwide publicity disaster for the NSA It was about Hong Kong. The fact that this guy was on the run, the FBI is looking for him. This is a worldwide publicity disaster for the NSA. And it's been created by one person who took a stand. And now they're going after that person as if he's some sort of a terrorist. One person that showed that, hey, you guys are kind of violating the Constitution. Like what's going on here? Do we have a Constitution anymore? Oh no, this NDA thing that you fucks past. That's sort of bypass the Constitution. So now all this illegal shit or that used to be illegal, you made it legal. So you think you're doing an okay job. Is that what's going on here? This is clearly bad governing. It's clearly. And I think that transparency is being exhibited in this reaction to this NSA whistleblower thing, where people, like the president's having to defend it now. And one of the things he was saying, I was just talking about this to Duncan. We were talking about how Obama was like, you know, well, this is something we should definitely have a debate about. We can definitely open it and talking about this. But really, well, why was it a secret then? Yeah. Why did somebody have to leak this? Why didn't you discuss this with people and explain the pros and cons of losing this much secrecy, of losing this much privacy? That's ridiculous. That's the, there's, there's not that many threats to this world. I don't buy it. I think they're doing a great job in shutting down threats. Have you stopped and look at how many threats and they've turned into actual terror attacks besides the Boston one and besides a couple other ones? There's very few, very few. When you compare them to actual days of the week, you compare them to actual human interactions that take place throughout 50 states and numerous cities all throughout the day, all over the time, there's very few like those shitheads from Boston. There's very few like, you know, whether it's a 9-11 that happened in 2001 or because they can squash most of them without reading every fucking email you sent. They shouldn't be able to read everybody shit. That's ridiculous. You know, I think if you could prove that you were just and that you were looking out for the best interest to man, maybe you should be able to go and like look into this stuff without a warrant. But because it's been proven like the IRS goes after conservative Tea Party groups, like much more than they go after liberal people, they like, they just got busted for doing that, like chasing down these Tea Party fucks and making their life hell, harassing them, like making their experience with paying their just taxes much more difficult. Well the beauty is is that the age of information in the internet is allowing all of these people to band together and make a force on their own. Because back in the day, imagine if you had to gather a large group of people, you know, you couldn't do it. You have to put out an ad and then you'd have to get that ad approved by whatever newspaper you're going to do. I mean or find a reputable news outlet that you could go tell your story to. But now with the internet, these things can spread and these things can gather and people can communicate. And that's a force that I don't think the powers that be are fully comprehending and are ready to reckon with. Diane Feinstein was explaining that we needed to do these things because we need to stop terrorism. And she was when she was saying this, I was imagining that this person gets to speak for me. imagining like the ridiculousness of this person getting to speak for me, this silly person who if there was a couple of us and she started talking we were like, okay, stop talking. You're talking nonsense. Like you're talking nonsense. If she was just around us right now and she was explaining why that would be important, she would look like a buffoon within a couple of minutes time. She would be stammer and it would be a disaster. It's a there's no argument there. And there's not a single argument that you could point to where a competent society that cares about its citizens and it cares about the quality of life, which includes respect for your privacy that that culture would allow these ass fucks to just download every email you send. Duncan had a great way of describing it today. He said, could you imagine if the government in the 1960s said, hey, everybody that sends a letter through the mail, we're going to take it and Xerox it and then we're not going to read it, but we're going to have it and then we're going to send it back to you. And we're going to just keep all your letters in a storage facility in Utah. You'd be like, get the fuck out of here. You know how to get to read my letters. Why do you need to read? You're just because what a person calls themselves a cop, so the CIA or the FBI, they put themselves in some sort of a group. Now also they believe they have power that a regular person doesn't have because if there's only two people on the planet, you and Mr. FBI guy and Mr. FBI guy is like, I believe you might be plotting terrorism. So I'm going to read your emails. You're like emails to who you fuck. This is just you and me. No, you can't read my email. Get out of here. Go fuck yourself. You're just a person. But when you're in a group and you're the NSA or the CIA or the FBI or any fuck another three letters you want to string together, all of a sudden you have the power to go and do really rude shit to people. And that's the problem with the big groups and rude by throwing them in jail and definitely, I mean, beyond rude. I mean, it's rude when your girlfriend reads your phone texts. If you haven't done anything wrong, you know, it's rude when people dig into people's you. Yeah. I mean, I write in journals and things like that. And one of like the most sacred things to me is that nobody picks those motherfuckers up because if somebody goes in and reads that journal, that means that every time I'm writing my innermost thoughts, there's going to be a little sensor voice up there saying, oh, well, what if somebody reads this shit? I better not write this exactly how it is. And as soon as that sensor voice comes on, the whole, the whole practice of writing in the journal is fuck. That's why you should always write in a journal after you beat off. That way you're at your most honest. I really know your piece of shit. Just spell it out. I think I recently got out of a situation where somebody did that, you know, where somebody went in my phone and screenshotted every single text I have, every single photo, every simple thing and sent it to themselves. And that now questions me when I talk to anybody, because even if it's something legit, I don't even want to type it down anymore because of that. Yeah. I mean, there's like that program that's popular right now, Snapchat, you know, where you send a photo and then expires in three seconds of your balls and stuff. People found out a way to hack that now so you can go in there and take all those photos and all those videos that are supposed to be, you know, gone forever. Well, all you have to do, they're so silly. All you have to do is have two phones. Right. And you take a photo of the photo of the photo and that way you don't even have to get a screen shot and you have to get a photo. Okay, there are so many to week game that we gain. There's so many vagina shots that you just sent to these motherfuckers are playing tiktok toe. There's no girls with workable vaginas that we're going to send good pictures anyway. It's all the games terrible. It's terrible game. But that is scary though. If you think about texting so popular nowadays, you don't realize what you're typing the people, right? You're typing secrets that only you and that person's supposed to know, you know, and then like six months later, you lose your phone or you lose your phone. You're like, oh, look at this guy. What he's talking about. Oh, look at this. Oh, you don't think a shit like that. You should make your journal. You should write it in like a very specific like do you have those, you know, those scholastic white and black book covers. It's like that weird pattern that they had and it was a hard cover. Like TV. Yeah. You should only write in those, right? And write my journal and then make up a dummy one with one of those ink bombs like they have for bags that they give away and during bank robberies. Yeah. And once you open some of your shit, glammy right. Oh, my God. All over you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Green with envy and rotten desire. Just you fucking green fuck head. All over like dirty green like a rotten stinky green or not. Don't write ridiculous shit paper leave it around your house. If I was a state over your house, I'd probably fucking read it. If I was to use your bathroom, but I took a leak and I was like, what is this motherfucker writing? And I'm on the shit er reading you're in your like, why are you still in there, man? Oh, dude, I'm constipated. I know you realize that your book is in there and I'm reading your book most likely. Yeah. Don't leave your back. Don't leave your journal in the shit er. Yeah. But I think I got it. I only have books in the shit er, if I'm not taking my kale shakes because if I'm on a regular kale shake program, I always do where I describe it is like a tunnel and then those zombies from World War Z or running down down the tunnel, just all stacking on top of each other. That's what the kale shake is. It just fills up your entire pipe with a thick green gooey substance because I down about 30 ounces and then those motherfuckers just push everything out and it's a wild ride. That's what you mean. Yeah, man. You know what, dude? I told you we, um, someone on the message board actually found out how much of that shit is in kale as opposed to other things. Celery has more than kale. Yeah. Well, he's a doctor said that. The doctor said that while he was here. I feel good. The doctor. Not the doctor. Dave Asprey, Dave. The last doctor. It didn't mean that. How dare you. But he said that on the podcast, but it still has a lot in it. No, I don't think he said that I think he said celery had less actually. He was whoever corrected him online. Apparently they corrected him. What he said was incorrect. It's just a misstate, whatever he said, but the way to combat that apparently that's effective is calcium and adding calcium to your kale shake is supposed to offset the effects of any of that. Take your nightly TPC. It's got it in there. But what I was going to say is people discount how, you know, the feedback that you're getting from your body yourself. You know, like, you feel good when you have a kale shake, right? Like you can feel it. Like if there was something poisonous in that, I really trust that the body would be like, yo, you know, don't drink this. Dave, don't drink this. Dave, you're paying this regular pussy. Dave, no, it's supposed to be really warm. But you know, I mean, people, it's the same. I mean, you can apply that same if you really kind of pay attention to those signals coming back. You can learn a lot from that. And that's, you know, with this, you know, the earth grown nutrients thing that Mike Dolce is always preaching about. You can tell the difference. And then you get these weird kind of ideas. I mean, I like a lot of the Aspiri principles about high fat. But if you take some of that stuff too literally and start hammering like lots of butter, and you just don't feel that great all the time, you know. But if you're following a more kind of common sense and just listening to the feedback from your body, it, it's tend to trust that more just kind of feeling what feels good. Yeah, but it's also good to have some real science and knowledge behind it too, which that's for sure. Aspiri, you know, he takes a lot of heat, but he knows a lot of shit. And he's not a professional. So if he gets something wrong, occasionally you got to realize that guy also runs like an IT company. People are always like accusing him of trying to hawk his items, which he definitely is like over bulletproofing everything. I asked him if he had a bulletproof wife, if this goes home to his bulletproof marriage and his bulletproof sex, he's just, you know, he's just, he's starting a business. He's got great ideas. He's got great ideas. But the point is like that guy had free shit up on his website for a long time. There's still a ton of free information. The really in detail, excellent stuff that he's pulled down. He has references. He tells you where he read it. He tells you what it's about. He tells you what the benefits of these certain things are. It's really good stuff. And I know that his, like his, his thing is try, he's like, he's on a quest to try to figure out the ultimate combination of foods and exercises and treatments for to rehabilitate injuries. And he's right about a lot of shit. Like he made me give me a great tip on that Pro Low Zone therapy. Yeah. For, for back issues, this fucking tremendous. It's tremendous. It's got a lot of really wacky ideas, bulletproof coffees, genius shit. That's a genius invention. You get another one of those things where you can really feel it. Yeah. Well, the, the combining it with fats so that it's a slow release of caffeine, that's, that's what coffee always needed. That's what coffee was missing all this time. Yeah. That fucking jolt that you get when you down like a 20 ounce Starbucks, it's black. You get that weird shaky, like, oh, fuck this is a real drugy feeling. Too much man. Yeah. Put some butter in there. Put some coconut oil, some MCT changes the game. Yeah. Just slow, that slow release. That's wonderful. You know what else is he needs to do? Really changed the game for me. And maybe I'll tell my whole hunting story too here if we want to get into it. But yeah, I've, you know, I went out on that hunt down in South Texas. And you know, we got a lot of meat back from that hunt. And every single time I have that meat as compared to some other meat, I mean, the way that I feel it digest, the way that I feel it absorb and it's completely different. Yeah. So, it's fantastic. Yeah. It's fantastic. And even if you're buying some kind of grass-fed cow steak, you know, this wild game that we went out and procured ourselves, I mean, it's not only delicious, but it's not only delicious. I mean, everything we've had has been pretty fucking good. Maybe one done. But most of the stuff we're making for heatas, we're making stew, we're making tacos, we're making steaks, we're making stir fries, and all of this shit is hungry. It's been amazing. But that was a really cool experience. And it may be something that we've, I know we've talked about doing something like that for on it. So really how it could potentially work. And it's a challenging scenario. So, you know, hopefully we're work, just know that we're working on it guys. We potentially make this possible because I think the health benefits are there and the whole process is really valuable. Because if you've gone your whole life, and I know you've made this pitch too, but if you've gone your whole life, and all you do is show up to the grocery store, pick some cellophane wrapped piece of meat that all you identify is as a steak. You know, you really don't get it. You really don't understand what you do. You do, you don't. Yeah. You know, you don't fully get it until you've been there inside the animal, you know, arms up to your, you know, arms covered in blood actually cutting those pieces of meat out of something you've killed that changes your reality. You know, then you have a full appreciation for what you're doing. So what we did out there in South Texas is there's these ranches. This one was 10,000 acres. And so there is a confined space. It is 10,000 acres. But these animals are procreating. They just kind of loosely measuring the herds because they're mostly wild. The problem with hunting most native game is there's very select seasons in which you're allowed to hunt them. So you have to really kind of stock up. If you're going to hunt whitetail, you better be in October and you better have books and shit in advance or go somewhere that's very small seasons. So what these exotic ranches have done, if it's non-native game you're allowed to basically take animals from the herd all throughout the year. So they've gotten species of animals from different parts of the world. And they're just, you know, that country's version of the deer. So there's fallow deer which come from Europe. There's some black buck which come I think they're from Indonesia, tiger food. There's some axis deer which also come from around that area. Black buck might be somewhere else. But then there's Orix and Addix and all these different kind of antelope and deer that they get. And they're just living, they're living it up out in South Texas. The plants down there have roughly 30% protein. And even though they're sparse, they have pretty good adequate protein. And when there is kind of a drought, they do supplement it with a little extra food as well. But they're pretty much just living off the land and thriving and procreating. And so you're going down there and not only is it like a cool safari where you're seeing all these exotic creatures, you're actually able to go out and take your rifle and hop out on some sticks or, you know, track them down in these kind of outdoor vehicles which are like these commando style suburbans and go hunting for an animal that you're going to take then and butcher and have meat for it. Man, I've been eating the same deer for like three months now. So it's a really fucking cool experience where you're out there in the land and these animals are, you know, ostensibly as wild as other animals. I mean, they're not sensitized to the truck. A few of the species are they get kind of used to the truck and that would be a little weird to shoot. But these black bucks, I mean, I was out there hunting for the entirety of the day. And I was really didn't think I was going to get one. You know, I was hoping to get one, but I kind of said, you know, all right, if today is not the right day to take an animal, so be it. So we're out cruising around and every animal that came within about 250 yards was just scattering. And I knew the ballistics on my gun. I wasn't going to comfortably take a shot that was over about, you know, 150 to 180. Just because at that point, my particular ballistics on the bullet, the bullet was going to drop about four to six inches. And I didn't see that to gauge that to gauge that. Do you have one of those goggles that you looked through and it gives you the number? No, I didn't have that. So it was all by, you know, we had a guide there and he'd be like, yeah, that's about 190. Oh, so that one 90's get it done. So anyway, so finally it's a very end of the day. I didn't think I was going to get anything. And we see this black buck doe at the very top of hill about 260 yards away. And instead of scattering, I was like, oh great, she's going to run away. Like everything else does. Instead of scattering away, it ran like right towards the truck for 80 yards. So it was like at 160. And this is like right when the sun was kind of starting set definitely the last chance I had. So I made like a quick makeshift brace. So out in the cross hairs, I tried to steady my part beat with pounding and try to keep the cross hairs from dancing all over the thing. Seeing sky, seeing ground and then focus in and take a deep breath. And then it just kind of turned just the right way and I pulled the trigger. Wow, you know, a big blast. And then it was just full adrenaline from there. I saw it rear up in the air, fell to the ground. And I remember, you know, running up to it because I knew that if it was in pain, they say to kind of wait and see if it gets up. I wasn't really down with that. I wanted to make sure that if it was there that I could, you know, ease it suffering as quickly as possible. So I just dropped the gun and went up there. I knew I hit it pretty good and sprinted up. Why'd you drop the gun? It's just who was heavy and clumsy. I had a knife on my knife. I had a knife on my side. So you're going to do it knife style. You weren't going to use the gun? No. Well, because the gun can spoil meat, right? If you missed with the gun, you could hit a shoulder, which is going to be 10 pounds of meat. You could, you know, miss and clip some back strap. You could, you know, really the cleanest way to do it to preserve the meat, which is why you're doing it. And kill less animals is with the knife. Dude, be honest, you were excited about killing it with a knife. There's something I'll tell you right now that's creeping me out. I'm thinking of you going to stray caveman fighting an ear or you saw on the net. Well, I'll tell you, I'll tell you all the emotions that went through really at that point. So just leave out horny. Right. That didn't cross the path. So you know, I mean, so we ran up there and you know, obviously your heart's pounding and it's a really weird experience. And I go up and I see it. And it was still alive, but it was probably bleeding out. It was definitely bleeding out. I caught a piece of the heart a lot along. And it was definitely bleeding out, but I wanted to make sure that it didn't suffer. But at the point that I got up there, the feeling wasn't any feeling of like, you know, it was nothing but just pure gratitude and appreciation for this animal. And I put my hand on its neck and pulled the knife out and just, you know, actually a very special knife to me is one of my own goal. Gave to me before he passed away. And I, you know, put my hand on its neck and quiet it myself and then put it into the heart. And I could feel the heart reverberating through the blade and the knife into my hand. Whoa. And I pulled it out and just kept my hands on it. One hand on its chest and one hand on its neck and could kind of sense the life, leave the body. And, you know, I said a little prayer kind of avatar style. Rote one out before Anna, you know, basically the idea is, you know, as your spirit goes back to the source to nourish new life, may your flesh, you know, nourish our bodies in this life. You know, thank you sister. That's very avatar like that. That's very avatar like that. If you said it next to me, I would never let you live it down. I'd be saying thank you, oh sister. That's true. Why were eating it? It would be laughing. And our guy, Sally Bitch and our guide would do the same thing. Most of the people that it's out there. Guys, did it too? No, they would say the same thing as you. I mean, this is for me what I needed. I thought you were saying they would say the same thing as you. Nobody would say it would be a party. But for me, that's what I needed to say. That's the way I'm giving you a hard time, but the reality is that's a beautiful way of approaching it. I mean, it's just something easy to make fun of and on my hat. You're right there. I couldn't let it go. But then so I look at its eyes, its face, and its face was covered in these spines. And so I thought it hit a cactus. And they were like all up in its eyeball and stuff like that. And then I smell the flick. I hear the flick of a lighter and a cigarette. And it's our country guy. He had like a Budweiser and a cigarette. I don't know. He's South Texas guy. He says, oh, a pork pine spines. You won't see that one time in a thousand. And so basically some porky pine had whacked it in the face and the spines were working their way through its eyeball. So it was like kind of a cool feeling to know that at that point, you know, I had taken an animal out of its misery. Right. So to speak to, which was not necessarily my idea, you know, I was going to take an animal that presented it, but that happened to be the one that presented itself. But then the really weird thing happened. I got really angry at the porky pine. Like my love for the animal, my appreciation for the animal was so strong that I fucking hated that porky pine. Really. Like I felt like that was an enemy. Like if someone, I think you're a blacker, yeah, no, the porky pine all it did is poking in the eye. You fucking stabbed it. But that's what shot it. I stabbed it. That's where we were. You went straight to Troy down that fucking poor deer. And you're like, cunt, you're that's what's ironic is that I mean, I'm the killer. I killed it. The porky pine was just doing its thing. But I hated the porky pine like it was something that like slapped a friend of mine. That's so weird. Yeah. I was like, oh, guacamole smells terrible. I tried not to puncture that. I got a little nick in it. But I did a pretty good job. And then you clear all the guts out. And then cut all the pieces away. But then we went fully from there to skinning it and then butchering it entirely. And it was cool. The best part of the meat is the tenderloin. That's what these flame and known, Chateau Brienne. That's what all this tenderloin meat is. It's really tender. But not until I was up in there actually cutting the tenderloin out and feeling what it felt like. It feels more like organ meat than regular meat. Did I understand? Oh, this is different part of the animal. This part of the animal is up inside the cavity itself. It's not on the exterior part. So it works less. It's just different. It feels different. That's why it tastes so delicious. And then the other parts, like the haunches, the back strap, they have a more simuy, grittier feel. Well, the back strap is the upper lung spleen. It is the lung. Yeah. No, the back strap is right along the spine on either side on the next step. The tenderloin is actually up inside the animal, underneath, like you go inside the ribcage. So it's kind of covered back strap. It's another section of it. No, it's completely different. Section the back strap is the long thing. Yeah, no, the back strap is the long side of the spine. And then the tenderloin is up underneath the animal, part of the internal muscles that move the legs as well. There's a really cool video of a dude taking a part of pig. I have it on my Twitter. If you want to see it, it's kind of fucked up. It's on my Twitter from a while ago. So I don't know what the name of the video is. See if you can find it, Brian, because I know you're not doing anything else. You want to show that on your stream? I think you can. Dude taking a part of the pig. But my point is, when you watch it, like you watch the, like they're, oh, well, there's bacon. Oh, well, there's the ham, hocks. Oh, well, there's that. There's the pork loin. When you, when you're watching it, like be dissected from an actual pig, broken down, he does it in like three minutes. They're fast. Yeah. This guy just hacks through this fucking thing. He uses a saw in some spots. This isn't it. This is, this is taking a part, but this is taking a part of cooked pig. This guy's got a raw one. That's, that's the one you want. You want the raw pig. I think this is probably, yep. Well, this isn't the one that I, but I had seen, but this is similar, where they just start slicing through and it becomes, it goes from an animal to meat. And it makes that weird transition. When you kill it yourself, it never makes that transition. Even when it's meat, it's like there's a re, you, when you put that steak on the grill and you're seasoning it and you're cooking it, like this is a weird connection with that animal. Absolutely. Absolutely. Most people don't get that, you know, they don't ever have a chance to get that. Yeah. It's definitely something, something completely different. It changes your whole opinion of the meat. And you know, probably there's some, there's some placebo effect in there because of your emotional state towards the animal, but there's also, you know, really feels like there's something tangible there too. You know, some, some deeper appreciation than actually manifests. And I don't know. I mean, your mind is so important and so many bodily functions to think that your mind couldn't affect your digestion or absorption or things like that. I don't think that's unreasonably there. Whatever it is, whether it's tangible or whether it's mental, you know, the connection and the way that you, you know, approach and digest assimilate that meat, which was, you know, energy from another animal. It's just different. Yeah. And even if it's not, I mean, it is healthy and if you think it's different, it becomes different. Yep. If you have this, even like, it's hard to dismiss the emotional connection that you have to it because that emotional connection is very important. Emotional connections are something that people poo poo, oh, you're just emotionally attached to that. Well, maybe it's good, you know, maybe it's something that you like, you know, keep that thing wherever the fuck we're talking about. Emotional connections are not necessarily bad. And if you have an emotional connection like that, it would make the meat feel better, making feel better like about your sustenance. Every time we cook this deer, we're pumped. Like we're excited about all this tastes so good and it really does taste good. Like just the feeling of having gone out there and, you know, caught it, put your diet, put it in our freezer and then cooked it up. It's like a connection to something that, you know, our ancestors have been doing for thousands of years. Yeah, it really is. It's weird. Even when you're doing it in a place with fences. Yeah. I mean, it's, it's not like going to Africa and taking out a wild zebra, but it, which by the way, apparently you're delicious. Apparently Zebra says, good, I never had horse before until I went to Joe beef in Montreal and they served as horse. Oh my God, it's goddamn delicious. A lot of cold food. A lot of people are hate saying that, man. They hate you saying that. And I get it. I've seen people in the horses. That's like their dog. It's pony better. I wonder how it's probably more tender. Smaller. I don't know. The shetland ponies are a little tough fast, right? Yeah. Anything with like the crazy pom-pom feet. Don't eat that. It's probably crazy. Yeah. That's why they're horses. Yeah, those are big fucking horses too, man. What are they chipping nails? What are they called? Clies, they're like, yeah. Clies, they're like, yeah. Chipping nails. Those can be big stallions too, Brad. Oh, you went with the gay boys. So when you went with the Chinese boys earlier and the gay boys? No, you found them a bitch. You sent them a bitch. So what we would do if we were going to have an on it hunting thing is basically just use that branch and just work it through. Like they could do it through us through our website. We explain it. Maybe map out of your experience. And these experience and I'm going to go there soon too. My experience, I want to shoot a buffalo. Yeah. I've got a bit. And people like it's not very sporting. I just want to eat a buffalo. And I want to shoot a lot of meat. I want to, I have a giant freezer and I'm going to set it up to eat my own meat. I just think it's the smart way to do it. I think it's the healthiest way to do it. And I think that wild game like that, whether it's buffalo or deer and especially venison, I think it's like the most delicious meat on earth. Elk is absolutely delicious. It's really the smart thing to do if you can do it. If you have the time, if you have the finances to go to a place and hunt, it's really the smart way to gather meat. It's just, it's the way we really should all do it. And if we did, we would have a totally different sense of like this connection between man and nature. Absolutely. Yeah. And you could combine it with a lot of other cool stuff. We could do kettlebell training workouts, mace, club and the day, get people familiarized with that aspect, have some talks and discussions about different things and the nights and make a cool experience out of it. The problem is is that you can't really get that many people with guns together at the same time. And we got a lot of awesome customers who want to go do this. So it's like, you know, can we do these things at 10 at a time? Every 10 months. You know, so not like the scalability of the gun thing is really challenging. But we're going to try and get some face to face some kind of movie. The only thing smart to do with the gun thing is to let them do it. Let the branch do it. We don't have because you don't want to put people with psychos. Like we're going to have a four. If you're going to go hunting together and one guy's just shooting the ground under his feet and trying to rock it jump. You know what I mean? Because you don't want to put people with psychos like we're gonna have a for if you're gonna go hunting together And one guy's just shooting the ground under his feet trying to rock it jump You never know what the fuck you're getting into when you meet random strangers. It's just a we all love alpha brain. I love Alfred you love out of brain. Let's play most dangerous game Rock paper scissors to go who gets killed They tag yeah, yeah, there's a lot of nuts out there as I'm trying to say but but having a place where you know You have like a gathering of the juggle those type situation for on events Everybody gets together and does battle ropes to lead throw over the garbage Val ropes fucking true text amazingly chess bump and it sounds like a natural progression for on it to start hunting well not on its start hunting but on it have Have an option where we you know, we connect you with one of those places Yeah, it would be a cool I would love to have like a Ted Nugest style set up and it's definitely not This the same as going out into like the woods of Alaska and going and getting around I would call it conscious meat acquisition. Yeah, it's like it's like you're acquiring your meat in a conscious way And that's really it happens to be at the you know at the tip of a rifle But yeah, that's really what you're about doing laser debt laser tag hunting with animals. Well, it's a funny thing Man, look at that with photos people look try to get the crosshair. Yeah, they do that they close up on them It's really dangerous mountain ones people try to do that the Photo tag what it would have what is laser tag is where you wear like a vest, right? Yeah, well, yeah You could put like like a vest on an animal like a cat and just have a laser tag tag cat ranch and you just try to shoot him because they're fast People don't have any problem with fishing in a place where they stalk the fish like nobody has a problem You go to a lake and the fish are in the lake like oh, they stalked it recently It's great catch big trout But if you go like to a fence in place and hunt an animal your piece of shit. Yeah, you know I you know, I guess the mammal thing, you know fish. Don't seem they're so different from us I had a cool experience fishing though recently I've always gone rod and real fishing and that's really foreign you're just kind of waiting around and all that said Shit and you grab the rod and you reel it in and you hope you get something and then someone you know wax it on the head and you know Maybe you pull the hook out if you're brave and sometimes you're with somebody who does it whatever that whole program is it's it's different But I went spear fishing recently which was kind of like a Little bit of a different paradigm as well that one feels a lot different. It's like hunting But for fish instead of fishing because you're out free diving with this a lath big wooden You know archaic looking thing with these bungee cords hooked to this little metal You know spear and you're just free diving down You know eight ten feet and chasing after these fish and trying to spear them So what is this in a spear gun? Yeah, so basically it's an old trigger Spill gun the trigger releases the bungee cord So you wrap these bungee cords like this you pull them manually like this Okay, and you they go on this like rod right in this the spear slides in a groove and the bungee cords are behind the rod Right and then when you pull the trigger it just releases the thing that's holding the bungee cords like a rubber band gun Uh-huh kind of and so it releases that and that propels the The spear forward through the groove and the spear has attached to a cord Right so the bungee cords. It's all full manual energy pull the cords back wrap it around and then release it in the bungee's go But it's really particularly challenging because as soon as the spear hits the water it starts to Dive a little bit. It doesn't always go perfectly straight because of resistance. It's not like air Get You know good people who are good could probably do it, you know 12 feet You know 15 feet maybe even maybe even farther people who suck like me initially Like I had to get like right up on these fish to get up like six feet You know eight feet. How many did you miss before you got one time? I was missing them constantly you're swimming around there's a hard current But the cool thing is is some of the fish you can catch with the hook like you can get snapper Which is really delicious? But the guide on the boat when I was down to Mexico doing this guide on the boat was telling me that parrot fish tastes like lobster And I should really get parrot fish well parrot fish are these little they have this little tiny mouth All they do is eat algae and you never catch them with a hook because you can never get a hook and their little tiny mouth Because you got nothing they want to eat that's on a hook unless you had a really algae to hook or whatever But it would never happen so but with spear fishing you can actually target these fish and so we got one Actually, Whitney got it and get it like fucking kept missing him Do the way more gangster with a spear gun on the boat But anyway, so she commented these parrot fish and then we brought it back to the boat I was really curious to eat it. We brought it in the chefs cooked it right away and it was fucking delicious Best whatever one of the best fish that ever had it was like a cross between like a nice flinch like a white fish and Like lobster like somewhere in the middle. Wow. It had a kind of that richer Kind of crustacean taste and texture. I want to go there and kill one just to eat it. Yeah It was so good. We had that and I had trigger fish to Viche Which is another type of fish that you would never catch Wow, so it opens up the possibilities and these fish are plentiful It's not like there's endangered there are endangered species in any sharks I didn't but that's dangerous when you're spear fishing because the sharks will You know know that there's fit because when you hit the fish there's fish guts exploding out of the eye Jesus, so if there are sharks, it's not an optimal situation. So doing it like Off South African coast. Yeah bad idea some dude just got jacked in France on this honeymoon Tiger shark and I do not know what shark it was But I do know that it was the third guy in two years to get Jack there Too many for my count. Yeah, you know what they should have they should have a restaurant They have these in Japan where it's just like this humongous salt water pool in the middle where you guys talk You're at a fish where you fish and you catch your own dinner And it seems like more places would have that like you just have pretty much a huge aquarium And you kind of get the the fun of catching your own fish and then eating it on top of it back when I was thinking of silly Las Vegas restaurant ideas I thought of an idea where you had that with like lobsters and crabs and all kinds of stuff and that you could tell them a Mermaid that someone with a mermaid fin to go down and you'd point to the one you want and the mermaid to go Okay, that's the one you want. She's dive down and swim and grab it for you and everybody could sit around the tank and watch the mermaids From around there there's it there's anybody's here that idea wants to take it go ahead. Yeah, I don't need any credit I just want to go just give me a reservation. There's a bar in a Sacramento called I think the mermaid bar where it's just this huge Long bar and on the top there's this humongous Aquarium and they just have hot chicks in a like mermaid outfit just swimming back and forth and it's so Erie to just see like this mermaid chick just swimming in a bubby But what sucks is everyone just sits there and takes photos like no one's even talking they're just taking photos of the mermaid Right, and there's no real point to it Well, it feels gimmicky like if they were actually fetching fetching stuff fetching stuff We're in for you. Yeah, or maybe you know They're trying to catch it with a net like you have fish in there like you're saying. Yeah They also have this restaurant. I've been researching a lot of things in Japan lately But they have this restaurant called the no panties restaurant where they have they have I know you're gonna say that they have this This thing what's a like a conveyor belt going around the top of the restaurant They just have huge dishes and so you just go there to your waitress You're like I would like that roast beef and then she sits stands up on this like thing to get it Why'd you choose roast beef? And she's got no panties. She's got no panties on and so These are people restaurants like this in the marriage. I mean if you really like to grow you would be constantly getting more dishes More food. Yeah, what do you think that America is just too savage and the people would just start grabbing her and they wouldn't be able to just Let her do that. I guess may be what it is. I mean, do there's not many restaurants like that in America Anyway, they're crazy like there's that restaurant dicks where everyone's they just like earn asshole to you the whole time I just think that I would know I think that most partners most spouses and you know in America just would not allow Would not go there and would not have a lot of husbands or boyfriends or anybody Yeah, go there period ever. It's not exactly fun like you know There's no Hooters where they're just just no top well, they do I mean that place in Florida that we want to strip up right? Yes, they serve wings and there's no tops. Yeah, it's already been done. Yeah, Rachel's best food ever Yeah, there's there's nothing wrong with looking at a little box where you're having some roast beef We'll we'll vagina just like there's nothing wrong for the gals to go to Cox and get some chicken Well, dudes are swinging dick in front of him. Hi, dogs. They really wanted what's wrong with it nothing It's nothing wrong with it. What if they want let them do what they want right? Isn't that wouldn't that be better and let us all decide what we actually like? Set a confusion to shit out of Catholic school girls by telling them the cock is bad Who's the biggest freaks ever right? Catholic school. They're impressed. Did you ever have a Catholic school girl experience? Oh, yeah one of my first girlfriends in Catholic high school all girls high school and every one every girl in that class was rabid Rabbit they got to hold us some cock as soon as they got to that school They would just start jerking dudes off. They couldn't help themselves. They're in a trance anytime you request those naturally Yeah, yeah, everything else fascinating isn't it? That girl was easily one of the like most sexually explosive girls I had every day to ever like As soon as you would start making out she would go full like satanic possession. It was insane It was very sweet. So many other emotions. Yes, and danger and all of these things wrapped up with an already exciting sexual experience Yeah, it's just too much. Yeah, and we were both 17 Fuck you're doing you're 17 you're just you're like just a meat machine Just moving to the whim of woman Right like those dick pills. That's what happens to me. It's not though. It's not the same It's not the same. You're forcing it. You're like I knew you're gonna feel so good. Pop lug lug lug lug lug It's a big difference from that and when you do remember those 17-year-old boners Those things were ridiculous. They would hurt. Your dick would get so hard. It would hurt. My dick felt like I was gonna blow up this morning Yeah, but you're on pills Some wacky fucking shit that you got in the couch. I had to do the thing where I had to take a shit when I woke up this morning So I had to like have a bucket that I usually used to come in a dog And so I could pee in the bucket work because I couldn't tuck my dick down while I was shooting Well, you got to learn how to have better balance you're gonna look at it like doing a downward dog And just grab a hole at the top of the lid of the you know the top with the upper deck is right and then just bend down and push your dick down Yeah, but don't push your balls don't push your balls so far back that it gets in the way you're shit Yeah, cuz that's gonna Yeah, right down your ball. You know you have to do one at a time. That's what you're gonna I couldn't have to yeah, you have a fuck to rock back and forth. I mean when you guys shit You can't really stop that pee. That's like a pee that you can't stop when you're shitting because it will stop the shit also You know what I mean? And then if you thought about that deeply and but now I am forced to I don't think I've ever actually shit with a boner. I just wait I just wait. Well, Brian is constantly on silence All day every day can't get rid of boners. It's affecting the way shits He's like holding it in because he knows his boner lasts for six hours. Another three hours. I'll be able to shit Yeah, so one of the one of the stories I've been reading after reading Danieli Billele's book I went back and reread some of my biographies of Rasputin. Yeah, oh, yeah You're doing is dick. Yeah, yeah Apparently you had a foot long dick with a ward at the root of it. Well didn't they save it after they killed it Yeah, yeah, the guy well apparently that there's put up Brian this Prince Putin's cock Prince Yusupov was Apparently tried to make homosexual advances at Rasputin who wasn't feeling it Rasputin was a old hard-drinking Siberian peasant wizard, right? And he liked women and that was part of the adaptations he made to his religion is that he was Always struggled with the fact that you know you couldn't have sex in Christianity, but he wanted to be a You know man of deep faith Brian's right there under Google images Rasputin's cock. They really do have it. Holy shit. So So yeah, yeah Put it up. He would you would go and he had struggled with it. You allowed to have that on your stream I talked to Brad today Looks like a potato and put that up on your stream Look at that that is Rasputin's dick, but apparently he could he could basically So he made an exception in his religion He saw some birds singing in the band This is his story the birds were singing and they were moved by sexual desire to sing such a beautiful song and if the God made the birds sing to create such a song and bring that out of them Then man sexual desire must be for the same thing and then he had this revelation in the forest probably eating And me to mascara mushrooms and then apparently came across three went three women bathing And he made love to each of them in turn and then prayed more clearly than he'd prayed in months Of course, and it was solidified. Yeah, really cuz your mind is totally clear. It was a giant dick So so after that point he was like, okay So God didn't strike me down and I'm praying better than ever so he adapted that to his kind of philosophy But apparently he had you know, it was kind of a bit of a Hypnotist wizard whatever I don't know how far you want to go with his powers But the reports were that he could contract and dilate his pupils that will like through mental control So he could do like weird shit and he had a huge dick and would just made just cut a swath through all of Russia Well that just saying saying everybody that he was able to dilate his pupils at will it probably means he was on drugs Probably yeah most likely Giant dick dude on drugs and but they cut it They cut it they didn't cut it off at the end looks like they went in and kind of dug some of that Dick out of it. Yeah. What they had to do to kill him. So apparently it's got you support for the bottom a lot of people did a lot of people didn't like him You know they hated him for as he was probably fucked every day there was Accusations that he was fucking as Arita and you know because he was healing Zarniklas's son So all these kind of you know people were jealous at one point one point he was having so much sex He loved drinking and dancing and fucking and he was in this bar and he's all Haggard and they're like you're not Rasputin and he's like like hell I'm not and he pulled his pants down and waved his dick around and it was like oh you're Rasputin okay Whatever damn but anyways this one guy wanted to Prince Yusupov apparently wanted to have sex with Rasputin Rasputin wasn't down with it and the tide of the tide had kind of turned against him in popular culture and he told his family to use probably gonna die So they go there and they start feeding him cyanide cakes right and apparently fed him enough cyanide cakes to kill Many many people but that didn't work Rasputin got a little bit sick and then he kept eating the cakes And he was like play me some gypsy music Yusupov and started dancing so like oh fuck This is the working so then they then they took out a gun Shot him in his back Bam bam shot him right in the torso in his back any pan. He just roared like a bear and stared at him So they all freaked out started kicking him and stomping him and kicked his head in kicked him so hard that an eyeball fell out and just Totally beat him to a bloody pulp and then wrapped him in a carpet wrapped him in chains and threw him in a frozen river And then when they found the body washed up he didn't die of any of that shit He died of drowning because they had the water that they saw in his lungs from him gasping for air So whatever the fuck what this guy was doing he was a strong motherfucker Really unhappy with him. Yeah dude his dick was 11 inches That's big and his thick as most men's wrist That's what it says. Yeah, the Russian women were all about it. That is incredible The dude was just super gangster. What do you mean it doesn't look that big it's bigger than that chicks hold on tire head? It's soft Dude, oh you son of a bitch. I don't think you're allowed to do that Brad from the U-Stream will frown upon those kind of shenanigans We don't want to get them in trouble Brian Shut the fuck up dude stop I've been talking to too many big foot people man This this show has been very fascinating. I'm learning a lot. I can't wait to talk about it, but I can't talk about it yet But I'm learning a lot Crazy people son Sasquatch is too. Oh, I'm wearing a lot about everything. It's all connected It's all connected psycho psycho The whole thing UFOs All your pube now now I shave my balls I trim trim the upper stack do you put shaving cream on or just lightly glide the Gladiass prime I like to use a double blade razor and defense soap. I lather up the old Sacheroony we so get it nice and primed with soap and then just the the raises of today You don't need to play to go five blades. I don't know how many blades are on there because I can't count So I just get in there whatever Never son these razors are so good these days. You're not gonna nick it unless you're not paying attention What about asshole? I would let that go you like a let welcome to the jungle. We got fun and games I don't know what's going on. I leave it alone. I wash it with ever possible and ignore it Like it's like a squirrel with a bullet where I'm very happy with the balls forward everything back is outside I don't know. I don't know where it fits in the equation Look like a rake went over it my shit usually looks like like It's like a lot of green in there like chunks of leafy vegetables Until I gorge on meat and then it becomes hard chunky. Fine. Do you think that Harry vagina's are making a comeback? Yeah, they are but I mean there's two different kinds There's the ones that they've always had the Harry vagina and then there's the girls that recently like I'm taking care of this and bring it back because There was one recently where it was just like no this has not this is like 70s vagina That hasn't been touched since the 70s and I think that's a little too much. Yeah, that's too much That's disgusting. I don't I you know what I like it completely shaved None wrong with that either. It's interesting though What a total victory porn has had over the way women take care of their vagina's complete They've internalized the whole philosophy. Yeah, well, they had to keep up They had to compete too many guys were like looking at these perfectly shaved vaginas and with girls licking them and you know Beat an optimum and the women catch them and they're like ah this motherfucker likes this shit I gotta shave it all down like the little Hitler ones that the girls do that almost like hey You're putting an eyelash or an eyebrow on your pussy. That's creepy or me then having here's the thing man I never had a problem with the big bush You know when when girls started trimming it all down I was like, yeah, I guess that's better, but do you remember like when you were in high school and girls never shaved it Yeah, it was always craziness down there was chaos down there and you didn't get upset You know you didn't get bombed out you remember like we tell stories like dude all the way up to her ass I was just there everywhere fucking hair over her back. I did a girl that I dated who had hair. She had hair everywhere I mean it was crazy. She had like her lower back was hairy. You know she was hot as fuck though dude didn't matter She was just not deal with that. Oh, you could have trust me. You could have dealt with it I'm definitely down with the the whole hairy Whole thing down there. Let's go, but then but then the armpits still in the left I can't deal with that. Yeah. I'm not even good with it when I see a little light fuzz on their cheek You know when the summer hits it right creeps me but the armpits and like maybe the hairy legs aren't so much But the armpits still fucked me up. I was friends with a gal who went to an all girls college in in Boston. I forget which one but it's super she was super left wing like the most left wing person ever dated Like vegetarian like full on her friends and shaved their legs at all She didn't shave her legs either, but she was blonde so you couldn't tell right, but her friend looked like a hobbit It was the strangest thing ever I went over her her friend was Greek and She had hobbit legs her legs were just black with hair and black feet and I'm I feel like a complete and total hypocrite to say there's something wrong with that complete total hypocrite Doesn't really fit right it all. How could I how dare I say anything? It's wrong with that if that's her choice, but damn it was gross Didn't matter I have no business thinking it's gross. I'm fucking gross er for sure, but it was gross. I had to get out of there It was freaking me out fucking hairy feet It was just so weird. They were so weird. They were like they were they were both they both came from money Money and educated parents and they were like just fucking fighting the power Tooth and claw and I guess I really appreciate that in a lot of ways like you know if you have like really oppressive Parents or very strict parents and once you very rigid in their focus you want to break away from that and like before I'm completely Radical opposing opinions make a statement, but when the armpit hair starts creaking like I've been a new bitch That's creeping over on of the tip, you know you ever did a girl here in a chest On the nipples. Yeah, yeah Only on the nipples. Yep Esther had one Back to weird places here now Esther had one really long and I got caught in my between my two front teeth and I plucked it's Jesus son Wow, he just got called out son. You just got called the fuck out now You need to tell the truth though. Is it true or is it not true? Yeah, it's true totally true On his root of nobody's room to Brian sorry, Brian. I apologize. No perfect person right there All right, let's get the fuck out here. It's late it's 10 30. I've been working all day talking crazy people And I talked to a senator today about UFOs Can't wait to tell you, but you're gonna have to hey if anybody hasn't seen any of my ladies Videos, I just did one on the psychedelic experience pretty cool. Please try You're doing like these So inspired video pills, yeah, and they're fucking good man What was that the one on the psychedelic experience? Just called the psychedelic experience It's vimeo.com slash warrior poet us and you can check them out. It's fun. That's a very good one It's very fun. I enjoy it very much. I like that you're doing that too, man And it's really easy to criticize those things. It's really easy to mock them and make a lot of yeah And if you were in front of me when you did it, I probably would have mocked you a little bit But it's not that it's not good and trying to put some But you're putting the right vibes out there and that's the problem with the right vibes is they've been co-opted by silly douchebags so if you get in that mix that energy vibe love mix you can you know Immediately like what bitch. What are you doing? What are you trying to do over there? You started a cult? You're a shaman you fuck head, you know, it's like no you're trying to do the right thing But there's so many people that aren't that are mixed up in the same vein. I guess I Mean I hear going to Burning Man's a lot of fun good fucking luck with that Good luck with that because it's at least 10 dudes there that you do not ever want to be stuck talking to And they're in the tent right next to you. There's at least 10 dudes 10 dudes that a 20. I would say maybe let's be super generous If Burning Man has 50,000 people I don't know how many people it has if it has 50,000 people and 10 of them are just insufferable twats Why would you go right maybe because 10 of them are Unimpossible inspirations, but the people that go to bring me. I know so many cool people that go There's a lot of fucking So you go for though you figure those guys balance out Yeah, if you could stay with him stick close to the herd don't stray that just sounds like a lot of it's pretty intense It's dust everywhere. I'm just no sandwiches Bordering for every I can probably awesome. It's we've never gone. How can we talk about it? We're talking about something We got to go. Sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Listen all of you people out there enjoying Burning Man Why you listen to the fear factor guy? Okay, make up your own mind about shit. I don't even believe what I say I'm just trying to fill three hours and entertain you in some way and if you're tired of me I'm tired of me too, so it's okay. It's all good. You're Fox. This episode is brought to you by hover Please go to hover.com forward slash Rogan and get 10 percent off your domain name registrations You sexy bitches It's also brought to you by on it calm if you go to o n I t and use the code name Rogan you will save 10 percent off any in all supplements go and check out all the cool new shit We have if you haven't been there for a while. We got a lot of new stuff. So a lot of food killer be honey cuz it's gangster and All human optimization that's the goal and thanks to all the customers out there you guys are some bad bad motherfuckers You're great people. I've really enjoyed interacting with all you guys And I just hope that we can continue to be some small part in pushing you towards whatever your you know Masterpiece of life is gonna be whatever's gonna help you be better I hope we can just play that small part and I certainly appreciate all the support We've had it's been amazing a massive amount of positive people and you know you put it out there and it comes back to you That's why whatever that's it folks. We love the fuck out of you. That's all we're trying to much love a bunch of fancy words It's just really this In a hug we love you check me out on Facebook I'm super active on there So if you want to talk to me hit me up on Facebook Facebook dot com slash where you put us and Twitter It's a warrior poet us on Twitter is exactly all right you freaks We love the shit out of you and we will see you soon peace