Welcome back ahead Good to see you again, man. Thank you. I'm happy you back, but I'm not happy that there was a motivation to bring you back Based on the violence, you know the violence that is going on between the cartels and it was the Mormons and then There was we were just talking about this Other person that got shot because they ran what would explain it again. They were ran a cartel roadblock Yeah, basically in Tamil litas a lot of the cartel groups actually make They build their roadblocks on the state and local roads and According to what I've heard from some of the people that I know there This family ran one of those roadblocks. They didn't know if it was cops or not And they apparently decided to run the roadblock and the cartel guys shot them. What should someone do if they encounter a cartel roadblock? slow down I mean if if Anything I would probably avoid traveling through those areas. That's the number one avoidance Usually, you know, I've actually gone through some of those myself really yeah, and it's all about they're all they're looking out for rivals moving through their territory They're looking for government personnel maybe spying on them and Usually it didn't usually they'll just shake it down for some money and they'll let you go on your way Unless you have a four-way four truck that can use for their you know their own purposes, which is what they might take your truck Yeah, they're specifically in Tamil litas four by four trucks are a commodity for them They use them for their ongoing term for. Oh, right, especially someone else's that they don't mind getting shot up Yeah, I mean most of the trucks that you see a that are aren't a barmer or they have the Rifles on top are usually stolen vehicles All of them are stolen vehicles and a lot of them are you know, Americans crossing into Mexico Some of them are American crossing into Mexico and just getting You know, they're trucks stolen to you. Is that that's a real common thing. It's it's starting to be pretty common Recently saw a case of an apparent abduction in in in Tamil, leap us You see the video and in the cartel guys come out of the car They grab the the the the owner of a pickup truck They get him out of the car and they take a cell phone leave it on the sidewalk because they're they're wearable the SOS technology and They take him inside inside of another car and they take the truck and You thought you would think you know, it's because he did something or he's involved in something The let him go a few blocks later and just took the truck. It was all about the truck. Wow. Yeah, it's resources You know, they just But acquiring resources for their for the war basically nice of them to let them go You know, it's not always the case, but it's pretty. Yeah I think most people in America are just now waking up to the chaos That's going on down there. I think that the Mormon assassination was a real wake-up call But I think people are paying much more attention now I mean we've we talked about this was the last time you were on it was like five months. Yeah I've a lot of the stuff we talked about those five months ago kind of That's how things progressed. We actually did mention the Mormon community down there, which was kind of eerie. Yeah and We talked about the possible designation of cartels as terrorists a terror a terror groups Yeah, you you had an interesting take on that so Trump was saying that they were gonna designate them as terrorist groups and that they were gonna have military action against them Yeah, and then there were some sort of negotiation with the president of Mexico. What do you think went down there? So I mean this is just you know from what I see and from how things traditionally happen down there Mexico's currently Currently a leftist president down there. He's very to the left So much to the left that he he recently gave Ebel Morales the deposed leftist President of Bolivia a silent in the country And there's been a lot of you know pro left Political stuff going on in Mexico basically As soon as the designation threat by the US came down there was some sort of negotiation and a lot of things happened after After some US officials went down there and talked to the government among them ever Morales is out He's he went to Cuba apparently and then went to Argentina, so he's not gonna stay in Mexico former head of Public security under the Calderon administration, which is two administrations past the president Calderon is the one that started the drug war he was arrested for cartel involvement and Basically for seeing money from the cartels or saw that. Yeah He was going through his immigration process and he was actually asking for full citizenship and they got him online through the authority The immigration authorities He said that he never received money from the cartels and apparently he did a lot of it Right, so all these things happened after after they walked back the threat of Designating cartels as a terrorist organization. So there has been some action So they must have made some negotiation where Trump had said listen, we're gonna do this and he said hold up. Let's talk. Yeah, I mean a main thing is One of the things that this current president unrestmental opus over Iran on was Creating a national place for us right like a national guard is what he calls it Which had already kind of been done before but you know change the name change the uniform change the packaging and it's a new thing Right He wanted the army out of the drug war because of the casualties We're mounting on both sides and he said it wasn't a military shouldn't be a military operation And he ran in a platform that was called a vrassos Nobel assos which means hugs not bullets Right, so basically it's corrupt amnesty for the cartels was basically kind of the main theme of that So you got into power first thing he did military wise police forces and create a national guard and Dissolve and tried to dissolve the federal police And most of that national guard force was designated to border patrol duties on the Mexican side so Some of them went to the south of the border Southern Mexican border and some of them went to the northern Mexican border basically To stem the whole illegal Immigration crisis with the caravan. That's what kind of happened and it was a kind of a Collaboration between the US and the Mexican government So that was one of the key points of collaboration that they had and when this whole designation thing went up That was kind of like a bargaining chip that the Mexican government had with the US And the rest of the things that kind of transpired afterwards You know, it's pretty interesting how a lot of things happened after that meeting down there And how they walked back the terrorist designation So the terrorist designation would mean that Trump would have some sort of incentive to invade Mexico It would it would it would open up the possibility for military direct military action against strikes Yeah, it's strikes without permission of the the nation that these strikes were gonna take place also targeting finances Or anything related to cartel activities would be targeted. Yeah, where do the cartels keep their cash? Well It's it's it's right now. It's a myriad of things They diversified long ago So it's not like they're keeping Buried cash in a in a container somewhere in the in the jungle like Escobar you to do right They're still finding some some like rotted cash from the 80s They're putting their money in cryptocurrency They're really yeah, they're diversifying their their investments in actual companies like legit companies so they clean their money that way Real estate hotels Property on the US side so they're also investing on the US side of the border as well So you know, money's it's not you know, it's not another the mattress or you know giant stacks of cash in the room. So what what kind of banks do business with the cartels? Well, how do they negotiate that? I'm not gonna say names But there's been a few cases of pretty large banks that have been involved in in money laundering for the cartels recently People can look that up easily, but you would think you would have a designate cartel You would have cartels designated as terrorists. So now their banks involved in funding terrorism So that would change things that's you know, there's a lot of things that would happen You know some some of these cons that people talk about yeah, that's a minimum as a terrorist and send drones out there Things that they kind of don't talk about is that if a terrorist designation does happen Most people seeking asylum in the US from Mexico now have the claim of running from terrorists in in Mexico So so the key so now they can claim that as far as a you know asylum seeking people can claim that now It's a different thing You know the main argument that a lot of people say is that cartels aren't can't be considered a terrorist Terrorist group because they don't have political aspirations The problem with that theory is that we have a lot of political killings by cartels in Mexico where they shoot the Cannery to have one side of the political spectrum because it's not good for them So they influence politics They also pay off a lot of politicians down there and they also Examples of the new generation cartel from Guadalajara giving out Christmas gifts or groceries to the poor basically doing hearts and minds type tactics in the area are clear political movements right yeah So you know how does a terror why is terrorism happening connected to politics? Well, that's that's in classical the classical definition of that is of a terrorist group That's what they're basing in on I think the cartels and in narco terrorism is a thing in and of itself It's a new phenomenon. It should be Terrorism should be reclassified to include it. I think you know most people that live through that type of situation in that type of and in that type of area in the country that facing some of these cartel threats that have fled it We'll call it what it is. Yeah, terrorism. They're terrified. Yeah, I mean, that's literally I mean who's more terrifying than the cartels? Yeah, oh So what's going on with the Mormons now is are they moving out of there now? Are they gonna go back to Utah and just take one wife? That's what it all started out with right yeah, although the fundamentalist group and they went down there and kind of proceeded with their customs I'm in contact with with a few of the members of that family and you know Wasn't contact me for but when I went on here, they kind of like one of them reached out to the hey Let's go in on help us out What do we need to do? Yeah And then you know it was like a friendly hello from them from past interactions and then this happened and You know, I kind of advise a little bit, but that's you know that it's a mess a lot of them a lot of them are leaving the communities down there There's a lot of them down there a lot of communities in Sonora Koeila and You know that leaving leaving the area. It's just two dangers Yeah And it only makes sense. I mean they just don't have the arms. They don't have the tactics and power and And they're also in the middle of one of the most important regions in Mexico right now for a lot of reasons Main thing there's two things that are really really kind of happening in that region one the traffic the trafficking of fentanyl and heroin and all these drugs through one of the main drug routes up into the US and There's a few factions fighting over that region Los Salazar which are a small cartel faction that has allegiance to see a lower cartel and The linear cartel which is historically leaving in control of the sea law the Juarez So they're both kind of buying for control of the area a few hours before the the massacre actually took place There were a bunch of firefights between these two factions in the area So one of the main theories is that these the this group of Mormons Basically were case of mistaken identity kind of driving into some of the areas where they're being protected by some of these people You know, it's one theory right The other thing that people kind of need to think about is that the largest mineable Mindable the posits of lithium on the planet right now are a few hours away from whether that massacre took place really? Yes, and that is you know, I'm not conspiracy theory I'm theorizing here, but it's a pretty important thing in that region and there's a lot of interest in that space and control for that space And they're not mining it currently there's pro there's a bunch of projects in play right now So they've identified the deposits Yeah, you know people can look up the numbers, but it's it's the largest Minable deposit of lithium on the planet. Whoa, and there was some sort of deal in the past where a Canadian mining agency was going to have Right-sill it and the mining agency was bought by the check by Chinese company so again After that massacre a lot of things happened a lot of the negotiations happened that problem that deal was one of the things that got killed after that situation Oh, no All right, so it's it's it's an interesting area. There's a lot of things happening there That's kind of put a tremendous amount of pressure on the cartels in some way, right? Well Historically any sort of any sort of mining operation usually has industry around it, which is perfect for the cartels, you know Extortion protection rackets Feeding the drug use in the area from the workers. You know, that's is there any way That you could see in the future the cartels being extracted From the positions of power that they're in now. I mean, is this something that people in Mexico are going to have to live with forever And I guess people in the United States as well, or is this something like to be fixed? You've you've you've talked about before in some of your podcasts and you know, listen to them a lot great podcast Great, you're on to thank you You've talked about legalization and how that would help that definitely is part of the solution and it is it is definitely part of the solution Legalizing some drugs, you know, not all drugs are made the same Maybe not fentanyl, you know, but yeah, but that would help out some things There's there's multiple things that could be done to guide us towards a place where things could stabilize down there and a lot of it is Not going to be able to be done in Mexico. It's going to have to be done up here, right? Basically, you know one you have to take care the US has to take care of the drug market up here the legal drug market and Certain things that have happened like legalization of marijuana marijuana some of the some places up here have changed the dynamics of what happens down there Some for the better some for some bad some bad things have happened Talking to my friend John Norris who was on here as well as comparing notes seeing how a lot of the drug recruits are up here the pot illegal pog growth They're up here exactly like the ones that I found in Baja Six seven years ago and how some of that drug money made from those fields are staying in the US It's not being sent back. So that means you have an active growing cartel presence in the US That it's US based So I think that one of the problems that people have is perception is that that's a Mexican problem It's a it's a US Mexico problem You know you have border there but the problem has causes right social economic inequality and these stabilization and corrupt government down there and a thriving illegal drug market up here and You know those two have to be solved to set me In a combined way how many members When you combine all the cartels How many members are we talking about? That's that means it's pretty hard to put a number on how I will say this more than a million I will say this they defeated the Mexican army in Tinaloa. Yeah, that was bananas. Yeah when they captured El Chapo Sun, yeah, and then The army gave it back. Yeah, I'm like you're gonna have them back. Well, sorry The that whole situation And it was like I remember That was happening and I was getting asked questions about it and it was life. It was All the sudden just popped off, you know Basically, supposedly official story from the Mexican government is that they send a special police unit to capture him, right? Which is completely false I think because you don't send 35 agents to capture One of the the heads of one of the biggest Tinaloa cartel cells, right? So it's pretty much by chance they spotted this party people were on there. They went there All of a sudden Chappo Sun is there. So you think they just stumbled into them. There's a I posted a video on on my feed of the capture of the El Chapo Sun you can see it and you can see the surprise and really How the agents are kind of uncomfortable or are fearful of what they just stumbling on Imagine U.S. agents stumbling on one of the America's most wanted individuals up here They're gonna put them on the ground. They're gonna handcuff it And the video you can see that they point their rifles at him and he calmly takes out his gun and hands it to somebody Inside of the inside of the house. He was in and walks out and kind of tries to negotiate with the people outside The federal agents that are trying to arrest them and you can see that the agents are like oh what did we stumble in on? Oh All right, so that happened They grabbed them. They reported back to Mexico. They captured him They started to announce the capture and his brother His half brother Archie Baldo basically called in all of the reinforcements from all surrounding towns and regent and seeing the law and It was flooded with a bunch of arm cartel guys all of you know what was wasn't there a video of the government people and the cartel people talking Yeah, there's all that there's it's on my feed. Yeah, you can see it if you want. It's a It's basically a An army unit that was being sent to reinforce security in in Gulikon being surrounded by cartel members Yeah, is this a radio? Yeah, that's it Obviously the guys running around with a vest and wearing skinny jeans or some of these female local hotel members And they just talk it through I mean They're outnumbered and also there's there's talk about There's a there's a specific community out there and seeing a law where all the army families members live And they were apparently being held hostage by cartel guys as a bargaining chip So all these guys that we're seeing here they're dressed in civilian clothes with the vest those are all cartel guys Those are all cartel guys Jesus Christ and that they're not shaking hands with everybody well, you know, hey, what's up? homie I Mean they Go back into the hole what what is the fight they have in them right? Seeing all cartel was basically surrounding some of their communities and holding their family members hostage So that went out over the radio so as an army member going in to fight the cartels and then what I'm out of the site Yeah, so they raise their hands so then they release the hostages everybody backs out. Yeah, I mean there's they defeated the Mexican government basically Anything they went up against, you know, it's around to the city usually you'll see classic classic Mexican cartel Cact activity they close off the streets going into the city by burning Semis and trailers and stuff like that See would see all these burning semi trailers in the region So if you want to move in you can't and if you want to use your helicopters the cartels have entire craft capabilities so They broke out a bunch of people from the prison just taking advantage of the whole chaos You could see there's a few other videos with it There's armored trucks with 50 cows and not oozes on the back of them just moving around the city There's no way there's no way you can This is the breakout state prison, you know took advantage of the whole chaos and just you know, but just let's break some of our friends out All right, so just pure chaos Eventually they let that the government decided to let them go That's the the official story but according to the people there There was no government saying let them go. There was like the guys holding him said, you know what it's not worth it Yeah, that's one of the the technicals as they call them up here Yeah, dumb trucks the armor plate the sides and you know put somebody out Imagine being a person living there. Well, that's that's what I'm Trying to picture yeah, what life is like for the civilians and most of these videos are all done now By civilians, so yeah, there's a certain normal We'll see in some of these cases especially in Tana law. It's part of it. It's part of the culture there And as far as sides go, you know, hey the army's coming to save us That's not usually what to keep some people in some of these communities think you know because the cartels are Those are guys in charge so seeing a low always been like that like how long as the scene will have traditionally been been Cradle for like the origins of some of the hot some of the more successful cartel heads, right? Isn't that where Julio season Chavez is from yeah, yeah, yeah and you know Lot lots of lots of anybody that anybody in Tana law has some sort of relationship to the cartels because they're part of culture There's no way getting around it. How does a real experience once when I went there? I did a class out there and the was running around this bumpy road and then all of a sudden just flat beautiful road. Oh, yeah, this is the cartel part of the road that they built It's like okay Wow, so it's like certainly the mom and Vegas and like the 50 in 60 exactly But it's now and they're way more hardcore way more hardcore. Yeah, some some of their gravy. They have a Have the nazette omaia is called is the narco cemetery they have and it's basically luxury condos They look like I mean I went there. I thought it was a church and it turned out to be a tomb All right So the the opulence and the money is just overt you know and how they move around they roll around and vehicles with guns and Nobody does anything because they own the city What can be what are they planning on doing? Does anybody have any plans or is it just they're just accepting this? Well, you know you you you get a lot of rhetoric about Collaboration, yeah, that's that's how the anazette. Oh, my all those are graves some of the maps CC you have a video inside their conditioning You know alarms They are graves those are gravesites and the cartel guys heads go there On the day of the dead have music live bands shoot their rakes into the air nobody does anything Wow Jesus Christ, this is crazy. Yeah, I mean the opulence is me. I mean to just seeing it You know, it's like having several less covars in one place You know, it's not you know, it's like a lot of a lot of a car tells heads are from that region and a lot of their kids grew up in that and You know the opulence is amazing Fuck Like is this gonna grow? I think it is I mean I don't think it is it is growing You know again going back to my friend John Norz and how I seeing his experiences up here Finding all these illegal drug grows in in in in in public lands It's growing it's growing over here too. Yeah, so roots. Yeah, so I think that a lot of people have to think about a lot of these cartel guys had their kids up here So they they made their money down there and they sent their wives up here and a lot of these kids that were born in the late 80s early 90s Coming of age up here With that cartel pedigree, so and their US citizens So you're gonna you're gonna see some sort of shift and You know, they're coming of age. It'll get experience. You get you know A handoff of rains from the older generations of near generation and you're gonna see you definitely it's definitely growing It seems so crazy to watch because it seems like it's not discussed nearly enough and It it seems like if it keeps getting stronger like what we saw with El Chapo's son being released What it what's the stopping from taking over Mexico entirely? Well, I mean you would have people arguing that it already has in different ways so I think another thing that people kind of have to kind of figure out and realize is that there's factions in Mexican in the Mexican government So you will see a federal government that apparently is being paid off by a very specific large cartel group And then you'll see state governments that are of different political party influenced Paying off by other cartel of the groups So you'll see you know that military units moving on the town and the state police blocking their way to get in there Because they're played for different teams, right? Whoa You know, there's a there's a lot of talk right now about Felipe Calderon's tenure and how his head of Head of public safety was on the payroll of the scene of law cartel which actually came out during a top of trial So now you're talking about basically a federal police force that was on the top of side So he had free reigns to grow and do whatever he had to do in that region with the Support of the federal government in a way so Technically, you know who's in control of some regions and realistically Somebody who's of Mexico are completely in cartel control now we discussed this on the last podcast But let's give people a little just a recap of this just so people can understand your position when you first started working on For the with the Mexican government with this it wasn't like it is now It was so what you give everybody just a rundown of how it went down so I went to I went to work for for state government down in Mexico in Baja specifically and This was in this was 2004 right Right before the start of the official start of the kickoff of the drug war as as a kick off the kickoff But there was you know that the official start was when Felipe Calderon came into office that you know what gloves off Going to go after the Organize crime right we're gonna send the military into into this onto the streets and they're gonna pet up his beer head operations against the cartels But before that things were happening still, you know Seen a law of cartel was growing there was a rift between the seen a law of Cartel and Tijuana cartel Fragmentation Cartel heads were being killed and one cartel turned to three all this fragmentation And then you know they basically militarized the war on drugs with Calderon came in militarized the war on drugs immediately you start seeing that drug drug Enforcement efforts were being put towards a single or a group of cartel groups, but not the month but not a major one like you know I'll cartel She starts seeing how they were basically taking sides. They're breaking up the competition That's what you would gather from making it look like progress. Yeah, and and also Oh chapel has been built up into this mythical figure like he was the head of the scene law of cartel He's the main guy. That's not true at all He was an operator for the scene law cartel, but not the main operator You know there's different theories and and and about who is actually who was actually in charge of the brain It's behind the whole operation when you say seeing the law cartel is not one Group it's several it's a federation of several criminal groups Enterprise is uniting and working in conjunction to put drugs into the into the United States Well one of the things they do is put drugs into the United States You do a lot of things, but that's one of the things they do So you know certain people there's a lot of people out there that theorize that oh myosambada Which is oh chapel's compata who's still out there is the actual head of the scene law cartel has been since a start But you see how some of these people become celebrities and as soon as somebody becomes a celebrity like a chappo who is Skate from you know custody of the few times you know under you know pretty interesting situation that means pretty interesting situations Now the government has a celebrity that can go after so they can point it like that I guess a bad guy right so you saw a lot of that a lot of theatrical theatrics around him as far as him being the head of Whatever you know group or operation was But at the same time you start seeing you know the DEA and the in the US government Condecorating and putting all these awards on a guy like Luna who was the guy that got arrested recently It was head of security down Mexico And now all the sudden he's now no he's not you know He was recognized by the US government as being a player for good guys and now he's arrested so you start seeing all these you know different interests different political political kind of movements around the drug war and what that turned into and You know what you don't know what they think right each and each also each US administration has changed the way They do things and when it comes to the drug war and also benefits certain groups down there so you know who knows realistic fuck yeah, it's just you know I want to teach in Utah. I think in 2000 2002 maybe 2003 somewhere around though that time and there was no concern Yeah, yeah, it's a different time. Yeah, but that's 16 and 17 years ago That's so recent in terms of like human history. Yeah, that a region changes so radically so quickly well it's it there's a lot of things happening you know There's a lot of interest China has a lot of interest in Mexico and You go back and you see some things like Sorry, you see things like the the whole How some armed groups started popping up In Mexico in the Mitchell-Con area fighting back against the cartels the the whole there was like Series like a documentary on them the the out of the fence as they were they were called basically like vigilante groups And then you later on you realize that they were all fighting for basically protecting or work in Or working around security for illegal Chinese or my mining in the area. Whoa. Yeah, it's all it was all about Chinese or mining iron ore mining illegal Chinese or my so the Chinese or miners they just made a deal Yeah, and then you know as we can get in on it So let's arm all these guys and we're protecting our communities, but there was a lot of echo and not all of them But a lot there was a lot of shady stuff going on the region when it comes to that now you see things like the stuff It's going on in Sonora and There's a lot of lithium there. That's pretty valuable thing, you know Sonora is a place that a lot of hunters go. Yeah, Sonora has these big hunting ranches and it's like it's famous for giant mule deer Yeah, yeah, yeah, I've been out there hunting myself and it's a it's a beautiful beautiful lot of part of Mexico But that seems like a sketchy spot to It's venturing it's too. It's perfect because it's perfect. We're them because of rule. So there's nobody around But if you were like a guy from Texas want to drive a truck down there to a little hunting I mean not my recommendation is this if you have a 4x4. Don't don't take it down there to a fucking you go We do have the largest population of American citizens living outside of the country in Mexico for some reason so really yeah In all throughout Mexico. I mean all throughout Mexico. There's fun down there. Well a lot of people like Cabo people love Mexican food Yeah, yeah, yeah, there's there's there's there's a certain chaotic freedom in Mexico, which I'll be being some a child of Mexico and then moving up here and Seeing you guys talk about freedom. Yeah Not that But there's there's there's there's I get the I get the draw, you know in some of these communities down there pretty safe But some aren't you know They're safe until they're not safe and safe until they until they all of a sudden you're in the middle of a Some place there's gonna be disputed which is I think is something along the line is what happened to some of these Mormon communities down there Hmm, you know you're on You're in the middle of your community and your movements are in the middle of our route Could you please get out of the way? What's the ceiling on this like if they can continue to grow? I mean it's It's really is it possible that we're looking at a Country that might be completely run and overrun by criminal organizations and drug so or some parts of it are already So what I think is gonna happen is you'll see escalations a Clear sign or a clear group that is like a like a sign of things to come is the is a new generation cartel The new generation cartel is a cartel. There was a used to be called laws and not that said thus It was basically an armed enforcing group that seen a law cartel made to go after their main rivals the set does Which were originally members of special Mexican special forces that said you know what we're gonna be cartel guys? Oh now in cartel enforcers now so they Whole sorted history These it was a militarized group that was formed formed to go after them right and their whole kind of play was that we're gonna be Against extortion against abducting people against affecting the community. We're gonna enforce the law in our communities But we're also gonna move drugs through here right but that you know that's kind of their thing So you see this group started kind of growing in the region and right now it's pretty big It's rivaling the little cartel as far as power and reach But the way they do their things is militarized It's very militaristic and kind of paramilitary and it kind of reminds me a little bit of out of the like the FARC groups in Colombia Hearts and minds they go into the communities that community policing in the area They originally said, you know, we were aware the government wants to fight drugs here in the region We'd read with their fight, but we are also gonna fight against these guys that are affecting community as well And they have like groups of people they have they have training camps No military militaristic training camps where they recruit people they take them there and they're being trained in Gorilla warfare and shooting and apparently there's some SF guys from the US that they advise them so That's the that's the next thing the ex the the escalation of Simple ragtag group of cartel guys enforcing the region to an actual cohesive Paramino cherry group now trying to vie for control not just of the of the drug routes But also of the populace and the confidence that the populace has in them So it could turn political at some point right It just seems like it's the genies out of the bottle it hit I mean it is I mean it isn't a lot of ways, you know And going after it just as a you know drug enforcement issue is not you know It's so much bigger than that. Yeah, it's a cultural. It's economic. You know some of these kids Post it up some of these cartel soldier kids have 12 years old But they've played guns go pretty gun, you know, they don't have a not they don't have options in their life Right, it's that or nothing right. It's either awesome life or Short off stream poverty short awesome life. Yeah, or short awesome life or extreme poverty So that's one component to it another component is systemic corruption as a society from who knows when you know It's always been a thing in Mexico people that grew up down there You get stopped at a red light and you're like Can I pay the fine here? You know people that are from now on there will be aware of this? Yeah, show you the show the paperwork you slide that thing in there, you know That's you know, that's part of the culture that's affecting a lot of things as well You know people don't pay attention to the small rules or the big rules don't matter, right? And just being next to the largest drug market on the planet, you know and having money firearms rounds going down and Fentanyl that it's it being fabricated in Mexico now and some of the Chinese fentanyl making its way through Into the US kind of feeling the voids that some of the drug markets has right now So they're making fentanyl laced fake fentanyl laced pills They're gonna either being put into US and fence will be laced heroin, right? So that's where they're going towards now. That's why you see this epidemic up here and a lot of things traditionally kind of focused on Pot before it was legal life and a lot of readings up here now is heroin fentanyl so it's actually kind of accelerated the production of the more harmful and dangerous drugs in Some ways yes, I mean they had to find another, you know, it was it went pot meth and now Fentanyl laced heroin or fentanyl laced pills see in the problem with the idea of Legalization is that if you tried to be the person who says hey folks We need to legalize drugs here in America because we've got this problem with the cartels Politically that suicide. Yeah. No. No one I mean even though it's probably right. It is I think it is I think it is very right It's one of those things that's so counterintuitive that most people are gonna go you're crazy You're gonna make my kids hooked on drugs. Well, I'll say this I was I thought I'm to drug where I literally a drug were veteran And if I had a white flag I would hand it over to you, you know, it's like I that it's a useless fight I got to destroy potfills Realistically thinking about all the effort and all the blood. I'm like it's just pot. Yeah, and it's so quick to grow back I mean that it is it is a fruitless fight fentanyl heroin maybe different drugs fentanyl in particular But a lot of that fentanyl is coming from China. It's not a Mexican thing. Oh, yeah. A lot of people that are making or Producing fentanyl in places like Mexico are from China Setting up laboratories in Mexico So it's a Chinese Mexican US problem as well. God damn What can be done other than the legalization? What can be done? I mean how does And unless the United States literally goes to war with the Mexican cartels and you made a face talking about that I mean I'd say designation is one of them. I think that's a nation should it's gonna happen a terrorist designation It's gonna happen. I mean again We just saw the murder the massacre of Mexican dual citizenship Nine people kids women It's not uncommon for that to happen to Mexican nationals It's pretty uncommon for that to happen to American nationals down there and that will come woke up a bunch of people You know and now we use another recent murder of another American National you know kid with his parents down there You know people will say but just don't go down Mexico But but some of these people you know live down there have family down there have communities down there It's just ultraviolet You know people have to wake up on this side to realize this problem is not gonna get any better this problem is not just the Mexican problem it's a US Mexican problem and You know it'll get to a point where it's gonna be you know I think in my lifetime is gonna be some sort of arm into intervention in Mexico at some point really So you anticipate almost like in a civil war I Think something's gonna happen in Mexico It's gonna be stabilized it's so much that the US won't have another option but to put put to an ground probably That's I think that's that's where we're headed the problem and again another another The problems is that the government is part of the problem So you can go down there and negotiate with this government but six years later It's gonna be another government and you got to renegotiate with them Yeah, and also use you palm grease Yeah, and then you put all your faith in the military and the military gets compromised You put all the fate in the Mexican Marines And then they get compromised and now who do you have? So it's a stomach don't tell that to Trump He'll use as an excuse We can't count on them. We're going in I Mean I wonder where it all goes Because it is obviously growing very fast. It's obviously huge and incredibly powerful and and it affects I mean I'm up here now and I could see the effects of it up here Walking through LA seeing all the needles on the ground Go into Seattle seeing the same Light brown fennel-laced fennel-laced heroin that I saw in Chantitounds down Baja It's like wow, so this is where it kind of ends up. Yeah So you you send you see the effects of it throughout so you know You realize quickly as somebody from both sides that I am You realize that they're realistically there's no board There's kind of no border when it comes to this problem. It's brought this problem doesn't respect a border wall, right? Some Marines will go around it tunnels will go under it drones will fly over it And it's it's a problem that just keeps you know producing an effect and I think the Majority of the United States citizens are completely unaware of the complexity and the depth of the problem. Yeah I mean it is It's also I think most people Seeing the Iran thing right now most people know more about that. Oh, yeah going off going on halfway across the world Yeah, then what's going on just you know if you are that's what's crazy to me It's like you know, we're we're in invading countries that are really barely affecting us So they're like a 17 hour plane flight. Yeah, I think I think the Again, I don't want to be edidomas and predict stuff edidomas but The fact that we have a lot of lithium in sonora is going to be a Factor for a reason to clean it up. It should be it should be it's pretty important It's a pretty important resource. Yeah, but if they can't hold on the El Chapo Sun How the that's that's why I think US gun is gonna have to you know put foot on the boots on around down there Wow now if you had to make a bet like if there's a betting line in Vegas Like how many how many days or how many years from now? Will they be American soldiers deployed to Mexico? I'd say five years maybe whoa in five years really? I mean we we are on We just passed this this past year has been the most violent year in Mexico in recorded history Really and it's the first year of administration of this new president like who's been trying to hugs hugs? How to not not bullets I've rasselin the velocities, you know this instead of that it's been his first year and you know hey give him a chance He's he's he's doing whatever he's only the most violent year in history. Yeah cut the guy a break exactly That's what they say but then I go down there and I have a lot of a lot of my friends that are still down there People that have trained still down there and I hear from them directly like I have some Young kids there on the end of our media which is like a federal police worse that Patrol's all in Mexico and some of the federal federal police guys they tell me like head we're They they said or you signed a new contract to be water than us or no and Lower your pay and all of your all of the stuff that all your benefits will be gone Or you just stay on here and limbo and just stay at the base and A lot of them are staying at the base. So it's nothing nothing's nothing's nothing's nothing's being done Well, I imagine that if it seems overwhelming and it seems helpless and it seems like the cartels are just taking over and they're making a shitload of money and You're not making any money. I mean that that is the real crazy thing about it, right? If the the government is asking people in this sort of already compromised situation in environment asking them to work for a small amount of money to go after people that are making a tremendous amount of money Yeah, and you're gonna be at war with these people these people They're basically your neighbors. Yeah, and also you go there With a federal uniform As far as the federal government you go into a community where you the federal government doesn't do anything for them Right the church is made by the cartels cartel made the road Christmas was brought brought to you by the cartels, you know They they are the good guys. So these guys come in here like really these guys when one or the either one or we're not gonna So that's you know, it's it's it's it is it's it's a mess to mess Wow But could boots on the ground actually fix anything? I mean I'm not I'm not I'm not a military expert, but There has to be some sort of outside force that is completely uncompromised by cartel Money and influence how long for the compromise those people well when you put demoreans on the border a few of them got picked up on smuggling people From the border so yeah, that's what I'm saying. Yeah, who knows It's it's it's it's also it's a different warfield because a lot of you know a lot of our war fighters and law enforcement Or have some sort blood ties to Mexico Of course, well not only that was just watching some video where there was this guy who is a US veteran Been deployed overseas fought for this country and his mom was getting deported and he said he felt betrayed Like here here he is in America is his mother brought him over here had him over here He's a US citizen and they're deporting his mom. He's if his mom was a danger or their problem There's a community of army marine and several veterans that are deported veterans that live in in place like the Wanna That's fucking crazy That is fucking crazy you fight for the country man You get a deal iron here, but how nuts is that it is pretty nuts. It's fucking ridiculous You fight for this country You you literally risk your life and there's assholes out there that haven't done a goddamn thing been mooching off the system forever and their citizens And you're not yeah, I mean my perspective and my Life life path, you know when I came up here. I want I want to earn it right? I don't know I came up here motivated want to do a difference work And apparently you know I've had I've had some you know static in my in my endeavors My kid was born in the US and Parented or moms American, right? When I went to to the hospital to pay for the the the insurance part of it The elated me it's how you shouldn't pay any of this your Mexican. You just can claim benefits All right That that wasn't California so that was like oh, but I can afford it ah You just you just ways around this, you know and that's when I knew you know there's America and there's California America, right? California America is different. Yeah California America is very different. It's a subtle blend. Oh, I mean there's there's ways around stuff You know there's free stuff. You know get it get it get at it It's a weird yeah again, I travel across the country just get to experience different parts of the US You know I spent New Year's in Kentucky and that's pretty interesting. Oh, oh, it's I mean I like it You know, maybe it's like a it's like a white Mexico. Is it yeah? How so? People were shooting guns into the air in the on years. That's pretty Mexican They do that in Texas too. Oh well, you know again, you know, I don't know It's not good. Some lady got shot. Oh, it's completely Grandma with her family and the bullet fell out of the sky and hit her in the chest Yeah, when we when you would come we would park underneath the the bridges in in Baja to not get you know There's firearms or legal in Mexico and then you know Tracing right trace around just going on like I like trace around Okay, you know It's it's it's again Mexico is a weird place. You know, it's why I call it the upside down You know, um, you know, there's there's a chaotic freedom to Mexico, which I get I mean I love Mike. I love Mexico as a country as a culture I don't like the government though The government is just you know at all levels. It's just you know, it's not a good Well, it seems like it's always been that way I'm reading this book about Kit Carson and the old West and when the United States You know conquered parts of California and took over parts of California and the West from Mexico And it was crazy back then. Yeah. Yeah, and they were they were talking about the chaos in the Mexican government and the Mexican military back then in the 1800s Yeah, yeah, I mean so so people that kind of figure it Realize if if if you want to be an officer in the Mexican army You have to go through war college and there's different ways to go about it, but There's a lot of hereditary stuff going on hereditary Like hey my dad was your general hug, okay, you know There's a lot of that going on also the army down there has a monopoly over selling guns It's only one gun store in all of Mexico and it's run by the army. What? Yep one gun story in all of Mexico and it's run by the army and you have to fly to Mexico City to to get a license Interprecure a firearm so if you live in the Yucatan You have to fly to Mexico City to get a gun which makes which basically makes the only options buying a gun on the black market or Flying over there and expanding all this money. So there's a now it's a class So only only people that can afford the plane ticket and to do this little process are the ones that can have guns So it's a that's class, you know the classes involved in there as well What kind of rights do you have with guns versus the United States second amendment is it somewhere? So the constitution the Mexican For guns for self defense But a lot of amendments and a lot of corrupt governments down there said you mean you're not a good idea to have this here So progressively throughout Mexican recent Mexican history. It's become more and more strict right certain rounds aren't allowed certain calibers aren't allowed and This just plainly the sale of firearms in all of Mexico is just relegated to a single Gunstore in Mexico City So you can't carry them without without a permit and to get a permit you have to know somebody and knows the president Or a general or something Well, what about all those gentlemen? We saw in that video just walking in front of those government agents with guns. Why didn't they arrest them? They should have they should have the same like those well The only people that respect those laws are you know law abiding citizens. There was a case in the very cruise of a old man former army guy old older gentleman He his son tried to get abducted something like that. He had this old Mauser rifle And he shot dead one of the guys that was chasing him just trying to abduct him He was arrested for the the firearm possession And the hosers with Lee Harvey Oswald supposedly used on JFK. Yeah, that's a old-ass gun Well, there's a lot of weird old-ass stuff down there you we up I mean as far as the stuff that gets handed over or just the weird exotic firearms down there a Lot of people called Mexico the US is garage and like the like garage as you just find weird stuff down there from over World two Arab pistols and explosives To new stuff like there's a friend of mine that works for the government down there told me that they found a bunch of parts for a mini gun in a house somewhere down there. What's a mini gun? It's basically a Remember that go remember that Terminator 2. Yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah pretty hard to get you know one of those There apparently there's one out there somewhere On a vehicle of some sort. Oh Jesus basically Elle obliterate everything well We talked about the Ed Holder fast and furious deal last time that you were here and that to me still is one of the most bizarre cases in in the history of Undercover operation that doesn't make any sense at all. Yeah, they sold guns Like literally sold working guns to a specific cartel down there to try to Was so they could track them or I remember what kind of bullshit argument that was but the the interesting part or if you want to go into the you know Questions that they benefit at a single cartel the scene in a logaritho That's the that's the thing, you know, that's most of the guns went to that if you had a guess if you were a conspiracy If you're like put on your tin foil hat. What do you think that was all about? They were probably as a as a as a nation you were probably wanting wanting to only worry about a single threat As far as cartels and not a lot of cartels so they empowered one cartel. Yeah, really I mean that was coming off the Patriot Act era Bush era thing I remember vividly People putting guy your counters and some of the drug tunnels that we would find So they were worried about nukes getting put into drug tunnels at some point during during that whole post-9-11 era So it would make sense that if you were and Worryed about national security you would want to not worry about a lot of Cartels maybe focus on one support one and just keep us in the know Do you think this was a covert operation of sense of the senteload cartel was not aware that they were doing this to empower them to Eliminate the competition to strengthen one group because they just knew it was inevitable that someone there's a lot Control there's a lot of people that are now coming out after the whole There's a lot of things that were said at the choppo trial that are That would lead somebody to believe that there was some sort of official support from the US government to the scene lower cartel as far as them Having deals with these this cartel specifically to keep things to keep them in the know about things happening down there supporting them to be that be in a position so they can keep control over their region and basically as an information group so they can have Have a clear eye in a year in a chaotic area like Mexico on the bad guys I that's what I that's why I gather from it Jesus Christ, but that kind of it's almost like They feel like it's helpless like they have to do something like that that they have to Do that because there's no way to fix it So what you got to do is kind of try to manage it or move it in certain directions well, there's there's all like every now and then I post them stuff up about that type of situation and everybody goes to Well, the CIA has been running drugs into the US for years and using playing the stuff like that There is there are Instances of CIA involvement and different stuff down in Mexico that you know are pretty obvious now from the 80s and then the 90s as far as Supporting certain groups or just trying to keep tabs on these people, but you know I think we're coming to a point in our history where a lot of these people are dead a lot of these people are in jail a lot of these people got book deals and a lot of these people are talking and you're I mean it's interesting seeing some of the stuff that it's coming out now that in my time when I was active Would have gotten you in a hole probably somewhere if you talked about it So there was definitely I mean I My mind was blown when I was seeing a chapel on Netflix Because a lot of stuff that was going on in that show is fictionalized stuff that I went through myself so it's like It's a Netflix now how accurate was Some pretty good accurate parts. So there's a there's a character in that show called We're talking about narcos and we're talking about the Mexican version of narcos, right? Because there's a there's a Yeah, there's a Narcos is pretty good. There's a there's a alchapo series on Netflix as well. Oh, there is. Yeah, it's in Spanish It's very popular, but it's pretty accurate. There's a guy in that in the in the subtitles. It does. Oh There's a guy in the show Gondravo soul is his name which would know but what people were trying to figure out who that was is basically a government Guy That had a deal with a chapel and they both kind of escalating power It turns out it was Luna, right? So this show was showing him the character Also, which depicts Luna as a corrupt politician that was working security working both sides and all of a sudden you know Recently a few months a few weeks back. They arrested the guy Wow So the show was kind of predicted Do you think that the show had anything to do with him being arrested? I mean it probably put I put the idea and the side guys to people to ask questions Yeah, yeah That's weird that shows actually do do that like saving surviving our Kelly That's what got him arrested. I mean everybody knew it was a peanut people and like fucking 20 years ago He's peeing on little kids. Yeah, and now it gives people like a good It's interesting you see you see fictionalized forms of stuff that happened down there The narco show as well is another thing. You know see fictionalized things of how some of these powerful Cartel groups kind of originated themselves in fiction and now that is in the public Kind of domain as far as collective knowledge so people start asking questions and some of these things apparently people in power Also ask questions as well Jesus Christ It's just it's so strange how popular it's become You know and it's such a popular focal point of fiction as well and fashion. Yeah, chapel picture with Chompan yeah, the shirt was like fire everybody wanted that shirt You know that Connor McGregor like wore something to mimic it when on purpose when you In the press conference for how failed Los Angeles. Did you know that? Yeah? I even stood he stood in the same stance like look at him look at him I mean he's doing it on purpose. Yeah, it's like a subtle nod to El Chapo Yeah, I mean he's a Top was a cheap legendary status for sure now his kid that was freed by the The Cartel down there. He was wearing a scapulario which is like It's I don't know if you can see it in there That's an interesting just big piece of a cultural thing from Mexico. What is going on in this video? So I just handed the gun over hit what his personal gun over to one of his bodyguards that was not even These guys don't even care about him this head head head camera thing and they're putting everybody out there and Personally, I would put everybody in zip ties and on the ground personally So these guys all have guns drawn and there's people inside with guns drawn at them And they realize they realize who they have now so they're like should we forcefully put it in cuffs Should we not? So how do you know that they're realizing this part is because of language? All of the saying I've went through a lot of the same training that they went through and I did a lot of this Type of stuff and all of them want to bin and zip ties on the ground Look at this girl went reached out and grabbed their guns and put their guns down this There's fear in these people they realize that they messed up Oh Jesus right so that's what you know people question and are these streaming this video live They have the head cam and they're streaming it not well It's not you know that they Have a recording it and and it gets sent back to the command post so when he was moving around he had one of these on This is a Scapularia it's called it's like a religious Catholic iconography thing. What is yours? What is it? This is a Santa Marta one Right it's like a holy death effigy. So he had that on he had his was a Santonino that tojo which is like a Catholic this a Christ baby saint they have As soon as that picture of him went on online They were sold out all throughout seen the law everybody was wearing that they have to work. You know they work Those work because I'm free got them free areas. That's the that's the scapularia Santonino The handsome guy. Yeah, that's it also an interesting cultural thing The the occult part of it where that that's Santonino that tocho siren is right now It's probably most popular shrines in Mexico or that one because they work and Then you go to the holy death shrines down there as well and you see how how both sides both Mexican government forces and the cartel they they both been a rekind of the same saints So it's that again. That's a weird kind of thing they share that faith What is that picture of his truck down there? Jamie you have some wacky truck now just to where you're truck? That's his yeah, that's one of those really little bullets. He gave out cars on Christmas As a like he did this party to any like townspeople where he was how many cars do you have? I have no idea like a lot of them. There's there's pictures of the El Chapo Sun gives out cars on Christmas and there's a bunch of cars there You know again who who are you like who were you gonna go towards him? Of course Government you know you can't car you don't get me anything. Yeah, they they like you said hearts and minds. They're really yeah, and and and You know they they pay for college education. So there's a whole generation of lawyers a whole generation of doctors They pay for immigration procedures So hey you want to you know Yeah, I'll pay for your immigration, but you know I'm gonna call in some favors later on Okay, wow, so that's you know that's that's how that's how you grow. It's full on mafia shit Yeah, I mean they they learned one day I'll come to you. I'll come home. I'll come home You know, it's car face All these things are kind of venerated by them. That's kind of their Cultural backing they have cultural backing They kind of look to the mob era guys as influence or inspiration you see You know insane paintings of the godfather or or Scarface in some of these safe houses with these people are right and you're like, okay Or you see cartel influenced Series for Netflix like there's one called la reina de la sewer Which is about a female cartel head And the the lady that that stars in that show was the one that took chomp in down there to mail chapel because of No, no chapel was a fan of that show. Really. That's how it got going When they finally caught up to him. He had the whole series on DVDs at his Which is pretty humanized Oh my god that whole scene with Sean Pan going down there and writing a story for Rolling Stone was Uber Bazaar. Yeah, well if they get the the terrorist destination He basically went down there to meet with the terrorist What happens to him then? Is it retroactive? I don't know I don't know but they he helped get him arrested in a sense right? He basically that whole commotion Put eyes on on the movements of El Chapo by the Mexican government Why would El Chapo agree to do something like that? He was a fan of the show That seems so crazy though doesn't it seem crazy that he was willing to take that kind of a risk Take a photo with Sean Pan and that that actress. Well, what's her name again? Okay? Cut the cut the el Castillo yeah right there. Yeah, Chappos probably banging that right If I guess there's rumors there's rumors of of a meeting. That's about it. I don't know anything else. Yes. I guess I'll say yes Just the whole thing with Sean Pan's smile. Hey, here's my friend the murderer. Well, I mean I get the I mean I've heard some of the stuff Sean Pan said about you know Chavez and Venezuelan stuff like that. I know his pro Chavez and stuff like that and have people friends of mine that live in Venezuela under that regime So he's a pretty cookie guy. He has some pretty interesting ideas about he can't possibly be that informed I mean how you you really have to have boots on the ground to understand what the fuck you're talking about And you have to be there for you know if you want to know what's going on in Venezuela There's so many different stories my friend Abby Martin's been down there multiple times and she gives me a Story that's so different than anything that you're getting in mainstream news and she goes there. Yeah She goes there and talks to people. Yeah, spends time I have a there's a there's a resistance group that is based in the US that works down there and you know They put up videos all the time Of people picking up garbage and trying to recycle Garbage to feed themselves and some places Instagram immediately takes all those downs Really? Yeah, why does Instagram take those down? I have a lot of that going on as well when I post something completely news related about something and and then get Shadowband or things just go down Depending on what I post up like weird things Post it up a Venezuelan People throwing rocks at this armored vehicle and one of them I think one of them got run over and that got taken down I didn't show the part where you got run over, but just the people protesting God with that kid taking down they got flagged as support for a hate group or something like that Support for a hate group by showing the news. Yeah, or showing the picture of cartel and again, I don't post anything Graphic on my feed because I don't want to get banned, but I'm still shadow banned Right, so you showed that one by the way Ed manifesto. That's how you find it Ed manifesto. That's that's that's Ed's page You post that one where you you saw a guy getting abducted. Yeah by fake cops. Yeah, yeah And that one you pulled yeah, it did yeah all of the all of the recent scene alone video ones are Were all pulled off the really Instagram account. That's how I had to reel up low to mall. I just don't understand their logic I mean look I can understand them Saying caution some of these images and videos are sensitive You know like with some bloody things and things on those lines something change in the algorithms a year back Like when I was on your first time I was on your show. I got obviously a saw a spike. Thank you by the way but all of the pro second amendment pages and People like there's a guy crispy was a yeah, you know he also he got a lot All of a sudden all the start seeing a lot of us stuff lagged. Yeah his stuff got taken down Yeah, I think he got a there was a photo of him with Donald Trump that got taken down Yeah, I was that's oh, I think was Donald Trump doing your Mike. What the fuck is wrong with you people? Yeah, just because you don't align with someone politically you can't take down photos and you can't pretend that he's posing with Hitler or something like yeah fuck is wrong with you. It's it's It's the abit people can report things anonymously. I think and yes, and if you hurt my feelings There you go So if there's enough people that flag your video and say this is hurtful or this is they don't even look into it They just pull it down. Yeah, so who do you think is doing? Do you think this Mexican government is doing that? Do you think it's the cartels that are doing that? I think it's mostly Americans that have Sensibilities that are completely beyond my comprehension That see a gun in a picture and they're afraid of the gun and it's a terrorism They're supporting terrorism. Make group. Let's report that picture or video Well, I could understand how some of what you're reporting on truthful as it may be would be disturbing to be able to find out that truth But you gotta let people do that. I mean, I mean, what does Instagram want to do? I mean, do they want to put parameters on what kind of truth you're allowed to distribute? So Just for people to get some contacts. I do work for two magazine companies and I do do articles so In that regard I do provide news in certain ways But when I post something on my page. It's a personal view of something I purposefully don't go into graphic material because I don't want to get flagged But sometimes there's always people with a certain affinity to when they see a gun in a post or where they see An animal being butchered For something like in a picture or when they see hunting related stuff or when they see some sort of a Remember posting up a picture of the make tequan a great again hats that they were making down there Red hats that said make tequan a great again when the caravans went into DJ and people started protesting the caravans in DJ That got flagged. What That is so crazy Oh Yeah, if you want to confuse if you want to make people angry and confused just wear one of those hats through the air Yeah, well lady got maced in the face for wearing one that said make Bitcoin great again Some guy mister in the face. It's not your hat. I saw somebody walk down walking in an airport with a make-hand tie great again hat Anything great again. You got you can't do it. You can't be close. Yeah, it's too close I mean, you know that the hat, you know, right? I've never seen anything more divisive in this country I mean other than like a swastika or something like overtly disgusting I started my immigration process When he got elected. Oh, no It's been a trip, you know, how does that work? Like if you are a Mexican born citizen and you want to become United States citizen, obviously it's very difficult so Married to an American having American kid. That's how I went through the process myself and You know, I got a green card The the thing is that when he got elected Everybody said, you know what maybe our time to get a green card is gonna get be less and less So let's all try and get one. Mm-hmm. So what would take normally six months took two years. Oh wow So in those two years you can't leave the country So if you what happens to people that are illegal over that's what's fucked up about it, right? So there's people that came over here illegally 20 30 years ago And they've done no crimes. They've been an integral part of society. They've had great lives, but they they can't pay taxes They can't vote. They have to live Undercover Yeah, I mean fuck that stupid they're they're you know, they do provide you know, they provide they pay taxes through other Cell-tax buying things, but they're not paying taxes. They're not good But if you made them citizens you would make money. Yeah. Well, it's not a popular view It's a stupid view. Yeah, it's it's it's stupid that we have these people and they're permanent Eligals, and they will be here until they die illegally and we know they're here like how about work with what you've got Look you've already Do you doing your best to stop the border traffic? Great fantastic, but listen Let's forget about the past these people are here. They're here and they're a part of our community Like how you how are you gonna deny them citizenship to the day they die and they're still here? Well legal immigration just like I went through is Hard enough. You gotta find some American lady. That's just difficult. Yeah I did you know and you know, but it was a hard process It's it's it's a difficult process and you speak fluent English Yes, that's another thing. I thought people in the line with me You know that did not speak a lick of English But they were from a country that had a quota Great like Holland or some shit from a country that has a quota But you're not you're not you know, it's hard for Canadians, man. I have friends from Canada that come over here Try to become citizens. It's a fucking grind. Yeah And don't get me wrong. I love this country a bit I'm new here and I like what I see. I don't like where it's going in some places. What don't you like? I don't like the I mean I left my country because I couldn't defend myself from the bad people out there The second amendment second amendment. Yeah, it's a beautiful thing. You have no idea how beautiful that thing is Tell you don't have an option to have it. That's one thing I Like to you opportunities this country provides. I've had a lot of opportunities. I would never get anywhere else I like that you actually work and work you the work you put in matters here I like I like how it's segmented and different you go go to Tennessee and You meet people out there and they're great people You know, there's some you know people have preconceived notions of what some part of the countries are but I'd love it and Then you go to California and you meet people that are on the same boat as I was and they're forgot completely what Mexico is and they're completely Americanized Americanized and they're completely against you as a new as a new person here really yeah So you find that really like Americanized Mexicans or or like second third generation Mexicans a worst enemy of a Mexican is another Mexican that's a classic what that's a classic That's a classic Mexican saying in this true most that that's a classic Mexican saying really most of the negativity Negativity I got from being on your show the first time was from Latinos Specifically Mexican let you know what was the negativity? What was their criticism? When I talked about how Mexicans protested the care of him's going through Tijuana and wrecking their city That was viewed as an extreme to the right or conservative viewpoint apparently yeah, but that was a fact But yeah, the apparently facts don't matter. Oh, that's so silly But that's people that's that's a good That's a good example of people that are not there. Yeah, yeah, you're talking about it You're not set you didn't make a value judgment saying that those people coming through were protested by Mexicans and either go back to where for fucking rice patty they come from you didn't say any of that So so this is what I saw when I when I talked about it Looks like experience that I wasn't I was in TJ for a while when that was happening Byron Caravan goes through obviously a lot of those guys were Gang members a lot of them were not all of them a lot of them were covered in tattoos It's pretty hot outside wearing all of our important hoodies cameras came by the females and the children won't be inputting Front parade in front of the medium to anybody was there. You could see the circus. I was going on hmm and then a Lot of the a lot of the camp encampments They would they would you know litter the encampments What needle on the outside one of them was next to a school? They had to be closed down a niece of mine had a kid in there and the school had to be closed down because it was next to one of these encampments They would protest and close down lanes most people that live in TJ Some of them are Americans and they commute so that's affecting their livelihood People that work on terrorism in TJ. Why would hood went down? So the fact that these people came in disrupted all that whole thing and then you would see these California, you know hippie Americans guys come down there and do puppet shows for these people and handover donations in the form of canned food black and get to stuff like that and then you would see these guys go The back door and sell all that stuff in the back and just get money for whatever they were you gonna use the money for We would laugh at it, but it also, you know, it's pretty this hardening Having that point of view Online because I started posting some of the stuff online for people. This is what's happening and that was like no No, no, you're going against the narrative. Yeah, the narrative and the people that are talking about you going against an narrative Really no idea. They don't care about the truth. That's what's crazy the absolute is Think so if you're against a if you're against this car and going through Tijuana and affecting your your probably at Trump supporter That's that I'm like so simple. I can't even vote of here yet You know have to be a full citizen to vote so that it doesn't even factor in on God damn. It's so crazy. What else about America bothers you? I think You know there's there's definitely this tendency in America that I see the youth in America like I like I have I have a weird Mental comparison of seeing my nephews down there playing soccer Going out and getting to trouble going to cock fights, which is probably pretty dangerous But they go to cock fights stuff like that and how see kids up here on their tablet You know playing games playing games getting offended by something, you know Down there you can still punch somebody in face if they get into your face and school You're allowed to do that in school. I mean there's there's you're gonna be some issues, but it's fine, you know You know there's there's still that you know up here. It's gone all that's gone You're gonna get into some issues. You're probably gonna get out of school or something You know you see this weird Pissification of American children say spaces. Yeah, don't say that that's politically incorrect. Pissification What's a good word for it? What's the play come up with a politically correct word for that that has just as much kick and I'll use that They can't doesn't exist. It's the Pacification. Yeah, I mean and and When I came up here the like the first year was up here I saw the California gun laws change like I got to see The weird California compliant rifles come to the range and you have to push a button to release the magazine Yeah, and make it more difficult to reload. Yeah so strange well, I mean if if if I've Never seen the California compliant gun in the hands of a criminal myself right so why are you why are the good like the good citizens falling along? Yeah, the idea that you just can't cap law abiding citizens And that's gonna somehow another save lives in mass shootings and Here's the other thing about And I'm waiting for this to happen, but it's just not happening They're never addressing people using psychotropic drugs. They're not they don't address that all those school shooters all those mass shooters are all on drugs Yeah, they're all on some kind of psych drugs and There's there's no mention of it whatsoever like what what is the action of these things? It's all about the guns. Yeah, and the guns are a huge issue I mean the fact that these people who are fucked up Yeah, they that they have access and they can get access to these guns and they can wind up shooting people Yes, that is one issue Security is another issue There's another issue and that's mental health and that's that to me is the biggest one because without the mental health issue You don't get mass shooters and that's uh interestingly we wouldn't I get people in conversations about the violence in Mexico and Purple you know perspective Mexico cartel guys, you know go into a town shoot up a bunch of people and it's pretty horrible But on the Mexican side we only had one school shooting That like a notable one Right and it was mentally ill kid when you took a gun to school, right? And as Mexicans we look at what happens in the US and schools and we're horrified by it That's like completely you know horrific. I'm not amazing. It's in again being on both sides I've just trying to figure things would about pharmaceuticals being prescribed to children in Mexico. Is it similar? Not at all not I mean we were so behind in some and some instances as far as You know, I didn't know about PTSD. So I came up here or TBI right real. Yeah, I didn't know anything about that When did you learn about TBI? When I started talking we should say what that is post traumatic stress disorder and traumatic brain injury for people Well, I learned about it. I learned about it from talking to most of my marine friends that were coming back from But like he had like what you're describing that your feeling sounds like TBI really yeah You should get yourself checked out and then you go down there and I was like oh your You know things would happen and people would get you know, it's just right get a few days off. Take a few Shots of tequila you're fine Get back at it Well, that's the old-school mentality. I mean that's what they have with them World War II and Vietnam and yeah Yeah, yeah, but you've got I mean when it comes to that but mental health down in Mexico. There's like It's not it's not anywhere as far as medicating it kids being diagnosed with things like autism and autism is a thing that I only recently kind of heard about 15 years ago in Mexico and Mexico and what about Anti-psychonic drugs and all these different drugs that you're seeing that these a lot of these school shooters are taking in Mexico It's not a thing, you know people think that it's pretty permissive in Mexico They can get any drug if you pay somebody off the thing is that a lot of these psychiatric level They're not they're not available down there or people there you can go to it They're like what do you want? No, this is not available here. So it's not a part of the culture. It's not America No, no Yeah in America It's such a huge part of the culture that people want The people are constantly wanting to take something to take the edge off or take something so they could feel better or take something to You know to just just to alter their state and the doctor will prescribe it to them And then the pharmaceutical drug companies are just raking in the cash from it. So it just becomes a part of reality Yeah, there was a few people like way back when I first started You know things were pretty lax when I got in You know they you would get you know you're interested for cocaine and whatever but Some people would go to Oaxaca and go on mushroom trips like some of the veteran guys that would go through whatever There's a there's a place in Oaxaca and in America Where they go up into the hills and get some of those but they call them beladas which is like a Basically going to midnight and they would smoke these mushrooms and take them and they would come back Apparently fix some of them. That was like the story Hmm, it was pretty good for them to work there things out well John Hopkins is they're doing Studies on on solo Simon and there's been studies done in solo Simon with troops with PTSD And that they they've found that that it does help them MDMA's another one that maps is doing all these studies with MDMA and troops coming back with PTSD Yeah, I mean a lot of that stuff has been around for a long time down there Yeah, like remember the Beatles and Members of the doors went down there to yeah, Maria Savina And they found out about it was a life magazine article from the 1950s that was one of the first Really mainstream James. You can find who wrote that it was life article in the 50s I'm trying to remember that the guy's name Wasserman Wasserman I feel like it's Wasserman who was one of the very first guys to sort of mainstream Silas Island mushrooms and it was because of Mexican tribal cultures Marissa Vina was like the the figure head of that movement She was a lady that would do these mushroom trips to for people that would come up in the hillside whether she would take her Was it Gordon wasson ah, it was close. Yeah, it was something like that Gordon wasson. That's right. Yeah, so this was seeking the magic mushroom And I believe this was what year was this Jamie? I think it's in the 50s Yeah, I typed in 1950 57 Yeah, okay, Maria Savina left the whole legacy of that in Mexico and She had a lot of people that learn from her and a lot of these people are all over Mexico doing you know healing in spiritual work Well, that's the other thing about Mexico Mexico has some You have some freedom like my friend Ed at clay. He had a Ibogaine Retreat down there where people would go to get off of pills. Yeah, because it's one of the Iboga is one of the best ways to get off of Particularly opiates. Yeah There's you know, there's there's Enforcement is hard in the country like Mexico, so you're not gonna have people trying to go inspect things in right in these parts So that's why there's a lot of places like that you still to the state you can go to place a white Hawkeye where Technically that's taking mushrooms is illegal, but they go on the hillsides. It didn't they kind of like Decriminalize a lot of different things down there for personal use so the quantities now matter more than they used to So sometimes you would get caught with a certain quantity of something and that means you're selling it So the how many grams of mushrooms can you have? I would have I would have to look up but everybody has a different opinion on what personal uses I mean I remember the first time I saw like a box of them and I'm like the hell are these and You know later on I figured out what they were and you know there were a thing there were a thing in Mexico There's a big thing in Mexico. There's a lot of people grow them. They're a big thing to anyone who finds out about them You eat them they become a big thing. Yeah. Yeah, apparently. They they use them in rituals and all sorts of weird rituals down there as a as a doorway type of element like there's a There's a ritual where they do where they bury you alive in a shallow grave. Oh Jesus Yeah, it's pretty basically a isolation chamber. Love really poor man's isolation chamber They bury you alive in the shallow grave with a rope with a bell on it And they give you a bunch of mushrooms so you can think about things in there And if you freak out you ring that bell and they dig you out. Yeah. Oh God. Yeah, how you breathing down there? They go two percent of shallow grave. It's just basically, you know about that much dirt There's a hole where the rub goes through here, so you're gonna find But it's a it's like part of the death cult down there. They do that to kind of initiate people into it But it's it's the mushrooms. They take mushrooms. There's a bunch of weird stuff that goes down down there as far as the the use of psychotropics like mushrooms and other things to put people in that mindset of you know Accepting a very specific day to your truth out there. Mm-hmm. Yeah So let's get back to what's fucked up about America I always like to talk to people that are The other side here from somewhere else and just sort of look at it with a fresh eye because obviously I'm I've been here my whole life I'm used to it. Yeah, and I'm third generation. Oh, you are. Yeah, okay So I'm my parents were second generation my grandparents came over here So it's all I'm ingrained. You know I'm in the system. I don't know. I'm blind What else is fucked up about this place? I mean I Don't know I mean I don't when I travel around I get to see different parts of America and all of them You know there's there's certain certain places I've been called Ah, you're you're one of the good Mexicans that you know We'll say what those parts of the country are but I've gotten some of that, you know Well, the United States is almost like Europe Where like there's all these different countries except they all speak the same language Yeah, you know like Europe has France and they have Germany and you go over there There's this one then they're Sweden and then it's all in this fucking big land mass But the United States's land mass is contiguous and They all speak the same language, but if you want to tell me that Montana is the same as Florida You're out of your fucking mind. Well, I take those comments and stride, you know But you are the good Mexicans. I mean being racist kind of racial like that and just Messing with each other is a thick Mexicans do that all the time, right? So I take and stride it's fascinating to me that people are second generation Mexicans up here take more offense to something like that Then then I would somebody say you're one of the good Mexicans. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, whatever. You know It's it's to me. It's like a thing. I've taken well The easier things get the more people get quickly offended. Yeah. Yeah, yeah That's that's me yeah hard times produce a hard men hard men produce soft times soft times produce weak men Yeah, so when I when I come up here I see some you know softness and a lot of the society and a lot of feelings get hurt Having to watch what I say as far as you know, I was still people. Yeah, I was still this to people First off, I'm from Mexico. I come from a Mexican education system sit there world country So please take everything I say with that in mind, right and then I go into whatever I'm gonna say And like when you do like when you teach class when I have a class where I have a like I recently did I Conference with a bunch of bodyguards and security professionals that work Internationally, how to start with that one just to not offend anybody, you know That's hilarious. You're teaching Security guards and bodyguards and you have to worry about being offended every now and then you get somebody You know what you said something oh Carized you fucking babies. Yeah, so never read the comment section never Never stay behind and talk to people especially if they look like they're They want to speak to the manager, you know, oh did you get that and you teach class right now and then I got something they say to you You know, I think I think your point of view is it is a skewed because you work for the government down there and you weren't part of the Like the poor class and like I wasn't part of the poor class if you work for like where I work from we were pretty poor Pretty poor poor right. It's not like you know, I want some middle class. It was pretty poor or Or they or they try to tell me the realities of where I'm from oh That must be hilarious. That's pretty good. That's pretty good. Ed You're just fear mongering about Mexico. I go down to Rosa Rita all the time when my family. It's fine Well Rosa Rita was fine go down to Tom Alipas where this shooting happened and tell me the same thing You know, it's perspective they really say that to you. I can't imagine Someone talk it particularly talking to someone like you. Yeah, who's got like real world experience. There's there's people I believe you. Yeah, I mean I do people are so fucking dumb. I do believe you. Yeah, yeah Don't don't go in there But it is really true that it's the the people that live the softest easiest lives that are most offended and the people that have Experience like real hardship and seeing real violence that are a little more hesitant to comment on things like that Yeah, that's that is possible. Yeah, that is real Yeah, and that's one of the other things that I really think is good about your page and it really makes me angry that Instagram Sensors it is that you're giving real world perspective You're showing real video of a lot of this stuff and you put it up with with also You are educated experience on what these people are actually involved in yeah And it's I'm not involved in any news agency and a lot of this like most of those videos came in through direct messenger To my phone from people that are out there. Hey, and this is happening here like okay. Mmm. Can you talk about it? Okay? I'll talk about it Like when the Mormon thing happened The people the people that reach out to me to talk about it were part of the family and was pretty surreal and It wasn't national news when I posted it up Right, so there's some of the first like social media post about it that I could kind of I was trying to look for it And it wasn't anywhere So I talked about it and like that that evening it went national news And but most of it is directly from having connections and people out there that still talk to me So let's keep my ear open to that type of stuff Specifically from that region because that's that's my thing. That's where I came from well There's not a lot of mainstream news that's dedicated to this crisis Dedicated to what's going on. It just it takes a big event like that to sort of break through all the noise and become a signal It reaches us over here. Yeah, yeah, and it you know again and things happen somewhere else and not all the attention Most people aren't focused on our right now. Yeah, the whole what happened down there. They're yeah, it's just fucking crazy There's a giant problem right next door you could walk to it Literally, I mean if you live in San Diego, it's a 15-minute drive. Yeah, like it's right there Well, it's just to me it's I love San Diego and I love going down there But every time I go down there, I'm like you guys could walk to Mexico like this is so crazy Like especially La Jolla yeah, yeah La Jolla which is one of the most richest parts of the country fucking Unbelievably beautiful stunning views gorgeous mansions everybody's driving in Mercedes You're 15 minutes away from Tijuana. Yeah, and if we have heavy rains at Duana All of our sewage is gonna go right through there really yeah That what happens a lot of the suit like recently has a little major major rain in Duana All of the sewage goes across the border to to a Tijuana estuary There's a there's a processing facility the US has on this side But it can't manage all that and they have to close all beaches in the air. Oh Wow, which is again, it's fascinating how to see how the effect There's a border wall there, but there really is in the border wall you get in a boat you grow over there It takes three minutes. Oh, he can park or Recently posted up a bunch of videos of people park wearing over that wall. I saw it. Yeah Look, I admire ingenuity. I admire people that find solutions to problems And watching that guy scaled that goddamn wall like Batman. Yeah, it's amazing. Yeah, they're coming up with weird ways like I saw some people using powdered titanium to to melt the bars on One of the slats how to titanium Again, I have to research it basically it's a powder titanium burn center very high rate and when you start it It's kind of hard to put it out So they make this hole on and this wall with powder type some sort of powder titanium mix That's like that shit. What was that shit that they were talking about? 9-11 where all the conspiracy theorists thought that it melted steel Goddammit Pyrane pirate A tanner something like that. I don't know right. We're just popped in my head. I'm just the one. Yeah Yeah, yeah, I feel like that's the stuff they blow shit up with right now They sell these things they call breach pens like and they there's the there's the for tactical applications of these pens The mistakes that you start and you can burn chains open stuff like that with them really yeah So it's basically a ghetto version of that is what they're using, you know and some of these places And I know they I mean the the wall is they're making it and speaking to some of the border patrol agents that I that I know It does a job as far as slowing people down so they so there's not an overflow of people coming through Yeah, it's not like yeah What would happen if it was that that's not bonsai? Yeah, what would happen if everybody if there was no border Everybody's like Mexico's United States United States is Mexico Have a good time. Yeah, I Would be chaotic of course how long though 10 years. I don't know how long I mean once everybody got in yeah I would be that other people would go there Yeah, I mean if would if United States Mexico came to a deal and they said yeah Yeah, we call wasn't there a thing that they were gonna do there was a North American agreement There was like they were trying to do that with United States and set up a single currency. Yes Yeah, so a lot of conspiracy theories around the Amaro. Yeah, yeah Something like that like they were gonna do it with Canada. We're all gonna become one make a seat I could see it with Canada. Yeah, but maybe not you know Mexico. Well look we got all spread all the good around Yeah, and then also like look Mexico's got some awesome spots wouldn't be great if US industry moved in there with you Yes, and let the other little bit. Well Columbia did a great job in eradicating all the did the problems with narcotics I think it is really well not all because it's still hell. Yeah, guerrilla guerrilla group down there that recently gonna the FARC that went Amnesty and then they got active again, but they still there's still a lot of cocaine being produced there. Oh, yeah Yeah, but it's not nothing like when asked about no what did they do well? They were facing just just a few criminal groups large ones and Mexico is facing a Lot of them that's interesting. They have the US right next door. There is pumping Money into the issue directly didn't have to fly in. No. Yeah, it's not a long plane flight It's a short walk also. Mexico is a pretty big country. I think people kind of miss that also It's a pretty big country. Do you remember when there was a CIA drug plane that had like several tons of cocaine on it and it crashed because the Mexican government wouldn't let them land a refuel. Yeah Yeah, I mean all sorts of conspiracy theories around a lot of that was a real CIA drug plane that had been to Guantanamo Bay At least twice. Yeah, like it was documented. Yeah, and they for whatever reason. I mean Flying back with a lot of coke look at that Look at all that coke. I imagine Government groups Everywhere have a Cowboys. Yeah, yeah, you have cowboys when people try to say the CIA brings in drugs No, no, it's people who work for the CIA Realize they can make a shitload of money if they bring in drugs and they they pass that money around and they work it out But the CIA itself does not bring in drugs. Yeah Custom customs and border protection agent agents and just homeland security as an agency has the most corruption charges As far as all law law enforcement agencies. Do they really yeah federal federal charges for corruption? Because they are on the border and a lot of money other of course that's that's why right it doesn't make sense and You know, I mean it maybe was the CIA guy that said, you know, it can make some money through here Well, I mean that was the whole Barry Seals thing that Tom Cruise movie made it was it called made in America I think I made in America That was about bringing in drugs with the with cowboys that work for the CIA. Yeah I mean when I was working down there in Mexico and I got to see different agencies that we would work with all of a sudden. We're like hey Can you guys just go like look over there or just And you would see like some sort of You know what's going on, you know, but playing lands playing takes off Hey, I know it's nothing nobody saw nothing, you know Money exchanges and just you know, that's in Europe just an agent, you know, it's in the background Well, that's the thing that's so scary about what's going on with the cartels is that the Quantity of money is so extraordinary. Yeah. It's almost like they can do anything. Yeah. I mean they have their own cell phone networks in some places What yeah? What's it called? That we good if I knew but they're not coverage they have that you got pretty good cameras pretty good coverage in their areas I mean they they dismantled some cell phone networks in the past also like a Whole cities with hidden cameras that are cartel controlled to see what goes in and out of the of the towns Wow Like so sophisticated. Oh, yeah, so Mexicans Mexican government is working with uniformed agents patrolling and pickup trucks in the back and these guys are living in 2025 and using drones to to to surveil the patrols in the area and They're using their own cell phone networks so they don't have to worry about government tapping into their communications They're utilizing encrypted phone technology that is available now commercially throughout the world to get around some of these things and And they're working they're costly involving in how they work, you know I remember the first time I was working in in Baja and all the cartel guys were we move around in suburban Stress like federal agents and they would look exactly like the legit federal agents or they were federal agents with the cartel guys So you would oh my god, so they'd be together Yeah, and then we started working with the military and the military didn't give a shit who you were So they would stop everybody she would everybody and the guys immediately say oh now we're using taxi cabs to move around and Different types of cars and we're gonna paint the the vans like taxi vans or we're gonna move around in ambulances So they change their tactics so we were always after these convoys of suburban and now they're Doing something else So that's how they evolve they just you know You're trying to go after it when the hammer and these guys are mosquitoes does it make you want to move to Canada? No Further you can get away from all the case. You know It must be going on up there as well, right? I think they know set up so I interviewed a a smuggler a coyote for one of the articles I wrote and he You know asked them directly like what do you think about the the border of wall and the immigration? Policies of this current administration It's a lot. It's good for business. You know it makes it seem like it's harder to put people in the United States So I mean that wall is pretty hard like how do you do it? I fly them to Canada and they walk down Well, we talked about it before that the border the United States is a wall to Mexico The border from the United States to Canada is a giant clearing. That's a hundred yards wide It's real clear. You can see it. It's almost like they make it easy. Hey, just go right here. Yeah I mean a lot of people that want to get into you You hear your your numbers from $8,000 to $15,000 depending on who you are what you're trying to do. How you're trying to get up here as far as being smuggled up and he's like Pass Mexican passport get a Mexican passport if you're Mexican get you a Mexican passport We'll put $2,000 in account somewhere So if they want to verify if you're just financially solvent they will check that And just fly to Canada and just walk down And that's what we do well Canada super liberal now, too. Yeah, Justin Trudeau guys Super liberal. Yeah, so a lot of a lot of their a lot of their business as far as some other people That's how they do it right now instead of going through the desert, you know There is that there is a lot of that going on now to like some there's a lot of people move from Afrika not migrants coming into into Mexico People in the Middle East as well, which is worrying for some people Coming in through Mexico trying to make their way up But it's pretty hard for these people now because there's a lot of security now on both sides of the border Mexican Wadi and as you know and On this side of the border things are kind of more stringent A lot of the people that claim asylum like a lot of the mac my caravan members come into the US claim asylum and say okay There's your number to wait, but you're gonna wait in Mexico so they get sent back Even if they're not from Mexico, they wait half the wait in Mexico. It's a very interesting. Yeah There's a lot of these Immigrant waiting encampments in places like Texas and even heat in even if you want to Just places where people get cross asylum. Okay. Here's your number. You have to wait in Mexico. They get sent back Yeah, man, are you hopeful? Do you think this is gonna work out okay? When you mean this okay like even this this what we're all talking about. Yeah, this is gonna Become better a better situation in the future or is it gonna get more and more crazy? Is the United States gonna become like Mexico? I think at a global scale We're gonna need each other before before you know before too long You know you guys are gonna need Mexico and Mexico's gonna need you There's gonna be some sort of situation we're gonna have to come together probably you mean like a global war. I don't know Good be oh Jesus Ed. I mean there's a lot. I mean there's freaks me out There's a lot of Chinese influences it and industry in Mexico. Yes as soon as Trump said we're gonna When Trump was going into into office. He said We're gonna bring jobs back, you know this whole thing so a lot of factories American factories and businesses moved out of Mexico And then Chinese moved in In a second way. Well, that's what's dumb about short-sightedness, right? Yeah Not understanding for D3 dimensional chess, you know, there's a lot of moving pieces and and you know people can say whatever they want about the United States American companies in Mexico are pretty good companies and they're pretty good with their workers and their their ethics are pretty good A lot better than China a lot better than China, you know, and it's a different it's a different game and You know, it's it's again you you see the these influences going into Mexico because they realize that Mexico is a valuable place where them to have influence in Especially with what you're talking about with lithium I mean with battery technology and green technology becoming in the forefront of American culture right now I mean everybody wants electric cars all these manufacturers forward Mercedes they're all coming up with electric cars Porsche is gonna electric car now Yeah, I mean that's a big deal. Yeah, and any of those batteries. Yeah, that's the that's the next uh, you know That's the next oil oil type situation is gonna be lithium and that's right next door All right, so I think again, I think as a second largest consumer of American Products in the world is Mexico second largest so Economies are intertwined. They have a lot of Americans living down there. There's a lot of blood ties to Within the country of course Americans don't want America to be Mexico and Of course a lot of Mexicans want Mexico to be more like America. That's what would fix things Increasing the opportunities and making Mexico a better place. Yeah, we need to make some make Mexico great again shirts and yeah Get getting fights at the airport I mean really if we're connected to Mexico. Mexico was like Canada where you know like Canada is fucking wonderful you go over there. There's amazing cities. It's great. It's safe It's clean if we can make Mexico like that then we'd have you know It would be better for everybody including Mexico including the United States everybody post line 11 At the border you could see how businesses started failing into any Because it became harder across the border So you're interested there's there's symbiotic relationship with some of these border towns specifically California is very dependent on Some border towns in Mexico. Yeah, we were saying that entry a day without Mexicans Yeah, shut this whole fucking place down man. There's nothing going on without Mexicans here. Yeah, that's why anti-Mexican racism Some of the dumbest racism in all of the United States, but particularly for California. Yeah, it's so stupid I You know, I got to see how like in places like a fallbrook California where the the avocado capital of the world Cutting down all the avocado trees Because there's a drought and there's nobody to pick them really. Yeah, there's less no one to pick unless people coming up and The harder to maintain like a you know, they hire alleles and there's holy shit As farms need to organize start working on border control Like the whole out of it. Oh man. I I'm I'm one of those people that believes in borders But I also believe if you're a hard-working person who wants to do better You should have an opportunity and I don't think a lot of people particularly poor people that aren't very well educated There's not an opportunity. They can't there's no reason for them to be over here So if they apply for United States citizenship Well, there's well why you want to come here. Why I want to come here for opportunity. Well, what do you have to offer? I'm you know, I'm a hard worker. Well, there's a lot of hard workers I mean, that's really the attitude. Yeah, you know, and I think we all just got me me I got lucky. I got lucky my grandparents came here that got lucky. That's all it is It's just luck and the deny that and to deny these other people this opportunity This just got to be a way to fill throughout bad people. Yeah, maybe as technology gets better We could recognize bad people better. Yeah, I mean, I Went through a bunch of questioning. They'll clear my background. I got a lot of questions We'll show you right. I got a look and it's fine. You know, and I you know, I was like I didn't you know Didn't do anything wrong. So like I'm here. It's fine but You know, there's a lot of people like again Girls the Luna Garcia Luna was here on a green card and he got Naved when he went through process his full citizenship So he was here for a long time. Wow. He should have just stuck with a green card. I would have kept quiet probably That's so he's in jail, right? He lied to a to an immigration agent. That's one of the charges he has on oh Right, so it's pretty interesting that people like him have spent a long time over here things like Open secrets and You know, yeah, I mean again not all not all Mexicans are good guys, you know not all humans are good. Yeah I know yeah, so You know hardworking people come up here I got some of the people that that I've met out here that are kind of on the same boat as I am Fresh in the country, you know Doing manual labor construction Working Kentucky ice I met a bunch of guys that were working on the Kentucky Derby or the horse stalls around them all Mexicans You can smell you know the tortillas good food is usually you can smell, you know You know where they are do there's a place if you're hungry There's a place I don't tell anybody the name because I don't want to fuck it up Okay, I place down the street from here that like everywhere time you go in there Mexican soap operas plan nobody speaks English the foods off the charts That's how you know language tacos. Oh, yeah language case ideas. Yeah make organ meet great again. Yes Another thing we're thinking I see all this stuff you throw away from the end. I know they've never had minuto Oh, that's that's sad this place up here has minuto. Oh, it's off the charts Bit best hangover food. I'm a new to the new to right. Why has it work? There's like a science behind that You know organ meat. I don't know there's a lot of nutrients in it basically a lot of newchins get stored in organ Me and it's a soup so you get the rehydration from that. Yeah, and it's like a common thing in Mexico about liver specifically Mmm, I grew up on a pig on a pig farm and my mom would have this rule if you killed it You have to eat it so I killed the rattlesnake once and I was peeling it and the liver over the rattlesnake was the like a treat that she would give us right Really yeah raw raw. Oh Yeah, it's a good core. Well, my mom was pretty hardcore. Okay. It sounds so yeah Melissa man. Thanks for coming here and dropping knowledge. We really appreciate you and again Manifesto is your Instagram page. Yeah, it's manifesto. Please everybody sign up go follow him check it out Get yourself educated. Find out what's going on and tell Instagram to go fuck themselves What they're doing is rude That's it. Yeah. Thanks brother. Appreciate you man. Thank you. Bye everybody