So it's amazing to me that over 20 years after the Iraq war, its architects and supporters are still not fully in control of America's foreign policy, but certainly in full-in shall end it. And it's shocking to me that two months after Trump's landslide victory, a race in which he ran against the neocons, the neocons are still brazen enough to try and influence and sabotage his nominations. We are days, but less than a week before Tulsi Gabbard's hearings. Where are we in the below the radar war between permanent Washington's national security establishment with the neocons and the incoming Trump administration? I think it's unclear. So as of this recording, 10 minutes ago, Mr. Hexath, the defense secretary was just confirmed on a 50 vote. Hexath is a interesting character, I believe a former colleague of yours. Yes, he appears to have done a bit of a conversion on his foreign policy beliefs and the best evidence of that is the people that he's picked so far. So his cadres, the people that will serve it. I actually apologize with their suit. This is relevant to people who have no Pete Hexath from clips on the acts of him from eight years ago saying things that would lead you to believe he's a pretty stout icon. Yeah. But okay, so that's what you're referring to. Yeah, I think the available evidence is that he is like a circuit 10 years ago was a pretty conventional Republican. Yes. And he has changed his life in more ways than one. So he is a question mark. But the early evidence is the people that he has chosen to surround himself are stark departures from the man from 10 years ago. And so that's a big deal. And especially in a place like the Pentagon, which is hard to control. Yes. And once no change under any circumstances, except an annual increase in the number of four star generals is the largest rock or sea on earth. It is. And it exists to serve itself. It's got a pretty dismal record of winning wars, a pretty great record of spending money. It desperately needs reform. And you're saying that based on the personnel choices you think he's making, he's now the defense secretary, by the way, as of right. That he is like sincerely on board with transform policy. Yeah. I mean, he did not need to make these picks. I mean, I don't think he didn't make these picks that get confirmed. I don't think he needed these to win any senators. He is courting, I think minor controversy now, which is why we're having this meeting. He did not need to do this. It was a move conviction and belief and principle in his early days in office for you. So give us an example. Could you give us a sample you're talking about? Sure. There's going to be this Michael Domeno figure who will have the Middle East portfolio. He has been advised throughout the process by another figure named Daniel Caldwell. These are both people in their 40s or 30s, basically get millennials who are veterans of the global war on terror. They're very much in the... So they fought in that? Yeah. Dan did. Yeah. And Michael was a CIA agent. Yeah. I mean, these are the guys that were hunting down IRGC or any revolutionary car people. And the federal wars that Trump advanced ran on reforming and ending, et cetera, et cetera. And so, you know, they're very much in the advanced mold of we went there, not really sure what the point was. And we want to roll back from that somewhat. I think you might have heard this message from Mr. Trump at least once or twice in the last 10 years. So these... I don't know, do you know, I know Caldwell who I think of as a man of genuine integrity, high intelligence and principle committed to his country. I think he's proven that. Yeah. I honestly think he's like a wonderful person. Yeah. But he's being attacked by people who never served with a long unbroken track record of destroying America as somehow anti-American. Yeah. How does this work? Yeah. I mean, I think the tactics are pretty clear. So no one reads anything. Everybody's in a cool confused. Says the bag is there. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. You're right. Get a headline out there. Call someone a naughty word. Say they're anti-a country or they are radical. You know, if anyone sues this publication, it will take years and years and years and hope that some club member at Mar-a-Lago hands this to President Trump exactly and tries to trick it and thinks that Mr. Trump is a stupid man. And this is the approach and this is what they are trying to do. That's exactly. Exactly. I mean, the word has been abused by the rest. They've done this to me. Yes. But it is this is actual disinformation. Yes. I hate to use the word. But like, but what are the publications who are the people involved in this campaign of lies? Okay. I mean, I'm not familiar and I don't know any of the people over there personally, but the big story that's going around on both to me know and I believe Caldwell is from Jewish insider. And again, no one really wants to be attacked by something called Jewish insider. It doesn't sound very fun. And so they are running headlines against people and they are attacking them. And what they do is they don't say anything that is per se inaccurate, but they totally strip the context for everything. So what? Let's go one by one. Do you know what you mean, oh? Just by correspondence. Okay. And what's yours? Is this a radical figure anti-American figure? No, this is somebody who wants to pull back, I would say moderately from the Middle East, which I think at this point is basically bipartisan outside of the radicals within Washington, D.C. Right. In the beltway. Okay. I think this is a fair assessment. So the people who want to continue what we're doing at unsustainable cost, being a bankrupt country, by the way, sending aid to countries that are not bankrupt. Those are the radicals, I think it's fair to say. So what are they saying about Demino in this hit piece? They are trying to make the reader jump to the conclusion that he is anti-Israeli, that he is pro-Iranian, he is pro-Iranian. Plurian. Plurian. Plurian is somehow pro-radical Islam. He's pro all the scary people in the middle. Radical Islam. Sure. What? It doesn't really matter. I don't know the guy. He's made a thing. You know a lot of she has called Demino or is there a common name for Persians? Not so my information. Okay. And again, I think it bears repeating that this person was responsible for the tracking of revolutionary guard corps members in Iran, potentially sent some of them to their death. So the whole thing has an opera buffet, flavors to it, that he's being attacked as part of it. So what you're saying is these are people who will say anything. It doesn't matter. They're kind of from the very way school of journalism. It's like you have an objective, something you want to achieve and whatever it takes together is fine. You will say it. It doesn't matter. You'll call anybody anything. If it serves your purpose, they are very, very willing to destroy this person with absolutely no compunction. Is there any evidence that he's quote anti-Israel? None. None. And in fact, as the evidence of the contrary, which he praises the country. Yeah. Okay. He is critical of aspects of the war. It's a to be critical of other people's wars or your own wars. It's okay to offer analysis of war or to even state that it's not in fact our war as the President of the United States just did in his inauguration day, emphasizing from behind the Resolute death that it's their war, not our war. So I read something from a guy called David Wormser who was one of the architects of the Iraq. We're not from this country, not really concerned with this country at all. And also, I think it's for to say, someone who should hang his head and shame given a lifetime of destruction that he's helped bring to our country, but describe these policies as anti-American. So I've seen it takes a lot of balls for someone who has no interest in the United States to accuse someone whose whole orientation is helping the United States of being anti-American. But I've noticed this a lot. If you raise the question, like, what are we getting out of this? The endless war cycle, we're getting bankruptcy, obviously, but is this good for us? They'll accuse you, the Constantine, Kiz, and also not an American. We'll accuse that wing, we'll accuse you of being somehow woke and you're left wing for asking these questions if you notice this? Yeah. I mean, it's interesting that you raise some of these figures. We go into Seoul night. I'd like to. I hope there's no more repulsive group in American life than the people who continue to push death in bankruptcy on the United States. I think that's fair. Can't recover from death. No, you can't. So I mean, I think that they're hoping that Americans don't do the reading. They're hoping that Americans read expoasts. Yeah. I think that Americans watch random cable news hosts that they're zoned out and they have a positive view of certain aspects of America's role in the Middle East and they start car and feathering people on the internet and that there's no pushback on it. At the same time, I guess the only reason I have noticed this is because it's so over the top. I think a lot of these positions are legitimate. I disagree with them. You know, a ton of these people are smart people. I know almost all of them and they could make like a straightforward case for their position. Like here's why we should affect regime change in a run or here's where we should kill Putin. I mean, maybe there's a case to be made for that, but they never make the case. They attack anyone who stands in their way in the most brutal and dishonest ways. They have no limits at all in their behavior at all. And I just find that repugnant and like corrosive, even if I agree with them, I'd be against that. What is that? It's guerrilla warfare, the winner didn't it costs? I didn't. Any costs? I know I'm jumping around. I'm exercised. I just watch what's happening to a man called Steve Woodcoff. Do you know Steve Woodcoff? Yes. Okay. So he's in front of Trump's. He's a real stick. I happen to know him just for other. How well do you know him? Pretty well. You know, just personally, I don't know a ton about his views. I don't sense that we probably don't agree on foreign policy in some ways. But he was tasked by Trump, as you know, to go over and affect some kind of ceasefire between Israel and Hamas. And he did. And I doubt he's anti-Israel. In fact, I know he's not. Whatever that means. And he is being attacked. Somehow an agent of the Islamic Republic of Qatar and like anti-Israel, Steve Woodcoff. Yeah. I happen to really like Steve Woodcoff. I think he's just like me. He's a great guy actually. And he's really tough and he's a good guy. If you didn't know the media, like him, trust me. But I'm just blown away by the dishonesty. Rather than say, hey, Steve, Woodcoff, like I disagree with you or whatever, he's working for Qatar. No. What? He's from like Long Island. What are you talking about? This is the higher profile. I mean, I mean, they're hoping again that Trump has learned nothing. They install the president's intelligence. These people are disgusting. They're liars. And like if there's one thing the country said too much of it's lying, let's just stop lying. Let's just be honest. I agree. I agree. We've been corroded by lies. It's completely. The country is about to collapse because of lies. And the people pushing endless war are one of the main vectors for that lying. Because there's just no reference point in reality at all. If Steve Woodcoff is an agent of the Islamic Republic, then I just give up. Do you want to mean? Yeah. Okay. Sorry. Luxural. No, no, no, no. I mean, the WCOT thing in some ways is what set the whole thing off. Right. Right. Right. Right. So it's the most reasonable moderate person in the world. No, he's not anti Israel. He's just tough. I think the WCOT thing surprised both sides though. I would note. So I think, so obviously you knew him before within recent years. Okay. So I think in general, the open source intelligence to use a lame term. I would say is that the hawks, people who want to say go all the way on Iran did not expect WCOT to be so pragmatic. And then additionally the realist and restraint camp also did not expect it did not. Although all the reporting from say Israeli media say Harats or sides of Israel, that WCOT went in there and sort of with both the incoming Trump administration and the remnants of the Biden administration force Prime Minister Netanyahu into some sort of deal, a deal that he had turned down six months ago in May of 2024, basically identical deal, that through most everybody in the loop for a loop. And that has set off as far as I can infer a climate of hysteria within Israel itself, at least among the I'm not sure sir Netanyahu himself, but at least within the factions of his cabinet that are hard line as hell. Okay. So they disagree. They've had to give a little everyone does. And he does. It did not a disagreement. I mean, like this will not stop unless there's pushback. All I'm saying is when you reach an agreement, everyone gets pinched. Okay. That's just the nature of it. And no one likes it. But like tough, that's what it is. And my read on WCOT is that he's just not super ideological. I think he's probably is real hell, you know, it wouldn't even question that. But I don't think he's an ideologue. He's a self-made real estate guy who started with like a single apartment building in Washington Heights. He's a tough human being. And I think you need someone who's practical and tough to affect a negotiation. You don't want someone who's captive to all kinds of theories. Trump says, hey, what cough? Get a peace deal or you know, get a ceasefire in an intermediate peace deal. First step toward one. And what cough's like, okay. And he just shows up and he's like, hey, you, you, you, you're like, that's what you want. I think I think a lot of Israel is surprised by this. I mean, I mean, this was lost in the absolute cacophony of 2024. Really? Like if you read, I read these really press daily. And you know, there were members of Netanyahu's coalition. So these are members of the Prime Minister Netanyahu. People who are not in his party who are more hard-lined than him. And they were saying, Trump's really talking about this endless war stuff. This might be a problem. And this was back in October and September and August. And no one was paying attention because it was Brett Summer and, you know, other things were going on. But this was coming and the fact that they got it done not even before not even during the transition itself also surprised people. And so I'm sensing inflated expectations here from this is a foreign country. Obviously in ally, close ally, the car closes to ally. I think it's for to say. But a separate country. And so, you know, I think realistic expectations would be we get some of what we want. We don't get everything we want because you don't have to charge the United States. But there's a tension here. I mean, so first, the relationship between the President of the United States and the Prime Minister of Israel is extremely unclear. Yes. I don't think maybe the only the two of them know. They have disagreed since at least 2020 over the election. But they probably disagreed beforehand over strikes in Iran. At the last time you and I spoke publicly was over the Solemnani strike in January of 2020. And there were since then reporting in the last five years has come out that the two have been disagreed over that. Trump felt that the Israelis didn't do their part, etc., etc. So for years, for at least half a decade, the well has been poisoned between Trump and Netanyahu. Doesn't mean the relationship is done. But there's been an atmosphere of mistrust. Well, he's had that. I've watched closely and interviewed him more than once. And for Netanyahu, yeah, for moving on 30 years because he's been in and out of office. And he said complicated relations with every President. Yeah. I think the key thing to understand if your listeners and anyone who's not turning this off because we're getting into the deaths of the Israeli politics here. But Netanyahu's situation is unstable. Yes. A super majority of Israelis want him out. They want him to resign. He does not want to resign because we resigns. He may go to prison. And also he's been a power, a shiver for 30 years. Yes. And I've noticed that people who do that often died quit. I think so. That's fair. Yeah. Okay. So he doesn't want to quit for both reasons of his freedom and you know, the way of his life. Yeah. Yes. Okay. So yes, not confined to be be international. Yes, it is. Okay. So how does he not quit? It's pretty clear that spectacular circumstances justify his presence is very similar actually. I mean, there are two comparisons between him and Churchill. It's actually fair. Only in wartime can someone like Netanyahu at this point get a position again. The war has to go on. So what war? So they have basically a deal of Hezbollah. I think it's not like I think that is by far the least likely that they're going to go back in there. They're basically two options. One, once all the hostages are exchanged, then they go back into Gaza. Okay. Or I guess one B is to do the West Bank, which is already going on right now. Or two, what do you mean do the West Bank and fade it and exit? I mean, there's a lot of people who live there like what happens to them? How does real is problem? What is the issue? What is the point of the operation? Ten extra terrors for it and build developments. I mean, this is this is I mean, and you know, the unstated thing is that they'll either export these people or eliminate them. And so it's pretty terrifying stuff. It's not light stuff, but this is not a light interview. And so the problem is the US is the military underwriter of this. Israelis probably can't do this without us selling them weapons. And so while Americans are tuned out and not thinking about this kind of thing, our reputation overseas is one of arms dealer and over time that affects your children. Being able to travel abroad that affects America's reputation overseas, it's dicey stuff. Well, it's close 9-11 among other things. So yeah, it has effects for sure. Yeah. Option two is Iran. Which is which is as I'll just quote them the quote the hardline perspective itself. Mm-hmm. It's the head of the snake in the conception of these really hardline and also the neo conservative right in the United States. For sure. And so Israel also can't do Iran in my view and also in general assessments without the help of the United States is usually joint US Israeli airstrikes or even a solo invasion of Iran by the United States is the ultimate sort of fantasy. I'm going to need more coffee. Sure. To proceed because you're blowing my mind. We first did a deal with Black Rifle coffee Evan the CEO sent us like a case of coffee beans and honestly I have not had any coffee since then in the past eight months. It's not made by Black Rifle. We are obsessed and it's not just coffee. They've got high performance energy drinks, tons of merch. It's very cool. It is the best and we can say that as daily obsessive users of the product. Black Rifle coffee is awesome. And by the way, Black Rifle itself is awesome. The company is filled with special forces veterans working there bringing you the best products on the market. Black rifles always been more than just about must have offerings. They're committed to supporting veterans for responders, law enforcement. Every purchase provides funding to those groups and gear. and people who are protecting us who are the heart of this country. From premium coffee rows, ready to drink cans to American gear. Every item designed to give you a sense of this country. BlackRifle Coffee. BlackRifle Coffee.com. Use the code TUCKER for 30% off on your first order or simply grab one of their items off your grocery shelves in your town. We drink it. We recommend it. It's one quick digression about Steve Wickeoff. I think it's really significant that he's not a professional foreign policy. Figure he hasn't spent a career at the State Department or doing bilaterally for his career. He's just a smart, tough, competent person who was charged with a task by the president and he got it done. And maybe we need more of that. There are certain printed statecrafts that probably have helpful to have experience in statecraft. But some of it's just pretty straightforward. Can't get a ceasefire. No, no. I think there has been anyone from the State Department who have done what Steve Wickeoff did. No, especially without the president's. But even if Trump had called someone in and been like, okay, Mr. Career diplomat, can you affect a ceasefire? It's very complicated. No, it's very complicated. No, it's a case. He's fired. Stop. No, it's a same. I mean, like the international relations has been made into, they have to make it into a pseudoscience. Exactly. Yeah. Smart. Exactly. Just like everything else. Yeah. Even education. You can't teach third grade without a master's degree. Yeah. So it's just neither the second class. When the first requirement is, do you like third graders? It's nothing to do with your master's degree. The whole thing is, it's re-absored. Yeah. And then, you know, it's the same thing of all academia, which is like people's theses are increasingly more baroque. And like nobody actually just must go to large things like the Israeli Palestinian conflict or at least know it in a way that is applicable in power and real life. And I mean, maybe things are changing now. But like also a lot of the foreign policy establishment, it's different now in the second term, but wouldn't work with the first term, wouldn't work with their team. And I think that was to discredit the country. I think that was, I think that did not serve the country. Well, of course it didn't serve the country. Well, we know the country hasn't been served because look at the country. And so I think, you know, we can say of all players, they didn't serve the country. That would include the media. And there have been times when I didn't serve the country. Like when I advocated for the Iraq war, I mean, we're all culpable to some extent. But it's just remarkable to me that people are continuing it. So now instead of telling us that Saddam has weapons of mass destruction or that Osama bin Laden attacked us for our freedoms or whatever the life that he was, the new idea is that Iran is what the head of the snake. How many Americans have been killed by Iranian proxies in the United States over the last 20 years, do you think? How many Americans in the United States? Yeah, I've been killed by Iran's sponsor, Teravas Zero. Red-run Zero. How many of the federal ODS drugs, pre-cursors come from China? Well, more than a million. More than a million. Yeah. Okay. I mean, I look, I mean, what are you talking about? Your audience back proxies that killed US troops in the Iraq war. Yeah, well, of course. But we shouldn't have done the Iraq war. Well, Iran took over Iraq because we took out Saddam Hussein's in a majority Shiite country. I happened to be there for that. And even I, as a 33 year old moron, was like, wait a second, it's just a basic interest in demographics. Isn't this going to go to Iran now? Yeah. Anyway, yes. Right. Right. But I just find it amazing that there's been no public conversation about whether or not the United States should go to war with Iran. There's been no case late out, at least in 2002, they had the decency to lie to us in a pretty complicated, sophisticated way about weapons of mass destruction. Now it's just like shut up your anti-American if you ask questions. And it feels like we're moving toward a conflict with Iran. Is that a fair? I think we have been moving towards one. And I think the basically the biggest risk of a democratic administration is a war with Russia. Yeah. And the biggest risk of a Republican administration is a war with Iran. Yes. That's why it's more ethical to be on a Republican because at least the Iranians don't have nukes yet. So that's actually pretty close to my first principle. Like just out right. We have simplified them. Yes. But the Iran war would be still like the worst and like not something that we should pursue. And look, the foreign policy experts at this point will chime in on this conversation being like, oh, well, that's just so unrealistic. That's not what we want. This is actually this particular externality. But I think it is worth noting that we have done wars, top-point governments throughout the region over the last 25 years. So number one, it's happened very recently. Number two, it is kind of the explicit goal of the hardliners. And the hardliners keep moving the over to window in their direction. And so while this is perhaps not a hundred percent certain, hardly, there is a hard drive towards doing this and picking off Pentagon deputies and allowing leaders like Trump advance to be surrounded by hawks and no dissenting voices whatsoever is absolutely essential towards any road to war. And I have to say the amount of calculated deception on the right. So all of a sudden, Barry Weiss, who's a leftist, becomes a conservative because she's against training isn't or something. Every normal person is against that. But it's pretty obvious that the whole purpose of her organization, the free press and her career in journalism is to kind of soften up the right for worth a run and to attack anybody. And it's a whole constellation of people or Neil Ferguson and all these kind of people who had weight to the project, but who really are all kind of paid to flack for war with a run and attack anyone who's not with the program. I felt the sting of this. So I didn't really understand how this worked, but then, you know, someone with like thoroughly moderate foreign policy views or only won't war with anybody. I'm not against anybody. And all of a sudden you're like, wow, you know, people calling you anti-American. Well, there's precedent for this. So we were just, I don't know. I don't know any of the people you described personally. But interestingly, there was, you said the problem with voting Republican is you're more likely to wind up with a war with a run. And I agree with you. I'd much rather have a worth a run than a war with Russia. But kind of don't want either one. And it's just interesting how the groundwork, I just know because I've been in conservative media my whole life, also know these new people and you're like, oh, very wise, so you're really conservative? Well, not at all. Then what are you doing here? Oh, you're trying to convince me that I'm not allowed to oppose a war with a run or I'm going to be written out of the conservative movement or something. OK, so a lot of people are comparing Trump to Reagan these days. And I think it is an inaccurate comparison. But there obviously are comparisons that are very different human beings to be in my position. So if you accept that Trump is the biggest cheese since Reagan on the Republican side, what happened in the Reagan years? So the new conservatives, that is, people who came from the left and moved to the right were very, very savvy, effective and reasonable at domestic policy. They were very, very good on the crime issues of the, of the ice and their periodic periodicals got gained currency because, hey, actually we should clean up the streets of New York, et cetera, et cetera. And some of them were, I knew a lot of them and some of them were really smart, decent people. because hey, actually we should clean up the streets of New York, etc., etc., etc. And so I knew a lot of them and some of them were really smart, decent people too. And by the way, some of their foreign policyers were not crazy at all. They were, they recognized the Soviet Union was evil. Like the first generation of neo-cons, mid-sector, I mean, I kind of love mid-sector. I don't know. You don't even mean, I don't think that they were all nuts at all. Yeah. But by the 90s and 2000s, if you believed in some crime enforcement in New York, you also had to believe towards the March, towards regime change in Iraq. And so again, again, don't want to sound- I'm skipping that part of the buffet line. Yeah. I will take the safe city and the thriving economy. I'm going to leave out the forever war. Is that okay? But I think it is the essential pitch of this new generation of neo-conservities. Which of course, it does not call itself that. But it is moderation on the social issues. Let's turn down the volume. Yeah. And at the same time, over here in the column space over here, a little, a little news item about what's going on in the red sea and why the US needs to care. And it's a drip, drip, drip, drip, drip, drip. And it can go on for months, in years and years and years. And all of a sudden, we super care about the Houthis and Yemen. We super care about Iran. And we have to underwrite a war in Israel until every single member from us is dead. And it's just not clear that the US international interest is there to put it lightly. Yeah. And I guess what I object to is, I mean, I'm never offended by people with different ideas. Because I'm never offended by someone who makes this sincere case, affirmative case, or something that I disagree with. Okay. And by the way, maybe he's right and I'm wrong. I've certainly been wrong a lot. The part where I get enraged is the bad faith. Yeah. And so you ask questions like, well, is this an or interest? Well, you hate so and so. I don't hate anybody. And I certainly don't hate that. Certainly don't hate that country. I like it a lot actually. But there's no room for it. They don't they're preventing discussion. Yeah. And a lot of these people have the gall to describe themselves as warriors for free speech. One of course free speech is the last thing they want. And they've gone out of their way to prevent any kind of open conversation about the most important topics in our collective life. So I'm just I'm just bothered by the lying. There's too much lying. Don't you think? I would say, and by the way, I'll even go far farther and say having worked for Bill Crystal for five and a half years in Crystal, the editor the weekly standard that was was the absolute launching point magazine of the Iraq war. For sure. And I was there. I mean, I started the very first day of the weekly standard August 1st, 1995. 30 years ago. And I thought Bill Crystal, I still would say it was a great boss. You know, interesting fun to talk to funny as hell. Obviously, I think he's taken a really dark turn in his life has been kind of a disaster and I feel bad for him. But one thing I'll say about Bill Crystal's circa, you know, 2000 is that he would make an actual case for his views. He would say, we have to go in and take out Saddam for the following eight reasons. He would write, you say this is 95 96 97. I mean, I was there for all of that. And I wasn't paying super close attention because I was dumb. And I was focused on other things. And I was like, Oh, yeah, it's his foreign policy hobby horse. You know, into that stuff. I'm not that into it. I don't understand the stakes. I didn't really say anything actually, but I was like a kid, but I always admired and still admire his willingness and that generations willingness to make their case to write some paper. Here's what we're for. That is gone. And now it's just like, can we censor the people? Can we call them names to the point where they get kicked off social media? So there's no kind of argument. Well, even Crystal himself is stopped writing. Well, he could never write back. Not a genius, I will say, but you know, an affable amusing person in meetings, you know, I mean, I mean, probably the most successful political organizer of the last 20 30. Yeah, an entire list, you know, and there are good things to be said about Bill Crystal, obviously, I'm just calling me a Nazi like a hundred times. But that's kind of the point. I'm not a Nazi. I just don't. I've got different views. And that's the turn that I'm really bothered by. Yeah. It's just the pure ad hominem attempts. It's an attempt at censorship. Yeah. And, and very wise engages in that like relentlessly behind the scenes using all kinds of proxies, some of whom I know. And I just want to say it out loud. I just want to say that this is deception here. Okay. So I hope people know that. I think it makes it impossible for the new president to do what he's promised to do if he doesn't solve this conundrum. Well, tell me what you mean. So, I mean, if the president wants to send troops to the US border in the Trump and the president wants to rebuild the American economy. And the president wants to focus on China. Yes. And the president wants the moral credibility to end the rush of Ukraine war at some point. Yes. Expanding the war in the Middle East, even with prolonged arms sales, corrodes his political capital. Who's going to be for that? The United States. No, but I mean, literally you're operating in the red to two trillions of dollars. Like how are you? Yeah. What world can we afford that? Well, it's a very complex top. We don't have any which in community hospitals left. We have the reserve currency. And we can keep writing debt until it causes an inflation crisis, which a lot of people thought would happen earlier and did not. And even our inflation crisis in the 2020s was mild by global standards. So, accordingly, we've got plenty of room for the big enchilada, which is an aran war. Yeah. So this it just feels like a big deal. It's a big deal to me. And it feels like it's worth, I mean, it certainly if you comment on this, you do ask yourself, is it really worth it? And do I want to get into this? By the way, a lot of people I really like and I'm friends with violently disagree. So you run the risk, which I really don't want of rupturing friendships over it. It's the last thing I want ever. And you think, maybe I just be quiet, but it does seem like that's a huge step. And at the very least, the public ought to understand that there are highly motivated people pushing us toward that. Do you think that we will participate in a military action against Iran? Well, the big question is right now. So there's a new Iranian president. So the previous Iranian president died along with his foreign minister and helicopter accident over the summer. Little mysterious. Are you going to use air quotes around an accident? I mean, a lot of things happened last year. It's very possible. I mean, I don't think everyone got killed here. So many accidents. The Iranians, the Iranians, equipment, helicopter it's time to understand he is old. And it is a rough part of the world. And it's possible that it's likely that it just went down. And again, I would say I would not fly in a helicopter with Iranian officials. I'm just telling you that. Yeah. And again, if you think it was Israel, these Israelis not pretty pretty much took credit where didn't deny all the other assassinations that occurred last year. You know, you're being of a Moss leadership, etc, etc. Just for the record, I try to suspend judgment because I know a lot about what countries do. And I do think this one thing I'll say in support of Israel. I do think that it is, you know, it isn't fair to just single out Israel and say they're doing naughty stuff like lots of people are doing naughty stuff. That's just a fact. My only, you know, the only point where I would feel like I want to say something is if the United States gets sucked into it. That now now we're talking about our interest, my country, or my families from. And I think it's fair to speak up then. Yeah. So I guess maybe the 2025 zoom out, you would say there was an election in Iran right afterwards. Yes. A lot of people disagree with our perspective. We'll disagree with this term. But the more moderate candidate, people think there are no moderates within the regime. But the less hardcore candidate one, yes, the first time this has happened since Trump left the Iran deal. And this person, it is not clear how much power he has within the system. The Supreme Leader is old. It's not clear how old. And there will be a succession crisis to succeed the Supreme Leader should he die. Yeah. So it is this weird situation where every time Iran is in a crisis and their crisis right now, their electricity crisis by all reporting. Again, don't know if we can trust all the reporting, but there can't keep the lights on a Tehran fully. And what will they do? And so every time Iran is at a decision point, there is a focus between what I will call the moderates and the hardliners within their government, the hardliners want to go for the bomb. They think we can't trust anybody. We need to get the bomb. They also recently side a defense pact, just short of mutual defense pact, but a security arrangement with the Russians. So they seem to have a bunker mentality right now. If U.S. intelligence or Israeli intelligence or Western intelligence assesses that they are going for the bomb in a real way. So they can either chew or false, but if they assess it, then there will be severe pressure on the new administration to do airstrikes on Iran. I get it. I don't want to run to get the bomb. I don't want to get the bomb. I'm against the bomb. But I was around when Pakistan got the bomb. And Pakistan is a country with a lot of wonderful people in it, kind of a great country in a lot of ways. I've spent from a time there. However, the government in Pakistan is arguably scary than Iran. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. Harbor to some have been lot in etc. ISI has been, you know, really a source of disorder in South Asia for a long time. And they've exported nuclear technology, including to North Korea. So no one's ever said anything about that. Like it's not a crisis that the Islamic Republic of Pakistan has the bomb. I don't really get it. I mean, why was that not a crisis? Why do we do nothing to do nothing to stop that? I guess it occurred basically when the US was still quays. I pro Pakistan over India. And it was that was a bad bet, by the way. It was an exonian bet. Actually, he really he really didn't like and dear Agadi. It was basically well, you basically it was like we can say longitudinally that was a bad bet. He just didn't like one person and it didn't really. I don't know. That was like betting on wing computers over Apple. Like it's kind of didn't turn out. Yeah. Sorry. I'm not holding a wing in my. So, but the point is, Derek, my want to cut that. This would be a bit of a set. So keep in the wagon. Look, I fit all I'm sorry. Father sold wing computers. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yeah. Personal. No, no, no. No, no. It's just at one point the top sales of the country of wing computers. Your father sold some wings. Yes. Is this actually going? Oh, it's actually going. All right. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yeah. All right. Peace is going. It was five years ago this month that people started to drop dead in the central Chinese city of Wuhan five years since the beginning of COVID. And yet for some reason, we still don't know answers to the most basic questions. And one man knows those answers. His name is Dr. Tony Fauci. And now a documentary filmmaker called Jenner first is out with a new film explaining exactly what happened. The film is called Thank You, Dr. Fauci. We'll see it exclusively here on TCN. Look, all I'm saying is it's important to maybe dial back a little bit on the moral outrage and assess the world as it is, assess what you can do. You know, create a hierarchy of priorities. Like we don't want other countries to get new to weapons. I think that's I'm with the neo-cons 100% on that. But you know, in a complicated world that we don't actually control. Right. What, you know, what can we do? What are the limits of our power given a lot of other factors like our domestic or economy that needs of our people like you can't do everything. That's all I'm saying. Yeah. No, I mean, I so I think Trump should complete the work of his first term, which is he revoked the JCPOA the bomber on deal. Right. And he should do a Trump around deal. There's sending WIC off over to do that. Yeah. So WIC off the aforementioned not only did what he did with the Israelis, he was promoted for it per reporting. He's not been confirmed to my understanding by the transition or the White House. But per the FT and I believe another outlet, WIC off is getting quote the Iran file within the Trump universe. That's as much power as the president wants to give it. But as of filming, his role is expanding. And if Trump wants a lasting legacy, a piece of prosperity, there needs to be an accommodation with the fact of government of Iran. So if, of course, there does, this is just in this is totally insane. It's counter-tour interest, I guess is what it would say. Yes. If you were Trump and you say to see WIC off, hey, see WIC off, go get a, you know, cease fire in place. And he comes back like 20 minutes later with the cease fire. Wouldn't you say, okay, we like that pace. That pays. Wouldn't you send him to Iran? I would. Yes. Yes. Yeah. I mean, I think I, yeah. I mean, I mean, I mean, and this is actually something both Trump and Obama who apparently get along now, at least profoundly agreed on is that. both just like Michelle. I think. So they remember Obama on the debate, stage 108, said, and he was, he was used how down for this, whatever you think of Barack Obama, said we should meet with the Iranian leaders face to face and Trump did similar maneuvers. Yeah. Well, first term. Why would you have Kim Jong-un, etc., etc. And again, we sucking up dictators. Oh, shut. I mean, I mean, it was North Korea policy more stable from 2017 to 2021 or 2021 to 2025. I don't think that for 25 years of this nonsense, killing dictators and watching their countries become more chaotic and more dangerous to the United States and the world, that we have any obligation to listen to people who chirp like that. No, no, shut up to link it all anything actually. It's some of the, so we started this conversation with, you know, sort of the campaign against the cadres that are now serving very hex-eth. The people that are leading it as far as I can infer are oftentimes many of the people that were behind the original rock war. And so, well, yeah. Yeah. So this may seem obvious. Well, I'm 55. So this is driving me completely insane. I thought after we discovered that the pretext of the war was a lie, that those people would, I don't know, Don Ash's, I think that Zach cloth and go like sit on a pillar for 10 years. I think a lot of Americans assumed that they did. So we do this for a little bit. They didn't. They went on the World Bank and they still run the State Department and Toria Nulan, who was an architect of the Iraq war was an architect of the Ukraine war, like this it just doesn't end. But most Americans have real jobs and don't know this. And so these people are disguised or shrouded from public view. And they are still quite effective at driving home an agenda. In fact, I would assume they will win absent pushback. And oh, they'll definitely win ups and pushback 100%. Yeah. So they are still I want an interview. Yeah, they're still hegemonic. And even if they're a minority government, so to speak. Yeah. And I'm put, because I spent my life in the media. I'm very kind of fixated on their enablers, their agents in the American news media. And one of them who's working has been working for years on their behalf on behalf of permanent Washington, the foreign policy establishment. Every bad idea is Jennifer Griffin at Fox, the Pentagon reporter who is now, you know, basically texting. Do you know, is that the Michael Domino? Yeah, is, you know, running around on behalf of, you know, her sources that depending on doing their bidding trying to torpedo these guys, because permanent staff doesn't want to be challenged on anything. And okay, you know, there's a role for that kind of behavior. It's called lobbying. But it's a little crazy that like a supposed news reporter would be acting like that. I'm not guessing this is a fact. She's doing that right now. And it has been doing that kind of thing for as long as I've been paying attention like a couple of decades. How does that continue? Yeah, I don't know, personally, but what I would say, though the role of most Pentagon reporters has always struck me since I've done this as extremely hierarchical. I mean, what do you mean by her? It almost felt like the reporters worked for the Pentagon. Well, of course they. Yeah. So I mean, in any place that I've worked that had a Pentagon responded and that was the only way you stayed in the room. And isn't this a democracy where we have civilian command of the armed forces and the entire federal government works for the population of the country. It's voters. It's citizens. It's constituents. Shareholders. No. There's no sense of that whatsoever in Washington at all. Yeah. It's like, what are you doing here? I think it's fast moving. I mean, you didn't see criticisms or skepticism of the military from the right until the very last few years, including from the new president, including from organs of conservative media. I think it started with with Mark Millie, but also all the sort of some of us were out of the force. Right. I know. But in public, it was considered a fringe position. It's not fringe. Yeah. You know, I just refer you back to the pivot point in American politics in my lifetime, which was the 2016 debate in Greenville, South Carolina, where Donald Trump, home of the highest percentage of military veterans of any state, famously, and Donald Trump came out against the Iraq war in all the dumbos at the channel I work for in Washington. Like, oh, he's lost it now. We'll never get the nomination. He's offended all the veterans. And of course, all the guys whose lives were destroyed fighting these wars, not on behalf of the United States, not to the benefit of the United States. They were filled with many emotions, frustration, shame, rage, sadness, and they immediately knew what he was talking about. And no one in DC knew that he opened my form of his polling. So like, he was in the whole he was pulling it a certain he was he was ahead. And the Bush family came in that that's when they it was it was the last stand for for Mr. Jeb in February of 2016. And George W. Bush campaigned finally for a jab. And it was like, we got to keep in the race. We're going to make our stand. And he did the big fat mistake. That is Iraq debate. And I think Trump was up 10 or 15. I think he won by over 20 in that debate. Don't we know that? But it was it was it was it was something like that. He was right before the primary it was over the polling. So like, not only did he not go down. And still one, he went up and then clearly try out. That was the moment when I was just, you know, whatever his flaws I was for Trump because here was a guy telling a real truth, a hard truth that no one wanted him to tell. And was rewarded for it. And I just felt like that was that's consistent with my principles and beliefs, which is you ought to tell the truth in a healthy country or words people who tell the truth, not people who lie. There's a cynical bet, though, I would say that. And it's a cynical bet on Trump. And it's a cynical bet on Americans. And it's a cynical bet on Republicans and independence, which is I'll just I'll just let's use the actual language of Senator Left or left wing media. It's a cult. And once the cult leader leaves, we can just go back to 2005 and implant the same old free trade open borders, maybe endless neo conservatism. And actually the people that are driving the opposition to these selections and the Pentagon agree with President Trump's critics, in spirit and in practice. You know, that's an interesting analysis. I mean, it's like MSNBC level dumb person analysis, but there's also like a real analysis. And there is a sense in which devotion to Trump has a religious quality to it. And that's undeniable. I was just in DC for the inauguration. I can confirm that. And there are a lot of reasons for that. I think a lot of voters feel like Trump is the only person who cares about them. He's their only option. And so they're on board regardless because we're also they're going. And I think I think it's true A and B. I think that's a reflection of like how badly the leadership of the country has failed. People will take anything other than that. But I also think saying true things out loud changes history. I think that's the lesson of history. The only people who actually change history are not the ones who marshal the biggest armies, but the ones who speak the truth out loud. I think it's a holy act. I think it's a transformative act. And all of history is the story of that act actually. And sometimes it, you know, it takes centuries for the consequences to unfold, but they do. It's inevitable. It changes everything. Once you that's why there's such a almost a crazed attempt to shut down people from speaking, why speaking, they don't care about violence. They care about talking because they understand correctly that that's what matters over time. Right? So once Trump has said all this stuff, there's kind of no going back. No. Do you think, I mean, that's my view. I don't know. I don't agree with the cynical bet. I think it's a bad bet, which is why the tactics are increasingly hysterical. It's even more enlargional. But we're robbed of like a real debate. I mean, I don't know. You know, if it's if you think it's so important to kill the leaders of Iran and get into a full scale war with a real country, which Iran is, which is part of a real coalition, they won't say full scale. They'll say they'll say that the the the Ayatollah has to go. It's very important to use as scary words as possible. Ayatollah, the MoLoz, the Islamic Republic, emphasize, you know, and again, like, basically the bin Laden who's dead runs a country, even though these different ethnicity and a different religion. And so it doesn't really matter you're stupid. And we need to do this again. And like, they won't say an invasion. But again, some of the people pushing this stuff didn't say an invasion in 1996. They they they they laid that they saw something around for debate on it. I guess that's the there wasn't a debate. I mean, it's a little harder here too because on the question of Russia, it's been surprisingly effective for them to just dismiss all criticism as sponsored by Putin. Like you don't think it's a good idea to prop up speed is very important. This lens, he government, you're a Putin puppet or whatever. You want someone to do something? Can you really call like a white American Christian guy a puppet of the MoLoz problem? I don't think that works, right? Does it? The guess or try it was Steve what cough? You're a tool of cutter. Okay. So she, I don't think is a rhetorical matter. It's quite as easy to address the actual allegation. So I mean, so we're caught if I believe took his real estate firm took some sort of investment from Qatar. And so first of all, I would say throughout the Trump entourage, a lot of them have worked with Gulf States. And as far as I'm in tell, the real estate business is rife with investments from Gulf States. And then additionally, as far as I'm aware, this is hardly that man's. Well, it's domestic. I mean, you can't buy an apartment in New York because there's so much Chinese money in the residential real estate market. So like, okay, so the argument is what? You're only allowed to invest in your own company's countries real estate. Okay. Let's start here. Let's ban foreign investment in our real estate markets. Oh, no. That's anti capital. It's just the whole thing doesn't make sense. What are they saying? What? I mean, with the Qatar argument specifically, I mean, I think it's an unusual place. It was supposed to be the eighth emerald. So it's separate from the UAE. It is the most conservative of those emeralds, I would say, at least in terms of the government. They have a perspective. They spend money on media. They spend money on press junkets. They have an influence operation. No question. But the idea that the small jetting, you know, LNG dependent, you know, peninsula controls US foreign policy, hook line and sinker, top the bottom. If you think that I don't think you're extremely curious. It's worth having an honest, I've never seen one. There's never has been one, but an honest conversation about foreign influence on American policy. That's a totally legitimate topic. And, you know, we've kind of done a lot of lying and pretending, for example, that Russia has like undue influence over American foreign buzzers. It's absurd. But, but why not have that conversation? Are there, are there foreign countries that exert influence on American policy? Who's interests supersede those of American citizens when, you know, the minds of policy makers and, you know, they're not the same with those? How would we rank Qatar, you know, in terms of its influence? Maybe, maybe not in the top three. Yeah. I know. Right. So just having lived in DC, this whole conversation is like so infuriatingly false and just silly. I mean, are they running into operations against us? There's a lot of cotar surveillance in Washington. A lot of cotar agents running around the Willard Hotel. I don't think so. Maybe. Very well disguised. Like, what are you talking? I mean, the archive is doing that. Are they hacking the Pentagon's mainframes? I don't think, oh, China's doing that. Yeah. Right. Okay. So yeah. But I mean, but making the allegation though is a kind of armor. Though it makes you seem informed. It makes you seem like a sort of a spy master. You know, like, I know something you don't. I'm more serious. I wrote on quote reviews. Yeah. Yeah. Like, like, let's not have a conversation. And it's very anti-democratic small D. It is it is not a green disagree. It is not saying we have different values and shaking each other hand, walking out of the room. It is, it is shutting down the spirit of the system. Well, so that's exactly the complaint that I have. And that's the problem that I have with Barry Weiss. It's a problem I have with Chen Griffin. It's the problem I have with Washington Post. And just so much of the media coverage of foreign policy is based on insinuation and like the cruelest character destroying insinuations that you're not loyal to your own country. Yeah. And I'm sure that the biggest thing. Oh, man, they go right for the face. And I just think that that's beneath a great nation like ours. I think it's beneath any decent person to behave like you have evidence that someone's selling out of his country, tell me what it is. But to start with that, to accuse Steve Wicoff of being a tool of cutter, it's like so over the top. I just feel like it's important to call out to people doing it and say, you're disgusting. We're not listening to you anymore. You have no influence except that that you project through aggression and threats. And like we're not, we're not playing along. I think a lot of it is effective in Republican politics because, you know, so you were there for the inauguration. I observed a week ago. And I've always observed that is usually when I meet someone from a red state, a red state, Oklahoma, Alabama, it's often the first time in Washington, DC. It's very like Roman province visiting Rome for the first totally. And I'm out from Gaul. Yeah. Show me around. Yeah. And versus, I would say, Blue State America actually has a lot of the coasts have a lot more familiarity of DC back and forth. Not before that. So when they hear the argument going on in the Capitol, there's actually a de facto trust. There that might be not as much there on the Democratic side. There's actually more jaundice cynicism of the Democratic side. So it was less effective. They assume that the, it's spider doll, but all of the failures that you've announced that you've reported on fairly tirelessly. They assume that the people in DC know what they're doing. And I'm not sure that's the greatest default assumption. Well, I mean, I think the track Especially they assume that the people in DC know what they're doing. And I'm not sure that's the greatest default assumption. Well, I mean, I think the track record is pretty. Space conclusively. I mean, look, I respectfully to present. I mean, Donald Trump again is the only US president who was not a general or a former statewide official or federal official. Right. So get the presidency. And with all due respect to the new president, healthy country doesn't elect something like that. It had that level of outsider. So, right. That level of outsider could only exist within a polity that was deeply sick. And I think he knows that. I think he recognizes that. And the fact that the capital doesn't imbibe that lesson. I think they're biving a little bit more, but it's like, I mean, it's still a big deal. But this is hard. 10 years on. I mean, Trump, June 2015, so we'd June this year. 10 years of Trump longer than Obama at this point. The Trump era in spirit. I mean, length. It's like, well, maybe there's some wrong with this country, but it's like a 5% recognition. It's not a 95%. I think Nash, I mean, first of all, agree completely. And I wrote a piece at the very beginning of this whole saga almost down here. Trump is shocking, vulgar, right. Yeah. He's winning because you failed. I'm simple. You know, obvious. Anyway, I don't think DC gets it. But I also think at this point, Trump is the most powerful president. Certainly since Roosevelt, interesting. And the potential for, you know, achieving his promises is really high. America has greater problems than it's had since the Great Depression, maybe even bigger than it had then. And we have a chance to address them. Probably not solve all of them, but make some headway on things that could help Americans, sealing the border, stopping the chaos, just taking a breather so we can figure out how to fix the country. And the only thing that could derail that is in, is another form. We can't do it with this stuff. It is an actual choice. It's an actual choice. We cannot do the border if we do the Middle East. So you had what 200,000 people you're dying of drug O.D.'s and no one said anything about it. And endless lectures about Ukraine. And it's no disrespect to the Ukrainians who I really feel sorry for. But like that's so unbelievable that that happened. It's like a bad dream. And now we've woken up from the dream and we have this chance. And I'm sorry. I just, you know, with respect to Barry Weis and Jen Griffin, you can't do that to us again. I just not going to not going to go without a fight this time. We have to reorient toward our own interests. That's no disrespect to any other country to our allies who we as well and will help us extend we can. But like the idea that we're responsible for all these other countries, when we're dying here, no, Moss, is that, is that a radical position? That's my actual position in my heart. That's my actual position. I agree. But it's it's it's very upsetting not only to leaders of some foreign countries. And this is not just the Middle East that we didn't even talk about Russia, Ukraine. But like, I mean, that perspective is obviously very, very relevant for extricating the United States out of the Russia, Ukraine war. And almost every European capital is unhappy with that. And you know, you can have a conversation with a nice Danish person and you might agree on immigration or trade or wine. But you mentioned like, hey, really sure the United States should be underwriting a quat of my or a new crane and like the conversation shuts down. It is stunning. Well, they're hell bent on suicide. The Western Europeans and not these European or central Europeans, but the Western Europeans are, are you have decided to kill themselves? And it's it's almost like if someone's standing on a bridge or in a window of a skyscraper and you're trying to talk them back in it. It's hard. And who knows why that happens? I think there's a supernatural element at work. It's my personal view. But whatever you think the cause is, that's what it is. You just wrote, you blow up Nordstrom destroy the German economy and you're not allowed to say anything about it in Germany. I don't know that we can help you at that point. Um, you know what I mean? Like if you're that intent on self harm, that anxious to destroy your own civilization, make it impossible for your children to live there, then you're killing yourself. You can't help someone just want to help himself. Like go ahead and jump then. That kind of that's how I feel. But just from an American perspective, like all of this has been bad for us, there's no way to pretend otherwise except to launch into some airy moral lecture about dictatorships and Winston Churchill and Neville Chamberlain or such is shut up. Okay. The Churchill thing is really played out. It's played out. I mean, it's played out. And there's a there's a there's a gamble that some of this stuff isn't played out, though. I mean, there's a there's a gamble that that this, I mean, I think people have have this country has a generational problem, right? Generations don't get along. Um, I think that's very good reason. Yeah. And I think there's just a bet that a lot of the voters that made the decisions in the 19 2000s. Um, are dumb and don't care about their kids' feature and we'll vote for the exact same thing. Clearly, you don't. Yeah. Sorry. And we'll exert pressure on the new administration to do the same thing. And, uh, I think there's a bet that the the the president is a desperate cynical man who will do whatever it takes. Uh, when he's pressured. Um, and I think the early evidence is that it's untrue. I mean, I don't I mean, yeah, the, the, the, the, uh, the evidence is the Trump is less cynical than even a supporter study was. I, I think that's the truth. I mean, there's there's the, uh, do you want to discuss the, uh, Pompeo, Brian Hook, uh, stuff? I would. I was just reading the, um, the very way I said a tutorial about how pulling pump hails, what did she say? I didn't read it. It's outrageous. It's a betrayal of Trump's promises. Like this is that with a free press. Are you? Yeah. That you can't, you're not allowed. You are required to pay for Mike Pompeo's security detail. And I will just say point blank is someone who was faced greater physical threats than Mike Pompeo. I can promise you that. I, you know, if I have security, I pay for it myself. Like, wow, why does pump Mike Pompeo is a private citizen? Can you stick me with the bill for his security detail? Like, how does that work? Barrywise. And the point is that Mike Pompeo is a faithful servant of the kind of ideas that she is here to push on the rest of us. And therefore he will be defended at all costs. But, but like let's just be honest, but what's going on? Anyway, sorry. Yeah. Well, I mean, details roll off the government doesn't usually advertise it. Everyone's got a detail to fouchy as a detail. Yeah. Yeah. Because he's in my dog park in Washington. I hear about it. I think the interesting thing. So it's very easy to just glaze over Trump fighting with officials. blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. You know, sort of the, the, the, the, the, the, or example of this is Trump versus Bolton. And we can talk about that and it's fun, but it's kind of over, right? Bolton's not in the mix. And release of Trump and like, but he still got bits of egg in his must actually I don't have his cell anymore. So I can't tell him, but he needs to fix that. Yeah. I so, um, Pompeo and Hook, um, I mean, look, it tells you they are. Yeah. So like Pompeo was the former secretary of state former CIA director, former Kansas congressman, former West Point valeditorian. Um, Harvard graduate, Harvard law graduate, was a big user. One can try. I'm just making a difference. The whole CV here. Yeah. Right. So, um, and he was, I'm so bitchee. I'm so sorry. I said that. No, it's that it's beneath me. I should have said that. The, the Bolton Trump feud is old. The, the disagreement with Pompeo is potentially quite new. And so, uh, by all available information, uh, Pompeo was in the mix, uh, for secretary of defense, most likely, um, in the days after the election, so much so that his son Donald Trump Jr intervened in sort of online campaign. Uh, and, uh, you know, other allies within that, uh, me, Lou, uh, stopped, uh, both Pompeo and the former UN ambassador to South Carolina and governor Nikki Haley for getting administration posts. I, I heard about that. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, Pompeo, um, patriotic America. And so, um, the Republicans rallied as they did in Boston in the 18th century. Still act on behalf of their nation at some personal risk, but they did it anyway. Um, unsung heroes. One of Pompeo's former deputies, Brian Hook, who, uh, ran something called the Iran study group and they had various other portfolios and titles at the State Department. He's actually someone Pompeo inherited from Rex Tillerson. His predecessor, he kept him on. Um, um, uh, Brian Hook at, uh, various points throughout the transition in the last hundred days. Um, was reported to be running the State Department's transition at some point. Then was rumored. Again, rumors, I don't, I don't, I don't post about it. I don't tweet it out. I don't write about it, but it was rumored to have been fired. Very unclear. Uh, Trump, uh, in the days leading up to him taking the Oval Office, uh, both, uh, issued essentially, uh, an enormous denunciation of Fox law against Mr. Hook, extraordinary to say not only like is this guy not in the mix. Hey, and, uh, he said that. So that, that occurred. Um, and then additionally, uh, both Hook and Pompeo's security detail was removed in the last few days. I don't know that Brian Hook is serving government in four years. Why would he definitely has not shared security detail paid for by taxpayers? Not an expert on who gets secret service. But can I just want to say, actually, I can, I can actually directly answer that. Yeah. So the, the key thing here is that there is an allegation, a belief, many intelligence community believes this, uh, that there were serious credible plans by the Iranians to assassinate members of the Trump high command. As it were. Yeah. So Trump, hook, John Bolton, et cetera, et cetera, in revenge, principally for the Soleimani. Cause that's getting a lot of terror attacks in the United States. You've noticed. Oh, no. You know, that was intense. And so, right. And so that is the essential that is the causes. I'm just going to have to scoff at all of the I've heard of the causes. Valley forces. So all the time. I think the key thing here is the critique on Trump always was he fired Bolton, but he didn't really understand why. So he just he, he, he's sour on the guy, but he didn't change any like policy. Uh, you know, he didn't learn this, this, this, this is the sort of, um, pedantic way of looking at the president. Um, but with the hook and Pompeo, uh, um, removal from his inner circle, uh, there is, I think very credible evidence that, uh, Trump's personal grudges are now blending quite heavily with policy. He doesn't trust the Iran hawk old guard. A lot of the Iran hawk old guard think tanks struck out in getting, uh, transition officials and officials in this government. And again, circleed around this very unlikely Pentagon. Helmed by a guy who has changed his life. It appears in pretty severe ways over the last five years, both ideologically and morally is this very new Pentagon that is now, uh, being targeted, uh, by all the usual suspects. And it is the biggest story in American politics that people are talking about. So if I could sum up what I think you're saying, it is that Donald Trump may have actually broken the grip of the neo cons on Washington. I mean, you control the Pentagon. You control the military. I mean, it's, it's, it's, I mean, it's the big. It just seems like this is because there was always this question about Trump, like you, you get up and you give these speeches where you say, we don't want more pointless wars. I believe in these through strength. It's not a wasst, it's not Jimmy Carter, but like, you know, you assert American power, but you don't embroider the country and worse that you can't win for no reason. It's a very moderate, sensible comment since I would say view. So you say those things, but then you hire Jumbleton. And the question is why and Trump would say, I've heard him say, well, I heard Bolt, I beg your pardon. I heard Bolton because he's a lunatic and he's a warmonger freak. He's obviously like watching war porn late at night and people can smell that on him. And so when he goes into a negotiation, he scares the crap out of everybody. And then I show up, you know, he's the heavy and I got he's the backup. I mean, I've heard Trump say that and I didn't know if I believe that or not, but I was trying to think that I should have just believed him because it sounds like Trump's actual instincts are what he says they are. Yeah. I mean, the Bolton firing itself is again, it's history, but it's it's circled around an issue of policy. So I remember. Yeah. So I mean, Trump had invited the the Taliban, which was then the outlaw, uh, not government of Afghanistan, as it is today, um, to Camp David on 911, which is I mean, did just Trump invited the Taliban to camp, it did. He literally did that. I mean, I know I'm just reporting the facts here. So, so, but it's a great sense. So Donald Trump invited the Taliban. So tonight who's coming for dinner tonight at Camp David or the Taliban will be here. Bolton Bolton was wiped out before this meeting never happened, but it was the instigating incident for the final breakdown of their relationship. Do you think it's important to just recognize the inherent hilarity of a lot of the, you know, just it is to being grave and, you know, historically significant. It's very. It is funny. A lot of the stuff is funny. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, so under your, your, your very restrained and business like in precise as a reporter should be as an is a, is a story of like real change. Yeah. Finally, we actually appear to be getting to like a form policy that puts America close to the center of the, of the action. Yeah. Is that, is that what you're seeing? No. I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, if he sees this through, this is, this is the biggest presidency. Certainly since Reagan, you alluded to FDR. Uh, I mean, it is moving the ship of state. Um, and people are going to try to stop him from doing it. Yes. They're not, they're not going to, they're not going to say that he's bad though. They're good. They're going to go after any rate. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I just want to counter signal by saying, I think what you're saying is true. I think it's real. And I've never admired Trump Moore. I don't, I don't think I'm going to ask you from the Trump question, but this is like, the, America really needs this. It's super important. But all it's just, it's, you know, you're adjusting expectations for what we can achieve. The reason that I started covering war and foreign policy principally is that, uh, the reality is that US domestic policy is some harass is impossible to get any done. Exactly. Uh, Obama tried to do healthcare plan. They did six years and they couldn't even have the website working. You know, the country is hard to govern. Yeah. But externally, the president is imperial. He's God. Yeah. Most, quite literally the most powerful person on earth. And, uh, if you want to burn us a legacy real quick, you do big things and foreign policy. Well, that's what shocking. That's what all the Republican centers have figured out. You're just surprising thing. You're John McCain, like you're, you know, whatever. You've got a lot of problems in your personal and public life, but you can bomb around Eastern Europe and get treated like an emperor. Right. And feel like you're doing something, you're, you know, Jim Rich or Mike Rounds or some like US Senator, nobody's ever heard of even in his home state. But when you travel to Romania, the tour in NATO based people like, Oh, you know, Senator Richard's here. It's like the former list chair. Yeah. So right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And they. So that's, that's a big, that's a big motivator for our lawmakers, isn't it? Sure. Sure. Yeah. I mean, you go to Idaho Falls and no one's like, oh, I can't believe you're here. But, you know, we're sharing. It's your marriage. Rich. It's like such an absurd. Oh, it's anyway, excuse me. Um, interesting. So and I interrupted you because I can't control myself. I zero self control. And go on the topic of pizza or neocons and I'm just out of control. Um, tell me your analysis of Trump canceling the security details for Brian Hook and Mike Pompeo. Well, he seems to have the authentic, um, view that these people can afford it, especially especially with Fauci, um, especially with Bolton. He's specifically flagged them. Yeah. Um, and Pompeo, like, who's now running around being like, I'm actually a business man. He's on a board of a Ukrainian company as well. Uh, and well, he's on, I think more than one board, but he certainly running around, including with people I know saying, I'm a really kind of a business guy. Look, I mean, so the Pompeo things, I mean, it's like, I mean, it's supremely interesting because, um, you know, I think it's somebody who probably would have positioned himself to run in a major way at Trump lost. I think it's somebody who's not going to quit being president. I think this is not an unintelligent man. Uh, this is smart. This is yeah. He's not dumb. He's not a real fighter. And, uh, I don't want to say he's part of the cynical bet crowd, but he's thinking a bet that the Trump thing will pass and I will be able to steam roll people like fans and even Rubio in the future because I'm more vicious. And, um, in the meantime, uh, you know, maybe make some money, uh, influence the debate, et cetera, et cetera. And he's very impressive if you don't know. I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, if you don't come in with huge foreign policy convictions as I think you and I do, uh, he can be very persuasive. Just for the record, I had no foreign policy convictions. I don't think I'm ideological on the question at all. I just think in general our foreign policy shiver for the nature. I am. I mean, I mean, like, I, like, I mean, so I think that's what's very interesting about some of these Pentagon picks not to keep making it back, but also the vice president. Um, a lot of people, my generation, the millennials fought on these wars. Oh, yeah. And, uh, although the baby boomers forget it, we're now old, uh, you know, and we grew up and, uh, we're quite mad about it. Um, and it's a, it's a bipartisan thing. It's not just like a Democrat, you know, anti-Iraq war, indie music thing. It's like young Republican people hate it too. Oh, I, and they might hate it more actually, which is actually the interesting thing. Uh, the, and the Republican party, frankly, might under Trump might be a vessel of anti-war sentiment far more effectively than the Democrats. I mean, I didn't see a lot of protests for the Ukraine war. Um, the Israel stuff was pretty interesting. And that was probably was number one threat to Biden, circa April. Remember that. Um, but, you know, if you look at the conversation online, if you look at the sentiments of, of young Christian services, young Republicans, the anti-war stuff is big. And it's not going anywhere. And I think that also drives a sense of a timetable, which is, um, you know, we've got these older people in their 60s, 70s, 80s and 90s. They have a certain belief set that the people that voted for the stuff in the 90s and 2000s. And we got this, get this stuff done now before the United States terms, um, you know, on both parties on this stuff. And this was always this was how we can't afford it anymore in our allies pivot to China and sell even more defense technology to China. Um, yeah. I do think they're okay. So with the backbone of support for these wars has been evangelicals. Let's just be blunt about it. It's everyone, you know, beats up in the neo-cons or whatever. These forbidden intellectuals and Washington, but really the foot soldiers of this have been Fox News viewers who are not ideological. They're not intellectuals. They're not, they're just normal American patriotic heavily evangelical people. And the truth is, I think a lot of them are beginning to recognize that their religion does not support this at all. Yeah. It's really clear. Genesis 6. Why do we have the flood? Why does God kill everything on earth? All the people except no one is family. All the animals except the ones in the arc. Why does he do that? He spells it right out because they're committing violence. That's why. So it's like the idea that, I mean, the rock or breaks out in all these preachers like, no, no, no, no, really, we have to fight Islam and kill all these people and that's what God wants. That's not what it says at all. And there's no mention of any specific secular government in the New Testament. Sorry guys. And I think a lot of Christians are beginning to realize this. It doesn't cause your Christian doesn't mean you have a specific political agenda at all. I don't think. But if your political agenda is like violence, that's prohibited. Sorry. And I just it could not be clear. It's an every freaking page. So I don't know the deception involved in this with just like mind boggling that these creatures could get up on Fox News and tell you that like, yeah, killing people is what Jesus wants. No, it's not true. And I just feel among people I know a growing recognition of that. And I think it's a huge problem for the war lobby, which is used to these people as its supporters. And you see it in the Congress, you know, I'm an evangelical and I'm for another war with somebody. No, you can't do that anymore. I hope people are zoned out. You do think that I think that they're having the country's old tired, zoned out, and they can't oppose it. And they're hoping that these initiatives can be achieved piecemeal, you know, start by bombing Iran here, et cetera, et cetera, maybe the government will collapse, et cetera, et cetera. To be replaced by what? The same people who are placed are. The same people who are placed are. They're a sauteed and cadaffian, Saddam and the Taliban. I mean, I think, okay, I mean, to take the other side, I mean, I mean, the Assad thing is it's like pretty close to the best case scenario of how that could have gone. And I think in Iran it would go way, way, way worse. It's a much bigger country. It's hard to know your role in the dice, you know, you start killing people and things go sideways. Like you think it's pretty close to Iraq and Afghanistan combined, right? You have you have you have you have urban, you have the you have the capacity for major urban violence, a lot of rock. You have huge cities, the cobble small, but you know, you have that. And then additionally, you have the mountain element. So any any outlaw contingent can just flee there. I mean, and we learned this before our southern neighbor, why is Mexico in governable? The mountains, just fleet, I mean, the entire coastline is why is Kentucky in governable? Same reason. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, so just kidding. No, no, I mean, it's hard to it would be very, very difficult. And that's Saddam Hussein. No, I tried to invade Iran and didn't work out for Mr. saying that a lot of things didn't. No, I agree completely. Well, you have actually given me, I asked you to come for this conversation. It's late at night. I was very exercised about it. You're nice enough to come and we're not hotel room in some city, but I thought it was going to be more depressed by the end, but actually I feel really hardened by what you said. I think you're having me. Well, thank you for making me feel a lot better. Kurt Mills. Thank you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, it's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's more. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.