So your lawyers have sued the Biden Department of Justice for misconduct. Tell us about the suit why you filed it, what you hoped to achieve by it. Yeah, well, my attorney actually had filed a complaint with the Inspector General about the way I was treated by the FBI and DOJ and how they were harassing me. And they didn't receive a response, surprise, surprise. So after we waited, there was no response. He filed a tort claim and is for $10 million and basically what the outcome will be hopefully is that they will open my FBI files and then expunge them. And the criminal case that has been opened against me in Northern California, the one that sealed will be revealed. And because that was opened by DOJ and FBI where they took all my Twitter communications now X. It's called but Gmail, you name it, all my social media was taken under sealed warrants. The only reason I know about the sealed warrants and it was publicized is because a Twitter lawyer had called and told me that this has happened and they have made a motion in court to tell me. And so this case had in paneled grand jury so it went pretty far so it's just like shy of indictment. But what are they going to indict before? Well, they won't tell me. Now as an American citizen that's infuriating, right? But I think a lot of I am confused. I think a lot of people watching this are confused. You of course are most famous for recounting in public your experience a sexual assault and I think it was a sexual assault by then Senator Joe Biden in an elevator when you worked for him. Now elevator corridor. A corridor, a big report. And unlike a lot of people who make these claims you have a you have contemporaneous evidence in your mother's call to Larry King Live which came out years later. It's an amazing story. And I think it's a credible story. But what did you do wrong? How did you wind up the subject of a sealed potential indictment of a criminal investigation by the US government? What was your crime? I think not shutting up. I think because I just wouldn't stop talking. I kept trying to push for an investigation. If you recall, Jen Saki, she was asked one question, one time Peter juicy, I think asked the question and said, you know about me about Tarot read and she said, oh, that's been litigated. It was never litigated. She lied right now. It's never been litigated. It's never been investigated. And I was asking for an investigation. All they did was pay money to have media hit pieces done on them. But of course they did. And you were attacked. The whole believe all women thing turned out not to be true. Right now. There's no media. There's no media. But a criminal investigation into you is a completely separate category and really an escalation of a kind most Americans can't understand. Why would they possibly be criminally investigating you? There were two. Yeah. I mean, one, the first one was for perjury when I was an expert witness and it took me lawyers and thousands of dollars to clear that. They had to drop that case and then they came out and be with the sealed case, which I can't do anything about because I'm not even supposed to know about it. And this is the federal government? Federal, the DOJ FBI. And so... A seal. So there is a seal. So, so via it's hard to believe it's what you're saying is true. But I think it's checkable. There's a sealed case against you. They're investigating you for a crime. They won't tell you what the crime is. But clearly it's a felony or they claim it's a felony. Correct. And I posted the sealed warrant and that's been in the media. So the sealed warrant is visible. You can see the case number. Journalists have tried to look it up. My attorneys tried to look it up. No one will tell them what it is. Then they started coming at me in more severe ways, which was basically harassment, death threats, particularly it amped up when Marjorie Taylor Greene and Representative Matt Gates asked me to testify in the Whistleblowers panel. Like I was going to talk about how difficult it is to be a Whistleblower because I had been so targeted. And then when I was about to testify, you know, I'll get to that part. But when I was about to testify, things really amped up as far as threats and undermining me. And it was hard to get a job. People thought I was a security threat. There were, you know, in UNDOS, you know, my reputation was destroyed. And we've talked about this. So my attorney basically said, okay, that's that, you know, we're going to, you know, file this complaint. And this came after, you know, when I was here in Moscow, Russia, I came here to publicize my book and to oversee the translation of it. And I did an interview with channel one. Which Russian TV channel and channel one is sanctioned, apparently. And apparently that was, I was here for vacation. So I had packed literally for seven days, five days. Didn't have much with me. And then about midway through I started getting, you know, messages that I was from former intelligence that were trying to get me messages with the blowers. Like look, you know, you're in danger of being indicted if you go back. I talked to my lawyers about it. And I did for what? For, for the Foreign Registration Act, which is the same thing they went after Maria Butana for. And Paul Manafort and Paul Manafort and Maria Butana for you read. There's a really good article called the spy who wasn't who really lays out why she wasn't a spy and she wasn't. She's now working for the state DMM. But she was definitely targeted. But that set the president. Paul Manafort in her case. And you're an American who has accused the sitting president of sexually assaulting you while you worked for him. As a young woman. And you have evidence to prove that that's true. Right. Contemporary. And all of a sudden you're the criminal because you wind up in a foreign city and you do a TV interview. Is it am I missing something? Well, they in 2019, if you recall, one of the smears that they made against me was that I was a Russian asset. Even though I had no ties to Russia immediately out the gate. That was the Biden campaign told that to the New York Times. They said that was their first response. Not a denial. Not, you know, anything else. They said, oh, she's a Russian asset. And that started in 2019 and got spread around and then it continued on and had a life of its own. Because it was spread by former Obama staff, Edward, Isaac, Dovir, people like that who have some clout on social media and people listen. So unfortunately there was that kind of overhanging it. So when I came to Moscow. So you make this allegation against the president of the United States, then it candidate. Incredible allegation once again. Wouldn't be talking to you if I didn't think was credible. I think it is credible. I think it's true. And they don't even respond. They just accuse you of being a traitor to your country. Immediately. That was the first response. Not even a denial at first. So I thought that was interesting. And the media amplify those. Oh, yes. New York Times amplified it. Washington Post did. Everyone did. Political. You know, they did their due diligence for their the empire, I guess. I didn't really understand the media at that time. And you have to understand I'm a regular citizen. I don't have a PR team. I have lawyers. I now I have a lawyer, but then I didn't. I didn't have resources. Where were you living? I was living in California. And I was really naive about, you know, the media and now I understand. I think a lot of people in 2019 2020 were still a little bit. Just to be clear, it sounds like you've been a fairly liberal Democrat your whole life. I was. I really had, you know, really believed I worked for Leon Panetta as an intern. I worked for Joe Biden. I worked as a Democratic operative on congressional campaigns. I was trained by Homeland Security. I was trained by Seattle police to do to help with domestic violence. I was a trainer. I donated my time. I worked for for Democrats. I believed in it believed in it wholeheartedly. And so it's been the heartbreaking when I came forward with evidence how I was treated how I still am treated. Like to this day, like I just get, I mean, I get calls right now a defector trader. I did back then before I left. I was just stepping on your story and I'm sorry. It's just a remarkable story when you lay it out and give the timeline. It's just it's amazing. What's happened to you. So just back to where you were before I interrupted you. So you're here on vacation to get a translation of your book done. Yes. And you do an interview with local TV and then you start getting messages from informed people who you trust. You're in danger of being indicted. And what happens then? Well, I would be put into a cage because with with the FAR Act is a backdoor into the espionage act essentially. It's the federal registration act. You have to register for an agent registration act. It's administrative. They never used to even use it. But now they're using it as a backdoor to espionage. So you know, you might recall the who were group, right? Very well. You. Yes. The black nationalists that we defended. Right. They're being sentenced this month up to 10 years in prison. And I've read through all their whole legal case and you know, I have a lot of grace. So I'm interested in those things. And you know what the charge is sewing discord. So I want people to really hear this because sewing discord shouldn't be a crime. And they shouldn't be able but they're being showing discord. That's the term under the FAR Act and the back door into the espionage act. And so they're facing up to 10 years in prison or more. Their passports have been taken away. The sentencing happens this month. They're they have no ties to Russia. They simply spoke out against the proxy war against, you know, Russia via Ukraine. And for that, they've been punished. And you know what I want people to hear is that it's not just January six people that are being targeted by the DOJ. No. It's to the left. It's to the right. That's right. It's someone like me that just had a claim against my former employer that should have been investigated properly and should have been adjudicated in a proper way. And I should have been treated with some dignity instead of having my life torn to pieces. So again, back to the story. You're in Moscow where we are now. And you hear that you could be indicted or punished under the Foreign Agent registration act for giving this interview with a local TV station. And what do you do? How do you respond? Well, I wanted to look at all the data points. You know, I'm not an impulsive person. I like to think and I didn't have a lot of time. I mean, we're talking. I had to make this in a 48 hour window. Right. And so this was a lot of pressure. But I did. I took the time. I talked to my daughter for hours. I talked to my lawyer. I got more data points of other people who had opinions that were educated. And then I talked to my gates. And I am forever grateful that he took my call. And he was, you know, I want to give him some credit here. The Congress voted for the floor. Yeah, because I was supposed to go the first week of June and walk with him on the Senate floor to get my Senate thing open. And I wanted to do that. And he advised me, he didn't advise me. I should raise that. He gave me information. He basically just said, you know, I'm worried about you. I'm worried about your personal safety. And you're good where you are, you know, that kind of thing. And he was, he just said he knew how those people operated. And so he was concerned about me. Those people being employed to the US government. Right. And he said something intelligence committee. So when a US congressman tells you something like that, it's remarkable. That's a remarkable data point. Right. It is. A remarkable data point. And I trusted him. Because he could have easily just said, oh sure, it'll be fine. And I did ask him. I said, please, you know, Congressman, can you help me? Can you get me off these charges? Can you? And he said, no, I can't. I'm sorry. I can't. My hands are tied. I don't even know what they are. And sometimes some of this intelligence isn't shared. But what I can tell you is just that I understand how these people operate in. Yeah, I'm really worried about your personal safety. Because I had received death threats at that point. And you think about it. I'm not that well known. I would have been in the news maybe a day or two, maybe you or someone else might have talked about me for a couple of times. But it would be considered a conspiracy theory like Adam Rich. Right. And his death. Seth Rich. Right. Seth Rich. Yeah. Seth Rich. So what I would find so compelling and shocking about your story is that I still don't understand what you did wrong. In their eyes, they see me as somehow being a traitorous. Is the words that they use. I think in the USA today there was a former CIA agent who gave a quote saying that I my thoughts about America made him viscerally angry. Because I was talking about inflation. I was talking about the fact that there's 600,000 homeless. I was talking about the fact, you know, I'm involved with geopolitics. I have a lot of great. I'm interested in it. So when you're an American, you spent your whole life in the United States. You worked for the sitting president. Yeah. Who you say sexually assaulted you. Yeah. You're upset about the state of our economy. Yeah. How does that make you a traitor? Apparently it does. And apparently my views about the proxy war against Russia. Maybe Ukraine. And in 2019, I had I had said, and this is true that if Joe Biden was elected that he would go to war with Russia. You're right. Yeah. So just to bottom line, the path that you took for people who were hearing us for the first time. You decided you could not come home after that. I decided then. And then I had to figure out, well, what does one do? Because you can't just like decide to stay in a country without proper paperwork. And these are right. You can't just like, oh, I'm just going to hang out there. That would make you a stateless person. Yes. Yes. So I reached out and I'm forever grateful to Maria Butuna. Because Masha helped me and she helped me with the process of how to just the how to of applying for political asylum, which I did. And it took a few weeks. Only 10% of those cases get accepted. But they did their they do their due diligence. And they felt that there was enough of a problem where they had to give me this is after speaking to a US congressmen who sits on the house intel committee who told you he was worried about your safety. Correct. How hard a decision was that free? That's a big decision. It was a big decision, but it wasn't just what he said. And I don't want to put this all on. Of course, yeah. It was it was several people's and one, I can't really say who it was, but went to great risk to send me a message to say if you get off that plane, they're going to take you into custody. From what? And violation of the far act, probably they were talking about violation of sanctions. There was talk that I had red notices, which are, you know, a rest once like I could have been picked up in Istanbul. And by the moment for what? By the US proxy by by, you know, that that's how they do it with interpol. They arrest on behalf of the US like in the UAE and Dubai. So I had a lawyer who actually specialized in people that have that happened to them. And she got the red notices pulled. And so now those are gone now that I'm under asylum. But they'll extradite you from every country. So the only two countries that will not extradite in American back to America is Iran and Russia. This is a really crazy story. Yeah. It sounds like you don't have any way to get your story to an American audience. No. No. It's very difficult. I mean, I have a large Twitter following and I have a podcast that I do. But no one has called. What's interesting to me is we have a supposedly free media in the United States as a backstop against a check against government overreach, too much power in the hands of two few. And so it's supposed to be a self-correcting system. If something truly crazy in totalitarian happens to an American citizen, our media is supposed to take an interest and alert the rest of the country so they know what's going on. And I think it's like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. I may not like to read. I don't agree with her or whatever, but you can't do that. You can't arrest someone for no crime or for complaining about the president. Has anyone for the New York Times called you? More political, political. No, no. The Daily Beast to say, just tell us what's happened with you. Those, those, no, of course not. Those, they only do hit pieces. They only, and they're working for the empire. There's no question. They're just working for the, you know, as proxy CUS government. I mean, I think, you know, some of the reporting that Matt Iibi and Michael Shellenberger have been doing has been really valuable. Yes. Because they've been showing how there's think tanks. Actual think tanks that basically put out articles to these, and then they reprint them. They don't even change them that much. So these are planted articles. Like there was all kinds of lies told about me that I lied about my education. Now I never lied about my education that I defected to Russia. I didn't defect to Russia. I was threatened with my life. And my family, and I didn't want my family harmed. I didn't want to be at risk of being put in a cage. And I can't tell you what that conversation was like with my daughter that, that it was hard. Have you seen her? No. Why? I can't. I can't. Under political asylum, I can't leave the borders of Russia. Because, you know, I'm under the protection. And to be frank, I don't know when I can ever go back to the US. I don't know when there's a safe. But what have you done? In their eyes, I've committed some sort of crime. And I haven't done anything. And that's the thing. I've never committed a crime. I'm not a traitor. I'm not a spy. I'm not a spy for Russia. I don't have tons of resources. I don't have a PR team. I just told the truth about Joe Biden. I told the truth about what he did to me. And I told the truth about the corruption. And I wouldn't be quiet about it. And I was demanding to be heard. But let's say I'm not going to get $83 million like Eugene Harrell or a perfume line like story reed annuals, right? Or treated like with dignity and the press. Like those women were because they accused a Republican. No. I was attacked and no one has offended you. Not really Rose McGowan. She really has. Megan Kelly gave me a platform a couple of times. Of course you have other than that independent media. Even the lefties, even though the Me Too reporters silence, you know, seeing Me Too reporters coming and telling my story to you, never once. They protect Biden. This is all about catching kill. And if you recall, I went to Times Up for help, right? Times Up, Roberta Kaplan, who just represented Eugene Carol. Roberta Kaplan had to resign from Times Up because she was smearing Me and the Cuomo, you know, survivors, though the people that talked about Cuomo. And because she did that, she had to resign. Times Up was dismantled. And she went on to represent, you know, Eugene Carol. And Eugene Carol publicly said that she was going to now support Biden and give him money. Just, it's unbelievable. It's totally evil. It's completely evil. It is evil. Where does it, I just can't get past this question. And I don't want to upset you, but if you're daughter, and you have a child in the United States. Yeah. That's been hard. You know, I missed her graduation. She got her masters. They went after her. Actually, while I was here in Russia, the first month I was here, a bunch of democratic troll farms or whatever, tried to do her work address, tried to get her fired. She was interning as a therapist. She's a therapist with children. She works with play therapy with children who have been traumatized. And they tried to get her fired. And they were saying it out loud and calling the work. But luckily, you know, my daughter's work is, you know, not interested in those kinds of, you know, smears. So my daughter's fine. But like, you know, having her face plastered everywhere because she's associated with me. My horse was almost kidnapped. They literally came and took him almost on a trailer and luckily the owners of the stable were there. So I'm getting this calls at three in the morning in Moscow that my horse is being loaded on a trailer by someone I don't know who's going to take him for Joe Biden. That was what they were saying. They were taking him for Joe. Like, so luckily he's safe. But I mean, it's been sort of relentless. It's been, you know, and I know public figures, you know, I don't consider myself a public figure, but other public figures do get harassed like that. But when you're a regular citizen like I am, it's really daunting, especially if we don't have the resources to protect yourself, right? And which I didn't. Do you expect you'll be able to see your daughter any time soon? I don't know. I don't feel comfortable putting her in, you know, the spotlight again. She's about to get married. Can you go to the wedding? I can't go to the wedding. And, you know, I'm upset. But, you know, and I don't want to be a victim here. I just, I'm angry. And I want Joe Biden to be held accountable. He's taken years of my life. He's destroyed it three times over. And I'm just, I'm going to continue to fight. To our read. Thank you very much for talking to us. Thank you. Free speech is bigger than anyone person or any one organization. The societies are defined by what they will not do. What we're watching is the total inversion of virtue. Hey, it's Tucker Carlson. The internet is crowded with interesting things that don't really matter. On TCN, we attempt to bring you interesting things that actually do matter. And a lot of them. Interviews, long form and short videos, documentaries. You can find all of it on Tucker Carlson dot com. And we hope you will.