Wrestling fan or the fans that have more passion in any other sport other than football baseball basketball Wrestling fans are the best fans in the world. I got the yellow belt I got the sunglasses bandana and a little bit of a tricepis. It's not like we go to a football game And you leave wrestling you it's something you can live every day and it's just inspires you at least for today It inspires you every day This beauty This is Fan You're seeing it live here people this is what wrestling is all about These are wrestling fans. I'm Dylan. I'm from Florida I do about 14 hours on a Friday night to come up here I got here and there was they were all sold out every ticket was sold out So I was like oh shit and I happened to know Byron The commentator and he's like dude just keep trying so I kept trying and next thing I know I got like a $50 ticket and then I got there and some guy gave me a floor seat second row The typical wrestling fan is wild crazy screams a lot jumps up and down when they see people It's all crazy I fly Fucking I've florried like almost 20 hours to be here in Australia I know it's a bit different. It's not as big as it is in America and whatever but when people like you like wrestling and whatever I'm like yes But when you make fans actually like wrestling and you're like We love it and we have that connection It means it will to be I don't know pick your favorite soap opera and Then like pick athletic people in it and be like Put them in one show together Like like this is gonna be a sweat people and it's gonna be the soap opera. I love we're gonna have one big storyline and it's amazing Fuck in Jesus. I hate both of them. I don't have to say a reclaire I hate Hulk Hogan Freaking hate Hulk Hogan. We're all one in some weird way like wrestling fans you have this All these different walks of life of people that come together from one thing they all love and it's professional wrestling And it's like one of the greatest things you've ever seen life like Like to see this connection that people share over wrestling is is amazing Changes people's lives in different ways like you love wrestling line Well, this person loves it because of this and I love it because of that like Wrestling is it's such a beautiful thing and one of the Why just variety of people you would ever see like anything? That's what wrestling is man wrestling is buying into these characters and emotionally Investing into something and that's in its purest form wrestling is love I Like storytelling I enjoy theatrics so I grew very interested in the way they do things I researched and I've studied and I Understand so much about it now that I just can't fucking get out of it. You know a wrestling mark a wrestling fan they They're rowdy they love that they love they love the good guys They hate the bad guys and they will definitely know it would definitely let you know how they feel Hogan a Ric player Rick Flair all the way fuck Hulk Hogan Hulk Hogan believes his own hype He doesn't understand that he uses the right guy in the right place at the right time And that's all there is to it there's rumors that he's going to be coming back as smack town general manager I think that's a terrible idea. I think if anybody is your be the icons thing WrestleMania is my birthday my Christmas My Super Bowl by everything all in one night most people Don't understand why we like a thing that isn't real and you That's predetermined I am actually a champion fighting his breast cancer Based the belt open your eyes open your eyes open your eyes like give it a shot It brings you emotionally to a place that you never thought you could go for me like I just realized I reaching those emotions Stories and through wrestling make me a better person when I was wrestling family our young girls like in the closet So it no one who like wrestling Being out of the closet is a wrestling front wrestling help Jim come out of the closet You know, well in England only geeks like wrestling. Oh really yeah, it's not like normal like he's like real So you've got to find weird people like it with you My name is James by a night. I'm originally from Zimbabwe When I was young I grew up in this small village in rural Zimbabwe We used to have one television like there was like one television in the whole village and whenever wanted to watch wrestling we would Walk like seven miles to go watch wrestling on its side of it. You know, I'm talking of the days where we used to have great hearts British bulldog management You know the undertaker during his hey days and We'll after them after watching wrestling would walk back Another seven miles so I mean it was kind of crazy So moving to the market coming to New Orleans and Experiencing like razor mania first-hand like this. Oh man. I said I have to really go watch Live this this was so many and I enjoyed myself. I mean it was breathtaking It made countries in Zimbabwe How called and is one of the most adored performance of all time actually Because people since since since since the time we started watching wrestling how come any I was always on the screen and Yeah, he has got a lot of respect. He comes a lot of respect from from people who love who love wrestling and also I think I want to say that you know how Resling WWE is so influential in my country that I don't think people know that Like if you go like all the kids there they can tell you about everything that's going on They'll tell you about edge. They'll tell you about Randy Orton. They'll tell you about you know all these This wrestlers, but you know kids from the village kids from Or the neighborhood in the city, you know, they they like wrestling so much and it's inspired them to You got my title. Oh, God To be honest with you Wrestling pretty much you know, how do I say this? The good things when you get over you know the thing that helped me my most with depression would be wrestling and music It's like you know when you have in a bad day or whatever, you know and you just not feeling it You know I can sit there and and sit there and term wrestling on and sit there and enjoy it and then it takes me away from all my troubles You know thing thing with music wrestling and music, you know, I didn't have that. I didn't know where I'd be It's theater in the round go there and vest yourself in the characters and watching just lose yourself in the action See what's out there and there's characters for everybody in wrestling. There's good guys It's simple. It's a good guys and bad guys Well, I love always a lot of about wrestling. It's never happened to say goodbye It's every you might see an amazing movie that will be better than any wrestler match I'd ever see but that's it Movie's done. You know no more wrestling. They're still here today. You know, I just met my old time here at Ric Flair Stone Cold, you know guys are still around you could talk about it You could share your stories. It's a way to connect with people instantly You see something in wrestling shirt, and you know they're a friend of yours, you know well the one thing I could do to convince you is I'm probably one of the most hardcore motherfuckers and take the camera Right here, and I would do this is for the fuck right there and that's what I would do that's what I would do on any given fucking day I'm from Mobile Alabama my name is far spawned in also performed as a major named Forrest Gluck in Las Vegas with the Globers Last year at the CAC What type of people Like wrestling really they come from all walks of life and what I can see It's been all over the place all over the world. It's actually look like looking at real life superhero Doing battle when the ring heroes and villains Then of course I loved like Batman and Robin from the sixties and it just went on up into this type stuff And I just love it all what do you do for a living? Actually, I've been a pro wrestling manager, and I'm a man of stirrer as whale I'm Scott. I'm from Tanvee, Tanya Wales in the UK. I was I was a friend of 10 being a town of Wales We live on the same mistake. It's everything really. There's not a day when we wake up We don't think about wrestling or talking about wrestling and some capacity. It's a part of our lives And a pretty big part as well If it as long as you don't take it too seriously Just look at the whole picture the fun and aspect of it and everything you should enjoy it Wrestling fans have I wouldn't say social anxiety, but it seems it seems kind of like that way But we're all tight knit like we walk up to anybody Yeah, man, N.W.O. after WrestleMania 31 when N.W.O. came out Hollywood Hogan raising Ramon B.B The big diesel Kevin Nash I said, you know what I'm getting a tattoo every single day Probably put you to sleep. I can put you to sleep about six different ways about two seconds Can we get the time to get this man in the shutty's come from Australia as well. Look at this George introduced yourself looked down the barrel of the camera. Hey seven WrestleMania is the name spider still standing One week in Nola. Oh, it's the Aussie. Oh, you're you. How cool gladiators What I've told you there's something better than fucking Roman gladiators Huh? What are the told you You can come watch it and if you don't like it. Yeah, you don't like it till you don't try it That's how he got pregnant with me Wrestling's the greatest entertainment greatest Ford Ever since I've been watching as a kid and I'm original Hulk a maniac Every time you comment on a Facebook post to try and make yourself sound cool saying Let's fake every show you watch on TV is fake It's what you choose to believe to enjoy what you like to accept as reality Suspension of disbelief being the stories that these men tell in the ring It's better than anything that you ever wish you could do or anything that your favorite TV shows Which they could do they put their bodies on the line every night that they go out there for their our entertainment and they give a damn Hell good of a show better than your shitty walking dead's whatever you watch at home Wrestling Russell mania is better than all of it I literally Got some Cropish I got pound of crawfish and I'm handing out crawfish to people you famous this is family, right? But I I hear the guy a crawfish from Cleveland and he never saw a crawfish before It's it's basically feeling like a part of a community You can't put it into words You hear these people streaming woo behind you that's the Ric Flair shop that's this community It's very unique. It's very different turn around real quick New York's playing more get it all the time to make it a I mean explain it. I really don't