Joe Roman Funga. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night. All day. Gentlemen, first of all, thank you for being here. I couldn't wait to talk to you. Congratulations on one of the most epic accomplishments in the history of combat sports, and that's not an understatement. I mean, it might be an understatement. I made it, it's not an overstatement. It's perfect. That was one of the greatest nights I've ever experienced of watching anything in my life. It was amazing. And have you cap it off and win the title when you're facing a guy that everybody thought was at least number two pound for pound. It was like him in Islam or number one and number two. And some odds had you at six to one, which I thought was very disrespectful. I thought, I thought like, this is crazy. Like six to one is crazy. Like, Ili is really good, but so's Justin, this is kind of nuts. To have you win the way you won in front of the fucking White House. Yeah. How'd it feel? Oh, you know, it's really not really, I was expecting to have like an internal sense of relief that like I don't have something to chase. Cause I was always chasing this belt. And I was expecting to wake up with like some kind of natural release of pressure, but I don't know. I don't feel that. As the days go by every day, I feel it a little bit more, a little bit more. Two days ago, my dad was like, you know, what was it like waking up being the champion? And I was like, I haven't even thought about that. And then I was on the shitter, like 10 minutes later, and I was sitting there thinking about I was like, wow. I'm the fucking champion. I think it's fucking crazy. And yeah, it's just, I mean, I've just been on the grind for so many years now. My dad dropped me off 19 years ago in Colorado. I knew nobody to wrestle. And yeah, to see to see where I'm at now, it's just absolutely incredible. I mean, there's really no way to explain how or why, you know, or like why deserve it or why. I mean, I've worked my ass off. I have made mistakes. You know, I've done things the wrong way, but I've always corrected and got back on the path. And you know, I think the coach is the mentors, but mostly the coaches that I've been, you know, the team that I have around me is a huge reason why I was able to stay on track and just keep moving forward and keep trusting that, you know, I belong in the top of the league. Well, you've clearly shown it throughout your career. And having a great coach like Trevor, and one of the reasons why I wanted to bring you in, Trevor's, because you guys have a very unique relationship. First of all, I love the YouTube series, the Art of Violence, fantastic. And what's great is watching you two guys work together and Trevor, you being like very acutely aware of when to pull them back, when to ramp it up, when to push. Like you guys, having a relationship like that is so critical because you guys know each other so well. You've seen him perform so many times. You've seen him fight and performing the gym that you know where he's at all the time. And having that sense of where your fighter is at any given time and camp, because you know him so well. Boy, that's a giant advantage. It is. Whoop. Hold on. Come on, my God. Just do this. There we go. That was testies. One more time. Yeah, I think that's a huge advantage is knowing your athlete. And you know, I've been doing this for a long period of time, but there's lots of coaches out there that consider their fighters or friends. I do consider them one of my best friends, but I put myself more in like a father position. I need to know when to tell him the truth. And I've got myself in trouble with that. With fighters, where you tell them the truth so hard that you have to let them go like a child, like, hey, if we were not in the same belief, go live life and see how it is. And then when you return, I'm still going to love you. Having that type of thing where I have to be dead on us for your career, not because it helps us now. And it feels good right now at the moment. I have to look at that from the time that we start, we talk about, you know, what are his goals? And then my job is to be an advisor, be a mentor to get him to that place as best as I can, because these are his goals. And I want to support those. And in the beginning of his career, his goals were to be the most violent guy out there, the most remembered, the guy that's, every time someone bought a ticket, they remembered Justin Gachi selling that show. And then it turned into, no, I want to have this belt. And that was hard because we did go and not get the belt twice. And you know, it's so cool to be in the kind of those scenarios where it's like, Dan, you had two opportunities. Now it's never going to happen. And that's what life is. Life is one of those things that you keep getting up and chase your goals. You never know how it's going to happen. And yes, you want to dream and you want to have a plan. But I'll tell you right now through all the times that I've had championship fighters in business and life, the plans never work. You always have to adjust them, but it's that dream and that vision to get you to the top of the stairs. You have to get up each one of those steps. So, you know, Justin went out there and wrote a story that I don't think will ever be forgotten. And he did it one round at a time. And that's what impresses me because his mindset, I love the mental game. I love to talk about the mental game. Even like, Ili, Ili is a special guy with how he uses his mental, the secret that if I see it, I believe it, it'll happen to a point. You know, it's like, I always tell people like, if you go down the ice cream aisle and you're like, hey, I don't know what ice cream I want. You're gonna stand there and go, oh, that one looks good, that one looks good, that one looks good, the people there like, I want mint chocolate chip. You get in there, you get it done, you grab that mint chocolate chip and you walk out. Very similar to Ili as last three fights. He went out there and he demanded what he wanted. His confidence got him through that. But it makes it very hard when you get that stale nasty rotten milk-fucking mint chocolate chip. So you start to go, oh shit. What is gonna happen now? So I think the relationship that we have is me guiding him, me pulling him back at the strictly situation. Hey, let's pull back a little bit. Let's focus on what's going on. I don't want no distractions. And having someone and he trusts that I care about him. I love him to death. I love his family. Like our relationship is so strong and I need that with my athletes. And I'm just blessed and 100, yeah, I say honored, but more importantly humbled by someone who I've never worked mental with who chose me different ways to the mental game of fighting, which I feel I'm very high level with is it's something that if you put yourself around people that make you better, this guy makes me better daily and I'm very grateful for that. You said something about Ili, about the fight, about having expectations. And you said you don't have any expectations when you fight that way you don't get thrown off. Yeah, I mean it's huge. I mean, my expectations come from my hard work. Obviously I expect my body to perform. I understand that I've trained my mind to, and maybe the narcissist tendencies in me love showing off and performing in front of thousands of people on that stage. That's what I love the most about this. And that's what my personality, like I'm very competitive. I want to win. But I'm never gonna lie to myself. And that's how I've never had a coach in my entire career since four years old, I've obviously have to pull me aside and talk about the mental aspect of competition because it's always been so natural to me. I'm not sure if it's because they see that I'm doing good and that they agree with my approach mentally or they don't understand what's going on. Or, but I've just always been so comfortable and so content with my situation of, this is the competition, this is the game. You know, I'm very competitive. I'm very petty. I take everything personal. And yeah, when I go in there with X, I have gone in with X by patients. And it's, I said it before the fight, you know, earlier like I said so many true things to him. And I think it was such an asset to tell someone that brutal truths, especially someone like him because it pushes them farther away from the truth. You know, even if I tell him the exact truth and exactly what's gonna happen and you're making a mistake by having all these expectations and when we go to round two and when we go to round three and it's not going as you predicted it or wanted it to or expected it to, then where do you go from there? And, you know, I said that exacting to him and then that pushed him farther away from it. And, you know, I, it's almost like you wanted to prove you wrong. Yeah, he wanted to prove himself right. You know, when he was unwilling to be open to opinions and because obviously I don't know him, he knows him better than himself. But, you know, I, I hear because I am coachable. I hear because I listen and I use every, every, like I posted yesterday, every person place, I think that has happened to me or for me has ultimately molded my mind and my body to be able to deal with the situation that happened on Sunday night. And, you know, I can, I can pull so much experience in the past, my losses, my wins, setbacks, failures, accomplishments. I mean, there was so much to learn from it. You know, every day is a learning experience and I constantly try to learn and be better. And, I don't know why I'm able to perform like that. I think I just think it's who I am. You know, when I, when I say I wanted to be the most exciting fighter ever, it's not that I wanted to be the most exciting fighter ever. That the thought of that was fucking cool to me, you know, but I was just being me and I've been blessed to be able to, you know, do my, do my childhood, to come from a small town, through having, you know, unwavering support from my, my family and my friends and my coaches and my teachers and everybody from, you know, it's just crazy to, to be able to come out on top. I mean, it's just crazy. One of the things I think was a giant factor in the fight is that you have been in wars. You've been in a bunch of wars. And, Ilia really, it only had some rough moments against Jay Herbert. You know, Yusuf Zalal gave him some problems, but it was nothing serious. The, the wars that you've been in, these just down and dirty brawls that you've been in, you're, you're comfortable with the back and forth. You're comfortable with enduring. You, you know, that you're not going to break. You know, if your body holds up, you're going to keep fighting and you can endure. I don't think you ever experienced that before. So when you didn't break in the second round, and I think you made a mistake, and I think you're correct about that. You said he made a mistake by going to the ground. Absolutely. And then he hurt you to the body. I told Trevor yesterday, I think, you know, him hurting to my body was the reason, one of the main reasons I won. You know, when he, when he hit me, when I dropped, it wasn't the first time he hit me in the body and I was probably like the fourth or fifth one. And he had landed some really clean shots and he could probably sense that I was in trouble and hurt. And I think that fact made him dump everything. Because it was his last chance to take me out. And he almost did take me out. But when I went down, it's always easy to make these decisions and hindsight. But when I went down, you know, he would, he said, he's had way more submissions than he has knockouts. And so for him not to have that belief that he's going to be able to go down there, especially with the could be biased, especially with the Charles Law verify, especially with all the negativity around my grappling. You know, I think he would have been foolish not to, because I would have stood back up. I would have stood back up. I and he would have charged forward, tried to finish me. I would have jumped on his legs. I would have pulled guard. He was going to end up on top of me, no matter what. I wasn't going to sit there and trade with him again. Like I would have, you know, front rolled into grappling situations or I would have made him cover me. And but I think me getting hit is what made him completely blows, you know, Shane Carwin-esque, blow his tank and, you know, go for the win. And I think that was the choice he had to make because it was going to continue to get worse. I'd be disaster in the first round. Like it might have been close in the scorecards. I absolutely took the first round. But the amount of damage that I inflicted in the first round set up the rest of the fight. I do think it was a mistake. And you're saying what you're saying is so correct. But what I'm saying is from a standpoint of him demanding it. He's going to finish you in the first two. Understanding the damage that he was taking, he took big risk. He got it there. He kept his hands on your collarbones. He was landed really good shots. Yeah, the two body shots before that, that left hook to deliver that the sound it made was crazy. That last one was clean. It was precise and deep. But you could tell it was already there. But if he didn't put that pressure on his self, and this is what I mean by mistake is like, when you come out, you have to know that you're going five rounds. And he knew that he had to unleash everything right there. If he would have been smart in that scenario saying, hey, we got five rounds, let me step back a little bit. Let me do some damage. But also he's like, hey, let me get you out of there quick. Justin, you know, can't grapple, can't do all these things with a lot of people think, which Justin's a great grappler. And what was so smart about you is when you get tired, that's where the worst decisions happen. That's one of my big things is coaching. As we get someone tired and then we make a make bad decisions and then we capitalize on those mistakes. Justin was able to stay so composed here with being speared to the body. And when you take a liver shot, it is way different than the head shot. A head shot's like taking a shot with your buddies at the bar. It's like, hey, let's go. You know, but you take a body shot, you're dying. Like you're liver shot. You feel like you're dying. And Justin, all the decisions he made on the ground from the triangle, from the arm bar, from not being flat. So many good decisions were made in that scenario. And I do think it was a mistake. Obviously there's so many different ways it could go. But those, those type of moments in fights are what make fights great is overcoming obstacles. And he had set that up. He had set it. He's like, hey, I'm going to overcome anything. I'm going out there to put the worst thing out there. Like what are you going to do to be? I've already been knocked out the last second of a freaking huge fight by Max. Like you can't do nothing worse to me. And that mindset I think is something to take away for all the fighters out there that always, I love how you say it. Expect the war. Always. Some of the biggest mistakes that I've made with fighters that I had is allowing them to think that they're going to go through this fight easy. And then that fight becomes super hard. You think it's going to be a war that you're like, hey, wasn't as bad as I was expected? Even if it was a little bit of war, they're not going to help them in that moment. Yeah, there's no point in that. That's fighting. Like fighting is mentality. I look at this like there's techniques out there and there's things like that. What makes this sport inspirational and makes someone that want to go out there and beat cancer because they were inspired by a fighter? It's not the technical piece. It's getting back up and it's okay to get knocked down. I love, I love watching people get knocked down because my favorite part is seeing how they get up. And that to me is why I love fighting is how people get up. Yeah, how they endure. And that was the big story of that second round that you figured out a way to get through it. And the change in tempo in the third round was very obvious because the sprint that you have to make like what Iliad did when he was trying to finish you, that he used so much fucking energy. And the great Chelsea in one said that if you try to win by knockout and fail, you won't win by submission. Yeah. And a lot of times that's the case because you know as good as anybody, if you fucking sprint at heart, you've wail on the bag with fucking everything you got for two minutes. And then they go time. One minute's not enough. It's not enough. Even in preparation. Even through it if they've been tired after the two minutes. That was crazy too. That was crazy too. We'll talk about that. For these fights, I'm doing 20, 30, 40 second sprints at most. I mean that was a two minute sprint for him. Yes. And pull out. For that is no power, everything full power, every punch full power. You're not even training for that. Yeah. You got a half spot. Right. And he didn't. He was just unloading. I mean that's a young man with a tremendous amount of confidence because he's a two division world champion. And he thinks he's going to go down as the greatest of all time. And hey, he might still, he might still come back. He might still come back. What was he 28? The odds are fucking great against that right now. Because of that loss. I hope he does. I hope he does. I hope he does. And I know that he has a skill. Right. So he has these skill to be a champion again. However, I same thing with 21st. I didn't break Tony Ferguson's confidence. I changed the perception of his opponents of him. And that is a huge factor when he's on there. Like who are you fighting? What do you feel? Before this, he was a guy that would, that you couldn't get through, that you couldn't push through, you couldn't survive with. And once I showed people that all you got to do is get through that, then nobody's ever going there with thinking that he's unbeatable now. And that was his identity. And that's going to be such a tough task for him to fight people that aren't scared of him. That's interesting. That's Mike Tyson in his prime. That's Anderson Silva in his prime, where the fight was lost. But we got in there. Yeah. If fight was lost before he got even got in there, physically, then I don't know what the truth is. But all these reports are that he has two fractured orbitals and a broken nose. Just that alone, just the orbitals alone. Like anytime you've got eye injuries, like anything severe with your eyes, long-term consequences vary. Psychological. Absolutely. Your body heals. And physical. Body is resilient. They're like, I'm telling you. I have broken bones make stronger bones. Like that is his his his over the bones will be stronger. It's a way to justify Justin. The orbital bone I had my orbital broken. And for six months, I'm going to do this in my tooth and move. And it's right where my sinus cavity is. You remember when you hit me with a spinning elbow? Your tooth would move when you push on your cheek. And I tooth the roof. Oh, summer is great. But it also comes with a lot of chaos, travel, and spontaneous plans. So make sure you're taking extra care of yourself with AG1. It's a simple daily health drink that replaces your daily multivitamins, probiotics, prebiotics, adaptogens, and more. Plus, AG1's ingredients are sourced from quality partners for potency, purity, and nutrient density. AG1 is clinically shown to close common nutrient gaps and support gut health to keep you going all summer long. Wherever this summer takes you stay on top of your health with AG1. Visit drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan. And for a limited time, get a free morning person hat and an AG1 flavor sampler for free in your welcome kit with your first subscription. That's drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan. I still feel this hotspot. But this is a very weak area where your sinus cavity is. That's a, you broke both orbitals and the nose. Do you believe the funny is your zilyaps? You ever seen my raps nose? Yeah. You ever seen the X-ray and my raps nose? No. Do you, do I send it to you? It looks like it's fine. Oh, dude. If you got 33 verticals actually, I mean, I've had, I've had, I've had crazy. I've had three broken noses. I've had a fixed twice. Yeah, I know you had a fixed. You know, this is what there it is. That's, that's, that's my raps nose. Oh my God. Oh my God. I mean, that, that looks like a long cocaine binge right there. It took out the whole fucking left side of his belt. It's like, those things like that hit with a sledgehammer. I mean, that's crazy. That nose is crazy. That is crazy. That is like, and to fix it, he's going to have to have no contact for like a year. Yeah. That's all right. And so he's not going to fix it. He's just going to deal. Look how turned it is. Make that, the bone. I've had my eyes fixed and my nose fixed and my nose was better for, for quality of life. Oh, the nose is a big one. The nose is a big one. My nose is a big one. My nose is huge, but when your nose is broken, like you have to understand like getting a haircut fucking sucks. You can't breathe through your nose. Your mouth's open the whole time. You're constantly breathing in fucking hair. Like there's so much to do that. Every time you choke it, every time you leave food like you just, there's something missing. Yeah. Sleep. I wore a nose trip to bed for 10 years now. You know, no. You don't have a stab, a permanent stab because the people that they got all the time. Yeah, my nose is used to it now, but yeah, no one can get a nose. When you got to fix which fight was it before the max fight? Yeah, right before the max fight. And then you could breathe out of it perfectly. Yeah. Is it still good now? Yeah, he broke it, but he didn't break. He didn't fuck with the carlage. He broke, he actually fractured the bone of top. So I didn't have to get a face. It's another factor that when we were talking about the fight and you know, people were talking about this matchup with Iliya. I said, you have to think about what he did to faziv. He was a super talented striker. And then you also have to think about the max hallway fight because he was pressing in the first round, but he got caught with a jump spinning back to the fucking face. And when that was that's a, that's a game changer and it happened at the end of the first round and from that it changed the tone of the fight because it was just dead on. It was perfect. Yeah, I couldn't have landed any better. And the truth, the other matter is, is psychologically I was not, I was not there. I was not prepared mentally for the fight when I fought my hallway. It was such a different circumstance. It was, you know, a guy that wasn't in my weight class. It was a guy that I had never thought about fighting. It was for fun. And that whole whole experience was so different than any other fight I've ever had when it comes to like being mentally prepared for a fight. What do you attribute that to like what was yourself my, my, my, and us like we took away to we told him to fight. He didn't want to take the fight. And we told him that you're going to keep the, the title contention fight because that's what they promised us. That's why he was very in very. One of you guys, everyone who used like, oh, something was different. It was like, why don't you guys fucking say something? He told you told me after the fight. I mean, something was different, but like I needed to know. He tells me. He's like this. He's like, I just didn't respect him. And I'm like, how could you not respect Max? And I didn't catch onto it. So it's like, I'm always looking for flags and things like that. And 100% I take one 100% responsibility because that's how we learn. Everybody makes mistakes. I remember the Tony Ferguson fight. I didn't give any fucking water. You know, like there's like things that we all learned from. But the thing when he had told me that I'm like, how did I not catch that from you? Because he's like, dude, he was a smaller guy. Just didn't end. And almost like dude, Max is like one of the guys that I look up to from the outside. Like he is talented. I remember thinking what, what am I looking for? Like what am I afraid of? I kept trying to convince myself that I need to be, I need to find what I was to be worried about. And I couldn't find it. So you always need that before a fight? Yeah. Yeah. No matter who you're fighting. Right. You know? And so like I was, I've never been as present and like, I've never been able to retain a fight. And I, you know, before the knock out, I was there. Like I was in the, I was in the, I was in the arena. I saw the lights. I saw the people. I heard the people. I've never been there in my life. And I think that I can attribute that to me not being scared. And so me not, you know, me not being in a real fight or flight. Real life or death situation. Yeah. So we're a fully focused. You could actually hear the crowd. Yeah. I could, I could hear my thoughts. You know, I had thoughts. Never had thoughts in a fight because I'm so intuitive and reactionary. And that one was just so dear. There was so much. And so sure the kicks, the eye pokes. No, I think I was not, I couldn't have beaten the night with the mentality that I had. And that was my last lesson to learn. I had made my lessons, you know, my lessons with all of era was like, I wanted it so much. I wanted it so bad. And I wanted to perform when I wanted to impress my fans. You know, Rose had a fight that night. And she fought like absolute garbage. And I, you know, and I told my coaches, I coached the story. I won't, I won't do that to you. He'd said it for about to walk as I don't want to coach. He'd go up and let you down like that. And coaches pissed and everyone's, you know, the lock room's all fucked up because Pat's fucking weird. Is that the Carlos Parza fight? Was that the same night? Yeah. And I was at home until there was just, and that was again, that was my fault. I allowed those things to affect me and to, you know, affect my fighting decisions. Rather than just being myself. And so that was a huge mistake. Another mistake was, you know, winning two or three times in a row and just kind of becoming complacent with how serious what we do is and how dangerous this game is and how much luck and chance are a factor every single night. And so, you know, I wasn't doing the extra credit. I wasn't seeing this on a, at home. I don't know. I don't know why. And I made that mistake probably into the Eddie Alvarez Dustin Porre fights lost. And then I won three or four in a row and then I completely went back to the same mindset of on the best in the world. No, we could be a me and I paid for it. And those two mistakes were huge, very, very big learning lessons. And then the, the Charles Oliver fight, you know, I was like, I wanted it so bad. And then I made the moment so much bigger than it actually was because it's just 25 minutes in time. And I, all I can control is being perfect. My preparation for it, but then ultimately being there for 25 minutes and being perfect. And yeah, those are the mistakes that I made. I had to learn. I had to make those mistakes. I would not change anything about my career. I think the farther back into my career, you go, the more special this moment is. And you know, I think in time, again, I, this is an age like my career is something special. The way that I did it, the way that I, that I lost, the way that I stayed on track, the way that I, you know, threatened retirement. If I wasn't going to get a title champ, a title shop, the way I called my shots along the way, then the discipline I had, I mean, is seconds and on. I've watched this for my whole life since 1992. My dad showed me, I remember as a four year old seeing it, I don't have a lot of, you know, great memories. I remember my childhood, but it's like you have specifics. But I remember seeing it for my first time in my dad's bedroom, we were sitting there watching it together. And I was enthralled. I was like, this is, this is amazing. I love this shit. You picture that? It would like a baby bottle just squeezing it. Ah, no, I didn't think you were all like this. I was a guy hard fan. I've been a die hard fan ever since then. And especially 2001 when it came along, I was, you know, probably in 7th or 8th grade, 6th or 7th grade. I just fell in love with it. And then, you know, me and Carl going into college, we'd go and sit above the wild wings for 6, 7, 8 hours, spend $5, those poor service people. It's just amazing that you've been able to keep this ferocious mentality for so long. Because I remember when you first entered into the UFC, the Michael Johnson fight, I was so pumped for it because I was like, get ready. Because this is going to be fucking wild. Because I had been a fan of yours when you were fighting. What was the world series of fighting? And then that Michael Johnson fight was everything that I thought it would be fucking crazy, just a wild ass fight. Crazy coming out, Barney. Giggled so many times in that fight. Dude, when you were going to get the cage and you were like this, and you were like, look back and you were like, oh, I'm looking for the shot and you're like, block it off the thing. And then you come back with the right hook and then you let it back in again. Did you hit it with the right hook again off the cage? Dude, there's so many giggle sessions in there. I wasn't nervous because just again, that's the way he fights him. I'm like, no one's going to forget this fight. Michael Johnson was swinging. I caught him with that left hand. A few times. Well, that's the same left hand he knocked out Dustin. His left hand is so fast. He's a foul pass. Michael's power. He's just a foul pass. Dude, and he was trying to win. I mean, he was going all out that you guys just emptied out in that fight. It was fantastic. And I was like, there it is. The three rounder did get off the back lip. Took three rounds. He got up there fell out. I was like, you can do it. You got out there, motivated. I'm always getting so good. You're not out there, motivated. I'm always getting so scared for your knees. You're going to do that. Please don't hurt your knees after you won the fight. 100% baby. I'm on my missy end. We're trading for Kebebu. We're over at high altitude. He's doing back flips off the cage and I was like, stop. They're doing this after the fight. Yeah, he's like, hey, no more back. Could be good. We're over at high altitude. He's doing back flips off the cage and I was like stop Do this after the fight No more bad for us like today today today today day day. I become a bitch Get something and all the sudden you're special that you start protecting it and then you won't be special anymore I told him all like till today today today. He's fucking crazy Like I never would have to stop you and fucking crazy like everything about him in life When you play golf with him, he's the highlight he does shit that like you'll never fucking see like it's like Everything you do is the highlight like his life is like his fighting. He's fucking wild So your mentality you've never had to work on I mean obviously you've learned lessons along the way But you've never had to like sit down and work on this mindset as to always been something you inherently possessed. Yeah Yeah, I think um, it's crazy. I think people just complicate things so much like when you can truly Understand that there's there is things you can't control, but it's not everything You can only control what's inside of you. You know, you can only control how you perceive things How you react to things the work you put in the the world obviously the preparation yeah, but it's um I mean there's so much You know and I can say I always knew that something was coming because no matter how far off the The road, you know like I've made mistakes, you know, I've done I was never enough I think God I was never in alcohol like I never left but I was I could say I was I was probably a drug addict It's you know one time in my life and what drugs? I don't know. I haven't ever told my parents about this. I don't know you know all of them I want so but it's you know No, this is gonna sound stupid, but so I went to school for human services. I wanted to help people a big part of that is helping people come off drugs and I lost many over a handful of friends really close friends from drugs where I come from we're not far from Mexico and we had the best we had the best hit coming right across the border before ever got caught up and it was um It was my life, you know, where I'm from is very boring and so like you chase again, you know We have it so good in this country. We're always trying to create chaos in order to feel something and I guess that's what I was probably doing and in college is when I really you know, I'm going to help people come off of drugs then how can I ever even try to Understand if I don't know what they're chasing and so that was a part of it Also a part was felt good you know and so You know once I did Certain things I knew what people were chasing But then I always knew that something was bigger for me and better for me And I had something to do and so that was always it was never a crutch for me I was always like that was awesome, you know, I'm not doing it again What is it in your head that were you always knew that you had something bigger? Well probably my faith I mean I've been My parents the best thing that ever did for me was make me go to church every single Sunday and creative relationship with With God through the word of Jesus Christ and Just trying to live up to those expectations I knew not that I was going to be a champion or anything. I just knew that I couldn't take the easy way out You know When you're on drugs or when you're when you're living in a lifestyle like that then nobody expects anything from you Nobody wants anything from you and that's the easy way to live You know those uh There's no pressure no expectation. No expectations. No pressure and I mean it really is I can understand how you can let that overcome the passion to live You know and um I don't know. I just think the passion to live because of my faith has never outweighed my desire to Feel good. I want to talk about the shift that you made in your career from being the most exciting guy in the world Wanting to be the most exciting guy in the world being happy with performing to the best Your ability whether you win or lose to wanting to get the belt What was what what started that decision? It's weird because I Don't remember a time or a day where I made a change Other than I'm not going to get hit You know in the dust and pour a fight in the Eddie Alberts fight I I absolutely almost broke them And it was no different than any of my other fights. Nobody just ever Same with the elia. You know like nobody ever got past it. Nobody ever been able to withstand the ferocity of my actions for two or three rounds and then those guys did and I was like what happened? You know and ultimately I put myself in a position and I got hit with a shot that Um Took me out of the fight and so after those fights. I was like I have to not take these shots and that was Ultimately all I can say that I that I changed mentally is I'm gonna I don't want to get hit I used to never care about getting hit because it's like doesn't hurt Nothing hurts in there. You don't feel nothing. It's never hurt And so that was really just a mind test. I just need to not Let them get me in a predicament where I'm not able to really have to stop the fight So the shift but he he probably somehow outside not outside sources. Yeah, it's it's definitely there There was a shift and it wasn't just like an instant shift. There was the two losses in row with Eddie and poor you Uh Where he's like I'm winning these fights and I need to be able to get to the distance And I'm like all right We got to become a spot fighter because you just drown people and You're yeah, what's happening is you're making mistakes me through a located against poor Eddie got caught because he Based back lazy with his shoulders above his hips So I was like all right. Let's be sharp. Let's fight in spots Then he goes on a three-fight wind streak where he's finding the right spots and putting people out from from Vic to Barposa into cowboy Soroni, and that's where he's like and then I I sat down with him and I was like Do you want to be a champion? And I was like this is how you have to fight to be a champion is be smart and He never said he he never said he did what would be the most exciting fighter to boy He would tell me after fights. He's like I'm not even trying to fight excited, but look at me Then it's like fucking like it's so amazing like it's in him. It's just how do we how do we get you to Sprint 50 yards pull back for a hundred yards in jogging and sprint for 50 yards They'd like be able to know your your your your red line. Don't don't cross over that red line. Don't hold red line That is again the experience that you found in wars. It was so critical. Yeah, you can do it Yeah, I don't want to make things and it is I think it's crazy I think um again the fact that they said that he had outstruck me in the first round 39 at 32 or something You landed some hard jabs. Yeah, there's years were devastating They might have touched in thunder. I'm talking about The perception yeah, it looks like I'm getting hit. It looks like it's a lot But I mean my I don't have special skin. I Am able to see punches and Roll with them and roll with punches if you watch my foot from you know fights frame by frame I'm not getting hit for the most part. You're moving with the punches. Yeah, yeah, it's be like water like I'm I'm constantly You know and intuitively making these Potculations. That's the scoring that when you see that I don't know who's counting that but that's like amateur boxing amateur boxing If the white glove touches you in the face even if it's not a clean blow That's considered that's how you judge. Yes, and that that's where just that I think where you look at it from a point system You can't just look at the screen and that's why You know judges can't look at a screen and go oh, this guy landed more This is who won you had the damaging blows. I think everybody knows that like I did it Like I see the way you roll a shot I see the way that you fade off Yeah, and allow the shot not to go through your skull and Deflect it. You're still gets touched to you So it's considered that they landed that shot But the damage is like what you do to people by the way that you hip-through That you drive through people so different like they just in hits unlike any he still I still think to this day We got to ask su of c but they did a test out of to see who has the hardest bones that you have see he had the hardest Speed up just like dude. I'm so glad. I feel so bad for Luke. He don't let me You just On his pet on I kick him and his nuts will do I get blue balls, bro And so I can't kick the nerve on the inside of your leg I talked to a doctor about it because I'm like bro Like he kicks people and they bruise on the inside of their leg and it's because the shock through But there's a nerve on the inside of the leg. I'd go home and I tell my wife I'm like Hey, I got people Like you're like from here and I'm like just and she looks every like The fuck you got blue balls from Joseph or one of the things you were doing early in your career that I always thought was so wild Was you were leg kicking people from a car tie? Like you're a leg kick I know oh my goodness Like what way happened no one's doing that Like you were one of the only guys that I saw that was doing that That was from the clinch was leg kicking You've got some fucking flexible hips man Because the way you were able to do that from like right in tight like this and then and not just you put it away Yeah, you're whooping in yeah, he pulls them to their leg So he's making a base on that knee and then it's just like you got a stump in the ground You're just trying to bend that tree. Yeah, you know, man He's very good at that. Let me tell you something about Luke because I got into the octagon at right after you won And Luke and you know, he looked at each other. He was like He was so happy. He was so hard. He was so happy It was amazing because seeing all those videos and knowing he's in camp with you all the time and knowing how much he loves you Watching the happiness that he had when you won was fucking incredible. No, Luke is one of my really really good friends Pukes every time before every time before Trevor was in my corner Luke corn. He used to go Tear was only with me. I had no coaches. I would just do it in between You know in between wrestling seasons and yeah, he would go down there with me and just Brought my hands and he would just be there. Wow. He's amazing. One of the best human beings on her. Yeah, I love that man Thank you tell him about the the Sunday so the Sunday before The fight fog so so there was one time, but I think it was in the cowboy fight where you were you were pummeling with Ben And he finished with a locate on Ben every time and I'm like stop kicking your coach and he looks at me He's like he's like Trevor. He used to drag me back on the mats. He's like He's giving this fucking give me this opportunity to be as So we go golfing Joe and Sunday we go golfing the Sunday before the fight we get their Saturday we go golfing Sunday And you know it's a Sunday we never work out on Sundays and Trevor not Trevor Luke and Ben got fucking pickled They had like three very very very stiff mark Um There he's Luke bought like 12 beers Because we got there and hey everything's on the president and he's like fuck yeah I've never heard that before he's on the president. I'm gonna drink it's a like whole 10 or 11 Trevor's like let's fuck with them. Let's tell them that we're gonna work out later So we're gonna work out but I'm telling them they're gonna be the workout. I didn't know we were working out put it I had no fuck that's that day. We're definitely working out. I thought it was fucking with me We were out there golfing his heart as shit. I'm sweating my ass off I had no idea we were working out that day. He's like let's fuck with them. Let's tell them that we're gonna work out All right cool So I told him about we're always gonna text them but give the workout because I'll get a layout to work out for everybody and I told Luke he was gonna go three rounds of sparring Full on sparring and then Ben's got to go 40 minutes straight no breaks just grappling God wrestling just grappling and they're fucking dude and I told Justin I was like all right. Let's fuck what to see how he is and dude instantly be fine in text that we just started talking about it So we're on the way home driving home and dude Ben is like dude. He's like I'll just take you down and he's like I asked him how many times you can take him down So many times I want 40 minutes So we went 20 to you at what seven submissions on your coach he drug them back on the match It was so funny because I was like dude you got to drag him back up the mask because I got to quit this thing It's funny because I got a video I went I went so we get home I go down take a nap for like two hours and they just stay drinking Up My YouTube guy filmed everything and they're just talking so much Luke was good though Luke was like Luke's been through it makes like you're really gonna say that like Luke's like hey, I ain't saying hey this Not me and Tim, but they're making a plan how they're gonna team up on me and so Then he got the video there and I'm beating Ben's ass. No actually I went with Luke first That was fucking him up Then because then we'll jump in He's like what the fuck man what the fuck man? That was a time And he's asking for help asking for help. I beat his ass and I Did not for sure it looks great coaches. They are whole team is just everybody so dialed in Yeah, that whole week is one of my every time we go that whole week is one of my favorites You were using the sauna in between workouts as well and before and so we were nothing That's just sucked. I say it was perfect. You say it was perfect. It was not It was detrimental to our outside. So yeah, the humidity was there I didn't realize it because obviously it's not you know, it's not something I can worry about right now But after round one I just remember thinking Oh fuck I am so tired right now. How how is this possible and the amount of the amount of fluid I lost was thank god it was lost like Yeah, because it was in the 70s Yes, tell me it's with the cool breeze. You know when he got there what you feel is the cool breeze But just hang in the fire man. Yeah, it was different. Yeah, I hated the fact that it was gonna happen But I'm glad it did you have me I'm again I would not again I think how could you change it affects me it affects him. You know, I again. I grew up in the country He's he's a cityboy. There's no way he's not a city. Why don't know him personally? But there's no way he's not a cityboy, you know, and so as a country country boy from The desert and Arizona like I was Hoping that it would be hot as fuck hot as fuck Like we're down in the still I was like oh, yeah, these outside fights kill me. Yeah, you know, he was Like you were shaking dude. He was like trembling. I was like holy shit Well, it is crazy to ask people to defend a world title in a completely alien environment that you'd never have fights in we've had How many fights outside? We've had the Abu Dhabi fight and like was that 2000 and back in nine or something like that. Oh, they did didn't What was the setting I wasn't there it was it was when Alessania did his famous walk out in like it was covered But it was it seemed like the environment was outside Poreia getting stuck in Abu Dhabi No, they were down with Abu Dhabi. Well, we did one in Abu Dhabi when bj The big arena lost to Frankie Edgar that was outside in Abu Dhabi And that was when Anderson Silva fought Damian Mayan is that what that Ferrari building The Ferrari building was there, but I don't know if it was the same place They had it did it have a fight in the Ferrari building. I think they did that I wasn't there for that one I only went to one of the Abu Dhabi fights. Yeah, it wasn't it wasn't that long ago Remember when I would say it would be the last seven years Remember to do it in Morocco said after the first round. He was done. He was just trying to survive He said it was so hot member. Yeah, I mean, that's what I remember it Being over there and then you know what you realize the climate over there in the community. It's like Do you remember in a fucking dog member? Bow dog fight? They had they had a fight outside in the sun. Yeah on the beach Caesar Palace in Vegas Never Caesar Palace. They had a boxing. We got to fight their vote. I fell up. So get it up That's right. These still always do the time. Well, who's a fighting Around the NASCAR event. Yeah, that's that was crazy The ran versus her they were they were great. Yeah. Yeah. That's true. That's right At least Vegas is dry. Yeah. Yeah, yeah Zone of Vegas Yeah, humidity was what I was training for with him was heat stroke like dealing with it where you can't breathe It's heavy air like like so we put in water on the rocks and the siren as well And so we trained in a hotter gym I'd turn a temperature up in the gym Just so he's getting used to dealing with a little bit more heat stroke. We would spike my heart rate Then I would go in this on 15 minutes and I would come out and do a return to 10 rounds It was great. I'm sorry. Why did we did it very smart very smart because that environment is You mean it's so completely different. I just Ultimately, I think the best way to fight is obviously the way you usually fight controlled environment. Yeah, so it should be it was cool Though Joe, you know why so cool So we did we went did a rehearsal Okay, and I'm like why are we rehearsing it walk through like it is a very little freaking wedding Like just tell us where to go the camera guys are always like all right Mark you know, I'm following me so why are we doing this? And then we go there and we get stuck in this locker room for two hours Because of rain and thank god that happened because then I started to go oh because it's all unexpected How alien said hey, I'm a visualizer. I can't visualize this this arena And I visualize a lot too, so I was like I felt the exact same thing when he said that and That's when I knew hey, these are gonna be some huge unknowns and I had told him that night because their rain was coming like it Was crazy how the storm split around because it was all bright red. I was like this is thunderstorms They just and they were talking about pushing the fight to 10 30 p.m We had planned up fighting out of the night Two in the morning. I started staying up till like 3 a.m. After the first while I was like 3 a.m When we fight I was just starting seeing up But that's what was cool like the walk out like having the soldiers like did just walking through the soldiers there was that We weren't able to take any of this in Joe And I can't really speak for him. I know where his mind said I couldn't from a coaches standpoint I was nervous as fuck because you don't know there's no pattern I can take on right now and kind of put myself and breathe to it. It was very unique and At the end I couldn't even really smile was just like dude I'm just like blown away now. I can kind of just look around slowly and just try to take in everything because it was very very hard to to Go through that scenario with the pressure of us fighting on this stage at the White House Were the Americans? Were a 6 to 1 underdog that gets to you that that can you know when you hear that over and over and over and over It's you know, you can't get here. You can't you can't you can't you can't a Marlon but uh having Just that scenario was so unique and then once it was over Then it was like now I get to enjoy The White House and just be in here and this this this look at that. See there you can see it. What is he reading there? Is that the decoration independence? Yeah, so we weren't in the room with him right there. We threw the the rehearsal. Yeah, crazy We got that he's in the oval office stepping out and then all the soldiers walking through so cool Like having the two guys next to him and a lot of people complained about this happening at the White House and but Do you don't think this is cool? How could you not like this despite anyone that this shouldn't be taking place to watch a shot Life is a fight world is a fight. It's incredible to watch Horational it's a wild thing to watch by the way how much gold did Trump put on those walls Look at gold everywhere look at these fucking gold designs with rear the the the oval office First thing I said is I was like this thing small is hell like you when I see that pictures it like seems so big And I was there but the gold pieces on the wall is the first thing I was like they dust that shit every day Because dude it was so clean. Well, he put that up there really that was there none of that was there He was explaining to me there was no gold. They wanted to have gold He's got a gold cherub like a solid gold cherub that's above look one of the doors Because if Putin comes hopefully it doesn't fall in his head It's like he's got gold everywhere. It's all him He redesigned a bunch of the things there, you know, he's a builder, right? So that's why he wanted to do the ballroom That's why he wanted to keep it, you know, he likes everything in gold. He's a gold guy What's out of the powers but watch we were just watching you look at the decoration of independence before you walked out Which is also wild like this is never gonna happen again This is more historic than rumbling the jungle more historic than it I mean think about all the great fights that we've all watched as kids that were like remember that This tops everything because of the scene because of the fact that not always it at the White House But the American who's a six to one on some books underdog pulls it off in spectacular fashion and just the sea saw the Back and forth the fight was fucking huge because the second round was crazy. It was like oh no It landed go on again when it's our corner. All the coaches were like dude They're gonna stop it and I was set out loud. I was like, please let it go on And I just wanted to finish like a defendant of ending dude Because that would have been a point where it's like especially with him going hair want to go and continue and then we have got her Come out and say hey you are God from mark God. Yeah, okay because if it wasn't from mark God or different Another lesson. He wasn't for me. He did he want to know. Yeah, you know, you know for a fact You do not ever as a fighter say I cannot see it's over and he was counting on that He said he had already stated he didn't even say it again He did not think there was I don't think he thought there was so you think that he called Goddard a turkey internally He was like when he said oh, you're going to play Hey, I was playing that moment. He just like I've done you know I'm I've tried and it might have been like you know the little devil on his shoulder trying to get him out and then he Reevaluated and rethunk in understood that he had to keep fighting because you say tongue Don't get me thunk it I Know I stop no I stop I stop him twice I stopped him twice I know there's no doubt about it. That's I loved it. I loved it This episode is brought to you by on X off road Ever wonder how to reach these epic mountain legs. They're tucked away dispersed campsites With on X off road you'll find legal open trails around you and even better guided trails mapped by real off rotors each one includes photos terrain descriptions and difficulty ratings so you'll know if your vehicles capable before you go Unlike other apps on X gives you turn by turn directions on the trail and their new dispersed camping layer Shows where you can legally set up camp you also get private land boundaries public land overlays and the ability to download maps for offline Use so that you're never guessing even when you're off the grid. It's a powerful tool built for serious off rotors try on X off road for 50% off go to on X maps com slash Joe Rogan well it was It was a big factor that Goddard let it go on because then we got to see that epic fourth round which is fucking crazy Which was just and the end when you landed that knee the body that was like the final Yeah, that was it. I think he was right back. He landed that heavy big that he just starts chopping it where he got him on Yeah, and then then he has to quit on his stool and if Goddard had just given to that referee or that judges or the the doctors rather Desires here it is. I love how you punch right here right on the spot Yeah, so right there. Oh, I just laughed. Yeah, he did not like that and that was the end Crazy fight. I mean it's crazy. How different so again being a fan of this before I've got to watch you know I would have usually watched this from and yeah, it would have been the most fucking incredible thing ever Being the fighter, you know, you really not Appreciating any of that because there's so long into It's like golfing like you don't know but golfing is like certain swing thoughts You know and nothing else can come in nothing in creep in and so Relicking at the Declaration of Independence. I was looking at it, but I didn't I didn't take it in as as this being the Deco I was sitting there. I was like, okay God, we said his feet gotta control gotta move left gotta move left Can't get against the fence, you know, and that goes with the thoughts. I'm having as though through the whole walkout And so I'm really not taking any of it in as it as it you know as the show or as the theatrics of it Of course not watching it in hindsight obviously is it's fucking awesome There was something special about you warming up with the American flag running shoulder, too We were watching that there was something special about watching you shadow box before all this with the American flag on I was like if he wins good Lord if he wins tonight It's gonna be fucking insane and it was is the the feeling of like joy Throughout the building throughout the grounds like the happiness that everybody had seen had been there to see such an incredible event Such an amazing cap to that event with your fight. It was just nuts. It felt like a hole arena to me It was crazy for the amount of people that you could see here. It is to Fuzz the double white house You It was yeah, hey tell me tell me what was it tell me what would you use Newton's law? First law object in motion. These are stay I just stay in motion Look at the size of that fucking crowd that was outside You could see this crowd like I could see this crowd, but no what do you hear them and you could feel them Dude you could feel the energy I mean even though there was only 4,000 people to dot did not feel like 4,000 people it felt like a hundred thousand people because all those people were behind us Mm-hmm, you know it was how many people were in that play at 85 thousand plus yeah It happened so fast that the size of the group outside was insane Yeah, I mean and then watching on these giant screens are freaking out like a concert Yeah, we're at the way as it was like dude. That's what I picture like would stock be in like dude I looked and I could not see the end of the yeah No, it was not the way and it's were nuts when we first walked out like holy shit This is crazy, but it just shows how hyped people were for this event You know, I mean it was an incredible event. I mean they you have see production team They just knocked it out of the park and then more importantly You knocked it out of the park. It could not have gone the cap It couldn't have gone better and the most important thing was that you did have to overcome That we did see a real back and forth and we did see the skills that led people to believe that this guy is the number one pound for Pawn Farter in the world. I mean his fucking boxing is it leads it is Sharp shooter and I mean my coach is a fucking genius I mean when it comes to like again, it's really hard to you always sound right in hindsight, but the strategy we had Was so perfect to fight a guy like that. I mean if you I think if you ask him right now which way was Justin moving he's in a think I was moving right the whole time because my head is so So heavy and I lean over to that side, but I was moving Left the entire time and he's so pointed that you know He's powerful here, but when you when you put him here like nobody can push and sprint like he's not ever gonna take off sprinting That way as fast as he can he's gonna have to gather and reset and then and then point and then go and I constantly kept readjusting him and It was so subtle and that's what fighting is is a subtle subtle movements but I mean his game plan was was and then his game plan his mind my Ability, but really it's my athletic ability like if People don't understand how athletic I am and I think that is what surprises every opponent I've ever thought is how You know, Hurricane jerky twitchy how explosive and how athletic I am And I think that's the biggest asset that I have why do you think anybody be surprised by that at this stage And why do you think there's because the Hewitt because it doesn't look like that? No, you're I just I think you're looking into the patty fight I feel like the patty fight you you because a lot of people are like you look older You look this because the way we fought like our style are our game pattern patty. How sweet is that now? I mean if you watched the patty fight you would never expect you would only expect punches coming from here Yes, that's all I threw because he would pull in his body like ring on the men And this guy no shock I'm striking like we need a palm strike him we need to keep him inside of our loop and If it's throwing straight shots that patty patty will disengage be very long with his his upper body So he was throwing wild shots and then long upper cuts like stay on the outside We didn't only up because good patty's got very good knees coming in so we can't get too deep with that very simple plan But also it was like make it chaotic as most chaotic as you could be To be able to do that because patty his blitzing was very fast He's a very good blitzer. He'll he'll blitz past you and almost like running type of punches like all the veto or bell for it But this fight is a lot different where it's now Elbows in we have to be tied in these types of positions And we need to step to his center and get on his back foot line or outside of his back foot line And that was like a key factor to this one is because We have to be tied in these types of positions and we need to step to his center and get on his back foot line or outside of his back foot line and that was like a key factor to this one is because Ili is very front heavy and will bounce back and forth. So once he goes to this angle We need to attack the rear shoulder and once he starts to reset now We're gonna be able to jab and stick the jab at the rear shoulder where your jab was landing on. There's my favorite part Is the jab wasn't landing here where Ili's got a very good slide We're jabbing outside. So you're not doing inside jab coming under your jabbing from outside your shoulder Which is pushing and mine is rear foot and then once we started to pressure my favorite part is the jab Pause right hand his left foot Justin's left foot when we go It has to be outside his rear foot right there He opened his lead foot and he got his foot outside and that's also so in case the right hand count That was a giant moment in the front line To the sound of it was I wanted to tell his ass. Oh, that was such a hard shot Do that one more time Jamie and watch his lead foot after the jab now watches left foot After the jab outside the rear foot boom And that because he's got a high shoulder if I'm throwing it right hand down this point if you were looking at me Joe If you're if I'm here if he gets his foot out Now the shot is coming from here So we're gonna put him on the back foot and find that over because the Ili's got a very good shoulder tuck He also dropped that right hand down. Yeah It was beautiful. It was beautiful. It was such a giant moment in the fight like look where I started I started with my back to us and left left Mm-hmm left left left left But if you go out to the left backwards where that's where Iliad to me is the best how we stopped Volk where he'll throw at you and then you go and then he readjust as lead shoulder Almost to us. Alpa super dangerous there That was one thing we talked about we cannot go backwards to the left because that's where we get square and Iliad dude he's very front heavy so he will attack you quick and he gets there fast Well if he can recover from this it's gonna be a big lesson a big lesson learn and You know, I wonder if he'll still have those celebration dinners the night before There's no way He better not dude his team that's that's how to his coaches to be honest It's it's a mate. You versus an amazing thing like it it people love that kind of confidence They love that belief in themselves and when someone pulls it off people were talking for days about the all of air If I you know, he celebrated the night before in that crazy been it worked that time and it It worked out pretty for him, but the lack of experience being the nail So much experience being the hammer Notations he never thought he had to be here But you keep said they wanted to go back to this thing that you said that the people don't think you're athletic and I don't agree with that I don't understand why I don't that I Mean man being watches the Michael Johnson fight even when I think you're I got to college You know my freshman year of college and I did a Cartwheel to a backflip and these guy two one I was like I would have never fucking guess you could do some shit like that Like I just don't understand you know if you look at me I don't look like an athlete, but dude you want to worry no, I know I know how I thought again. I just see you talk the perception. No, no, no your perceptions crazy listen You look like an athlete. What do you fucking you talking? He's he's saying he's said me in this picture What I first bet of from he went up to do a clinic with his coach up in Granby with Ben Churinton and he sends me this video. I don't know why open it up and he's got a soccer ball And he's in this auditorium with the pads that on the ground And he's got his phone set up on night that the pads that are against the wall He throws a soccer ball up in the air and he does one of those bicycle kicks That really just like one or two years on the air He did a bicycle kick landed on his feet and the ball knocked the phone off the freaking thing dude He hit the freaking phone. There was a coolest thing I've ever seen I was like, bro, you are nuts. This guy snowboarding when we had snowboard because I wrote professional with I was younger Got taking out that out of high school for it and he This dude He would catch things so fast and his tumbling. There was one time we were watching him He was in mogles and mogles saw kind of snowboard. He does this 360 catches his edge Falls to his back and bounces off one of the mogles to a backflip right back into the mogles and do these people on the side thought You bet to do that shit I was like, bro, his tumbling skills. They're a freakin' nuts. You are an athlete. I think everybody goes through that Well, you're not built like poly costa if that's what you mean. Yeah, you know, it's like you're not You know, there's there's guys that have less body fat than you and guys have more prominent muscles than you But nobody looks at you fighting and doesn't think you're athletic. That's crazy I think it's the experts after the patty fight saying oh, he looks sloppy and those fights got to be sloppy Those people were retarded. Yeah, that fight. You like like chaos Looks like you were gonna press him and you it also looked like you were kind of disdainful of his his ability to hurt you There you go. Yeah, I know what I know exactly Yeah, once once I didn't respect his power, I was like, I'm fucking walking through. Yeah, and that's what it looked like It looked like you were just just trying to make it as chaotic as my You make it sound like you had like a water boy like someone was like The water sucks. Yeah, he's like Making the noises there. No, you don't know you but that's also a probably a good thing that you think about yourself that way You know because it forces you to Rise above and beyond anybody's expectations of you You know, and I think one of the things about this fight that makes it so important is because Iliad was so dangerous you had to get like deep in this you couldn't have a moment like the max fight You can't what the max fight got me here without that. I would have never Been as hungry. I said it was gonna happen and it didn't happen didn't happen didn't happen Then it happened and it's like, okay Now I can never let my parents see me like that again. That was that was a driving factor like I can never let my mom I remember being knocked out. I don't remember getting out. I got knocked out I don't remember anything. I don't remember him getting his hand raised and it had to have been 40 minutes to an hour and Then I just my first recollection is being in the ambulance and see my mom's face. Did I tell you that kid? I tell that story. Yeah, yeah, I mean what I did because I still don't know so we're in the ambulance, okay? You never know how you're back. Your mom's standing outside the back doors. We're waiting for the driver That there's a medic in there with us, but he's he's good, but he keeps asking the same question over to her I'm already this that I'm worried about like you know everybody's parents are different on how they react, you know and His mom was just cool just like I was so impressed I was so impressed with her just spirit of seeing that happen, but just as lay there and he's like He's cool and everything he does. He's got like this cool like lay like he's like, you know Just got stopped and he's laying there and he's like he'll look at me and he gets like his head He's like I got knocked out and I was like yeah It's like what is like what round? What round and I said last second of the fight and he goes good for him Dude, they didn't like do not tell you like two minutes ago by and we just be having normal conversation And he looked at me I get knocked out and I was like yep Dude it happened over it over and over and out and with fighter yes, but him saying good for him The way he said it every time that he came back to it Like the that's the type of person Justin is like if he if he loses in competition The better man won that night and that to me is something that stands out to me That's character character of him saying when he does it that that's subconscious traits that you have That's it. There's also the character that allows you to reach a full potential Absolutely because you're not being held back by any bullshit ego things not fake because there's a lot of people that are held back As good as they are they don't ever reach their full potential because they have some bullshit ego problem Absolutely They care of what everybody thinks and that in that situation Losing that fight in the last second of the last run and having that reaction that is the true Tested character that man is ever gonna go through. Yeah, that is true a test of character ever in front of the whole world But I remember first to see a mama's face. So I saw her face and I saw no concern I just she was worried about me, but she was not Concern chosen freaked out. No, she wasn't freaked out at all. I was like And that's when I never I never reset and asked if I had gotten knocked out again after that moment I don't think no no once it happened for probably I say you probably asked this six or seven times and then once It then we were cool for by five minutes before we went to the hospital. They are totally cool The the cool part about this Joe is Those are some of my in a sucks because you use he's taking a shot like this But me as a coach and as someone that just loves fighting and loves the inspiration and what these guys do is Those are my proudest moments winning a fight like this. It was proud and and You know take it in you're going wow This is a cool spot to be in and you have to be grateful for it But there's times where I'm caught smiling when my fighters are down like when when come Marl got kicked and I stood next to him with the biggest smile just because I'm like dude You went out on your shield. You were looking so good And this is the way you stand up again so important to me. Justin Salas one time with Tim means it was one of my proudest moments Just to see his subconscious like I love the mindset hard knee through Tim means hits him with the knee and He fights through it a little bit and takes another knee and he goes down and he's on the ground and his right leg is still like moving And he's like still punching and he's out and I'm like dude That's a fighting spirit like there is no quitted like a year your fighting through being knocked out and subconsciously he still in the fight and his body is still reacting that way instead of shelling up and being like I just got rocked I'm gonna shell up I could not wait to get in the octagon And they're like not trying to let me in and I'm like let me just get over to him and sit next to him put some ice on the back When we stop guys, I'm always over to the other opponent first to me That's that's the coolest part is being able to see someone go out there and do their best and then to watch them come back And that's why I'm very I'm very excited to kind of see what happens with Alia This is gonna be a hard one to overcome, but I hope he does because he's he's he's that talented if he takes the right lessons That's gonna be a super inspirational thing to overcome. It's gonna be hard But I sure hope we get the witness at I wonder if he's gonna stay at 155 There are big guys at 155 And he's he wasn't that big for 45 You know you think about weight cutting in the modern era like you were you're considerably bigger than him when you guys were standing next to each other There's a big difference. I've also really focused on getting bigger last three or four fights. Yeah. Yeah. I mean I You were a three in a patty fight of Wayne. I was 83 in a patty fight so he was I touched I touched 80s this fight We waited on Saturday at 11 Saturday when I went to bed. I think I was 184 Wow, and then I think when I woke up I was like 176 that's how much water will flow It's crazy. Our bodies are crazy Right especially because all the week, but I think when I got there. I was pissing so much I was actually too hydrated for the drug test. So I had to piss three three times a couldn't drink water You're too hydrated for a drug test? So if the pisses too diluted then they make you do it again really yeah That's why you know doing it after a fight. I used to do it after the fight It's all fantastic, but your dronel is gone So you don't pee so it takes a long time I've reached out to locker rooms for hours waiting for the piss test But when you're doing it after like rehydration That's a shitty thing because these guys have to hydrate everybody can take it as much fluids as they can So that makes it tough, but with the weight cutting that piece with him going back down I agree with you. I think Italy is a smaller body, but he's also a Big advantage for really a speed and when you go up and wait that speed is a huge factor If you see a lot of guys go up like with Max, Max kept to speed when he came up He when he went back down. I think you know everybody was like oh he beat Max He beat a drained Max. Yeah, I think that weight cut down to 45 for him with a rule That's and this is where From like a coaching standpoint if it is hard for you to make it at that weight I care about the longevity of of a person and I've seen guys get dropped with jabs because of bad weight cuts Yes, and that going back down and that's to me this carries part in this in this this fight game Well, I think there's two things we have to change the fight game one of them is weight cutting into them is your gloves You're fucking close it but the weight cutting thing. Don't you think that we need more weight classes? Or I should say that I should say do you think we need more weight classes? I think there's there's many ways I think you're gonna have to have some type of a weight class and There's different ways to do it like maybe you have where you can't go over a certain amount of weight after you make weight And you weigh in a week out where you can really recover because I think guys are gonna do it anyways It's gonna power for me. I think for me. I want nothing to change I mean we are grown as men and women and We're making these choices right, but you can make 55 and it's good for your frame now For me 55 shorts hard. No, no, no, I'm not thinking it's easy But you can't make it even made it over and over again But like think about guys that are in between yeah, like should there's a 60 or 65 or like a boxing Yeah, 70 to 85 is crazy 85 to 205 is bananas and then 55 that's those we classes are already watered down in a way and so you just gonna water it down more so These are my thoughts and my research that I've done that that it's it's I've talked to Dr. D about it and I want to get some expert some doctor who can actually talk to me about this because when I started researching boxing Why is there so many deaths in boxing? What stood out to me? Was almost every death in boxing in the last 10 to 15 years If there's every once in a while it's from a punch where they get dropped and they don't get up and They get hemorrhaging Almost all of them are past the ninth round Especially the ones I'm talking about that don't take a punch They're past the ninth round and it looks like they start to get tired and they're just like hey I need to take a knee and lay down a lot of these guys are winning the fight and not even taking a lot of damage and If we're cutting weight the day before you're teaching your body to sweat and sweat and sweat To me I believe because I've had a fighter Where you know come on is last? Fight we were cramping so bad so scary so frickin scary I was within like like minutes of calling I talked to the whole team about it but if you did dehydrate yourself think about lips if they get dehydrated they crack when I smile and If you dehydrate your brain and I talked to Dr. D. I was like could that be something if you dehydrate your brain We caused something he's like absolutely and then I started the research that but if you go back and look at all the Boxers and if we can get someone that could do their true research that understands this stuff That to me is like what scares me about weight cutting because you're training your body to lose that amount of weight and when you start to do things in patterns You just D took all the nutrients out of your body and then you're going hard in a fight like that And I was like the big thing with that Tony Ferguson fight that's kind of funny now, but it wasn't funny to me I didn't give no fucking water for a flat round fight That is crazy and the longer you take your brain to that point of dehydration But it's even water you just forgot dude, you know, we were locked in this guy don't train with water So I was like I don't drink water. I train with a practice because there was like you want water for pussies Talk about the mindset drink any water and training at all No, you know drink afterwards like he we did this height. They made me this day. I'm so do you think that that Luke? No because I it doesn't it can't because I'm fucking working right now. I'm locked in like I Might not get water one day. You know, they're my I might want water even when you do a strike the conditioning everything Nothing I never drink water. Wow, so you make sure you're hydrated before you get in there and drink a lot after and But once you're in there you just going Yeah, this fight was different. But that's crazy. That's crazy. That's me. That's you hear about the Me being the ramen asshole. Yeah, you know ramadons nuts like good You know, I know balaw was training with no water and you know drinking no water during the day and then training again at nighttime And you know that's that's got to be so hard but going through hard training sessions and no water So you do it but so there's two things go on why don't why don't they got maybe you could do more work and get more route meant more reps and more this if you're rehydrating but then the other thing is like Would you and how much mental toughness are you getting by not It's a crunch and the mental Toughness thing ultimately one you this fight. There is a lot of fucking human beings at the top Top level the sport that would have folded in that second round you did look the happiest at the Tony Ferguson I never look you gave me No, one it's not for one second. Did I contemplate that was done. No, I mean you that's that's how you hit me all the all Shit get to hear me the He goes dude. That was a good body shot. I was like yeah, I was three body shot Who does that I know who says that is like dude? Look at his face wasn't like like eyebrows like a frame cabin. Well even after the fun you were talking about how skilled he was You were talking I mean I could go I could go so many different ways with how I react to this fight. I just want it to be known How disrespectful he would have been if he beat me if you put me to sleep with his I mean can you imagine how shitty he would have been and I mean it would have it would have it was at the world owner and the world would have been fucking like For so much crazy. I was fighting for so much that night. Yeah, you know, I'm never gonna let people from what I know how special what I've done is and It would have taken all of it away with the loss And I wasn't gonna let that happen. How about the people called here? He has loaded gloves. Do you see the picture that? What a compliment. They're not watched any of his fights. Yeah, what people saying. I'm juiced what a compliment people saying I got bricks in my fucking gloves what a compliment You can't read the internet. There's always gonna be someone saying something. I know by getting you go I got here because I was petty. I Recomanced I read comments They fuel you they do they do I've got time to not tell them not to do it because I'm my brother This fuck's with so many people just we had the conversation outside I can say it up cause your mind to go crazy and he's like I love it so much David Goggins takes haters and he records them on a loop and then plays it to himself while he runs Yeah, I mean that's crazy. I don't I don't need to happen on video. I know Right, I know what they're saying. I knew what they were saying every fucking day, right and that's you know Parley why won well, it's you know that Teddy Roosevelt quote about the man the arena You know, yep. That's what it is. It's like there's always gonna be people on the sidelines or talk Impossible especially at that level that you're fighting because ambitious as you are you can never make everybody happy No, that's why it's a pressure. You know really is detrimental to like Overall like what you're trying to achieve and it's just so hard Well, you can't make everybody happy because some people are just not happy period. It's all like you being awesome Yeah, but some people are not they're not healthy. They're not mentally healthy Their brain isn't right. They haven't done the right things in their life and they see success as being somehow or another It steals their own personal joy Other people success is bad because they compare themselves to other people and they realize that they say I love seeing things happen Good things happen for people. Oh, like because I went when Max knocked me out I was like good for him like I'm fucking imagine what he's feeling right now Yeah, but because you have given everything you have that you you've truly Maximized your potential you've made mistakes. You've made great decisions and ultimately you wound up winning the biggest fight of all time Not to exceed but that's that's why you can be happy for other people to exceed your expectations From 2017 to exceed his expectations from 2011 to exceed my own expectations is I mean I cannot describe how special and how good that makes me feel you know in general Like that was my goal by two XHU You didn't exceed a man you you I always had a feeling that you're gonna do some wild shit and after the Tony first Do this No, listen at this there was a lot of conversations that I had with people that were counting you out Those are like I don't think I think you can win this fight 100% I mean I said it on the podcast I even said it to Ili like Ili was saying it was I was I've seen that podcast and he was so wrong So many times. Yeah, you're not just the whole he has zero chance against Patty He said something about how I probably sleep during the day more than I do at night Because I party too much and it's like you were so you don't remember him saying that He says something about weed and you're like I don't know about weed, but For him to think that that's true is fucking insane and you have five loses Two dollars got one lucid who could have Wow, what a fucking idiot You know like to think that I got here by just being a a guy that drinks and You know has fun all the time like that's fucking crazy. My life is so boring. I don't go to bars I mean I don't do any of that I sleep I sleep eight to ten hours every single night I was sleep in ten but it's too much so now I have to sleep eight but for This whole week I was sleeping 12 hours Every single night of the other fight week. That's nice. He was so fucking nice That is nice. You know, it's just one of those things if he wanted to watch your you have a YouTube channel You could watch well, I mean To be said about how I knew he was watching if you go back to my other like we always show sparring We'll always show me hitting mitzi I didn't show myself hitting mitzi one time this camp I didn't show myself sparring one time this camp purposely Switching up the game plan big time He had he had expectations, but they were none of them were based in reality and I controlled that That's awesome. Yeah, and then we know when I did make that an Comment about his wife, you know, it was in a In an interview like this where we're just fucking around and I said it in just I didn't It was a hundred percent true. I was like that he's so fucking annoying I couldn't imagine being in the same room with him, you know with his pompous attitude You know and you just trying to like hang out with the guy, but he's like constantly stealing all the thunder and It's irrational and it's like I would leave him too like I mean if that's my part like that's why I broke over my girlfriend because they were somewhat like that And so I didn't mean it in a mean way like I would never did get somebody and I would never make fun of someone's personal experience But that was like on that was just my honest take you are the honest guy and I was joking but But it was true you just say what you said so many two things to him I said the only I told him that he's gonna go the second round go to the third round You're gonna be fucked because you're not gonna be able to pull yourself out of this, you know with the way that you're thinking There's no possible way you can have these expectations face adversity and then come out In a positive way. There's no way it could happen. You're good. You could dig deep And you could be even more of a narcissist than it might work but You know, you're gonna you're gonna walk yourself into a situation that Is gonna fucking be detrimental to you and this is detrimental to his psyche and This is 90% mental Well, so again, I want to see him. I will see how he adjusts to the loss But you don't see us. He will be with himself the strategy has to change You can't just hit the gas like that and we've seen that with boxers We've seen that with all kinds of fighters. They just think they can just hit the gas Well, obviously you had to make your own adjustments. Yeah, you know how he overcame the the max fight. Oh, he adjusted You guys Wow Really good DC was even about it. He's like I never seen anything like it because this guy's playing golf like he's been playing for years It's really good everything funny. It's well, you know, that's Mind said that's coachable. That's a coachable mindset competitive and also Objective, you know, it's the same reason why you think you're not athletic It's like you you could look at yourself in a critical way and then see what adjustments you have to make where a lot of people are delusional Yeah, and then Delusion though keeps you from getting good at you doing a lot you perceive Dude, you got it perspective is everything like how are you seeing things? And you always got to see it from the internal lot not spot that it peaks in valleys like this right here like we come home and even through the airport Don't celebration. I can see this what it is Where's like Celebration there if you what we did there's someone was buying us drinks like we got there We got there a little bit earlier. She had to be in a fucking parade. No, I know, but I don't want that. Yeah, I know Don't I have to do it because I do need to take advantage like I am the champion. It's crazy. He still can't Fathom it, but I am the champion and I need to I need to be the champion Be a little and be the cherry joy being the champion For a little bit and you need you to look at yourself in the mirror and be like there's times to sit back and have bliss Where you're like man, I freaking did it like there's times to really watch what I thought that would come down You run down fucking yelling out different brands of manays with no motherfucker close out to make bad decisions You're like well, is that for us shit? Then we did fucking three fists of fucking vodka Are you gonna continue fighting right now I'm punning on it yeah, because you are done I don't have like hey, there's not there's not something natural in me that feels like it's over Mmm, so that's all I can say also after a performance like that Yeah, I mean I obviously either either right now either also either capitalize because the financial I'm in a I'm in a place where it's like I deserve To be compensated for what I have done 100% not for what I'm going to do or I know I shouldn't have to fight next to be I UFC 300 you have c3 24 and now this those are the biggest stages that the UFC needed somebody to To do something phenomenal and they picked me every single time and and I delivered I wasn't the main event of UFC 300 but combing events still still a show even though I lost and So I think I need to be compensated for what I've done That's what I'm asking the future for like an x-fight like yeah, reading the No, no, no, no, I'm not talking about for the next five I'm talking about the UFC should make a company and give me equity in that company and you know so I can build Passive income like that like I'm not saying that's what you talked to them about something. No, no, I would I would I've never as Luckily I have a personal assistant now, so she asks for things for me But I've never been the guy that asked for things. I wish I Wish people that were opposite me that asked for things and get all kind of things I wish I was given those things without asking because obviously people know That it's appreciated and I like it, but I'm not ever gonna be like I'm not taking this truck from fucking arm And there's absolutely no way I would take a truck. He never shook my hand. Oh, this is arm and tariq in Which should explain that so arm and tariq in he? He'd bet a million dollars on Justin's friend and one He won like five three Five seven five seven I mean, I would never truck Wow, now I just saw yours get a raptor. I have a show Raptor I think now that I've seen you truck that will be my next truck also it has USA on the side. Yeah, no wrap I love that you didn't do that wrap. Oh, that is a week. I want that joke You need that truck. Yeah, tell arm and body that fucking truck. No, I'm not taking something What the fuck if I was arm and I would force it down your throat. I would I would deliver it to your house and give you a hug No, you want him five Around in a fucking truck that a dude bought from me every day. I don't know. I just can't go there. You won that we didn't shake on it I don't give a fuck take that guy. I'm right you do. Yeah, take the truck It's first of all it's cool. Yeah, and he might also be an ex-dependent I mean, that's possible. That's the guy I mean, he's the guy that's up. That's the guy. I mean if there's anybody else in the division that that is the guy I mean now that Islam is up at 170 who else is there. That's the guy. I agree Yeah, and What a division? I mean, holy shit, and now Charles is saying he wants to That It has been a map and and the lightweight title on the line that would be crazy So there's fights available. Yes, there is big big what do you what are your thoughts like when you're thinking about competing? Who do you think it will be you think it would be Armin? No, no, I can't say that I have a name Do you think Eli's gonna try for a remap Peating who do you think it will be you think it'll be Armin? No, no, I can't say that I have a name Do you think Eli's gonna try for a rematch? No, he doesn't get a rematch. He can try but he doesn't get one. Wow He quit on the stool. He quit twice. I stopped in twice. What else do I have to fucking do? Plus his next challenge can't be me. He needs to fight patty Or someone like that. Is this patty of a fight scheduled? I think it's my end. The same the name. Yeah. Let's stop fight. Yeah Ben was a beat game. Yeah, fucking crazy game. It's a crazy game. It's a crazy game Think about where you were when you lost to max and then where you are now just like think of the highs Was not that long ago now you got to be a the the BMF champ. I wonder fight you Have every belt like have three three bells three real belts two intros But those are fucking real belts a real belt to be a NFL and in the UFC 250 belt Yeah, the UFC 250 belt. No one's so cool. They're doing too. It's so heavy It's free enough and of this sport like what do you want to come in here and do things that are not Easily attainable. Yeah, man. I've done a few things that are impossible to obtain a tame nine bonuses in my first seven fights 16 fights in the UFC. I probably what like 12 main events. Yeah I'm 16 five and to be put in the main event of a UFC fight is fucking huge like you know you go on the poster Not many people get to experience that and I've done it almost every single time and so I mean yeah I mean it's I've done something Unattainable. It's got to feel good. It feels great As a man it's awesome As a fan it feels good right as a fan of yourself As a fan of the sport as a fan of the sport. Can you see what you've done? Yeah, what do you think about zero con? We didn't do so We're in the locker room like are you guys are gonna go to a different staging room as soon as Bruce Buck for starts announcing? So they took us into a room with no screens That's probably where the video of me shadow boxing with the flag Yeah, we're in there for like 30 minutes before I walked and we could hear You know you little bit you hear that I heard the ding of that you know they end the round the horn I was like, okay, was that round one? Yes, and then you hear nothing and then I didn't even hear the finish I didn't hear the crowd roll and then I heard and still Yep, right yep, because he was no no no he said and knew because they were both gonna be new a Still no, it's gone. We heard gone Yeah, there he goes. Oh fuck he won Right guy moves like that's it's crazy. Yeah, he's for a heavyweight I love watching heavyweights I can move like they remember the Mike Tyson era just watching I was I love Mike watching Mike Tyson and just watching all the guys He fought Heavyweight box. He was so good at that time. He will use the jump roll Yeah, now it's like like I'm not gonna say that that all heavyweights are lazy But you know my knees are bad. I'm a big person like those guys can move and cereal gone is one of those guys But he's the most so fast and think about him as he started out as a basketball player They think about basketball. It's all these plyometric It's a constantly changing direction and moving and jumping Yeah, it's all agility and that translates so brilliantly to his striking style because you've got a guy who's 248 pounds who moves like a middleweight or moves like even lighter than that I mean really moves like a welterweight almost he's fast and just very agile and When you notice it is like because you know how good Pereira is and Pereira getting lit up on his feet like that and then drop with a jab It's like whoa. Yeah perfect time. It's heavyweights like those are big dudes Yeah, it like obviously prayers put on some weight, but it's frame size Yeah, you know and it's you know and it's prayers got a big frame, but it's there's levels Your body's been yeah wait for a long period of time like it's again that consistency. It's it's it's MMA guy going into boxing Yeah, they're shorter rounds, but you're hitting sprints every round like it's a different like there's there's you have to do it for Period of time to be able to adjust to that. That's a different Right everything that you do you have to slowly go into those positions You can't just jump into it and when you think about how big he was at 205 It maybe would have even been better for him to not really put on much weight I agree 100% like cereal gonzert grappler and you got to be fast. Yeah, you got to be fast Speed's a factor. It's a giant factor and he's got insane power. I mean his power has always been heavy He was so big he was 251 and I was thinking man now It's like even though you have more power you're also moving around with extra weight on your body like you're your way down more by gravity I mean gone looked so light and so loose He's just like that style for a heavyweight light on the toes like that is so unusual And not allowing for her to set his feet. No never like that's very smart and even like Fainting take down it's not like committed to those, but he's got him thinking about looking at drops and with the bottom into it now here's the question because One of the things that Pereira is saying is a lot of there's a illegal shot a lot of the shots were illegal into the back of the head But a lot of them were decided close close because they can't run so many when they yeah Yeah, it's a two inch line down like a Mohawk But it's like this is legal. This is legal. Yeah Legal illegal and the couple of those shots definitely landed illegally, but there's a handle his hammer Do you see a drop his head down to the hip exactly moving? That's legal. That's a Illegal one there's probably three or four right, but it's also movement and chaos. It's not like Liberty that's like poking some of the iron purpose like if I was that good I would touch their chance Right What's the fight stop there on the ground? No, no kept going This is actually the finish of the fight right there was a fig bottom of the big elbow right here and rocked him I mean Pereira was in real trouble. Yeah, I mean it was he got fucked up. Yeah, and Syro gone did a fantastic job. He really put it on him. Should you ever stop a Championship fight this is right here That was it right there. I would have at that point. Yeah I'm not saying I haven't watched a fight here. Here's the stoppage right here. You can see I have an either I'm just watching this. Yeah, that's like he always It was so many blows maybe he could have taken one or two more after that for sure But Pereira is pissed off at Herb Dean and he's saying Herb Dean should never ever Again because he allowed those shots of the bag of the head. I mean it you're in the moment I mean yeah fight but that's natural for a fighter to do like You want to first off you gotta bring awareness to it so they're not you know there you have to Always be aware of hey, I could have did better here. Yeah, that's how we all grow So we need to do we need to talk about it But from what I just watched her and I haven't watched the whole fight was the fight competitive at all. Yes, okay The first round was okay, so that would change a little thing But from what I just watched right there at the end that was that looked like good finished the first the roughs have such a tough job Yeah, I've been I'm notorious for being really hard on these rest because I mean it's they you expect You know what you need them to be perfect their their main job is to protect you When I thought Michael Chandler, I'm still and again I only speak about it now because I've never had a retraction from the referee whenever he poked me in the eye and then he Didn't get in between us and he let him hit me with a huge shot and then he doesn't give me my time To rest not rest to recover and there was only five seconds left in the round So it turned out that I got a break anyways But he goes in there. He says are you good? I said no, I'm not good He just poked me in the fucking eye and he says okay, well, are you good? And so then it's like can I still fight so that I said yeah, I'm good. It's okay. Go who would referee was this I like I with a braid that he puts in his belt trial my belt trial and so I was very upset that he let Michael Chandler land that that shot and I know why he was so scared of the fucking heat We were throwing that he Didn't want to jump in there and get in the middle of it But his job is to protect me and he failed he failed so bad right there and so like after the fact that I need you to Knowledge this so that you do not ever let that happen to another athlete in there because you fucked up so bad and You know, he's trying to justify it and it's like what the fuck are you doing? How can you justify this and so that for me that that that pisses me off and then the decision not to give me my time like I need an explanation Yeah, you know because I need to know that you are gonna learn from this experience and for right now I still believe that he doesn't think he did anything wrong and So I'm still upset about that well once you say Paddy where paddy you know you should be in that situation because you say to someone you got poked in the eye Are you good and you're like yeah, I'm good I got poked in the fucking eye and then you're supposed to say one or two seconds One two seconds, but are you good? I said well yeah, you're supposed to you're supposed to okay go Are you good is not the right question you have five minutes? Are you ready to fight can you see to bring it a doctor? There's a series of questions, but the you have five minutes is very important for a fighter game poked in the eye You have five minutes to recover. Yeah, I didn't feel like I didn't know I didn't know with the point I was I feel pressure in my face right now. I don't this feels you're not gonna know for a couple seconds Yeah, I don't know you're gonna you're gonna blink a little bit move around a little bit all right I'm good and that's when you're it's supposed to be very clear That's when you're ready to re-engage and that's what I'm saying That's the mistake he has to learn from because it was such a and after that the round ends I walk over to my dude Get your fucking head of your ass What the fuck are you doing? He said go to your stool. I was like no what the fuck are you doing? Like your job is to protect me. You just let me get hit with a huge fucking shot What is going on? And he's like go to your stool go to your stool And I sit down and then boom never thought about it again, but Still pissed off about that one you should be that mean that's that makes sense Who's the ref that against could be? After the fight he corners me in the hallway and he's like I you know, I know you I know you would never Never tap I was like I tap three times He's like no you would never tap. I'm like I might do it from the horse's mouth I'm telling you I tapped and he still was like no, no you wouldn't tap I was like what the fuck how can we get through this? That was time and you went to sleep I've seen that yeah, I tapped three times 100% you tapped 100% and he's like no you would you know I know that you with your the way that you Compete you What's a guy thing I hate to talk I only want to hurt a dog. I only want to one of the bus You know because it's like his in her job his intentions were good for me. You know, he believed I was He gave you a chance gave me a chance, but like I fucking tapped man I did fight should have been and I went to sleep because of it and luckily there's no detrimental and chronic You know long-lasting Problems because of getting choked out So I'm not like getting no repercussions. Yeah, there's no concussion. There's no TBI Like it really is not detrimental at all as long as you don't hold it too long and I die as long as I wake up I'm good right and so I was like okay like the repercussions aren't as severe and so like whatever I'll just let this go but ultimately he Did I mean I was even when I told him he didn't believe me that was the first thing you said when you jumped up You went over to him and then you guys had the conversation afterwards But you went over to him saying do what the fuck I tapped He's like that we see them later, but that was a good night didn't I was like do I tap three times I Tap three fucking times. Yeah, it's pretty obvious Like you know, they don't say and everyone's like oh you said you know, you're some kind of fucking You think you're some kind of Superman. Why would you tap? It's like when your life is ending? You know, you're a fool if you don't understand that like I knew I was dying And this is where I was yeah, so You are to everybody he said there I was like doctor. I know you better you do you never tap like You kind of fight like that. That's what I mean people think the best that's how he's the best thing up to this moment is people people don't get me credit for my intellectual abilities and I've also played into that and I've also understood how Big human asset is for people to approach me like that. You know thinking that I'm just some animal that doesn't Think or feel or whatever whatever people think or think I'm retarded Well, I think what it is is when you are such an animal people think you can't be smart because a smart person would be Aware of the consequences and wouldn't have the courage to fight the way you fight That's all it is and they and people who don't have that kind of courage They like to dismiss people that fight like savages because they go well savages can't be smart That's not right. That's not correct people. It's like you see a really hot woman. You got to be a retard Yeah, like no some of them are really fucking smart and also hot You know, like the world is confusing. Yeah, and you can't categorize people and put them into things little little you know Little fucking boxes just to make you feel better. Yeah. That's all it is, you know and your and the thing is I never signed up like when we were walking out to the the press conferences like 12 15,000 people out there. I look at the guys. I do I never ever signed up to be a public speaker What the fuck are we doing here? Like I never wanted to be this where I talk in front of this many people like I'm not what I prepared myself forever and now I'm in this situation where I have to You know every single word I get I say before these fights is analyzed by the world like the whole you know My father is my dad like Sometimes I get tongue tied. Yeah, sometimes I miss You too and I talk for a living. So I mean But nobody if people others if it had to listen to themselves They would understand that they also make mistakes themselves like fuck man like I can't be perfect. I'm sorry I really I didn't mean my dad was my father even though, you know, it fucking makes sense Listen you're dealing with a bunch of people that have to write Writing a story because something's interesting they have to make a story no matter what it is They're always their job is to create content and I guess you your job is to create content You make content out of nothing and it's not usually it's usually not good Yeah, and that's what they're doing. They're not good deals. I could have been mentally coached It would have been in that aspect public speaking just like I Think you speak very well. No, no, it's like I just you I guess there's no lesson to learn like you just have to do it It's like fighting just do it a bunch of times You get comfortable with the or you're naturally talented like Connor, you know, what a fuck is that guy? Why guy yeah, he's great at that like he's fantastic at that shit. I mean that's where he shines you ain't lying You are like Tom petty Tom petty to heartbreakers you are a pet is who cares what people think no I think he speaks right right I like you know, I like to see what people are saying about my Our interview and you know because I want to see the perception I want to Just keep it's my yeah, but the thing is you're asking for the perceptions from people that you would probably never Fuck and talk to in real life They're hungry and annoying what you know, some of the people that are most likely gonna comment Yeah, the people that are most likely gonna you think Michael Jordan's out there leaving YouTube comments No, right. It's not people that have their fucking shit together and have big goals 100 people who are really dialed in and really fucking discipline and the people whose opinions you'd respect they're not leaving comments They're certainly not even shitty comments you nailed that that's just the reality And I'm not hating on these people I'm just saying like I would have been one of them if you if somebody give me a fucking YouTube account when I'm 17 I'd be posting the most horrible shit about everybody Right everybody would you're a kid you're or you're a dumbass You don't have your life together yet But that's the type you can't listen to them and take that as gospel because it's just not just seeing him walk through the airport and just Everybody's perception when they see you and me too is so great dude like kids like people they like like Brother haters you if the haters met you know, I'm a big fan. Yeah, but still, but it's better One of those things is like the inspiration on people like Everybody comes up in there. They're your favorite fighter like I have the brand that you're the your favorite fighter favorite fighter Like that is unique. Yeah, that is like such a cool thing like you keep inspiring and very proud of me you You should be should be so proud you should be here So I asked you after the fight if you're gonna fight again You said to you promised your mom you weren't gonna make a decision and so it just settled in I mean where today We're here. It's Friday the fight was just Sunday. So it's five days ago So now you're just like fuck you can't you not after that? I mean you're the fucking champ. It would be great to go out like that. It'd be the an amazing cap, but also Great to at least one more Yeah, you'll see people like to watch chaos It's the highest level control course You know, it'll never be that chaos again because it'll never be like hard to understand By your gent flyovers and how dangerous this came is if you don't do it right and so it's impossible Yeah, yeah, so that'll be a huge It's a huge fact. There's a lot of there's a lot of variables that I have to contemplate When it comes to that decision Do you have a timeline in your head? I? Do you know I so You can't remember a time I fought two times in six months in the UFC I fought two times this year already in less than six months and So I'm gonna take the rest of the year. I hear my body to heal it. I would I mean I have What's the fucking diagnosis? I have a severe? Bone and demon in the tip of my fibula that happened on Christmas and I have been dealing with that since Christmas day So bone breed bleed like a bruised bones. Yes in the bone marrow of the tip of my fibula tip of my tibula is clacked against my femur and It caused a huge a deep deep bruise and I cannot get to help because I went You know, I was going through training camp. It really hurt after the patty fight When do you leave in when do you leave in today? We thought like six thirty? It's three o'clock. I got one of them to see if I can get you into waste well let me text Brigham and see if they could Jam some fucking stem cells in there before you know, I've gone to Vegas. I've got stem cells multiple times PRP Please PRP put me on crutches. It was crazy and then I did a corazone shot on the Friday before I left Wow and that that helped a lot Well, not training is really what it needs right and you've been doing any hyperbaric chamber stuff now That's huge. I got like a breed. You have no idea how Against my process you guys would be I mean, I got two probably had two Massages this camp Well, it's really funny if you look at the difference between Iliotoporia say YouTube channel as well where it's fantastic really goes into depth But they're using like all this high-tech neuro stimulation headgear and he's doing all these different things And it's all the video it's got him doing that and then me taking a 420 dab We're he had the the dog chakra on his forehead and it's how he got straight with his legs I got flat I hit the button And his legs again. No, yeah Balls each other yeah trying to tap into those intuitive abilities Yeah, which are I mean Yeah, funny I come from the fucking dirt You know my parents fucked up didn't put a golf club in my hand at four years old. They threw me in the dirt and You know I became comfortable with the uncomfortable That's a giant factor though being comfortable with being uncomfortable with a huge asset. Yeah, it's such a no It is it was everything in life with everything in life wrestling is definitely Definitely has is the biggest variable when it comes to my success. I mean the mental the mental side of it like Nobody can it's very similar to fighting in the fact that nobody can help you You know it is it can all the blame is on you all the success goes to you and you can never Use somebody else's excuse any team setting I played football if I baseball soccer swim team Something's a little different, but you know there's always Adjustification for why you failed or why you lost when it comes to those and you could always always Point to somewhere else or at least a piece even if it's one or two percent somebody else's fault They think then you can justify it. Yeah, the loss. Yes, and in wrestling that's never the case Not only that it's a combat sport that's acceptable in high school Like it's a combat sport They'll be taking junior high school. You take in high school and kids learn like there's there's guys out there that are different They're working harder than you the more aggressive than you they want it more than you they put in more time than you and That's a learn that's a lesson that's very valuable when it because kids Get delusion about what their abilities are how special they are who they are when you get fucking flatlined by some dude Just fucking picks you up and slams you on your back and pins you and you're like And you can do it any time he wants and this is the reality of training with this guy like over and over and over again You're like oh great. He lateral drops you in front of the whole class. Oh great Like this is this is reality now you're either gonna get better or Or this is gonna keep happening to you over and over and over again and the mental toughness that comes out of kids That grind it out and wrestling and learn how to wrestle on comfortable learn how to cut weight at an early age All that shit's terrible for you, but the mental aspect of it is fucking undeniable Think about how many great wrestlers have become great MMA champions. That's the most important Great business people like they they watch this a study a long time ago They said that the boxing and wrestling that Created the best employees because they accountability. Yes, you know and again the cutting the weight like you're responsible like that's the this What I love about Justin is What makes us so nice to train him is High-level people like I've had the luck to be able to train some high-level guys lately and I don't have to deal with any shit Like you know, and it's if I hold myself accountable Then there's we don't have to have these deep conversations or get our feelings hurt that were just true to it His accountability for everything is just there's there's nothing like it And I credit that to his parents his parents are just such amazing people and the way that they had raised him to hold You know because he screwed up a lot as a kid. I don't have if we were hanging out We were younger Trouble because you remind me of myself super hyper so like like making super bad decisions But getting punished getting grounded getting not not being able to go out late at night like strict parents in that Being able to understand that there is rules in life and you have to be accountable if you screw up You had to deal with the punishment and that is it comes from your parents in my degree I think my parents being such good people So my mindset as always since I was a kid I have looked up so the reason I take comments on Line and I read them. I've always looked up and given every single person I've ever interacted with the benefit of the doubt of being good and Whether it's what they're saying what they're doing their actions Everybody's been in my role model. I've never never looked at myself as a role model I've always looked at whether no matter what I even strangers like I Trust that they're gonna that they're good and that's where I start my that's where I start everywhere from and So reading comments online like I truly Taking to account what what I'm reading You know, and I don't know why because I know it doesn't matter a lot of times a lot of these probably fucking 1314 year old kids But I in my mind there are 50 year old, you know men with experience and I just try to use as much and as much of the readily available information comments Words action as I can from a place of like I feel like a child in a sense When it comes to like interacting with people and I don't know why that's how I take it or that's how I do it But it makes everything you know a little bit Better and I'm not as disappointed as much because like once I learn that they're not that But they're not good and they can't help me then I don't be like oh, that's a bad person. I'm just like okay I'm not gonna Have that experience again. Well, that's a good perspective. It sounds like you use it then and that's this everyone's different And if you can handle it and you don't get mentally ill from reading comments. Dude. That's a rare your rare person We had many That's what my I went to school for humans have I love to help people you have no idea how much joy it brings me To assist people to make people's life better to live someone's spirit I mean those that is what makes me feel alive and that comes to my faith And through my parents, you know my parents are such good people they deserve so much more than then most parents Because of their actions and their example that they showed for me and yeah, I'm just so grateful To be the person that I am because you know it makes life easier Life is easy life is so easy when you're not concerned about what people think when you're not worried about Things that you can't control. What's also easy if you're a good person What's your favorite person without the example of my parents you have an idea how good And naive my parents are and when I say naive it's in such a good way because they haven't Done the bad things that most of us have done and I and I failed him and The last time I ever did Drugs I woke up in an ambulance and I'm pretty sure I died And I was like I will never fucking do that again My parents do not deserve that And that was probably 2016 Wow, and I like I will never touch that again Ever my parents do not deserve that and that was that's why I'm here Well good for you dude That's awesome and it's great that you have such an awesome relationship with your parents And it really does seem like that attitude that you have is very freeing In a lot of ways it is Really is yeah golf We Trevor let's talk about those gloves What the fuck do we have to do to get your gloves into the UFC? It doesn't make any sense that we're using inferior gloves Wait, I want obviously I want to talk about this but the gloves I fought in this week Were different they are they felt they were different different They were the same same glove the leather was different it was Limited thicker I think and so it was softer And so every time I've ever fought I've had the most excruciating pain in between my hands right here And I didn't feel that at all this fight So it's like if you have like a thinner material going through it's going to cut through this little easier so it's tighter material This was looser because it was thicker it was weird So it was better better better for that feeling that all fighters For comfortable. Yeah, like there's no idea how uncomfortable we are when we always like to pull them on the glove The pole to back it's not getting a hand wrap too tight and you get those little things It's constantly pulling on the tongue here So you make it fish and it is harder But you discuss the genius he can fucking make anything So Hunter reached out to me three weeks ago four weeks ago and said he wanted to ignite Conversation again, so we'll see where that goes, but you know from that first position that we were in a lot of things happened in a great thing I always told you it was gonna be timing timings everything and They did the right thing and tried to make what we had spoke about you know we had a NDA and We had a five year and they moved it to a two year Took a lot of great notes and I'm very grateful to be a part of those because they did go out there and use a lot of the ideas that I had but they just couldn't do it to the level that I could do it and I thought it was super cool that they were trying because it was it is a problem that they don't really see and understand so I think they're they're in the right mindset and you know them helping the athletes that that was a great great thing to do But during that time when I was gonna talk to I actually brought the gloves and it was when you were fighting on 300 We were out there and I had a new patent that I had been working on so we could go opposite direction If they want to hone it it's a separate patent from the patent that I had that goes in all of our products the internal strapping This was a new patent still within internal strapping, but a more dialed in for a fight glove And then we had those two options and then when we got there all he had told me that I mean, this was a new patent still within internal strapping, but a more dialed in for it. Fight glove. And then we had those two options. And then when we got there, Ali had told me that they're releasing a new glove. And so we have, you know, two versions now, which is super cool. And yeah, I think it is great. Here's the conversation though. Like what are you trying to fix? I folks. Okay, I folks. That is not possible. You don't think it's possible to make less I folks. You can make less. You're making less. You never stop. I have to stop. Well, the question I'm going to stop because the fingers are. Your issue is the athlete. The issue is the comfortability of the athlete and the performance of the athlete. That is where your ambition has to lie when it comes to making the glove better. Because the things that gloves were finding now are fucking terrible. You have no, it's hard to make a fist. You have to use your entire muscle of your arm to make a fist. And so by the time we get to the fight, this is already exhausted and then the pressure in between your fingers is like something you can't replicate. Let me ask you this. Do you think it's possible to make something that's like a mitten? Something that covers over the tips of the fingers, you would have fucking 80% less I folks. I do think you could do that in time. I don't think that's that it changes hard for everybody. That's a huge change for grapplers and things like that. But you're a grappler. So most people are going to say, well, that's going to affect this or my certain locker. I think it would try it. But again, it's it would enhance it. The problem would be like rear naked chokes. Getting the ham on that. You have more thickness. Regular gloves are a problem already. But is it more of a problem just have the fingers covered with the regular glove? I think it's the same. It might actually even slip in better. But the thing is it's like covering the tips with like a mitten like those old school ever last bag gloves. I just think that I think it's a different sport now. But why? You can still clench. Do you do everything? You're talking about you take us to the ground. But you're like the same. You can still grapple. This is telling me so much right now. And if you take that, I'm going to show me. Yeah. Right. Like that is a that's a huge factor when it comes to intuitive abilities. OK, like explain that to me. What are you feeling with your fingertips? What do you think would be missing? Well, it's not the fingertips. When you get to my hand, like he moves away, he moves any direction. Like I can make that read. And that was farther than I was there. Right. And I think if you're going to take touch away from us, that would deter our intuitive abilities. Hmm. I wonder. I wonder how much it was. But I also think you've started. You have to understand where as a fighter for me, it's like when I am relaxed, when I'm relaxed. And if my hand can be in this position when I'm relaxed, then I'm OK. Then there's not going to be as many eye-pokes. But when I relax, and it goes like this. Right. And now I have to force your hand. Now I have to do this. I'm naturally, you're never going to take the human reaction and instinct away to protect yourself. And the instinct to protect yourself is, no, that is the instinct. Right. Natural, it's intuitive. And it has to be that because you're trying to get your chin tucked behind your shoulders so that you don't get hit. The uncomfortability and like the strenuous effort it takes to make a fist is fucking stupid. That's stupid. And this is the difference between your gloves and the current UFC gloves. My gloves are made of your hand. My gloves are one of those things that it promotes a natural hand. Natural position. A better grip. Yes. A better fist position where I'm not, when I squeeze my fist and I have the wrap on it, it doesn't pull my hand up like this. And when you see guys touch gloves, they're usually like this. Uh-huh. And it's lighting the bones up for, you know, again, they said that the last gloves were causing less knockouts, hard gloves, which are cause more knockouts because of better hand position, better grip strength on being able to have holds. Like if I'm holding someone's protection for your hands. Absolutely. And internal strapping. Like that is a huge thing. Like my goal at a certain point would have to have where you can't have hand wraps on. Like if you have a glove that's actually protecting your hand, but you have the gloves on that that what's equal 100% because if you got 1% of ads more, uh, more padding, more less padding or double layers tape, like there's many different things that you can do. And that to me, it's like if I, if one fighter has tape wrapping their hands and the other one has house wrapping the hands, the wrapping differently, which one's better for breaks, which one's better for punching. Like like, like so having that, that's would be really cool. And that's, that's the difference with like like our gloves. I'll show you that. I wrote my hand when he's ever taped my hands. Like his tape job is I can't wait to show it off to the commission every single time. I'm like, look at that. Tell me you've seen a better one than that tonight. And every time you're like, I don't think so. You got gloves? Of course you do. Of course you do. Of course you do. They're my favorite by far. And that ladies and gentlemen at home, if you're just listening, the difference is you traverse gloves and everybody else's gloves. One of the big differences is that you can see if you're looking at it or not. Let's see how their curve folks. Like I hand. The regular gloves from the UFC are not. They're straight just like this. So these gloves promote a natural punching position. Look, without even putting them on. They're already in that position. And then when you put them on, they're damn near perfect. The padding is amazing. They're fantastic. They hit the bag with. They're just fucking awesome. And they and more importantly look what they promote. So my hand is totally dead relaxed and it promotes a close fist position. The cool part too is this is what I was talking about. So this is he's doing the internal strapping right now. This is coming from over here. So that's going to pull this. Mm hmm. You notice we got pad on the side. So there's no like all the other gloves. Right. Right. Right. Coming down on a single knuckle. But again, this strap is going to really seal you in. Oh yeah. I've done this one. So these are better than the last ones you brought here. Oh, this is fucking fantastic. I've been dialing and finding the right product. Oh my God. You don't even need hand wraps. Well, you had told me before that when you hit the bag with his gloves, his bag gloves. I haven't used it. I haven't wrapped my hands in 2015. Pifer doesn't fight with hand wraps on which is crazy. And it can get to the point if we have the right position. It's awesome. This is so superior to the UFC gloves. I mean, the fact that this isn't being used by the UFC right now is fucking great. We're going to get it done. I hold it. Hey, you know what? I stepped away from like the business part. I'm the visionary now. So I got the right people that know how to make deals. So it's right. And the UFC is going to be happy. We were ready. Yeah. Dude, I'm in there like dude, you know, I don't do it. That was me versus could be a lot of people. It's responsibility. Oh, I believe it. That I didn't know that you could do deals all these different ways. You know, would they say what they wanted to do? I was like, yeah, that's how it feels. Really feels so good. Yeah. It's so better. It's just much better. It's like, where do you put it on? You're on the back. Well, this is one of the things that I love about you. is that you're so fucking creative with stuff. And you're constantly trying to find a piece of equipment. I have trained with for the last. Dude, we see so many. So that's your training back. You're training. Yeah, that's that's what I training. Yep. So that's how it pads in that. Never I never wore hand wraps once. You know, that's fantastic. And there, but yeah, I was trying to open your hand to go straight out. Mm hmm. And then the pointer knuckle protecting that pointer knuckle is so big. Yeah. That's it, right? Yeah. Oh, it's so nice. Yeah. Then you, you're still grip. You get still grip. But your fingers wrap things. It was hard to choke. And the door knocking knuckles. This is what you're trying to do with those. I bet you do. You got to go palm to palm. It still is those. Those are your fantastic. Oh, thank you. And I got you another pair of X factors too. Yeah. You got big hands. I remember I gave you the 60s. You're like, bro, please, I got to wear it for me. Yeah. Big hands for a little dude. Unusual. We'll get it done. But I mean, anytime you want to. I'm so happy. I'm so happy going to get it done because I pushed for it so many times. I brought it up, dang it. I brought it up to everybody. It was like, listen, what the fuck are we doing? You guys spend a million billion dollars trying to make these new gloves. You got rid of them in three months. That's because this could sound bad. That's because they've never thought about the fighter. But they did try. They tried. They tried. They tried. They didn't fucking try. They did do. You know how much money? They put it in my mind. They did. To do what? Giving the same exact fucking problem. They don't know how many people. They hired people. They didn't know what they're doing. They hired a company that works on full of money. They changed in their glove. But they don't know. They took the ideas. At least they tried. They did. I will give them 100% credit for that. They did try. But I remember seeing the gloves when they tried and going these suck. These are not as good. I'm right away. I was still uncomfortable. I'll hurt my hands. That's too important. Why don't you just get Trevor's gloves. What the fuck are we doing here? These are good. These are good. The best gloves exist. They're already made. There's only a few people out there that are willing to really get creative and redesign an engineer gloves. When someone does it to the extent that you've done it, like God. So Joe, when you think about that, that's where I think I fit in well with this because I want to involve with the company. If we change one thing, my first thing I want to do is help a performance. I don't want someone to hurt their hand where all of a sudden I hurt my hand on the top of your head and I just left hand it now. Everybody just, you know, there's no paper view now. But I paid to watch these fights. And now the guy that I wanted to see fight can't continue because he hurt his hand. So we fixed that problem. We fixed longer, better grip strength for the grapplers who are going to need to have risk control when throwing shots. I want to help athletes perform. And as we go, let's slowly develop and test with the athletes and find out because it's about the athlete. It's what works for them. And when we can get gloves on people and try something like you were talking about, that will take time. You have to train it and go, oh, I'll actually like this better than the pros and cons. There's pros and cons to everything. So it would take time. And that's where we're, I'm passionate about is let's find a problem and let me think through solving it. But I need to know what that problem is. You're here and we should send anybody to your website. Is it onyx? Yeah. ONX sports onyx problems. Dot com. Yep. Lot of people smell it with his gloves. The best shin pads. Thank you. And it's fucking phenomenal. There it is right there. That's the website onyx sports. It's fucking fantastic stuff. I mean, it's really obvious that it's a high level coach who's developed all this shit. I mean, everything you make is top of the food chain. Best tester in the world. There you go. I'm hard dude. I fucking break everything. I'm sure. I cannot break these gloves. I cannot break these gloves. I have to switch every like six months because I wear the phone out so much. I don't ever want to hurt my. but you got two or three sessions of training every day. Like that's for a typical person. These gloves are going to last well over. I Corey had his shin guards for four years. That's my shirt. That's my shirt. It was like three years. Yeah. And when you think about the amount of damage that that three years entails, that's pretty incredible. He was a leathery foam. Yeah. You're so much fucking so much. With sweat. Everything's getting broken down and moisturized and drying out again. Correct. Hey, that's the our bags that we're up there. Dude, we got connectors for the shin guards and the knee pads on the outside. So all your equipment is on the outside of the bag to dry. Oh, yeah. So that's really cool too. So just trying to rethink how things work. So I love about the way you approach things. You're always like fixing the problem. I can't stand when we're not even working on kickboxing and someone's kicking. And it's because they're fucking gear. That was a worse thing about fixing my nose. Fucking smell and people all like, oh my god. You know how the gym is especially with you. Right? Oh, like, the dudes who don't watch their keys, those guys are. That's a real problem. It's a real problem. And those are the ones always give you fucking kudies to do. Right? So nasty. Yeah, it's nasty. Listen, Justin, I just want, I'm so glad you're not going to fight to the end of the year. Like for whenever just enjoy that because that was a fucking masterpiece. It's so. It was beautiful to be there. And as I felt so American. American. American. I felt so. I wonder if this country because we're such a melting pot. Yes. And I think I have done it. I think I achieved that. And so I'm very, very proud of that. Dude, you did it in spades. You did it five stars. It was fucking phenomenal. It was one of the greatest events that any sporting event has ever put on. I mean, maybe the greatest sporting event in the history of the world. I said every four weeks, it's going to be like some miracle on my shit. It was man. I know. I knew I knew I had the opportunity to do something special. I did it. And then here, come down. Yeah, I want to stand me. It was incredible. That was so cool. So cool. That is. Look how cool that is. That is so amazing. That's so fucking amazing. It was an amazing night too. That was so happy. I went. I'm so happy. I was there to see it live. It was a really long time. I was honestly really nervous, Joe. I was like, dude, there's like just again, being around everybody and something can happen. The drones that kid, you know, that they stopped like, again, I wasn't knowing what to expect. And then till after the fight, because again, we couldn't take it in. It was a beautiful thing. And Justin, I was like, fuck it. If I get taken out in the middle of the cage, how fucking legendary would that happen? I said the Trump. I hope it don't die in the air. I said the Trump. I hope it don't die in the terrace. I goes, we got to go somehow. I go, I mean, I just like, I remember for the rest of the day, he turned me there. I'll pass. Find me up. Better the way it went. The way it went. That's the way we went. That's the way we went. I'll come. Way better. And here, congratulations. Masterpiece. Yes. Both of you. Let's go on. I just got a, I'm going to shoot a L. I saw on the first one on the go on website. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's awesome. Do you see that? Almost in your shot. Take it out. We fucking missed our ass off. It was windy. These things do not stop moving. They could see us forever. And they just kept going. And we were on shoot. We couldn't get prone. So we had to, you know, you're, you're, you're, you're, you're, you're, you're, you're, you're like, I'm going to have a prone position. I'm going to shoot from, we can not get in a prone position. So we're on shooting sticks, trying to manipulate the sticks and take shots. Yeah. And we were not really. So Luke, Luke misses from 140 yards. This story was so much. This thing goes to about that. That was in 93 yards. Crazy. It hits it in the head. Jobs it. And we're just like, what the fuck, Luke? How, how do you hit that shot? And there's a honey. This is, yeah, look at this. Wow. That's 1000, 1092. Was he shooting for the head? No. I don't even know for him. I mean, it was like an act. Yeah. It was like going in the neck. It was, well, 1000 yards. No, it's not. I'm just trying to hit the center of the fucking target. And these crazy prairies too, the kind of wind drift you're dealing with. And they don't, they can see from miles. These do not stop moving. No, they're, they evolved to get away from cheetahs. They used to be North American cheetahs. And so North America, this is all before the younger driest impact. So it was like when somewhere around 11,800 years ago, 65% of all North American mammals went extinct. And there was American lion that was bigger than the African lion. And then there was a cheetah. And these fuckers, these guys evolved to get away from cheetahs. So they can run like 55 miles an hour. For every, it's fucking crazy. That was crazy. That was a wild. When you look at them, they look prehistoric. They're eyeballs are like way out here. It's crazy how good a decoy works with them though. Oh, horses too. Guys walk right up on them on horses. Yeah, get a mukow. Mm-hmm. I think just walk right behind them. Walk right behind them. And then that's how archery hunters do it a lot. Because you have to get a lot. Yeah. Very tough to sneak up on them. So what do you do, Bo Hunt, do you ever, Bo Hunt? No. No, would you want to learn? You would love it. It's not going to have to learn. He's just like, but he's a hell of a bo. It just hasn't hunted. I shot an elk and did not recover it. And I told myself that I will never go archery hunting unless I have a time and effort to be 100% ready. Yes, right. And so right now it's just rival. Well, rifle is always going to be the most effective way. It's still an awesome way. Who's White Tail in Arizona is my favorite hunt? Oh, really? I'm going that with me when he's in. That's a fun hunt. Those are tiny little guys. Tiny and great goers. I grew up there. So my buddies, their whole life, have looked. We could go out there. We wouldn't find shit. Right. They're fucking everywhere, but they're hard to find them. Yeah, they're on the great goes, and my buddies can find them. And it's such a fun hunt. Yeah, it's a great hunt. Well, Arizona is a great hunting state too. Yeah, really. That's a real skeleton country. Yep. Yeah. Gentlemen, again, congratulations. Absolutely. Mastering Sunday night. One for history. One for the. Yeah. Maybe the greatest event in the history of the sport. I mean, it comes on to a road when again, baby. Anytime. One more time. Let's do one more time when you do decide to wrap up. Yeah. Thank you guys. Thank you. And onx4sh.com. Get the best club from the world. Thank you. Good night. Bye.