Hello ladies and gentlemen this episode of the podcast is brought to you by draft kings draft kings.com America's favorite one week fantasy football site where you can win enormous cash prizes every week You've already researched the players for your season-long fantasy team Especially if you're like Jamie and you're a serious dork about it turn that knowledge into instant cash at draft kings.com Last year these are real numbers one player turned eleven dollars into 4,000 in one weekend another player won a hundred grand his first time ever playing and another player won a million dollars in one day Just playing fantasy football I used to think fantasy football was ridiculous, but now I'm starting to understand it It's like when I found out how much poker players made I went whoa wait a minute I said poker what are they playing cards like a bunch of little kids No, no, they're making stupid amounts of money playing fantasy football. That's real I can't believe it like man like men. Yeah, keep your season long League where it is, but also play one week fantasy at draft kings.com to win huge cash this weekend hurry Get your entry into the millionaire maker event where first place takes home a million dollars That's a million American real dollars not like McDonald's bucks or fucking Chuck E. Cheese dollars or some shit Headed is there a McDonald's dollar. I'm gonna make that up head over to draft kings.com now and enter the pro Bo code Rogan to play for free to become a millionaire Imagine if you win a million bucks by entering the promo code Rogan at draft kings.com for free That would be ridiculous draft kings.com bigger events bigger winnings bigger millionaires and to Rogan for free entry now at draft kings.com That is draft kings.com Oh, she sent me another one the me undies one which I'm wearing me undies right now by the way Not that you need to know, but there's a new There's a new underwear sponsor. Where's the fucking me undies thing, man See this why hate when people when she sends me separate ones hold on so I'm gonna find it me undies They're the best underwear I've ever had I can give you one without any any Preparation, but I'll tell you what I didn't think anything of it I used to buy cheap underwear You should buy underwear like a package those little plastic packages that you get it like Walmart or something like that Just throw it in the car and keep moving but when they started sending me these me undies I was like what is it just underwear like what's the big deal? Well, this is one big deal Pete the average man Doesn't change is underwear more often than every seven years That's ridiculous like the average male buys a pair of underwear and keeps that rotten butt filter for seven years That's terrible and they're not that comfortable They also have that weird hole in the front that no one understands that shit was made like during the depression When people didn't understand how to really pee out of your own me like what is that hole nobody uses that goddamn hole Okay, do you use that home shut up Anyway me undies calm is seriously the most comfortable underwear you have ever tried on you will try these on and you will say oh They actually wick moisture away from your body. They feel perfect. They don't ride up on you They pull moisture away from your skin so that you're cool all day long I have them right now. I wear them every day now. See only underwear. I wear now I know it sounds ridiculous But if you try me undies calm just give it a shot listen to me try it and You will see that there are underwear that are better It's like everything else like someone came along and they figured out they figured out the better mouse trap they figured out how to make underwear better Go to me undies calm forward slash Rogan and get 20% off of your first order That's 20% off your first order when you go to me undies calm forward slash Rogan and you'll even get free shipping in the United States And our friends to the north and Canada free shipping up there as well I guarantee you're gonna be happy with them the best underwear seriously have ever bought go to get that 20% off Go to me undies calm forward slash Rogan At last but not least we are brought to you by Ting if you go to Rogan dot ting dot com you can Save 25 bucks off of any of the new Ting devices that they sell at Ting what ting is it's a mobile site that They it's a mobile service that uses the sprint backbone and They buy time on the network on the sprint network So if you are if you were on Ting you're actually on the sprint network But you do it by Ting's rules and Ting's rules will save you money my bill last month was 18 bucks Excuse me now. I don't do a lot of phone calls. I mostly taxed But that's fucking ridiculously cheap 18 bucks and I go online all the time with it 21 dollars is the average monthly bill per device for 10 customers $440 is the average annual savings for the per device for a business with one to 20 employees That's a that's pretty interesting. What's interesting to me is that companies are starting to What it's actually 11 to 20 employees a business with 11 to 20 employees $440 is the average annual savings What they've what they've done is they figured out a way to make you feel better about your relationship with yourself on provider like for a lot of people Cell put self on provider is just this big company and they have their rules and if you don't if you go over your cost you money If you you know this a bunch of weird shit that goes on like if you want to cancel you have to pay some sort of an early termination fee Tings removed all that no early termination fees no cancellation fees just cancel That's it if you don't want to be a part of many more you're gone You don't have contracts. You don't have any of that stuff you use what you use and that's what you pay for You don't have like X amount per of minutes per month It used to be that you would buy a certain amount of minutes a month like a hundred minutes a month And if you only use 70 of those minutes you never got credited for those other 30 minutes So Ting they did it first the first way they did it was the credit people They decided to give people the money back and credit their next bill And then they decided like why are we charging them for stuff? They're not using anyway What let's let's just set it up so that we charge people for what they use and in doing so? You will most certainly save money and it's the most logical and reasonable way to provide cell phone service in my opinion I don't see why anybody would not want to just do it that way the only reason is it Benefits the cell phone providers to charge you a fixed rate then when you go over that fixed rate They hit you in the overage charge and if you go under that fixed rate It's to their benefit so Ting cut all that stuff out and they they provide you with an awesome service With a great company using the sprint backbone and they do it completely ethically and I just I like doing business with them They're the official cell phone provider for this podcast the the phone that we use when I coordinate guests and make calls and stuff All that stuff is all through Ting you go to rogan dot ting dot com you will save 25 bucks off of any of their devices And they have all the finest Android devices in stock like the one that I have is the Samsung Galaxy S5 which is pretty awesome and It has a lot of features that like even with this the new iPhones that are coming out doesn't have like it's water resistant Which I don't understand why these people are making electronic devices that aren't water resistant when they can make ones that are water resistant It just seems logical if you go to rogan dot ting dot com you can find all the various devices and then if you're a cheap person or Frugal or or you just want those people that realizes like most Most of the time you don't really fucking need the latest and greatest and all this shit It's just it's a fetish in a lot of ways and if you're a weirdo and you like flip phones they have those too You can buy one of those Samsung M400s for 72 bucks you can buy one of the older iPhones You get an iPhone 4 for 112 bucks. Yeah Or you can get an iPhone 5 they have iPhone 5's iPhone 5s is coming They have the Galaxy Note 3 the HTC one M8 which is an awesome phone as well Anyway, rogan dot ting dot com go there save money be happy. All right gram Hancock is here Why fuck around young Jamie cue the music? The Joe Rogan experience My friends Graham Hancock I'll take these off since you're not wearing them. Good to see you buddy. Nice to see you Joe good to be back Good to see you Returning from floating. I saw your tweet. Would you a picture of Looks like someone was in space. Yeah That's how it felt to me now. I have to thank you for this because you're the guy who turned me on to floating I never did it before you spoke to me about it last year I was so harassed and so rushed and I never got I never got a chance to do it I thought I'd do it when I got back to England. It didn't happen So I got in touch with your friend crash a few weeks before I came out here and he very kindly Fitted me in and I think his place is called float labs. Yeah technologies. Yeah, I read the photo there. They're in Venice Beach So it's a totally new experience for me and what made the experience even more surreal and special Because I'd asked for an appointment fairly late in the day was that I mean He needed more notice. He's constantly booked up. Yeah What he could give me was the two rooms one for myself one for my wife's saunter at midnight at midnight two nights in a row and Actually, there's something about floating at midnight Which I think is really is really special. I don't do any floating during the day right right It's a really good time. It's a really good time to do it. Yeah, so we went along to Venice Beach and Part the car and crash came out and took us in. First of all he showed us his collection of African masks And he has got the most amazing Slightly fearsome collection of African masks up there. It's really incredible actually. Yeah, this is a deep guy He's he's he's he's a trip thinking about a lot of a lot of stuff and I've never I've been I've spent a lot of time in Africa I've never seen a collection like that. It's just just amazing doe-gawn, you know some of the really fascinating people's in there and their and their masks then he takes us down he talks us through what it is so You know You go into this room And in it I've seen in some places they have like a pod where you close a you close a lid of you But that's not what he's got he's got a bigger room than that and there's a big full-size feels like a huge metal safe If you have trust issues, you know, it's a little bit You've got you're gonna close yourself up in a huge metal safe in the darkness It takes a little bit, you know a little bit of courage is I would say is required to do that at midnight on Venice Beach We did it and and you know we go in that at certain warnings You don't want to get the salty water in your eyes. Yeah, if you do it's a big distraction You don't want to get it in your ears because it's gonna block you so you wear earplugs doesn't bother me I just go in with my ears. I don't worry I would prefer to because because the feeling of being completely deaf was slightly slightly alarming for me although I realize a sensory deprivation is part of the deal yeah and So you close the door there's a towel hanging off the back of the door in case you do get salty water in your eyes And then you just lie down in this I guess body temperature saline solution in which it's in which it's impossible to sink and there you are in the darkness Completely without without sensation Totally by yourself for the first time in a way ever I mean this is the sometimes we're alone but to be completely alone in total darkness yeah suspended in that Amniotic fluid that strange saline saline solution with no sensations coming in no sounds no light It's an extraordinary opportunity to meditate to reflect to just drift Away into another place and not There's a only danger. I would say it happened to me. I kept I find it difficult to shut down my mind my mind is always running and and a few times it when I was just wanting to let everything go Every day concerns and worries came back in and started and started annoying me But most of the time I was able to let go and it felt like I was I was weightless and I was floating Floating in space. That's why I posted that that picture on Facebook today because that's what it felt like and sometimes I didn't know whether I was horizontal or vertical. I felt like I felt sometimes like I was vertically Floating vertically. It was a very odd sensation I wouldn't say that I got into deeply trippy space, but I did have fundamental visions patterns lights started to start to generate purple Purple strips of light started to appear which suddenly were not there in the in the darkness with me and that was and that was interesting But most of all It was just very relaxing just very relaxing to let go Be completely supported, but by this soft gentle water and Drift drift away into the realms of the mind. It was it was a wonderful experience And I felt much better about it the second day than I did the first the first day was someone familiarity The second the second night last night was just amazing Yeah, that's what it's all about. It's all about getting used to the experience and the more you get used to the experience The easier it is to slip into the deeper and deeper states. Yes, it's but the first time it's very alien It's so odd and it's also kind of bump against the sides. You have to See crashes African masks Yeah, you probably shouldn't show you those before you go in a total darkness in a meat locker. Yeah Exactly, but yeah, the second day the second day so much better and so much so it's made me think Maybe I should get myself a float thing. Oh, you definitely should it's huge. I love having one I love knowing the time I want to go in there Are they loads of loads of money or are they okay? Yeah, they're loads of loads of money. Yeah, but I'm not choosing some thousands of dollars Yeah, especially the flash ones the crash ones rather the Original one that I got which was a some moddy tank. I think that was like six or seven thousand dollars But crashes are more like 30. Okay, because it's like car. Yeah, it's like it's like buying a car And it's also it has these incredible filters that it's set up through like it He has it set up like the one that I have in my house I'm the only one who goes in it, but if you it's a commercial grade Filtration system, right like he filters things through ozone. There's all these different various steps that it takes He's written like an entire like a multi-honey pages probably like 50 or 60 page booklet right on the necessity for different types of filtration and you know what he mean He's an obsessive guy. Yeah, and his obsession with tanks has made He's there's a guy in Austin that has some really amazing tanks too that does it a little bit differently. He does it through a Company that makes boats and his are really excellent too, but crash is like the leader of the pack Dr. Did out he's the master of the game. There was nothing like his stuff when his stuff came out now There's guys like the guy in Atlanta in Austin, brother. That is elevating his I spent some time there and checked out his facilities beautiful He's friends with my friend Aubrey, but the What what crash did was there was no innovation going on in the United States We came to float technology. There was like the standard samadhi tank, which is really great I mean, it's cool. You could definitely get a cool experience in it. And there's some some home models that a few people had But what he did is he just took everything to the next level and made everything these steel modular boxes that it fits together perfectly more sound deadening more insulation better filtration system stronger Reinforced sides because of somebody once would kind of bow out on the sides a little bit from the water and sometimes they would Rotten like you had to get things replaced. He fixed everything. Yeah, he fixed there was an issue with the the Linings would burn out sometimes because of the the heat pads He pads would short out it would burn through the linings and they would leak water everywhere He fixed that by first of all by setting like this redundant system and having two heat pads to so one Burns out you have a second one ready to go and then secondly he put these thick pond filters Yeah, he doesn't use like the same kind of filters that a lot of people do not filters rather Liners right his liners are very thick. They're like koi ponds. Okay, so he's done a lot of innovation He's really figured out a lot of different things. It's the place to go if you look enough to live in LA Well, also if you're lucky enough to be able to get in now because now he's booked way in advance But that's what I found I mean I wrote to him I wrote to him at least four weeks ago Yeah, and there were just no slots available during the day here That's why he gave me the two midnight slots. Oh, that's actually I'm really glad he gave me them the midnight slots That's the way to do it late at night's the way to do it. I understand he's opening a new unit in Westwood Yes, whether be seven. Yeah, that's long enough. No even seven's not enough I mean there's not there's you could open up one somewhere that has 50 and that sucker would be filled all day It was be 20 million people in LA, so there's not so many other people doing this in LA right now. There's a few You know, I think people are starting to Become aware of it now. It's it's a growing experience. We will need experience What one question I have and wonder about? What about if you you know have a joint before you get in or take some sort of cyber and what would that do? I don't know what it's like to not do that before you go in you do that every time I'm not so aside been but I have but the the pot is the Edibles the way to go for me. Okay, so I think about it now before yeah terrifying supply of edibles a terrifying dose or he's like oh, what did I do? And then I get in there. That's what I like to do. Okay. That's what I'd like to do as well if I hadn't given up Makes me years ago makes me very humble. There's something about getting in there. It's just uh and Because I've done it so many times But you know because I have the tank in my house I'm super comfortable. I can get relaxed with floating. It's a normal thing to me So when you're on the edibles, too, it just takes you to these really really really bizarre places No moments of paranoia or fear. You just calm there. Um, I mean, I wouldn't say that I'm pretty good with that though. I mean If I had real problems with paranoia and fear I wouldn't be able to do everything I do for a living sure You know, I mean everything I do this live. Yeah, you know everything I do when I do commentary for the UFC That's live edgey live edgey. Yeah, all these things are all live and you know, they all depend on Maintaining your sanity. Yeah, under sometimes pretty intense pressure, but um, so I don't I don't have those those Paranoid or fear issues, but I certainly feel the the the the thoughts I just don't indulge them. Mm-hmm. I feel the thoughts, but It's like a lot of good. Not indulge them. Yeah. It's like a lot of psychedelic experiences It's a matter of controlling the mindset I kind of equated to just the ability to communicate on the internet and the ability to access information on the internet Is led us to this weird place where if you wanted to your day could be filled with horror You could just go every day to the worst possible Websites and see the most horrific videos and the most horrific photographs and see the world and the worst possible light if you chose to Just a Immersed yourself. You know, it just watch the news. Yeah. I mean even worse than news I mean if you really wanted to really change the way you saw the world Yeah, you could live on a beautiful treat line street with the nicest neighbors and you know the the the the cutest little dogs Barkin and the life looks beautiful. Yeah, but through the portal that is the internet You can immerse yourself in one of those twisted sadistic minds and and it's like you have this decision to not do that. Yeah, and that's in in in sort of reinforcing that decision and in and You know making those choices you build up your resistance to doing things that are negative You build up your your resistance to indulging in negative thoughts And in that sense I think it's good Like one of the weirdest things is if you've ever seen someone who's never been in any sort of a conflict type situation But they get thrown into one and they have a panic attack. Yeah, and they hyperventilate They don't know what to do. Yeah, it's very weird. I've seen it happen many times I've seen it happen and then I've seen other people that are in panic situations or rather High stress situations a lot and they know how to stay calm and keep cool and I think Sometimes your life can depend on it sure very much because a killer. Yes scuba diving Which I did a lot of panic panic will kill you. Oh, I would imagine. I'm terrified of scuba diving I've never done it. Yeah, but I would imagine that being a hundred feet down in the ocean where the winds are Moving the currents banging you against rocks and stuff. That's got to be you lose it down there and you really gone Yeah, yeah, that's a that's a whole another world. I did some snorkeling recently with dolphins right that was in Hawaii and I actually did it with my four-year-old too Like I took her with me into the water and you know She had the mask on and everything and she's like looking down and we've seen the dolphins swimming under us. It was amazing Really incredibly rewarding did they come in scan you? No, they didn't but they they just swam underneath us, right? You know, they really didn't give a shit about us. There's really kind of what are those weird looking things of man They just you know, it's it's kind of um It's an eye opener like how little of a shit dolphins carry They don't care about you man as long as you're not trying to capture them. Yeah, they're like More people whatever. Yeah, avoid the boat. You know they came near the boat I've been around them though when they're very playful too Like we were fishing once and they were jumping by the boat and being really playful with us This was a totally different experience. This was they just pretty much indifferent But so beautiful like just being around them hundreds of dolphins. Yeah, and you're just looking at them swimming underneath you Yeah, I could imagine that Panic in that world Well something goes wrong, you know Adapt in a current if you panic you literally are dead. That's when you have to stay Steady and that's that's the power of the mind you have to it's mind of a matter you have to you have to impose your mind on that on that on that situation because you know I don't know why actually if you know we have all this evolution Why we panic? I mean they would have thought millions of years of evolution would have got rid of that terrible dangerous thing Yeah, but actually it's there Well fight though is so necessary it sharpens your reflexes It's one of the things about fighters is that a fighter going into a fight and not being nervous can be incredibly dangerous Yes, and when I was competing there were moments that I was too confident and I went in and I couldn't compete right I didn't I couldn't and I also couldn't snap myself out of it Like there's a level that you achieve when you're really nervous And you're not sure of what the outcome is gonna be There's like a level of reaction and of intensity that you achieve when you go into the into a competition Where you're scared when you perform so much better right right and then there's like when you're super confident You look there's something that happens where you're not nervous at all You can't get up for it. It's a weird thing that happens right so that adrenaline is I think it's a necessary component It gives you that extra charge. It's just about managing that and managing it's very difficult It was interesting. I watched a told you a few moments ago. I watched this some Hickson Gracie movie choke called choke yeah, and that's one of the things that he said quite early on in the movie he said actually He's always afraid. He doesn't say I am a fearless person. He says he says I'm always afraid. Yeah And and yeah, it's managing it's managing that what a formidable fighter that guy Yeah, he's an amazing guy too We had him on the podcast recently him and my friend Eddie Bravo together it was a Just a huge treat for me as a martial arts lifelong martial arts practitioner fan because he's a real master Fascinating fascinating any guy that documentary. I recommend that to everybody even people that don't do martial arts like yourself You what how'd you hear about it? Okay? Well my son-in-law Jason saris does mix martial arts He he does particularly Brazilian Jiu Jitsu at a place called the MMA clinic in London He does it three four times a week. He's very very very devoted to it and he's he's been talking me through a lot of these issues over the last year And I get it I get I get why he loves it. I think it's been I think it's been a really great thing for him And I think it's a really it's a really great thing for anybody there was a time in my life when I did do a martial art I did I keto I Got to brown belt in my very early 20s and then I quit I got quite sure why I traveled I went away I'd lost the practice and then in my 40s I went back to it and I went my way back up to To green belt, but I keto is a different thing from from this this real Grappling I mean in Brazilian Jiu Jitsu what I see is two two people who are interlocked and they're sense They're sensing each other each other's movements all the time is that you can't you can't predict what's gonna happen next in any in any way and and I Understand that it's a kind of meditative thing also that that if if you actually start thinking I imagine Because I don't do it, but this is what my son-in-law tells me if you start thinking while you're in there in that grapple with that Other very strong very dangerous person. I don't think that's really good I think you have to not be have to not be thinking you have to be acting somehow on muscle memory on on on on instinct on Experience you're not really thinking through your next move or are you I don't know sometimes you're thinking but a lot of times you are reacting on in What you try to do is achieve sort of a Zen state a flow state and when you're at your best you're in that flow state Where sometimes you'll be in a position where you don't even realize how you achieve the position you just you just Instinctively did and it's instinctive based on Thousands of repetitions many many hours of Matt time Matt Matt time is very important Matt time being the actual sparring itself Right because the the rolling the grappling sparring. Yeah, you you understand like the language of human interaction Like there's a there's an interaction which we in a person attacking a person defending and there's just like this thing that goes on We kind of figure out yes, and this is something that in daily life in our modern technological society Most people have no experience of at all. Yeah, they never in a in a fight Situation right never ever having to having to deal with that So if they suddenly find themselves in a situation of danger attacked on the street They're not gonna have a faintest idea what to do no well. Hopefully that never comes up anyway But the benefits extend outside of that in my opinion the benefits are it's it prepares you for Like the the drama of regular life pales in comparison to the the real drama of training and of competing inside the gymnasium like because Essentially every time someone does jujitsu they're competing every time you you spar Even if you spar with a very good friend you're still competing You know you you get used to this struggle and that's something that most people don't they don't have in their life right and in in having that struggle and in this competition It makes the regular stress that people go through the stress of bills and of relationships and it it alleviates and mitigates a lot of the issues that people have because The the life or death struggle of someone trying to choke you and you battling it out and you're tired You're exhausted and you're trying to remain calm and catch your breath and defend and trying to stay cool and trying to figure out What's the proper defense for this situation and how to turn this around and how to get back to a better spot? It's it's so harrowing and it's so it's so stressful But in a good way so you're totally in the moment. Yes. Oh, yeah Totally in the moment. You're not thinking about the other shit. So you grow you dated when you're in high school where she now You're not thinking about that. You know more the bills you got to pay No, no, you're not thinking about any of those things and in that sense it is very meditative that it alleviates a lot of the stress in life and then when it's over You just kind of you feel very relaxed because you're you've you've spent all this excess energy that I believe people I mean, it's not a scientific way of looking at the human body But I think of the human body in a lot of ways It's sort of like a battery. Yeah, and a lot of people's batteries are sort of overflowing with juice because you don't use them You sit down in a sedentary state in front of a computer all day Which is pretty bad for your back and you stare at a screen and you do your work And then you sit in your car or on the train or whatever to get home and then you sit in front of the television That's that's a lot of people's lives. Absolutely. That's none You stare at a screen and you do your work and then you sit in your car or on the train or whatever to get home And then you sit in front of the television. That's that's a lot of people's lives Absolutely, that's not normal for a body. The body is supposed to be Moving while you're young and alive and while you have energy you're supposed to be your body wants to be involved in activities Your body wants to go hiking and do things and and if it doesn't it atrophies and shrivels up and it stops being functional and When you can get all that energy out In a training session it does a couple things one it strengthens your body So that if you ever do have to use it for something even if something simple is like picking things up or you know Just strength to help move something. Yeah, you have that but two you you alleviate all the excess energy You drain the battery a bit and by draining the battery you put more juice in the battery for the future Make the battery has like a higher threshold and then you also like you could deal with stuff easier Like when I don't train if I don't exercise if I don't do some sort of rigorous rigorous physical exercise like at least a few days a week I really react differently to stress right you start getting snap-ish and yeah, well I get more irritated than I should I Fex me more than should but when when I train like if I train a lot of this Everything is pretty easy. Yeah, I've seen this effect on my son-in-law His couple of years now doing this. He's been it's really transformed him. It's really really great thing I mean I'm 64 years old. I don't know. I don't think I can go and do that stuff now I don't know if you found another 64 year old. Yeah, okay, or I could work with one with one personal one personal teacher You know to you know to you know to who would understand my my my level I see I see huge advantages in doing it I think it's I've got more and more interested in it over the last couple of years. It's really fascinating thing and also tell me about this I mean In a way you're being a warrior in there In a way in a way it's a warrior thing. I mean this is a contentious issue the human race we've been Around in anatomically modern form for the last 200 thousand years for a lot of that time our young men In many societies have been Have been called to warfare in one form or another I would say that it's it's gone on long enough for it to be a fundamental part of the human experience actually In our society today a Lot has a lot has worked to Move that aside and probably that's a very good thing although we still do have war of course when it's done at a distance largely It's done. It's not I mean I'm writing I'm writing novels about the Spanish conquest of Mexico at the moment I am dealing with I'm getting inside the heads of warriors and those guys are on the battlefield hand to hand with edged weapons That kind of experience of battle and warfare doesn't happen I think much in modern warfare today It's you know, it's more the guy remotely pirate thing piloting a drone and shooting people shooting people from it from a distance But maybe there is maybe there is a warrior need in us which which can be met in a harmless and Positive way on the mat in something like mixed martial arts. That's what I'm coming to would you agree with that? It's very possible that there's something to that I think that it's very possible that there's something to the idea that we have ingrained in us a certain amount of experiences based on the genetics of all the people that have lived before us and that Whatever fight our flight is inside of us whatever I mean throughout history Like I've been discussing this with friends like how fascinating this time is because throughout history in the past If a boat of strangers showed up, it was very dangerous. Yeah a boat showed up and you're like holy shit It's gonna but get crazy a bunch of men climb off the boat You got to hide women and children and now when a boat shows up its tourism and everybody gets excited Like oh, we need their money. Yeah, come on come to this island come to this place. Yes, bring your family It's a completely different world that we live in it is and those those experiences that led us to that led the human race to 2014 these experiences of People pirates showing up and Viking showing up and all those dangerous people showing up in these different places You know people coming over the hill on an army's coming that was just a part of being a human being for the longest time For a very long time have you seen this new thing that was going on about the the autopsy of Which king of England Richard? Yes second or Richard the third. Yeah, they found his bones. Yeah, which is really amazing man They found his bones like they found it under like a parking lot Yeah, how crazy is that? How do they know it's him? I Think that there's there's a long tradition regarding him and the battle that he was killed in and there's a famous These even a Shakespeare play where he's at the end of the battle saying famously my horse my horse A horse a horse my kingdom for a horse so that he can flee But it seems that he died in in face-to-face combat and yeah Was hacked to pieces as far as like one of the last of the The the kings to die like that to die in combat. Yeah, you would we're in the sort of late 1400s there I would say I would say so I mean combat went on the period I'm writing about 50 early 1500s was brutal and bloody brutal and bloody period a man like Henan Cortez is a leader But he's a killer, you know, he's a cold-blooded. He's a cold-blooded killer I I think that that kind of that kind of experience is is rare today Does it freak you out when you read stuff about like these these days and realize that that that all could happen today We'll just we need the wrong set of events to take place The we're not far removed as a species now from that time in in terms of actual history like it's the blink of an eye between then and now absolutely blink of an eye we are the same People nothing's changed. Yeah There's been some there's been some social changes, but look we're still slaughtering people on you know large scale In large scale levels. It's just that it's just that that hand-to-hand face-to-face thing technology has intervened a little bit in that If our society were to go into a radical collapse People could find themselves facing those contingencies very quickly very very very rapidly and it is in fact in a radical collapse in other parts of the world I've been I've been talking about this on stage a lot lately because there's a lot of these This is duck dynasty guy. It's hilarious. It's duck dynasty. This is ridiculous American reality show But one of the main guys on duck dynasty He gave this speech in this video speech where he was talking about the impending apocalypse and What they call the rapture when we Christians think that Jesus is gonna come and he's gonna take away everybody That's Christian and bring them to heaven and everybody else gonna be stuck on earth I believe there's a very elite group. I'm gonna go 144,000 of them. I'm gonna be floated. Is that what the idea? Apparently and he told people that they should watch this Nicholas Cage movie That's about to come out called left behind that's based on this very famous series of books Right amongst the Christians left behind okay and like these these people have a mean he doesn't use somebody who doesn't get ratcheted Is that that I guess yeah, I don't know it's so fucking stupid. It's so stupid. It hurts my brain to talk about it What's fascinating is that they're all worried about everyone's worried about the apocalypse. Yeah, the apocalypse the apocalypse the end again but The apocalypse if you go to certain parts of the world, it's there. It's there. It's in Liberia right now It's in Somalia right now right now listen back in the 1970s. I lived in Mogadishu I lived in Somalia. I lived in that that failed state. It was fine place then Back then it was fine. Yeah, it was fine. I mean why was it fine? I mean this is not politically correct But it was run by a dictator and he kept things calm, you know if well that that has been the case in many unfortunate scenarios I mean that's what's argued about Iraq You know if you looked at Iraq before the US invasion it was largely superior to what it is now vastly superior to what it is now again I mean we're not you know kind of not supposed to say these things right honestly for the average Iraqi living in Iraq Things were a whole lot better under Saddam Hussein. It was peaceful. It was there was not a lot of Interreligious conflict one was a secular state It was a secular state in fact quite tolerant and and all you had to do was not get in the face of Saddam Hussein Yeah, that was the simple that was the simple rule of life Just don't get in the face of Saddam Hussein and that was a simple rule of life in Somalia in the 1970s Don't get in the face of sie ad barre if you do. I tell you a story See ad barre Muhammad said barre was a president of Somalia when I when I went there in 1975 He did a number of interesting things for example the Somali language was not written. This was a nomadic society 70% nomadic he introduced a written script for the Somali language based on the Latin alphabet This had not been possible before because religious leaders had said they had to have it in the Arabic script because they were Muslims He just forced that through then he introduced a family law which allowed women to divorce their husbands At that point 11 religious leaders 11 shakes Mobilized the public and said they had to rebel against the ad barre Well, what he did he hold those guys out of the mosque the very same day and shot them all That was the that was the end of that argument and suddenly women Women could divorce their husbands and the society was very free and very open one can't imagine today from the scenes of horror that we see from Mogadishu actually how peaceful it was so you know it may be the case that in some in some situations An Iraq is definitely another example. You know we in the West are constantly saying we must have democracy democracy is a great thing Well, maybe it is a great thing at a certain point at a certain level when you're in a society There's very sectarian very divided into tribal interests very divided into different religious groups Maybe it's actually more comfortable if you have a dictator well, there's a power vacuum issue that I think the issue is Civilizations largely operate on momentum. Yeah, and when things have been set up in The way that they have been in Iraq on the way they have been obviously in Somalia Where there's one guy who's calling all the shots and they kind of got this whole thing established when that guy's not there anymore and then Everyone scrambling to be the new guy everyone scrambling creates chaos absolute horrific and hell and it creates this intense violence amongst the people like that they are Iraq the the people that are in that civil war state that they're at now were various sections of their population are vying for control of this failed state. It's horrific. It's horrific Yeah, this hideous death cult called the Islamic State Which may or may not have been initially funded and set up by the United States of America And it's allies who knows who knows who knows, but it's a death cult and it's horrible and give a frankly I would rather have Saddam Hussein than the Islamic State Crazy thing to say right the one evil is better than the other evil is obviously we're only talking in Objective reality terms here. We're not we're not like saying hey, it's okay to be addicted. No, no to total evil to be addicted clearly It's evil in the same as a terrible person. It's evil and wrong And we don't ideally we move to a state where a situation where we have no governments and where people run their own lives and peacefully Negotiate with one another, but that isn't the way it's going down in Iraq and it's not the way it's gone down in southern part of Somalia Yeah, that I mean that would be ideal right, but it's really hard to run a bunch of people Hmm like the idea of a society the idea of taking a million people five hundred million people whatever the number is and having a group of people that adhere to the best interests of all the folks that are in that society when the Their needs are so varied their resources are so varied They're the they're fortune in what situation they find themselves born into Yeah, it's so very and then you have the people that are fortunate sons and daughters that are trying to keep the unfortunate from getting into their gated Community of life so much craziness and you could be sure the dictators sons and daughters are all very well looked after in a dictatorship But always happens like some kids like see on various kids It's always always the case you know that they are and that then generates feelings of anger and fury that that is that is happening But a situation where just bullets are flying down the street Constantly and you live you live in permanent fear of your life That's not good either. Yeah, the arguments that United States has funded ISIS in order to build up support for an invasion of Saudi Arabia or of Syria rather are really terrifying And more terrifying because I don't want to look into it because I don't want to know it's a horrible thought Yeah, I don't even want to know I know that that kind of shit has happened before So when you see that it's happening now you're like oh fuck is this really going on? Yeah, because that really what's causing you know all this is profoundly depressing and the problem the problem is that We can't really believe Anything that our political leaders in the West say I mean they are they have been proven to be Absolute crooks thieves and liars. Yeah, they lie by instinct all the time And that problem with constant lying at the top levels of politics is that it pollutes the debate completely You suddenly can't believe anything that said and that leads to to suspicion of all of all kinds of horrendous possibilities including the funding and Setting in motion of this ISIS horror. Yeah, it doesn't help when someone like Julian Assange comes along and exposes all these things There are a lot of people disagree with and what do they do? They try to get them locked up on some trumped-up charges and export them as if they were really trying to export him from you know To to Sweden and eventually to the United States because of some sexual thing that wasn't even it seems so both violent or it wasn't even rape It was consensual with some weird sexual charge like I think they call it surprise sex or something like that It's not they're not even calling it rape right there's one thing like if if there was a woman who was saying hey Julian Assange Is a piece of shit he drug me raped me. Yeah, okay. Yeah, it's not that guy to Sweden But they're not even saying that This isn't a charge that makes any sense the fact that this guy's been locked up in the embassy in London for all these years It's crazy. It's a very crazy. It's a very crazy situation. It's really weird to see man It's really weird to see him on television doing these Skype interviews and knowing that he's in this embassy Yeah, and then the moment he steps out of that they're gonna snatch him up Yeah, so like he's just being protected by some weird loophole. Yes. Yeah, well you could take take take sanctuary in an embassy It's an old this an old little but you can't leave like he's gonna have to dig a hole underneath that motherfucker Well out yeah out of the street and then pop out of a manhole Yeah scoop him up in a car and take him to yeah coast of reefer somewhere where they're gonna Honor now we live in a time when they're just they're just constant Conspiracy theories. I mean there's even conspiracy theories about him, you know He is that he is part of the problem rather than part of the of course All of that all of that happens nothing is nothing is believed anymore and that the problem and that comes from the proven fact that our political leaders are actually liars that's like us again and again and and how can we how can we trust them? How can we entrust ourselves to them when they when they behave in that way? What's needed is is Transparent so what's needed is open do you think the transparency is gonna be an eventuality because of the internet? Do you think that I think it is right I think it gets blown wide open It's very difficult to keep secrets and it also it erodes faith in the the leadership when like Is this a democracy is this a representative government or is it some sort of a weird dictatorship? Because if it is a democracy how the fuck are you keeping that guy locked up? Yeah, how is Julian Assange still locked up? Yeah, because do you I need to know please tell me what exactly he did that you need to Export him to the United States. Oh, he really some information. Yeah, which is our information. Yeah, citizens This is not you know Information that should be kept secret. It's not from a king. It's relation. It's it's information that Someone who was being paid with taxpayer dollars did a bunch of shit that the United States doesn't agree with Everyone was upset by the information that was released. Yeah, everyone was upset by that video the collateral murder video Everyone was obsessed by this massive amount of of data that showed there was a lot of coercion a lot of lies a lot of Lot of stuff that we don't agree with and because of that this guy is like public enemy number one Yeah, that's that's so Anti what we think of as the United States completely contrary to everything the United States stands for yeah Compound and that and and so in answer to your question. I would say yes, it is some kind of weird dictatorship Yeah, posturing and posing as a as a democracy because for democracy to be real you have to have complete openness of information People must be told the truth then they can vote and make decisions on the basis of facts What we actually have in our society is the continual very clever mass arging and management of information There's so it ceases to be Democracy when the voting when the voting public are fed lies on the basis of which they they make their decisions and vote That isn't democracy anymore that is and in a way democracies are the worst kind of dictatorship because they have this appearance of freedom I have this illusion of freedom and everybody can say well It's great because I live in a in a democracy at least if you live in a dictatorship You know you live in a dictatorship and there are certain parameters that you have to work your way around But when you live in a dictatorship that is posing as a democracy It's more complicated and it's a where a lot of people truly believe and act as if it is a democracy But at the very top there's fuckery and manipulation and coercion and money and corporate greed and interests and the military industrial complex that is funding all these maneuvers and this people Profiting wildly and not to forget all the big corporations big big fan critical corporations all of this is about management of Management of information that we that we are given so what the internet offers is the opportunity for Ordinary people who are not part of the power structure not running a big corporation to take power back To themselves and that is that is happening and yeah, and it's happening in a big way And it's very disturbing to the powers that be yeah people want like an instant change But it is almost instant the the the amount of time that we've actually spent Having the internet has been pretty brief 1993-ish for issue I just want to give birth. Yes, and then like 2014 where we're at now It's really only been around in this form for the last decade like 2004 2005 and then social media allowing people to exchange information in the heat of political crisis Yes, and they were they've been able to expose things that are happening in real time that ordinarily would be protected Absolutely by the media there or they would shelter and filter the information now I'll tell just coming out and they can't so they have to shut down the whole fucking internet and some of these countries Which which which which is a very difficult very difficult thing to do now I've seen the the huge shift in power that this has that this has introduced There was a time as a as just at my own small level as an author Where I would have depended on The goodwill of the big media in order to get my ideas out there and since my ideas of sometimes been radical and contradictory to the established order of things it was very difficult to do that Well, I don't need the big media anymore Right absolutely don't need them and they're not they're not required at all they're redundant as far as I'm concerned What is what is important is the community of light-minded people that I am I am reaching through social social media through Facebook Through my through my website not to say that Facebook is perfect because Facebook is very problematic And is itself a large corporation which is filtering and controlling information But at least it's there is something there's some excellent things in Facebook though one of the excellent things is that everyone is themselves Yes, like that is your Facebook account. This is when you're posting this is who you are Yeah, for the most part. I mean obviously there's some frauds out there Sure, but a lot of when people are commenting they're commenting using their Facebook indeed identity Yeah, so like that's a real person. Yeah, as opposed to Twitter or a lot of message boards You're getting trolls and a lot of assholes that are posting under fake names and they just there's a lot of people out there That's like a sport to them. Yeah, like to be shitty or to rile people up like that always puzzles me that I come I come across I get relatively little of it on my Facebook pages. I have an author Facebook page I have a personal Facebook page. I run them both Parallel but the same stuff on both them is one of two people who kind of haunt me there and and just Always want to say just always want to say negative and unpleasant things and my view is go for it Guy, you know say those things if you want to well you're always gonna get that if you are in the public eye and the thing to be aware of Is that it's a tremendous waste of unless you're actually doing something evil and someone's trying to expose something which you're clearly not But if you were then that kind of makes sense like these people are crusaders But a lot of them are just what what you call haters in the United States Yeah, and the thing about haters is they're all losers Yes, there's no one that lives a fulfilled successful life with an awesome family a great relationship They're doing what they want to do for a living They're happy and at peace and they also go online and they're very Haters things and shit on people exactly no they're there. They're it's a mess of wasted energy Yes, like they're you and some people are really good at it It's like damn if you put that energy into something productive Absolutely instead of stalking Graham Hancock, you know and fucking with them all day You could get a lot of shit done exactly probably a happier person exactly so the only answer at the receiving end of that is not to Feed it. Yeah, it's not to nourish it with angry or or hurt it or hurt you know, hurt responses Well, that's what they're trying to do. You know, what's that? Well, the research is shit your fucking books. I white my ass with your book. Yeah, yeah Trying to fuck with you. Absolutely. Yeah, and the answer is the answer is Somehow somehow what I try to do sometimes is to just respond with love, you know, just that's it's nice if it's true It's real and I try to do the same if I can So does it's really hard But you do also agree I definitely feel this about myself that some of the Some of the criticism that I've received even of extreme criticism even if it's unbalanced. I've benefited from always Yes, it's useful though that there's something to learn from that. It's nothing. I was saying, you know What doesn't kill you makes you stronger? I mean you have to let you have to learn from this It's out there we have to engage in some in some way with criticism I've received an enormous amount of criticism from from my work and for the suggestion that was a lost civilization And then work that I've done on psychedelics and altered states of conscious just endless. It's non-stop And my my view is thank you. Thank you for criticizing me. I appreciate it If there are holes in what I'm saying if my argument is weak in a particular area and you're helping me to see that The right response is gratitude to that They really are in a sense working for you in some way because I Mean there's been unwarranted criticism that I've received that have made me Re-think a lot of things I do even if it's unwarranted They've made me rethink like what is the what is causing this reaction? Like what is there anything that I could have done differently? They could have avoided that or is this an Necessary evil that just comes with the business like yes, and it makes you think about things in a more complex way and although that might be Uncomfortable I think there's some great benefit of it. There's some great benefit from it and once again It's putting us it's putting us into a real social social situation as you say these people are real. Oh, you know It's like being back in the village in the old days where where you might be directly criticized by one or other of your fellow villages well now I village is the whole world and and it crosses all national boundaries and and all religious in interest it can be anybody anywhere who's taking an interest in you and and I'm I'm constantly receiving Information some of it critical some of it positive through Facebook in particular through Facebook which is which is very helpful to me And I really and I really appreciate it and I try the best I can I try as much as I can do it would be I don't I don't want to spend my entire day Morning tonight on Facebook, but I try to engage with that I try to respond because I realize that people are giving me their time Somebody sends me a link to a story. I haven't ever seen before. It's really important for my research. Thank you That's really great Twitter's giant for that for me. Yeah, just absolutely gigantic I've gotten more information from Twitter more interesting Websites that people sent me to more interesting articles that people sent me to than any other resource that I've ever tried contact with Yeah, and it's just directly because of interacting with people and when they send me interesting things I retweet them. Yeah, and then you know those retweets get seen by a large number of people So people see that I do that so they send me more interesting to exactly it's really cool in that way I like that. It's like it's establishing a network in that sense. Yeah, really it's a whole new situation Which we've not not faced before done on a done on a gigantic scale and and What it means is that information which used to be strictly controlled and in the hands of elites is now Changing the part the power structure of information is changing entirely and that's a very that's potentially a very exciting New time to live in and great things are coming out of it and and it's easy to say this But I think a new consciousness is dawning in the world actually I don't think it's very big yet I think the old way of doing things is still extremely strong But people are waking up to their power and saying you know, I am not simply To be pushed around and told what to do by an expert or a government official or or a corporation And that's great. Yeah, I believe you're correct And I think that it's hard to see while you're in the middle of it. Yeah Because it's all happening while we're you know, we're participating in it We are living in a time of extraordinary Rapid unbelievable change and when the history of this time Maybe things will settle down. Maybe they won't I don't know But when the history of this time comes to be written There have to be some perspective on it 200 300 years from now It will be seen as one of the most extraordinary moments in the whole human story My friend Amber Lyon has an interesting way of talking about certain events and one of the things that she talks about when it comes to Corporate control of information and like things along the lines of like the Julian Assange situation She talks about being on the wrong side of history Yeah, and I think that's a very good point that there the people that are trying to suppress information in that way and the information that would directly affect the lives and not just But the consciousness of the entire culture. Yeah, that that's the wrong side of history in the exactly all things are said and done People trying to act in their best interest currently. They don't realize like the fucking jig is up man You might be able to hang on and keep treading water for another three or four years Yeah, but the jig is up. Yeah, it's like the Inquisition was on the wrong side of history You know when it made when it made Galileo say that actually the Sun did revolve around the earth Even though he knew that the earth moved It's clear that Galileo was on the right side of history. We know that now We've got perspective on it. We can look back with hindsight and and it's the same It's the same thing that's happening today in the different ways. Yeah, it really is it's just it's just more It's more intense because it's happening worldwide and it's all happening at the same time and we're seeing positive and Negative repercussions of it like these failed states that come about because of Arab Spring Yeah, like everybody says let's carry the dictator and then you know more mark Pandora's box is killed. Yeah, yeah, and now Libya is like this in hell world In the years of hell world Syria is a hell world Iraq's a hell world In every case Pandora's box has been has been opened and the immediate result has been the things got way worse than they were and they were before and then You know if we if we're talking about the the dark side the negative side of things as well. There is this this horrible problem of bigoted Religious fundamentalism which is which is not confined to the Islamic world by any means I mean there are there are many Christian bigots as as well There's a tendency for people to cling on to old and devalued ideas and and and to have an almost Religious fanatical commitment to them and be willing I mean what idea is worth killing another fellow human being for because they don't share your idea I mean this is demonic. It's a horrendous horrendous situation that this happens I followed a few guys on Twitter that are a part of that whole Islamic state. There was an article about this guy Who's a rapper who is suspected of rapper from London suspected of being one of the guys that beheaded one of the American journalists and I was following his Twitter feed. It's just like it's they they banned his Twitter account, right? But it was you know It was just it was And I was following his Twitter feed. It's just like, they banned his Twitter account. Right. It was so strange to see what's going on. And also strange to see his, there was this thing that was going on with his interaction with the other people. There was this intense camaraderie. This intense camaraderie with this other Islamic warriors, you know, that they all looked at it. Everyone was brothers and sisters and everyone was, you know, it was all this, there was great intensity to all of the decisions that were being made and great intensity to the bonds they all had, you know, fighting against what they thought was the evil United States. And unfortunately, there was also some things that he said that, you know, they were talking about everybody's freaking out that one head got cut off, one body part got cut off off of this one guy, but what about the thousands of people that are blown to bits by these drones that no one's talking about? And that's undeniable. That is undeniable. That is absolutely true. Two wrongs never make a right. So you do not. The fact that that happens does not excuse the cold blooded slicing off of fellow human beings head, but nevertheless it happens. It should not, we should not condemn the one without condemning the other as well. Absolutely. But the one, you know, you're talking about one individual as opposed to thousands of people that have been killed by drones that are innocent, but completely innocent people who are so-called collateral damage, who are just ripped apart by our high tech weapons, you know, which will be head-to-person in an instance. Slice body parts off just completely destroy that. If you're lucky, if you're lucky, they only break off a few things and then you suffer for the rest of your life and agonizing pain. So we have to own this. We have to take, we have to accept that this is something we do. We in the West are not innocent of this barbarity. We're also part of it. Yeah. Is it we, you know, that's the real thing. Well, that's the real thing because when you come back to the question of the manipulation of public opinion by very small interest groups who have a very unbalanced control of information. Right. And who, what is, what does we mean? If it's not you and it's not I, do we take responsibility for people we don't even know, doing things that are under the orders of people we also don't know. And under the influence of corporations, we're not really exactly sure who's pulling the strings or how it's getting done or what politicians are moving, what pieces into place and the whole thing. Are we taking responsibility for standing by and letting bad shit happen? And not anything about it. And how rather to fail to fail to act when we know that something really wrong is being done in our name, that is, that is as bad as doing it ourselves. Have you ever seen the interview? There's an interview that's out there of one of the guys that say he was a drone pilot and he was responsible for, I don't know, a large number of deaths. But he would describe what it was like to be a drone pilot and what it's like to, you know, to operate these death machines and fly through the sky and just launch rockets and how crazy it was. And this is a new thing that didn't exist decades ago. Didn't exist during the first Gulf War. There was no drones. This is, I mean, this idea of precision attacks by automated machines that fly around the air and launch hellfire missiles. I mean, what a fucking crazy name. They call them hellfire. Yeah. And it becomes like a computer game. Oh yeah. You're looking at it on a screen and completely detached, completely detached from the mass murder that you are in fact inflicting. What a dark world. Dark. We live in a dark, we live in a dark time and the only, you know, the only thing is that there is this light which is growing. There is the capacity for love. Human beings, we are capable of love. It involves detaching ourselves from controlling orders and actually thinking as human beings, thinking for ourselves. Very difficult to do, but it is, I think it's happening. I also think that that conflict, the conflict of battling against the negative builds up the positive in some strange way. I mean, the anti-war movement was really a big part of what made the hippie movement of the 60s. Like, that was a lot of it was in response to the Vietnam War. War, the people knew to be unjust. And so this flower power, love power movement, LSD and marijuana, you know, that came out of that, that very resistance to killing people that didn't do anything bad to us. But used this very positive thing. But then of course there was a then-a-counter reaction to that, which we call the war on drugs, you know, which slapped down on that and shut it all down again. I mean, I know you're not big into supernatural issues, but you know, when I look at all of this, I have to say the Gnostics who, you know, if I simplify the idea, the Gnostic ideas and the not, we know about Gnostic ideas because a batch of texts were found buried at a place called Nakamadi in Upper Egypt near the Temple of Denderer in Upper Egypt, and they've been buried for 1,600 years. And they were found in 1945 and they contain a complete corpus of ideas of a people who call themselves the Gnostics. And they see a dark force at work in the universe, which is seeking to snuff out the divine spark in humanity. And it's a supernatural force. And what they say is that the entity who we've been taught for the last 2,000 plus years to believe is God, the abr...the abr...the God of Abraham who may be called Yahweh or who may be called Allah, that that from the Gnostic point of view, that's not a God at all. That's a demon. That's a lower level supernatural who's got this huge inflated ego who wants to be praised and worshipped, who's constantly urging his followers on to acts of violence and war. And I think it's...we cannot say there are any facts in this area. Maybe it's just the dark side of the human psyche. And maybe it's all generated by our brains. Or maybe there is a supernatural realm. But I think it's...I think Gnosticism is a very useful tool to look at the society we live in today. They believe that there were entities called Archons who are evil angels, who disguise themselves as human beings and mingle with us to drive us into all manner of crimes and behavior that is hostile to the nature of the soul. That's what I see happening everywhere, but they believe fundamentally we are good, and that we have this light within us. And that the way to reveal that light is through knowledge. That's why the serpent in the Garden of Eden is the good guy in the Gnostic frame of reference. That's very bizarre at the serpent being the good guy. He's the good guy because he's saying to Adam and Eve, you have to know the difference between good and evil. You can't just be these thoughtless meat creatures who are wandering around in a happy days in the Garden. If you're going to grow and develop, you have to make choices between good and evil. And it's the tree of knowledge of good and evil that the serpent introduces Adam and Eve too and says you need to eat from that. And actually I would say this is true. We are defined by our choices. It's through our choices that we grow and if we're ignorant of the context, how can we help to grow? Yeah. I mean, the stories of like Adam and Eve and all that stuff, it's allegorical. Right? I mean, it's supposed to be, there's an allegory to... Certainly an allegory. They're certainly an allegory there. It's not a real serpent. It's not a real... I don't read it as a real secret. I know you don't. A real apple. I mean, actually, for the Gnostics, very clearly and definitely it was a psychedelic mushroom. When the Gnostics portray the tree of life in the Garden, sorry, the tree of knowledge of good and evil in the Garden, it is... I'm going to need to mascara. It's the fly aggregate. It is sometimes it's a siloside. It is a visionary substance which they were said to be picking. And that that in a way from the Gnostic point of view is a necessary part of the liberation of the spirit that it's an agent for awakening. That's what the serpent was giving. Now, I know that all the fundamentalist Christians are there going to say Hancock is a devil worshiper because he's saying that the serpent is the good guy. But that's what the Gnostic said. And there was a deep and ancient study of the mystery of life and the mystery of reality. I've read somewhere I don't remember the source, but I read somewhere where they were talking about the interpretations of ancient languages and the translations from ancient Hebrew, Aramaic, Altagreek Latin, that a lot of things got lost along the way in the confusion and that one of the confusions was that the word apple could be interpreted also as red and then it wasn't an apple but that it was a red and that red being the color of the aminean amongst the area. That was why. Absolutely. I mean, folks have to understand if they've never tried to pay attention to how people translate ancient languages and then try to translate them several times, not just from ancient Hebrew to Latin but also from Latin to Greek, from Greek to English. There's so much that gets weirded out along the way. If you've ever taken a phrase from a Russian website where you don't know what they're saying and then put it into Google translate and you see the English version of what they're saying. Oh my God. So convoluted and confusing because of the way the structure of their language is very different. The grammar that they use is very different. It's nothing in comparison to how different it was in ancient times. A lot get lost in translation and a lot the translator imposes his or her idea of how nothing should be on the material and many of the texts that come down to us are highly edited artifacts which are actually representing a particular point of view. That's why these hidden Gnostic texts were just laid buried for 1600 years until they were found in the 1940s are extremely interesting. Actually we don't need to rely on translations. There were most of the Gnostics were wiped out by Christianity when Christianity pulled on the jack boot of Rome and became the state religion of the most powerful militaristic empire of the ancient world. It's set about destroying all competitors and amongst those it destroyed with the Gnostics but they were bent at the state from a very early date. But some Gnostic sects survived and they have left us images and there are a number of Gnostic churches. These guys saw themselves as Christians. There are a number of Gnostic churches where they painted the tree of knowledge of good and evil quite specifically as I am many to Moschariot. Yeah and even in French frescoes what is that fresco from like it was I don't remember the year but it was an Adam and Eve portrayal that showed several different types of several different kinds of machines like the Gnostic and Sabin. And it's Adam and Eve clearly standing and it makes you wonder like this was in not modern times but not 5000 years ago. This was like 1200 years ago. Something like that. We were at the tail end of the last surviving Gnostic sects. The Cathars in the south-west of France are an example of a Gnostic sect who survived through until the Catholic church wiped them out with the so-called Abigencien Crusades a truly horrendous act of ethnic murder that took place in the 1200s. So we are actually not that long ago and things have survived from that time. And it's very interesting that they are clearly indicating that the psychedelic experience is of crucial importance, that it's a liberating experience, that it allows us to wake up to the true nature of things. Now of course they would do it right. They would do it in a sacred context. They would work very hard on the setting to create the place and the space where this experience unfolded because that's part of the experience. The substance on its own is only part of the story as anybody has worked with psychedelics knows. The context in which the experience unfolds is at least as important and the intent with which you go into it. And what we're seeing now, again history has been obscured from us but recent research is showing for example the famous Elliucinian Mysteries in Greece 2000 years at the temple of Ellusus. Pilgrims came from all over Greece once a year to undergo an experience and that experience involved drinking a brew. We can now say with absolute certainty that that was a brew closely that there were elements in it closely related to LSD. And that this is- How do we know that without the work? Because the work has been done by Hoffman, by Gordon Wasan and others. There's a very detailed study of what was in that brew. It was called the Kaikion and growing on the barley that was used in the brew was an ergot, a form of ergot which contained LSD amides and which was soluble in water. They've really done the science in great depth. And when you read the accounts of great figures from the ancient world people like Plato or Socrates who went and had the experience at the Elliucinian Mysteries, they drink this, they enter a darkened series of corridors and passageways and chambers in this huge temple and this light appears and they start seeing visions is pretty obvious what's going on. Yeah, pretty obvious that they were tripping in some way, shape or form. And they saw it as nurturing. They saw it as nurturing. They felt that there were several of the ancients who had this experience and who said that after having had this experience they lost their fear of death, that they understood that it was not the end. Now we could argue about that but that was the experience that they had. Yeah, that's the experience that a lot of people have when they take acid. One of the things Larry Hagman said who was a popular American actor, he did this interview when he was on CNN and they were talking to him about death and he said that LSD completely took away his fear of death. He just didn't mean what it meant before. Yeah. Because he realized you're part of something. Yeah. He's part of something that's the, you know, it is important to have a sense of self because it's important to brush your teeth and it's important to pay attention when you're driving. It's important to take care of your health while you're alive or you'll suffer some ill consequences. But it's also important to recognize that a lot of your need to take care of yourself can be, can overwhelm your greater perspective, the greater perspective of being a part of everything. That it's not just about you and the worst cases of human beings are the egos run a muck like the dictator like the Sodom was saying or anyone who control, it's all them. It's all about them and you know, the illusion saying yes and they cut people down and smash you know and destroy and kill and leave horrible horrible lives in the wake of their ridiculous detachment from these universal ideas. We are a part of a giant collective consciousness and that's almost impossible to get to that without something. Whether it's yoga, whether it's DMT, whether it's something that you ingest that gets you to that understanding. That understanding is very difficult to realize with our normal conditioning, the normal alpha male primate behavior that I call the only problem solving state of consciousness. That state of consciousness is not our friend when it comes to understanding our place in the wider scheme of things. It is our friend in many ways and it's a good state of consciousness but there are so many other states of consciousness that are that are of value and that need to be sought out. Now some people are very lucky and they can get into deeply altered states of consciousness and see reality in a different way without needing to take any substance. Or they can get there through meditation or they can get there through floating in a flotation tank. But for a lot of people, a very powerful vehicle for changing our perspective on the nature of reality has been for thousands of years the psychedelic experience and it's time that we rehabilitated that and gave it a place in our society. Well I think as you were talking about earlier that this is a time of great change. I think this is a time of great awakening when it comes to psychedelics. I was listening to this guy, Sturgyl Simpson. I tweeted it today. He's a country music singer who sings about DMT. Oh really? I haven't come to trouble. I mean as country music like old school, wayland, jennings style country music. If you're into that and I am, I like to kind of hold me. I've been really into that the last couple of years. I've always been a Johnny Cash fan. I've always liked Dwight Yokeham and some country singers but I've gotten into a bunch of other stuff recently. This guy, Sturgyl Simpson, it's like a big part of what he's singing about. It's psychedelics. Yes. And in a country song, incredible stuff. And I think that that to me just sort of highlights that this is spreading through a bunch of different genres, different art forms. You see a lot of psychedelic art now. Not just Alex Gray who's the master but you see others that are coming along. A lot of psychedelic art work. I see it all the time when I go and speak at events at conferences. I'm not made with their art and I'm seeing this huge explosion of visionary creativity taking place. And I'm constantly meeting people whose lives have been transformed by these experiences. And I think a lot of people are getting informed by guys like you who have written books on these experiences from supernatural to your own discussions, including the one that got banned from TED. But the whole TED thing has kind of been exposed as being this really bizarre, almost cultish thing that's done a lot of great good. I mean, I'm a big fan of a lot of the speakers that have come on TED. I had Eddie Huang on the show where he talked about his experience in TED where they kicked him out because he left there to do my podcast. They wanted him to be a part of this whole thing all day where you had to hang out. He had to stay in a hotel room with someone else. Like they made him. He's like, can I get my own hotel room there? You have to get that experience. You have to shack up with some fucking random dude who's talking about physics or whatever it is. It's a cult. It's a cult. It's a cult. It's like Scientology. Well, it's also become intensely profitable. And one thing's become intensely profitable and they come to his giant business. That's part of why your talk got banned from TED. Instead of having an open discourse about agreeing or disagreeing about what you're saying, there's nothing wrong with that. But your talk got banned because of pressure from a bunch of people, they start using the word pseudoscience. Pseudo-science. Stop the pseudoscience. There's almost a cult of people that are afraid of debating ideas that are very controversial and very difficult to nail down, especially when you're talking about the emergence of consciousness in early man. No one knows how the fuck people got from hunting things to drawing on cave walls, to experiencing visionary psychedelic states. But we do know that happened. It happened. It happened. It's not like 1940, whatever the fuck it was when people figured out ayahuasca, whatever year it was, what year it was? Ayahuasca goes back a very long way. No, but I mean Western world, when McKenna talked about how they first when they found harming, they wanted to call it telepathy. Yeah, telepathy. That's right. But they realized that it had already been, it had been scientifically defined as harming. Yeah. So that was like what year was that? That would probably be in 1930s somewhere of 30 or 40 years. And then Watson, Gordon Watson was in like the 50s. It goes down to Mexico and Countess Maria Sabina has a mushroom experience. And that's the beginning of the mushroom story in the West, actually. So that's like modern Western culture and civilization. This is our introduction to it. But the shit it been going on for thousands of years. Thousands of thousands of thousands of years. So for us to assume that these, you especially you and I who have had these psychedelic experiences, I've never had an ayahuasca experience, but I've had a dozen DMT trips. And mushroom trips. Yeah. There's something there. Yeah. There's something there that's unbelievably intense. And to deny that that had an effect on consciousness of emerging people. That's crazy. It's ridiculous. It's just crazy. That's, in my opinion, very anti-scientific. It's extremely anti-scientific. It is like the modern Inquisition. But it's a weird thing where people are ignoring that aspect and concentrating on all the other potential aspects, which I think probably worked in some sort of a symbiotic fashion. The introduction of meat into the diet, the experimenting with different food sources, because of the changing of the climate. There was a lot of factors that came into play that made lower hominids human beings. A lot of evolutionary factors, a lot of environmental factors, a lot of experimental factors, a lot of things happened where there was some benefits to certain types of behavior. And those people survived. And then things evolved and changed. Boom, we have Graham Hancock here, 2014 sitting in front of his Apple laptop. Yes. I mean, there's a lot of things had to take place. A lot. It was a very complicated process, but I'm absolutely sure that psychedelics were a key part of it. Everyone who's taken psychedelics is pretty sure that it was a key part. You know why? Because you've had the experience. And everyone who doesn't, if you haven't had a psychedelic experience and you're talking about psychedelics experiences being not a factor or a non-effective, you're crazy. You'd be better to shut up. Well, it's just nonsense. Because people who've not had the experience at all are just, they don't even in my view need to come to the table because they've got nothing to bring to the discussion. I don't mind if they come to the table, but I find their arguments to be almost hilarious. I have a very good friend who's a very intelligent guy and he's never taken any drugs. And his take on it is, and he's a brilliant guy. I love talking to him. His take on it is simply all the work's been done. I'm not going to learn anything new from that. And I'm like, well, that's so crazy. I just say his name, Pendulate. I love that guy. But he doesn't do any drugs, doesn't do anything. Right. And he feels that there's no need for him to say. He said it's all been figured out. We've all all the work's been done. I'm like, oh, God, dude. Yeah. Let me get you high on DMT in the last 15 minutes. And you tell me what work's been done. See, that's what soves. I think what's so special about DMT in particular is that there is no negotiation with the experience. There are very few people who can resist it once you hit the threshold. The threshold. Like, does. Yeah. And it's going to take you where it takes you. And then you are confronted by one of the most intense and extraordinary experiences that it is possible for any human being to have. Yes, we can jump out of an airplane at 10,000 feet. Yes, we can scale a sheer cliff. That's also very intense and very extraordinary. Yes, we can go scuba diving to the depths. But if we look at the whole range of human experiences and say, what is one of the most intense and potentially most transformative experiences as possible to have? I would say DMT, done with the right intention in the right context, is right up there with anything else. Yeah. It's the most intense thing I've ever experienced. Me too. I mean, I've experienced everything. Obviously, I've never been scuba diving and never been sky diving. And it doesn't mean that those things aren't intense as well. But to deny the impact of those things, it seems silly. And the people that are arguing against the efficacy of these experiences or against the influence of these experiences, to have those people actually have never taken these experiences, arguing against them. It seems so silly. It's crazy. It's crazy that they don't even care of them, though. Those people who are running the rules in our society still. Yeah. Well, if they weren't, that would be really terrifying. If our society was run in the way it is now by a bunch of people doing DMT, you'd be like, what the fuck? Yeah. But that's one thing we can be quite sure if our society was run by a bunch of people doing DMT, it wouldn't be run in the way that it's run. No. Well, you know, McKenna found out about DMT by a friend who was a scientist who worked at the Army Research Lab, and they had like a barrel of the stuff. They had a fucking barrel of DMT. And if anyone, if you've DMT, it's very small doses. They're transformative. These tiny little doses that you smoke take you into these incredible realms. So the idea of a barrel. Yes. Or LSD. I mean, McKenna described LSD in the best way I've ever heard is that the amount of LSD you need for it to be effective is like an ant that can break down the Empire State Building in 30 minutes. Yeah. Like it's literally that little. He was a great genius. And it's very fortunate again we have the internet. And the Terrence McKenna has passed in the year 2000. He's still with us. And he is having this liberating effect on people all around the world. And he had the gift of language. Yeah. He spoke in a such a compelling way. I love listening to Terrence. I do too. I do too. I do too. I do too. My ex was a huge fan of McKenna and became, I found out about McKenna because of Hicks. Because there was a joke where Hicks said something about leaving mushrooms under the table of all these people. I take it. And he said what Terrence McKenna would describe as a heroic dose. I don't remember saying who the fuck is Terrence McKenna? And so then I wasn't even a Google back then. Yeah. I searched Terrence McKenna because of hearing about it on Bill Hicks. Right. And then I got a hold of some of the audio recordings. And then you listen to the guy's voice and he's like, wow, what a weird guy. A weird, interesting, compelling way of communicating. Incredible use of language which just makes you think all the time. That's the service he's providing for all of us still. Yeah. I mean, he missed the mark on that December 21st, 2012. Sure. That's what he did. Sure. He did. Everybody's going to miss the mark. I a lot and come up with cool theories and things that think about. And when you're postulating and thinking about the future, here's the thing about thinking about the future. No one's ever got it right. No one's ever figured out the future. It's not a single fucking person. It's ever sat down. Anybody to get it right. Nobody got it right. The future is the future is indeterminate. Yeah. It's interesting. I mean, talking about psychedelics, what's happening with cannabis in the United States right now is very interesting to me. coming from, coming from Britain where, you know, nobody is ever even willing to contemplate the legalization or the derestriction of cannabis. But in America, state by state, people are voting with their feet. And the barriers are being, are being broken down. I mean, America has been the huge dark force behind the war on drugs all over the world for the last 40 or 50 years. So many countries, rather, would have just blindly followed the American lead. That's the American government. That's the American power structure. But the American people are saying, no, the American people are saying, actually, we want to smoke cannabis. And we find it positive and nurturing for us and state by state. Either it's being decriminalized or medical marijuana is available. Or it's actually being legalized in a number of cases. This is a big change. Again, there's all kind of conspiracy theories like how Monsanto's going to take it over and so on and so forth. But I see it as a really good thing that these barriers in the heartland of the war of drugs are being broken down by the American people themselves. And I say, cue to us to the American people for getting on and making that happen because it's going to be a benefit to the whole world. Yeah, Warren Buffett is starting to get into the marijuana trade. That's when things are going to get freaky. Yeah. Because then you've got a guy who's worth $90 billion or whatever the hell he's worth. That's when things can get very interesting. Well, sure. I mean, people are going to... People are going to make commercial advantage of this. But at the end of the day, I just come back to this is something that I've said again and again as the years have gone, have gone by. For me, the fundamental issue is the right of the adult to make sovereign decisions about their unconsciousness. And one of those sovereign decisions has to be the right to use cannabis or not to use it. But one must be free to make that decision and not controlled by society. And once that is recognized, once all the scare stories about cannabis go away and we find that in fact state by state, it's a positive rather than a harmful thing. I think that the question marks are going to begin to arise over the psychedelics too. And we're going to see all those barriers breaking down in the years to come. Yeah, I think you're right. I think bringing up Warren Buffett and Warren Buffett's company specifically what's happening is he's a part of... He's a subsidiary subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway. He's a company called Cubic Designs. And they sell... They maximize usable floor space in warehouses. And they send a thousand flyers to weed dispensaries. And we... And they sell, they maximize usable floor space in warehouses. They send a thousand flyers to weed dispensaries in recent weeks. And these flyers, they show these medical marijuana grow-ups. And it's like double-year useable growth. Yeah, yeah. This is fucking like this is intense stuff. Yeah. Because it's this companies that are real estate holders that have, you know, giant amounts of money invested in this. They're saying, you know what, we're going to dip our feet into this growing marijuana industry. Exactly. I have a friend who works at a dispensary in Colorado. Yeah. And the dispensary is five acres indoor. Wow. Five acres. That's great. Five acres. Yeah. That's an enormous building. Yes. And it's all pot. Yes. It's just millions of dollars in marijuana. And there's people that are there, this has only been less than a year. Yeah. And it was made legal last January. Yeah. And here we are. We're talking right now. It is September of 2014. Right. This is a crazy thing. Yeah. I just did my comedy special in Denver. And I hadn't been at Denver in a while. The place has changed. Yeah. And it's like marijuana is a huge part of the culture. Yeah. People are moving. There's marijuana tourism. People are moving there for marijuana. They're moving there to be a part of the marijuana business. Because you can get really fucking rich right now. Yeah. Because there's a lot of people that are not sure what's going to happen federally. It's still illegal. And federally. So they're not sure whether or not they want to dive into it yet. But the people that are bold that are willing to take a risk. They're making insane profit. Not a chance of making a straight fortune from it. And the government is making a lot of money too. 39% of the profits go to taxes. Wow. So every marijuana joint that's gets sold, 30. If it's sold for a dollar, 39 cents, no one's selling for a dollar. But if it's sold for a hundred dollars, 39 dollars is going to the government. They're making over a hundred million dollars this year in taxes just in Colorado. And state government. Yes. And so they're looking at this. So the federal government is not reaping the revenues because it's so. No. Because it's illegal. But they're finally allowing the people to put their money in banks. Yes. Which was for a long time they had to do this weird shit where they had to like put it in safe deposit boxes or they had to buy take the cash and then use it to buy bank notes. And they're like buy bank checks. Very strange. They weren't allowing them to use credit cards or any of the normal ways that people do business. They keep them from being robbed at gunpoint by criminals, you know, untrackable bills. So they're having these kids that were driving around, stacks of cash is really dangerous and scary. Very dangerous and scary. But it's very good that all of this is changing. I can only see it as a good thing. I don't see any downside in it. It's a really positive development that's taking place. I agree. I think it's also a part of this whole movement that you and I were talking about where the world is changing. Yeah. And for the issues out there. People are just not prepared to put up with that fucking shit any longer. Yeah. They're not prepared to put up with it to be told what to think, to be told what to do with their own with their own consciousness. And it's great that it's Americans who are leading the way in this and the rest of the world is watching and all the lies we've been told about cannabis, they're going to just drift away and be wrecked and destroyed forever by what's happening in America. So it's a great service that's being done to the world. As you know, I had my own long term relationship with cannabis. I smoke cannabis for 24 years. I over indulged. I undoubtedly abused my relationship with cannabis. I don't blame the cannabis for that. It was me. I was I was crazy. I was crazy. I mean, it's very crazy to smoke it from nine in the morning until two o'clock the next morning, seven days a week or rather vaporize it as I as I did. And I reached a point thanks to a series of ayahuasca journeys in October 2011 where I made the decision that I wouldn't smoke cannabis. Nice. Three years have come since then. But I want to live in a society where I and fellow adults are free to choose either to use cannabis or not to use it without any state agent sticking their nose in our private business. This is our private business what we do with our own consciousness. Yeah. And it's incredibly encouraging to see that the Americans are taking that power back and showing the rest of the world how to do it. And also anti pot doctors are being exposed. It's really fascinating all these doctors that are paid off by pharmaceutical companies. There was an article recently about anti pot doctors being paid off and all of the leading pot like anti pot doctors all of them. I take it off. I'm a spiny. Oh yeah. All of them. Why am I not surprised? Well, it's interesting that guys like Sanjay Gupta who used to do that and he used to be on board with that now has come out in a huge way. And he's also starting to address psychedelics. Yeah. Starting to address what's going on with psilocybin and there's a new study that's shown these people that took psilocybin and quit smoking. Six months later 80% of them some large number, 70 or 80% quit smoking. And didn't go back to it because of just the clarity of those visions where you kind of understand like what am I doing? Oh, I really get that perspective on yourself here. And that's the big news. You know, that these things are positive and beneficial. And the way forward for society is to create a positive social environment and positive spaces in which we can explore these experiences. And the result for society as a whole will be very positive and positive. Very positive. Yeah, vice.com is the guys who broke the story. It's incredible. And it's all these different doctors that have been like here's one. Dr. Herbert Keybler of a clever of Columbia University. He's been impeccable academic credentials. He's been quoted in the press in academic publications warning against the use of marijuana which he stresses may cause wide ranging addiction. That's my favorite wide ranging addiction and public health issues when he's writing his anti-pot opinion pieces for CBS news are being quoted by NBR and CNBC. What's left unsaid is that clever has served as a paid consultant to leading prescription drug companies, including Purdue, pharma, the maker of Oxycontin, my bracket, bank Kaiser, the producer of painkiller called Narofin and Alkermes, the producer of a powerful new opiate called ZOHYDRO. How do you say that? So hydro, so hydro. He's kind of professional cut. And what you say is what he's been hiding and covering up is that all this stuff he's pushing. That's the real addicted drugs. It's a real good thing for us. It's a 16,000 deaths a year. It's a multi-biz billion-dollar business. Absolutely. It causes 16 deaths a year just in this, this, 16,000 deaths a year. 16,000 deaths a year. Stunning. Yeah. And doctors are on the take to keep promoting that and to stop us exercising our free choices, adults, to manage our pain in other ways, for example, with cannabis. And even if it was just 16 deaths, I agree. I agree. I agree. It was 16 deaths. That's 16 more than cannabis. Cannabis is causing zero cannabis deaths and kill any point. That's what's most ridiculous thing ever. You could die from aspirin. A lot of people die every year from aspirin. A lot of people die from salt. They eat too much salt and they die. Absolutely. We have a painkiller. I think you call it a set a set in minifen here. The Cineamerican. We call it paracetamol in England. It refucks your liver. Oh, yeah. It's a really, really dangerous, dangerous thing. And once it reaches a certain level, there's no recovery from it. And it kills thousands and thousands of people a year. Well, I was reading this thing about bodybuilder or watching a video rather about bodybuilding. And this guy was being interviewed who used to be this big competitive bodybuilder and they're talking about the drugs that you have to take to get so big. But one of the things that we're talking about was that what really kills these guys is not the steroids. It's painkillers. They all get hooked on painkillers. Because they're in pain all the time because they're lifting all this crazy weight and they're fucking up their body while they're doing it. And they take a set of minifen, all these different volumes, percussets. It just destroys their kidneys. Yeah. It destroys their liver. Yeah. And the withdrawal symptom from stopping taking the painkiller is huge amount of pain. So you then go and take more, more painkillers. These are highly, highly addictive, highly, highly dangerous drugs. Yeah. And state sanctioned. And so the government's talking about what is the same thing. Totally state sanctioned. So I'm wondering now three years after I gave up cannabis, whether, you know, the legal you're going to get back in, dip my toes back in the water in a respectful way. Not not do it every day. Have some sacred moments. I value the sensual side of it. I don't know. I'm the next time I have an ayahuasca session, I'm going to ask ayahuasca is going to be my intent because it was ayahuasca that really interrupted my cannabis habit. I'm going to ask, is there a way I can do this? I don't know. Maybe that's weak of me. I wondered this. I was talking with a Fred last night and he said, there's a true addict speaking. You know, when I said this. Because it sounds a bit like that. But I did value cannabis. It was an extraordinary positive thing for me in many, many ways. And what I feel is that I got out of balance with it. And if I could find that balance again and use it rarely at special times, then I think it would be OK. But I'm a little afraid to go back there. Well, you should be afraid, right? Because you've had personal experience with addiction. I think that addiction is purely mental. It's purely mental. It was very easy to stop. Once ayahuasca gave me the message and I really got that. I had a severe kicking. First of all, a DMT trip. Then immediately afterwards, five ayahuasca sessions. I was psychologically beaten up. And the message of that beating was, you have to stop smoking cannabis. And I did. And looking back on it, it's absurd. This is a very powerful plant agent. And here I am, you know, vaporizing it 16 hours a day, seven days a week. You went deep. I went deep. I went deep. And I went very deep. And it got to the point where I actually wasn't enjoying it anymore, where I just felt that I couldn't live my life without it. But I discovered I easily could live my life without it. When I stopped, it wasn't a huge chore or problem to stop. It wasn't actually difficult. In that sense, I would definitely not physically addicted to it. Right. Yeah. That's the thing is that I think there's some people that do get physically addicted. I'm not, you know, I used to say marijuana is not addictive. And I don't think it is with most people. But I think biological diversity, biodiversity and human beings is such that like, there's certain folks that have weird reactions to all kinds of different things. Cats. Some people around cats. My friend Gary, he can't even come over my house because I have two cats. If he walks in the door, he was talking, he gets out of the way. He's like, he can't breathe. Like he has to get out of there. You can kill him with a room of cats. But then I got my friend Joey Diaz who has, what is he all 11? I think he has 11 cats. Yeah. Some other fucker has 11 cats. Right. Because he's five of that. But if my friend Gary went over my friend Joey's house, he would die. But Joey's having a party over there. He's got cats on his lap. He's pet numbs. He's sitting on his shoulders. Yeah. We're all different. And what works for one person doesn't work for another. And that's again why this issue of adult sovereignty of us having the right to make our choices about our own bodies is fundamental. And actually with the psychedelics and the cannabis issue, that's just the tip of the iceberg of the whole issue of health and personal health and how our society is working to take away our choices over our personal health and to turn us into robots who consume the products that are pumped at us by the big pharmaceutical companies or inventing every year this unholy alliance with psychiatrists inventing every year new mental conditions for which new pills will be dosed out. Yeah. And you guys don't have those commercials either. Those commercials are so fucking insidious. Ask your doctor about this drug that might cause you to shit yourself all day long. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's the big untold story about antidepressants. How about antidepressants cause people to kill themselves? How about antidepressants that supplement the antidepressants? Like there's a certain antidepressant. I forget what it was called. It had insane side effects that they were promoting as a supplement to your regular antidepressant. Yeah. Regular antidepressant isn't doing it. Then to mix it up with this one. But this one could cause fucking kidney failure. Your dick might fly across the room like a mockingbird. Anything could happen to you. Yeah. But you might not be depressed or you might. I mean, fuck it. Just take our pills. These are the most biggest drug dealers. Yeah. These are the true mafia of drugs. Well it's also the idea of commercials. Commercials are influential. And the influence of commercials is very insidious because there's one thing if a commercial is influencing you to buy a particular vacuum cleaner. Yeah. That doesn't bother me man. This is the best. Look, if you're too much of a knucklehead to go on consumer reports or, you know, to read reviews online by independent people that tell you this vacuum cleaner is great, this vacuum cleaner sucks. If you're too much of a knucklehead to do that, I don't feel bad for you. Exactly. But when it comes to consciousness, when it comes to pills, especially when it comes to happiness, man, because that's the big one. Antiderpressants, they should be calm, happy pills. You know, I wrote an article a long time ago for my blog about happy pills. I called it happy pills. Right. And I was thinking about this, this, this, this girl who's taken these, these antidepressants. And I think that the selling of happiness in pill form is the ultimate ridiculous American notion. It's horrible. It's, it's, it's suggesting that the answer does not lie within the, that it can be bought. Right. But happiness can be bought. But I think that the ultimate illusion also, what's insidious about it is selling it on television like that does a huge disservice to the actual people that could use antidepressants because they have a real mental imbalance. There's people that do do that. So like you're selling it as an antidote for a shit life where there's other folks that might have a real issue, they have an imbalance. It's a chemical imbalance. Yes. Like that can be adjusted and adjusted and adjusted and make their life wonderful. People that have a miserable life, they can make their life wonderful. Instead, where people will trivialize it because you see a commercial where a chick's running around a field of wheat, it's spinning around with their baby. And then someone says, I want to live like that. And then they call her fucking doctor. Next thing you know, you're on a pill that you didn't need. If you just start eating vegetables and going jogging every day, you, you'd be a way happier person than you were on that pill. And again, let me let me say right out, outright that the psychedelics are very effective antidepressants. Yeah. So I've been being trial tested in human communities for thousands and thousands of years, ayahuasca, in the Amazon, at least 4,000 years of use. And anybody who's worked with cytoside or ayahuasca enough will know that they do help with mood. They do help you take a more positive outlook on life and whether that's to do with or altering the chemical balance in the brain. Because they do work on the serotonin system in the brain chemically. Or whether it's to do with the revelation that one has that, you know, life is an incredible gift and an incredible joy and a privilege to be to be alive. This is what we forget immersed in the cares and woes of daily life constantly struggling to meet the next, to pay the next bills to get on in work, had relentlessly driven to produce and consume and we forget that it's a magical enchanted, gorgeous, glorious universe that we live in and we have this amazing bodies and we should just celebrate every minute of it. Psychedelics help with that too. Yeah. It's hard. It's hard to keep a balanced perspective. I think it's also important to realize that perspective shifting, conscious and shifting experiences can also change the way you look at the world. And when you change the way you look at the world, it can adjust the way your brain functions. And that it's not an either or situation. It's a combinatorious situation. Sure. It's not an impact your brain in a very chemical way, but also just altering of a perspective could enhance your mood and enhance the way your body and brain function. Yeah. Because the mind is what we are. We are our minds. The mind is the most powerful, the most powerful thing. Yeah. And that's where all healing, I believe, resides. It resides in the mind. If you can kick in the body's ability to heal itself through right mental attitude, you know, no medicine will do that for you. Well, that's why Placebos actually work. Yeah. That's why they work better than the prescription drugs that they had been tested again. Well, most of the time they don't work better than prescription drugs, but occasionally they do work. Or just the fact that they work at all. The placebo effect is not nearly as effective as medicine, in most cases, but just the fact that it does work at all, that there's a way that you can tell your body to make itself better. And the way is by tricking it to thinking it's taking medicine, look, you're going to be better. I'm going to be better. The vision of stress and anticipation of this horrible, you know, demise that you're impending doom and you can escape with a sugar pill. That's incredible. It's incredible. It says something about the mind. It's something really worth looking at. And that is enhanced in psychedelic experiences. The perspective enhancing aspects of that, I do believe, can change your overall health, or change your overall consciousness, which can change your overall health. Yeah. There's a lot going on, man. And I think these conversations are super important for people that are unenitiated and that haven't, they don't understand what the, what's the hoopla all about? Why is everybody got down with that rug and going on about drugs again? No, I have a constituency of my readers and people, people who follow me on Facebook, who, you know, constantly throwing that, you know, handcuffs are a druggie. And I just feel this is really important. It's a really important conversation to have and fundamentally get right down to the bottom of what it's about. It's about this whole issue of us taking back power over ourselves. Yeah. That's what it's really about. And it needs to be seen in that, in that context, to make decisions about our own lives right or wrong and to learn from our mistakes and to grow and develop as a result. I think it's also super important that you discussed your relationship with cannabis in a abusive way too, that there's a balance to be achieved. Yeah. Is a balance to be achieved for all of us. Yes. That's what I've learned. That's what I've learned. In a way, I had to deny myself this wonderful sensual plant, which helped me to enjoy food and music and many other sensual places. Sex. Exactly. Exactly. Exactly. You've never had sex on part. You don't know what you're talking about. That is even though it lets up on sounds like that. Exactly. It's a beautiful sensual ally. And I've had to deny myself that sensual ally for the last three years because I abused it because I want to spark up a joint right now. I want to. I want to die then right now. Of course, the jail you're like the serpent in the god of Eden. Sure. You want? Yes? You sure? I don't want to force you anything. You're not forcing me. It's an interesting experience. No, no, no, no, no. No, no, no. I'm going to go live on jail, Rogan. Is that bad? No, that's not bad. That's not bad. That's something that's the way to do it if you want to die then. We'll go a little baby hit. Little baby hit. I think my first baby hit in three years. Yeah. Nothing crazy. Nobody has to get hurt here. OK. You were showing some images from Lebanon to us before the parking lot. What have you got into? Well, now by the time I smoke this little baby hit, I'll probably have forgotten. But so what I was getting into was this fella here. That's some American shit too. That's not that crappy getting England. That's made by American scientists and botanists. They all drive muscle cars and they do steroids. Oh, that's so familiar. That's such a nice feeling. That's back. Are we seeing that on the screen? That is, you're going in for another baby hit. Look at you. Oh, my. So well, just a tiny. Good. Good. That's it. Stop right there. Right. We will see. So here it is. Lebanon. This is the, this is what is called the stone of the pregnant woman. Whoa. At fallback. That's the level. And that is me on top of that. Can I see that? This is a PowerPoint demonstration. So we see it. But this little tiny dot. A little tiny dot up here on top of that. That's me in Lebanon. And is this a recent in July? Yes, I was there in, I was there in July. People say that Lebanon is very dangerous. And this place is right on the Syrian border. But I didn't see any danger there at all. I had a, I had a magical experience at Lebanon. It was great. It was exciting. It was. Well, for you, it must be incredible because that's a site of so many ancient huge monolithic structures that are unexplained as far as the construction methods or. So the temple of Jupiter at Baal back in the temple of Jupiter. This is what they call it. It's a run, there is undoubtedly a Roman temple there. Okay. That Roman temple dates from the known historical period, some two, three hundred years after Christ. It's the Roman temple of Jupiter. And it's very extraordinary, but it stands on these huge foundations. There's a group of stones called three stones called the trilithian, which are each weighing 840 tons, 840 tons. What the fuck? And they are lifted to 20 feet above the ground and built into a wall of satan. Top of one of those stones I've been down underneath it and looked up at it to 840 tons stones. This is a gigantic achievement. Now the Orthodox view is that the Romans did everything, that they built those foundations and they built the temple. I think, and many researchers who've studied them in this field agree with me on this, that actually the Romans found a much more ancient site. And they, which was just extraordinarily megalithic, gigantic stones and they built their temple on top of it. And later historians have simply given the whole thing to the Romans without considering what was going on there. And part of the reason I think that is because of these stones that are still in the quarry, which I was trying to, I don't know if it showed up on the screen, I was trying to, you got it. I'm trying to show it just now. These stones stood in the quarry. Now, so what the historians say is that the Romans, okay, they found they could move the 840 tons stones. That's 1,680,000 pounds for people who don't like the number, the word ton. You got the calculator going back. Yeah, I had to because it didn't make sense. I was trying to double it, but it's not double. Like it's two pounds. Like it's 2,000 pounds. It's a favorite number, whatever it is. It's just a fearsome number, it's 6,000. 2,000 pounds for every ton. So I was going 8,000 for each, what? 840 tons, 2,000. Is that real? And then that's where it is. That's what it is. So here's the thing, those are the 840 ton blocks in the walls, in the foundation of the temple. Then we go to the quarry and we find this humongous thing, which weighs over 1,000 tons. And there's another one on the other side of the road, which weighs 1,200 tons. 1,200 tons. 2,400,000 pounds. Yeah. So here's the thing. 1,400,000 pounds. Yeah. So here's our fuck. So here's the theory, okay. The Romans found they could move the 840 ton blocks. And they did. This is the Orthodox theory and then they built their temple on top of it. But they found they couldn't move these thousand, or 1,200 plus ton blocks. And by the way, this one is completely separated from the bedrock out of which has been cut. They couldn't move them. So they left them in the quarry. I think that actually proves that the Romans didn't create the 840 ton Megalith. Because if the Romans had known that these gigantic blocks, if they had cut the blocks, okay, if they had cut them themselves, which we must say they did, if we are saying that the Romans were responsible for these Megalith. If the Romans had cut these blocks themselves, they knew they were there. And the very first thing they would have used for the smaller blocks that they put into place in the temple of Jupiter was these large blocks. They would have sliced them up like a loaf of bread into smaller blocks and moved those over to the temples. The fact that these huge Megalith still stand in the quarry suggests to me that they were buried when the Romans came to that site. Because otherwise it would have been the very first thing they would have used for quarrying smaller blocks that they were buried and that the Romans found an existing prehistoric Megalithic platform. And on top of it, they built their temple of Jupiter. It's fascinating theory. It seems like open to interpretation to me. Sure. It's just fascinating. Yeah, because you're looking at either regardless of why they built the one, what is it? 1 million Jesus Christ, 2 million 400,000. It's freaky when you die in pounds. That's insane. Yeah. When you do it in tons, it's abstract. You're 1,100 tons. Okay. What's that mean? It's hard for my head. Well, let's consider an average vehicle, which might weigh. That's, let's push for a thousand pounds. So it's about two tons, right? Is that about the weight of an average vehicle? So two tons divide 1000 by that. So you're looking at 500 family sized cars in a thousand tons. And a thousand tons. Oh my God. Just imagining a 2 million pound rock, the bunch of dudes are moving it. And we know that someone at some time in history, they built that, they moved those stones. I mean, it wasn't that one, right? It wasn't, it was, what was the first calculation that we had? What did we say it was 640 tons? No, they ate, there's three blocks of 800, 4 tons each. So I'm so closely, you can't slip a sheet of paper between them. I mean, they've not been just roughly levered into place. They've been set down with perfect, with perfect precision. So I, so someone did that. Someone did that. And there are plenty of people arguing that the Romans did it. I feel, along with other researchers who've approached this subject, I feel I want to look at alternative possibilities for what these megalists are all about. And that's, and that's one of the things I've been doing for the last year is travelling around the world. Looking, I feel so lucky to have the opportunity to do this. Oh, and looking at just amazing, amazing archaeological sites. God. And one of the countries that I visited and I want to really mention this is Armenia, where I have seen incredible stone circles, just wonderful, dwarf stone hunch, make us just stand in awe and look at the way that these huge megalithic stones in what is called the Karahunge stone circle. They have certain holes drilled in them to align up with particular areas of the sky. And an Armenian archaeo astronomer from that kind of data believes that the place called Karahunge is not just two or three thousand years old as most historians believe, but well over 12,000 years old. Why do you believe that? Because of the astronomical alignments, that the positions of the stars in the sky change very slowly down the ages, that the alignment to the solstices changes because there's a slow nod on the axis of the earth. Very, very slow over tens of thousands of years, which means that if the sun rises at a certain point on the horizon, on the summer solstice today, in two or three or five thousand years time, that point on the horizon will have changed. You wouldn't notice it in a lifetime. You wouldn't notice it in 10 lifetimes. But if you stay long enough, you'll note that actually the sun isn't rising in the same place on the horizon anymore. When did we get the source? That's called the procession of the equilax. Well actually no, that's a second, that's a second. That's a different level. That's the changing tilt of the earth's axis, which kind of is a wobble. No, there's a wobble and there's a tilt and then there's actually a tilt within the tilt. No, where? Yeah, this is the view. But the effect is because the earth is the viewing platform from which we observe the stars and which we observe the other celestial bodies such as the moon and the sun, the earth is our viewing platform. If you change the orientation in space of that viewing platform, then the rising points of stars, the moon, the sun change and the positions of the stars in the sky change. Wow. And it becomes a kind of language. Once you understand this, it is universally available to us. The calculations can be done. We can do it. Anybody can buy a computer software today, which will show you the ancient skies over any point on the earth's surface. Anytime in the last 30,000 years. That's amazing. Yeah, and what's involved in those computer simulations is simply calculations that had been done in previous centuries by astronomers. And we understand these processes. We can measure them and set them up. But there you have a regularity, a changing patterns in the sky. If you tie that into architecture on the ground, then actually you have a way free of all language of dating, of actually speaking. You can use this. tie that into architecture on the ground. Then actually you have a way free of all language of dating, of actually speaking. You can use this universal language of the stars and architecture to make a statement to the future. You can say that this particular time was very important to me, to our culture. It mattered to us. It mattered to us so much that we've created this huge monument to freeze the skies over a particular point. I wonder why those particular constellations, if at all were important to them. That's where things get really strange. If I wanted to play devil's advocate, I would say, well, these holes, they're pointing up towards the sky. There's a lot of fucking stars up there. How do we know? Just because they line up with this 12,000 years ago, it doesn't mean we're a little bit further. It's very complicated. What you want is multiple locks. I mean, take the Pyramids of Giza. And here I cite the work of my close friend and colleague Robert Bovall in particular in his book, The Orion Mystery. You take the three great Pyramids of Giza and you look at the heavens overhead. And you also look at the religious system of the ancient Egyptians. What was important to them? What did they believe you? You pretty soon discover that stars were incredibly important to them. Stars cover the inside of the ceilings of all tombs, all the Ferris tombs, for example. Monuments are lined up to particular places on the horizon where a star perhaps it's serious. Who's counterpart amongst the gods was the goddess Isis. Perhaps it's Orion. Who's counterpart amongst the gods was the god Osiris. This is the thing you have a mythology that speaks of entities who have clearly stated to be connected to particular asterisms, particular constellations. That's the first thing. Are the constellations that are being said to have a reflection upon the ground in architecture where they significant to the culture concerned? Well, yes. Absolutely. The constellation of Orion was of enormous significance to the ancient Egyptians. Therefore, it has to be a matter of interest that the three Pyramids on the ground are laid out in a pattern that is temptingly similar to the pattern of the three belt stars of the constellation of Orion. That's fascinating. Temptingly similar, but there's something else. Then you have shafts, which run through the body of the Great Pyramid. There's a place called the Kingschamber. High up in the Great Pyramid. It has a shaft in its north and south wall, which are about eight inches high and eight inches wide. Those shafts cut all the way through the body of the pyramid and they come out on the south and north sides of the pyramid. You can actually, and it's been done in the past, you can drop a cannonball in at the outside entrance to those shafts, and that cannonball moment later will appear in the Kingschamber. The shafts are about 200 feet long. In the Queenschamber down below, there are also two shafts. These shafts do not exit on the outside of the pyramid, which creates a mystery of its own of great interest, what is at the other end of those shafts, but they do have very definite alignments. What Robert was really the first to show, some archaeo-estramas were onto this as well in the case of some of the stars, but what Robert was really the first to show is that in 2500 BC, the epoch in which Egyptologists say the pyramids were built. All of those four shafts that shoot up out of the Kingschamber in the Queenschamber, all targeted very significant stars in the sky at that time. For example, the southern shaft of the Queenschamber targeted the star series at exactly the moment that the star crosses the meridian, that's the north-southline that divides the sky above our heads. That exactly the moment that the star crosses that line, the shaft targets it, and you could fire a laser beam up and you'd hit that in theory, you'd hit that star. The alignment is that great. So they're locking the pyramid in the epoch of 2500 BC to four significant stars in the sky. The star is the lowest star of the belt of Orion. That tells us that this is a dating mechanism of some kind. And it can't be an accident that that's the case. And once you understand, you understand that these alignments will change. So it therefore becomes very interesting to discover that the orientation of the pyramids on the ground is which Robert argues are the terrestrial reflection of the three stars of the belt of Orion, that the orientation of the pyramids on the ground, because of procession, shifts very slowly down the ages. And if you can see this clearly on any good sky map program, as you go back in time, you find that the constellation of Orion at the moment it crosses the meridian, the same place that was targeting the star series, at the moment it crosses the meridian, that the perfect alignment between the belt stars of Orion and the three great pyramids of Giza is not in 2500 BC, but in 10,500 BC, 8,000 years earlier. So we have a very interesting problem here. Either it's all coincidence, or the pyramids are monuments that speak both to the age of the ancient Egyptians, 2500 BC, and to a much earlier time. Wasn't it also the same time where these finks was pointing towards the constellation Leo? Well, that's again the third part of the lock, and Robert and I looked at this in depth together in our book called the Message of the Sphinx. And so we have the Giza Plateau. We have the three pyramids laid out on the ground in the pattern of the belt of Orion in 10,500 BC. That's looking south. Now let's look east. Let's look jouest, east of course, where the sun rises, but people who don't observe the sun don't realize that the sun tracks back and forth along the horizon during the solar year, reaches its most northernmost point on the summer solstice, 21st of June, and its southernmost point on the winter solstice, 21st of December. On the equinox, the day that night and day are of equal length, the sun rises directly, perfectly jouest. That's actually how you define an equinox, because the sun is rising perfectly jouest. And looking at it is the Sphinx, aligned gazing directly perfectly at the point of sunrise. Now we have to consider what's behind the sun then. What is the constellation of the zodiac that the sun is rising in? Because that's what the zodiac is. It's a group of constellations that by chance the sun passes through during the course of the year. But that, the constellation that the sun rises against the background of, is also affected by precession, the wobble on the axis of the earth, and that changes. You have roughly 2,160 years in each house of the zodiac. For the last 2,160 years we've been in Pisces. And as I often say, it's not an accident that the early Christians use the fish as they're simple. Before that it was the constellation of Aries. The ram. Rams were incredibly important in the year from 2000 down to the time of Christ. Just look at the biblical stories. Anyway, to cut a long story short, the great Sphinx is a lion, admittedly with a human head. But that head is rather small and we think that the head almost certainly was recarved in a later time. Probably the whole statue was originally a lion crouching there on her rise and gazing jouest. At the rising sun on the equinox and at the constellation pine the sun. And that constellation is in 10,500 BC, the constellation of Leo. As above, so below. Leo speaking to the Sphinx. A lion speaking to the pyramids, locking in to a date that is far before any civilization began. And I know I'm on a long wrap here. But just at that point, when the Egypt told you to say, well it's impossible for there to be anything like a civilization that geese at 12,500 years ago. Just when they're very happy saying that and they're telling us that no other monument can be found anywhere in the world, which is 12,500 years old on this scale, low and behold up pops, go backly-tepi. Right. In Turkey. Go backly-tepi in the area of Turkey that by the way was once historic Armenia. Go backly-tepi pops up. It's dated by the German archaeological institute. They discover that this huge complex of stone circles has been deliberately buried 10,000 years ago. And the carbon dating because you can't date stones, you have to date organic materials. The carbon dating of organic materials found with those stone circles puts their age back to 12,000 years and more. For you that must have been like Christmas. It was like Christmas. It was like a gift. I don't want to. I have to confess. I mean we all have egos now. Of course. I have to confess that it was a nice moment for me when the new scientist magazine in Britain, which years ago back in the 90s when I published fingerprints of the gods, was amongst the magazines that attacked my work as quote unquote pseudo-scientific. I don't know how my work can be pseudo-scientific because I don't claim to be a scientist. I'm a fucking journalist. I'm not a scientist. I might be a pseudo-scientist. But you just a guy who's got an obsessed with an idea. A little bit. And a little weed-like in a succession. So anyway, new scientist magazine back in the 1990s was saying that I was wrong. The basic message of fingerprints of the gods is history is much older and much more mysterious than we've been told. So it was great in October 2013 when new scientist magazine came out with a headline saying history is much older and more mysterious than we thought. It's funny. The hand cock was right. The title should have been in my next slide. We're sorry, dude, in my next life. We were fucking with you. But there was there was correctly tippy and that's that's what changes everything. Yeah, that really doesn't have that. And I'm just saying I guess we may be running out of time. I'll just say, are we good? Yeah. I just say also Indonesia, which is the the other place that my wife's on. I've done a lot of research in the last six or seven months has been found what was thought to be a 2,500 year old site. On top of the hill. A site made of blocks of column that basalt, which forms naturally, but which can be used as a construction medium. Okay. It's called Gunung Padang. And on the top of the hill in a series of terraces is a rather extraordinary monument thought to be about 2,500 years old made of these blocks of column that basalt. No really thorough research was ever done by archaeologists. a little bit of trenching down to about half of half a meter in depth was done and some carbon was brought up and dated. But really the site it was just kind of taken for granted that it was 2,500 years old. Along comes Danny Nattawajiji who is a Caltech trained PhD geologist working out of the city of Bandung in a government agency of the Indonesian government. In fact, he particularly focuses on earthquakes. Earthquakes are his thing. He comes along and he's intrigued by Gunung Padang. First of all that there's old traditions about it being a sacred place. Just go back, it seemed to go back a very, very long way. And he starts to look at it as geologist. And what he realizes suddenly it comes to him, he's not looking at a natural hill. He's looking at a pyramid on top of which is this relatively recent monument. But somebody built a pyramid there. So he begins work on this. So it's covering dirt. It looks like a grill. But it's inside. It's a man-made structure. That was Danny's intuition. Then he had to prove it. So he put together a team and they did a huge amount of remote sensing work and some core drilling down to depths of about 15 meters into the hill. And what they discovered was incredibly tempting. It supports Danny's intuition that we are looking at a man-made pyramid here. It produces dates that go back as much as 26,000 years right into the last ice age. And the remote sensing equipment shows rather regular cavities inside the monument, which look like chambers of some kind. Well, naturally, Danny and his team were stopped working for quite a long while by the archaeological establishment in Indonesia, who said we know that this structure is 2 and 1,000 years old. And there's no need for any further research on it. And it just disturbs the local villagers and go away. And so they lobbied and they had him stopped. But Danny took it to the highest level. He got the support of the Indonesian government and two and a half weeks ago. They started work excavating thoroughly excavating. And the father is on the very interesting. Well, if they get down very interesting. See a building 26,000 years old. And again, we can't summon up a map magically. But if I were to do so, consider Indonesia, which is a long string of islands. Today. But if you go back 12 and a half thousand years ago, that long string of islands is joined to a gigantic mainland. Huge ice age continent because sea level is hundreds of feet lower. And therefore, Indonesia becomes actually quite a plausible place for some sort of haul of records, some sort of time capsule. Because Quebec Litepi is also a time capsule. That's so absolutely incredible. I can't say fascinating anymore because people are starting giving me shit about it. Yeah. Last few podcasts, I see. I don't know. When things are fascinating, I can't come up with any, you know, meat in its my way of going low. There's interesting stuff happening in the world. Beautiful. I've been lucky to spend some time exploring this. I am writing a sequel to my best on book undoubtedly as fingerprints of the gods. The evidence for Earth's loss of civilization. What year was that? 1995. 1995. And now, you know, after being scorned and put down by the archaeological establishment, there is enough new evidence out there for me to produce a whole other book. Yeah. There's a whole other story to tell. Not an update of fingerprints of the gods were in new book, which looks at all of this information. But what's going on in Stonehenge? There's most recent monocities discovered in March bigger than the rest of Stonehenge. But then the rest of Stonehenge. That's the thing you see. This way, archaeologists need to be a little more humble because the next turn of the spade can change everything completely all to the story. And we should always remain open to that. Yeah. Just one discovery like that. One farmer finding a stone and go backly tappy. Unnourished this incredible structure that rewrites history. And literally one turn of the spade. That piece of stone is seen by American archaeologists in the 1950s. Really. And they decide not to look at it because it's so finally done that they think it belongs to the Ottoman period within the last four or five hundred years. Actually, it turns out to be 12,000 years old. Well, it's good that they didn't fuck with it. They're pro-er- Yeah. Well, it's cool that it happens this way. Like the German archaeological institute later. Unfortunately, they've stuck a hideous roof over the top of the tappy. They have. Oh, it's trying to keep it from decaying or something? Look, it was 19 years it was exposed to the sun. It was out there. It was being, they began the excavations in 1996. And it's fine. Fine. And now that they've finished the excavations, they decide that in that particular area, they're excavating other areas. They decide to stick this horrendous roof over it. Which cuts out the light makes it impossible to see the stone pillars. The roof is badly built. So there are platforms built inside it on which huge heaps of stones have been piled up. That's to keep the roof on if there's any high winds. So suddenly, yes. So suddenly the possibility of any kind of magical experience at the world's most intriguing and mysterious ancient site site is completely written off by this hideous piece of so-called protective architecture, which in my view is just the worst kind of vandalism. I really offended by it. I went back to, I was back in Quebec Lettet, in 2013. I went back again this year. And I was just horrified it made me feel physically sick to see what had been done to it. That's so bizarre. Is it because to sell tickets to people who have to pay to get in there? I think it's a kind of, in this case, I think it's a kind of possession. This is ours. Really? We've seen it. We, the experts, we, the authorities. Wow. No, the other people really get to form an opinion about it because we're going to damage its appearance so much in protecting it that it'll lose its essential mystery. Well, it just seems bizarre that they're trying to protect stone. That doesn't make any sense. It's like imagine if someone decided to put a giant canopy over this fence. What are you talking about? I've been here forever, don't you? You see, and this is being done at archaeological sites around the world. It's been done at Manajran, Hagerim in Malta, which have profound astronomical alignments. You stick a fucking great dome over the top of it. Oh. It's being done at Rossin Chapel in Edinburgh. We ruin everything. We ruin everything. Everything. The worst vandals are often the authorities, those who are in control. Well, that's how we hawask guys in the poking now, right? No, he's not. Didn't he get arrested? He did, but all the charges were drawn. Oh, he came up with some shackles. Yeah, it's a way. He's a big front man for Egypt. Is he still running everything over there? No, he's not. He's got an official position in relation to the promotion of tourism. And so bizarre when you see those guys so vehemently opposed to new information, which is essentially what the idea is being proposed are. There's new information. There's certain pieces of new information that in my mind are just undeniable. The Robert Shock stuff. Sure. So, my first trip to Govettepe, Robert Shock and I traveled together. You guys made a video, right? There was some filming, yeah. But we were at Govettepe in December. Sorry, not Govettepe. At Gunung Padang in Indonesia, Shock and I were there in December 2013. And then I went back again with... What was his impression of it? His impression was very much that this is an intriguing site. He looked at the remarks. But you see, as a geologist, he can understand what remote scanning paperwork looks like. And he looked at what Danny's team had produced. And so this is absolutely fascinating. It really deserves further research. And that's now what it's getting for us. Well, it's just amazing when they uncover these things. I love the ones they could find in Mexico when they're building something. And then they stumble upon some ancient Aztec temple. Not many people who go to Chichen Itza and see the temple of Kukokan there, the Pyramid of Kukokan, which is the famous monument of Chichen Itza. Not many people realize that there's another pyramid inside it, which is inside it. There's a little door at the bottom of the northern stairway. And I don't think it can be done now. The place has been so tightly controlled. I don't think people even allowed to climb the Pyramid of Kukokan. When did they start that? I believe that stopped in the last two or three years. I was there... No, it may be a little longer. I was the last time I was there, I was in 2010 and then it was stopped. When I had you seen it erosion, I'd be busy. I don't know. There may be a little kind of arguments, but the fact is it was possible to climb it. Yeah, I used to... Back in the 90s... Anyway, inside it is a whole second pyramid. The pyramid that we see has been built on top of an earlier one, and there's a passageway that leads up to the top of it, and there's an altar and there's a figure of a puma or a jaguar inside is very spooky place. Wow. Yeah, that whole complex is so incredible. It's so amazing to think that... I know you scuba dive. Have you ever done those tunnels that they've found? In the center stage. Yeah, I know. I haven't. Those are terrifying. These people scuba dive and they go... There's these Mayan tunnels that they had found that are underwater. So you have to... But the people that are treasure hunters have gone into these things and found these incredible artifacts. Yes. But you've got to be willing to swim underwater with scuba gear in a dark tunnel for a long time. Yes. Like they're long. Like you can get a mile in. Yes. That's... It takes tremendous courage. It also takes... It also takes very special equipment. You know, you're having to carry a lot more air with you. And it would be a very complex mixture of gases. And sometimes they have narrow passages to squeeze through. One of the most... Cave diving is one of the most dangerous things. But not now. Because... Because... Because... I tell you why, because the entrance passage can be long and winding. There can be several alternative routes through it. And it's often heavily laden with silt with sediment. If the driver is not very experienced, or if the diver panics and starts thrashing around, that silt gets thrown up into the water and completely fills the water so that you can't see your hand in front of your face. Suddenly your a mile in 100 feet deep and blind. Oh, fuck. That was one of the most legitimate freakouts I've ever had on a podcast right there. You saying that? Yes. What you're thinking that was just a tremendous freakout. Yeah. Just the idea of being knowing that you're going to run out of air before it settles to. Yes. Oh, yes. You're done for. Unless you can find your way. That's my some miracle. You can find your way through that fog. With the very first thing, if you're going to do that, that you have to do is you have to calm your mind. You're freaking me out, man. Yeah. Yeah. Woo! Well, let's talk about my novels then. Well, listen, those people are just brave as fuck. It's just amazing that people are willing to do that. Yeah. It's guts. It's courage. It's courage. Courage of the warrior. Anyway. So, um, is this how many novels have you written that? So I've written three. This is the third. Well, I've written an entangled, which is a whole other story. Right. And then I've written volume one and volume two of War God. The first volume was War God Knights of the Witch. It was published in 2013. There was a big support and take up from your audience, which is extremely grateful for. I heard a lot of positive reviews to people enjoyed it. Thank you. And I made an offer at that time on your show, where I said that if people wrote to me at a particular address, which is War God Dedications at gmail.com and sent me their own address and showed me that they pre-ordered the book, I would send them a signed dedicated book plate. In other words, I would sign a label. I would dedicate it to them. I would send it to them. Little did I know that nearly 5,000 people would ask for those signed dedicated book plates. It became a massive labor of love for myself and my wife, Santa. She's doing the envelopeing. I'm dealing with the correspondence, putting the signing the book plates. We're going to post office. We're spending thousands of pounds on postage. But it was great. It was a fantastic thing. And it gave and it helped the book to get noticed. Because there was great skepticism about buying a second volume from my publishers, unless the first volume worked. And the first volume worked enough for me to be commissioned to write volume 2 of War God, which is called War God Return of the Plume Serpent. And that is published on 9 October. And I'm making the same special offer. Very limited. Don't do. Two years. But it's going to be a bit different. First time, first off, you go to my website, go to www.gramhankock.com and go to the War God page. It's very easy to get there. Scroll down at the bottom of the page that shows the covers of all the additions. And you will find a statement there. And that is that if people write to me, if people pre-order, first of all, they have to pre-order. Either order volume 1 or pre-order volume 2. Amazon don't take your money until they actually send the book. And I've got the links to amazon.com there. I will, when I finish my travels, and I'm going to be on the road until the 27th of October. But during November, I will send out those book plates again. But what I can't do this time is I can't get into personal correspondence with people. It was very interesting. It was very touching and heartwarming thing. But so many people wrote to me, and so many of them, I wanted to speak back to them. It's very cold to receive a letter and not to reply. So I did. But the problem this year is that I've got to write the sequel to fingerprints of the gods. And I really need to start that during November, because my research travels will be over at that point. I've got to write that, and I can't spend two months or three months corresponding in detail. So my offer is write to me. Show me that you've bought the book or pre-ordered volume 2. And above all, please give me your post-al address, because you can't imagine how many times people write to me, asking for the book plates, and don't give me their post-al address. Please give me your post-al address. And when I get back from my travels, I will sign the book plates. I will send you a signed book plate, which is simply a label that you can stick inside your copy of the book. And that, if that results in a bit more uptake for War God 2, it'll be good for me, because it's very difficult to start a sort of new career as a novelist at the age of 64. But you seem to be really enjoying it. I love writing novels, and I love getting... This is why I was talking about warriors earlier. I love getting into the spirit of the warrior. I don't know why it's fascinating. It's just absolutely fascinating. What would drive a man like Cortez to take 490 men and face them against the might of the Aztec Empire? Hundreds of thousands of men under arms who will kill you in the most awful way, if they catch you. What kind of will does it take to do that? And it's been interesting for me to get inside the heads of these people, and also to consider, because I'm interested in them, supernatural elements, where they're being misled by demonic forces in some way. That's something that I examine this. So I love doing it, but it's... I'm known as a nonfiction author, and that's mainly what I do. People buy nonfiction because they're interested in the subject very often. People buy a novelist because they trust that novelist, and know that his next book will be good. And I need to go to that. And I need to go to that. And we do it. It's your fascination with demons. What's your fascination with supernatural influences? The concept of demon. For a long time, I didn't believe in any spiritual element to life. I didn't see any of that at all. It was only really when I... And this is where my critics will say, well, Hancock's gone nuts, you know. It was only really when I started drinking ayahuasca in 2003. I suppose for a decade before that, I'd been immersed in the ancient Egyptian texts, and the ancient Egyptians are all about the quest for immortal life. They're all about how you live this life to continue on as a spirit, and ultimately to live the life of millions of years. And they very clearly indicate that dark forces are at work in the universe, which can mislead us, as well as there are light and positive forces that we can choose to follow, which will lead us into very nurturing and worthwhile and excellent directions. All those influences are there. So that's there in ancient Egypt. Then I start drinking ayahuasca in 2003, and I encounter seamlessly convincing parallel realms, inhabited by intelligent beings, some of whom seem very dark and dangerous, and some of whom are filled with light and joy, and exercise the power of healing. Now, I absolutely accept that all of this could be a projection or a creation of my own mind, and no exterior reality to it whatsoever. It's just that's all there is. But I don't think it's that way. I think that what happens in a deeply altered state of consciousness is that we reach you in the receiver wavelength of the brain, and encounter other levels of reality that are normally closed off to our senses, and the first thing I would say to any, I know that a number of people who've worked with psychedelics in depth haven't come to that conclusion. I know that, but the conclusion that I come to might the little offering that I bring to the table and many others have brought is that there is a separate freestanding reality of some kind which we don't fully understand yet, and that in altered states of consciousness we can encounter interact with that reality. That's the that's the view that I have now in that reality our spiritual forces, some of which seem to eat fear and energy, and dark energy. They thrive on, they seem to thrive on anything that's miserable or wicked or cruel or thoughtless or vile about humanity. And at the other side of it are entities that glow with light and love, and that seek to show us how we may bring to light that divine spark within us to go back to the lost, and the lost, the nastic idea. Those you encounter in a very direct way in the ayahuasca journey, because unlike you do encounter them in the DMT journey too, they're not quite the same, but unlike DMT ayahuasca allows time for really processing and thinking through what you're experiencing. It's unfolding over four hours, not four or five minutes, and that is a huge effect, and how the huge effect on me, and I'm not adamant about this, I accept I could be fantasizing at all. It's interesting that other people encounter pretty much the same beings and the same sort of drive to do something better than they've done before. It's interesting that there's that transpersonal side of it. I choose to believe that there are free-standing parallel dimensions, and that we are encountering them in all the states of consciousness, and that therefore there's interesting scientific work to be done, because in theory we could actually begin the targeted exploration of those dimensions by using volunteers and psychedelics. I choose to believe that that's what's going on. I could be completely wrong. It could just be the majesty of the human mind that we just invent all these words. That's what I was going to ask you. What's the most compelling argument against it? What's the most compelling argument rather from a neurological standpoint? Does anybody ever explain to you what's going on? There isn't a compelling argument. They don't know. There isn't a compelling argument. There's a reference frame. This is a game where I got myself into so much trouble with Ted. The reference frame is the reference frame of materialist science, and that reference frame says that all consciousness is a kind of accidental epi phenomenon of brain activity. There's actually no reality to consciousness. That is not something that's been proven scientifically and experimentally. It is just the way that a large and influential group of scientists see the world that everything can be reduced to material causes. The change is in brain activity that the company visions. You can measure, you can observe those changes on MRI scanner. that everything can be reduced to material causes. So the change is in brain activity, that the company visions, you can measure, you can observe those changes on MRI scanner. Those changes in brain activity are the experience you're having, according to this reference frame. Your experience can just be reduced to that, and there's nothing else to it. But that's not a fact. That is a philosophical view about how reality works. We don't know for sure. It could easily be the other way around. That the brain activity is simply necessary in order for us to see something that was always there, but that was normally closed off to our senses. So the compelling argument as far as what's happening when you're having these extreme visual experiences, what does the argument? Is anybody ever tried to explain it? Is it just supposed to be some chemical reaction with your cerebral cortex? Well, that is the materialist reductionist view, but it's just that and nothing more. But there's a whole other view on it. Rick Strassman at the University of New Mexico, you're very familiar with his work because you presented the spirit molecule. Yes. Rick Strassman does entertain the possibility that what is going on is not merely in a novel of our brains, but does represent stable freestanding dimensions of reality. We have no facts in this, but we're having an incredibly intriguing area to inquire into. Yeah. It's also one of those things where I feel like when you've experienced it yourself, you get a really better frame of reference as to why is this compelling at all? Because it sounds preposterous to someone who has no experience. I know. I know. I know. And I'm going to have loads of people saying handcuffs are freaky. Of course, too late. But there's that thing that people, when you want to define certain aspects of whatever the psychedelic experience is, where they seem to be almost impossible to define for people who have actually experienced it. Yes. The real problem is when someone who hasn't experienced it tries to define it. And it's like, man, you can come up with a bunch of really compelling arguments from like medical standpoint is like what's the effect on the cerebral cortex? What's the effect on the visual aspects of, your interpretation of this thing is because of this chemical interacting with that. That's all fascinating, amazing stuff. But the experience, bad science. It's bad science to present it as fact when it isn't. I, many times given this very simple analogy of the telescope, which I think explains the logical problem in the materialist view. If you want to look at a distant star with your telescope, you're going to point it at the right area of the sky, first of all. And then you're going to focus it. And as you focus it, physical changes will take place in the relationship between the lenses inside the barrel of the telescope. Yeah? Right. OK. Eventually the star will come into view, and you can see it clearly. You'd be completely wrong to say that the star is the physical changes inside the barrel of the telescope. Those physical changes have simply allowed you to see the star. Whoa. And that's the blue my fucking mind. And that's the same idea with DMT, that it's changing brain function to allow you to see something that it's refocusing the brain, in other words. Wow. That's very possible. That's how it's possible. It's an interesting inquiry. I never thought about it that way, I don't think. Not entirely. And interesting experiments could be done to test that with human volunteers. You could begin to investigate. If there is a free stunning reality, then the wheel ought to be able to get certain information out of it. There should be possibilities. So you know, that's the thing. I always had just thought of it as a chemical gateway. Yeah. But I think this is a way better way of explaining it. The idea of a telescope having to focus in to see something and then the chemicals focusing you in, that a chemical your own brain makes it focusing you in. And perhaps for some very good reason. Wow. That's amazing. I never thought about it that way before. But whatever it is, it's pretty fucking profound. And for someone to comment on it that hasn't taken, it seems kind of silly, especially because it's only 15 minutes. Yeah. It's disrespectful to speak of it. It's fine to speak of it, but it's disrespectful to put it down without having had the guts actually to have the experience yourself. Don't you think it's becoming more and more accepted, though? Because I think for a long time, academics resisted taking it or if they did take it, talking about it, because they didn't want to be labeled. Because there's a lot of people that will label you if you talk about psychedelics. So very recently, it's been considered a career-ruining move. And yeah, it can take very recently. Even though they all knew the news, they all knew the positive side of this. But this is again gradually changing. And again, I think the American role, the role of the American people in changing the legal status of cannabis state by state, is also going to feed into this and allow us to have a more rational dialogue regarding psychedelics, which can be, of course, I'm not saying to people to go out and take psychedelics. What I'm saying is that these are very powerful agents and that they can be extremely healing used in the right way. And they can change our whole view of reality. Why should we be forbidden to explore that if as responsible adults we choose to do so? Yeah, the argument is stupid. And I think the argument is eventually going away. And I think it'll be replaced by a new argument. And then the new argument is what the fuck is really happening. Yeah. And you answer it. Your question about it, or your proposal, is that's very fascinating one. But whatever it is, those things are there and you can benefit from them or not. It's up to you. But yeah, it's up to you. The fact that we live in a world where those are illegal is crazy. It's good to know. And if people are having very bad experiences from time to time with psychedelics, part of the reason for that is the world we've created, where these are illegal and where it's impossible for people to get good advice that they can trust and whether it's this atmosphere of danger and threat that's around it. Take all that away. And this very powerful instrument can be managed much more effectively than the situation. No doubt. And I equated in a lot of ways this idea of it being bad and negative. I equated in a lot of ways to vaccinations. And here's why. There's this vaccination, this anti-vaccination movement in this country. A lot of people feel like vaccinations are unnecessary. And they may have some good arguments. They may have some good arguments, especially about some certain vaccinations for things that are sexually transmitted diseases and things along those lines like hepatitis shots, shit, you're giving a little kid. So there's a real good argument against that. And there's definitely an argument that there's a lot of medication that kids are taking and is it the right amount? But there's no argument that vaccinations haven't saved a fuck ton of lives because they have. They've stopped a lot of diseases dead in the track. Absolutely. But they also, much like we talked about some people or allergic to cats. Some people are very different biological reactions. So we're to different chemicals. And there's gonna be some adverse reactions. Plus there is some in your body. I absolutely agree that vaccination is a incredibly effective medical tool in many ways. But there also is a kind of vaccination mafia at work because they're the ultimate mass medication. And people are making money. There's no doubt. Whenever there's profits, there's fuckery. There's no getting around it. Processed away human beings. Slide by slide. So it's one of those scenarios, very much like psychedelics in a way that there are gonna be some rare cases if we make psychedelics legal across the board. There's gonna be some rare cases of a person in a bad state of mind or a bad mental makeup or what have you, bad psychological makeup, you can fill in the bikes. Where they take it and it's detrimental to them. It's going to happen. And that'll be highly publicized and uses an argument to stop all of these freedoms. And building access ridiculous. Bill Hicks had the very best answer to that. As I'm sure you remember, that the lunatic who leaps out of the window in the evening can fly on LSD. Why didn't the fucker try and take off from the ground? Yeah, because we lost tomorrow on the world got lighter. Exactly. The world got lighter is one of my favorite lines. Beautiful. Yeah, but that is, it's just a strange argument to keep people from doing it because, especially this doctor that we're talking about earlier that's talking about cannabis in the addictive properties of cannabis. This is even talking to someone who was addicted to cannabis in you. It's still, it's a silly, like there's a lot going on when someone's addicted. It's not all necessarily chemical and the ones that are chemical. You're getting paid for. So that doesn't even make any sense. The ones that chemically make you addicted is the ones you're getting money from. And this one... And this one... And this one... And this one... And this one... And this one... And this one... And this one... And this one... Yeah. And the will be. But we are moving forward. I think we are, as well, I think it's, it's... It's pretty cool to see too. Yeah. But, you know, I think it's also important that a guy like you, who smoke pot from 9 a.m. to 2 a.m. every day. 7 days a week, 7 days a week. And it's 3 out of 65 days a year. It's going to enormous lengths to be able to obtain it when I was traveling. Yes, how is that? Well, we're all working. I would probably have to happen to that very much. But you know... It is, I do know what I'm talking about. I had a long relationship with it and I understand how. How do you feel now? How many of you have been dipped back in the water a little bit? I feel good, but I don't feel any urge to become that kind of a smoker again. I like my clarity. I was able to write with cannabis, but since I stopped smoking cannabis, I've been clear. My mind, there's been a clarity. It's a certain fog were lifted. That fog wouldn't have been there if I'd had one joint at the weekend and that was all. But since I was smoking all day long, that's why it was there. It's nice not to have that fog. I feel good about it. I feel more productive. On my novels, I can write 5,000 words a day, sometimes I get soaked. I get soaked the zone, so into the flow. All that is good and I feel good about it. I feel probably in the long run, my right choice would not to be have a big relationship with cannabis. I think I've done that. I've been there. I've done that. I've got the T-shirt. For me, it's a tool. I don't use the same tool every day. Sometimes I'm going to use any tools. I don't need it. It has a pretty profound effect on a lot of ways. You know one of my favorite things to do is at night get high and go down to the beach. It stared the ocean. I used to love doing that. Oh my God, that thing freaks me out on my mind. When you're high, it's a monster. It's a living thing almost. It's a force. It's a nature force that doesn't give a fuck about you. I think there's one reason why people that live by the beach are so mellow. The beach communities are notoriously mellow. I think one of the reasons why they're notoriously mellow is because they're faced with overwhelming evidence that they ain't shit. You're sitting there looking out at the greatest natural force that you could imagine. It's an entire different world. You're out there. Literally it's like if we had explained it in a galactic term, it would be like you're parking yourself next to the membrane between dimensions. You're literally in this world over here and right next to your face is a whole another world. We couldn't even imagine that, but that's the fuck exactly what it is. If you go to Santa Monica and you go over by where that pier is and you just walk along that sand and just start walking out into that water, you're at another world in 20 steps. You're over your head and you're in another dimension that you can't survive in. You better get the fuck back. It doesn't feel like you went to another planet, but you might as well have gone to another planet. Definitely. Definitely. It is right there. One of my strongest experiences of diving was just to tell a little story. It was diving it off a tenorif in the Canary Islands. I was down at a good 20 meters under water, let's say 70 feet. But there was a storm that day and the huge swell on the surface was so powerful that it was smashing me against the bottom of the sea. Oh my God. Bang. Bang. Bang. And I just that moment I realized I am in the hands of a gigantic force, but I can do absolutely nothing about. There's nothing you can do. The sea for me is a goddess. Fortunately I got over a lip and down into deeper water and it was okay. Deep of water. Yeah, another ten meters. What the fuck man? How long did you have to wait it out? That was another story. We stayed down for about 20, 25 minutes. We then had to come up. We'd been working quite hard at depth and you get through your air. But what we hadn't done was wrecking the exit point. And when we surfaced in this heavy swell, it was extremely difficult to get out of the sea. The rocks came down quite steep and she just... I think we discussed this before. You came up at a different spot. Yeah. And it was bad. But anyway, here I am to tell the tale. It was an older and wiser man. Greg Fitzimmons is a terrifying, he's a good buddy of mine, very funny stand-up comedian has a terrifying story. He was on vacation and he saw a woman drowning and he went out to savor and he realized that they're hanging out to this woman, swimming back while his kids and his wife and everyone was on the shore. And he was like, holy shit. Like I'm trying to save someone here. And sometimes people try to save people. They get drowned. I know. It happens often. Yeah, that's... You said that the tide was a little bit too strong. He was always... So it was sea. The sea is something to respect. Yeah, it is. Something... It's something... That's a terrifying thing. But that's my favorite thing to do. One of my favorite things to do. One of my... I was at the beach late at night. Yeah. By myself. Just stand out there and stare by myself. Put everything in perspective. It's just... It's like the ultimate... It's very... Not just like a dog, but it's very isolation tank. Ask in a way. It's an overwhelming amount of information. But there's solitude in the sound and the noise that sort of drowns out the rest of the world. It doesn't totally drown it out like an isolation tank does. But it has a partial effect because you get... It's a moving but semi-static image because it's these water waves that are coming at you and they're very similar. So you get in this very similar thing over and over again with very little variation. And then there's the overwhelming number, the gallons of water that's just so in front of you. So you can't see past this fucking thing. And it's dark. So then there's the unknown. The unknown, which is the big freaker. You know, you're looking out this black monster and sometimes when it's this black monster, you get a better sense of it than when it's this beautiful blue thing during the day when the sun's hitting it and it's reflecting. Because then you get all this visual stuff that's distracting you from the fact that's a fuckload of water. The giant fuckload of water. It's right there. And it could just go, which... Just come in like this, which... There you go. And everything's gone. Like a thousand fucking feet high waves. Can that's happened before? It has happened before. So that's also part of the new research that I'm doing. And I'm about to do a trip with Randall Carlson. Randall Carlson who's been on your show. Love him. Randall was so far ahead of the curve in recognizing that the gigantic flooding that came off the North American ice camp wasn't just caused by what I used to think it was caused by, which is that lakes of meltwater develop on the surface of the ice cap. And finally the dam, the ice dam breaks and the meltwater pours out. And it's been a little bit pointing out for years that the water flows were much too radical for that. Something much bigger had to be involved. So he was well ahead of the evidence when scientists began to realize that the North American ice cap had been hit by a comet 12,980 years ago, setting motion, the epoch that geologists call the younger dryers. So Randall is a great expert in this area. My wife's santhes traveling with us as well. and a friend of Randall's who's worked with him for many years called Bradley. And we're going to do a road trip from Portland, Oregon all the way to Minneapolis following the, it's about 2000 miles, I believe, following the southern edge of the former ice cap and Randall's going to show us the scars and tears on the landscape of what happened when that ice cap was instantly liquidized by a comet impact and huge tidal waves of water roared down off it across the land. Good Lord. I see that in detail with Randall really looking forward to doing that. Also the first time I've ever crossed, well, most of America by road, I've always wanted to do that. The certain spots shouldn't stop. If you feel like you're in danger, you're in danger. Just get in a car, hit the gas. And if you do know what country music is, you've got to listen to some of that. Yeah. Get a hold of some country music. You've got to fit in. Can you fake a southern accent? Because if they think you're from the England. I can do my best. You know, but from the England, they won't like him. They won't. You don't. You don't. You better not. What do you doctor who? The funny thing is, in England, I often get mistaken for an American. Do you really? It's weird. Nobody knows what I am. But in England, I'm not. Did you think you're American? Yeah. Or sometimes Canadian. Whoa. Canada has a bit of that. There's like a certain amount of English. It sounds like in the way they talk about things. Yeah. And certain a clear variation between them and us. Yeah, there is. Definitely. I even I can hear that. Yeah, I can hear that too. Yeah, I can totally tell. I can make a Canadian after a while. But so similar. Yeah, very similar. Yeah, very similar. That's hilarious that anybody would ever think you're American. I know. I know. Anyway, it's going to be great. I'm really looking forward to this more myself. That sounds fantastic. It's going to take loads and loads of pictures. And we're going to go up in an airplane a few times and look at the land underneath us. And there's going to be a great exciting research trip. And it's the last research trip for this sequel that I'm writing to think of. I'm sure you've seen this most recent discovery about micro diamonds. Yeah, that's exactly it. Yeah. That's precisely that is the that has finally settled it. Any scientists who were attempting to argue that there wasn't a comet impact now with all the evidence that's come in over the last five or six years is just settled by the nano diamond scattered in a huge swathe all over the world, which are a sure chemical imprint of a massive comet impact. And they know a lot about it now. It's really very, very clear. And this was an episode that changed the world. It killed off the many of the megaphauna that we've all heard of, the mammoths, the woody riders and so on and so forth. And it got rid of what was called the clovis culture, hunter-gatherer culture in the United States. And I think it got rid of a whole civilization that we've only remembered in myth and memory, at least that's the line that I'm investigating. It's a fascinating line, especially when as each visit that you come back to the podcast, there's new information over the last time. It was the nuclear glass that they discovered when they were doing core samples again, which is about 12,000 years ago. And then the new one is this micro-dime. It seems like over and over again, this not it becomes not a possibility, but a reality, that there was some sort of an impact. Something gigantic happened all over the world. And right it wasn't just the world over the world. It was massive in America, but it was the effect was everywhere, both impacts because this comet broke up into fragments like you make a levee nine, both impacts, but also very important, the gigantic cloud of dust that's thrown up into the upper atmosphere, which then, so you have this immediate reaction of flooding as the comet liquidizes part of the North American ice cap. And then a huge dust plume is up in the air all over the world. And the whole earth is shrouded in dust as in cool and cool because it's reflecting back the sun's rays. So we go into this 1,300, 1,400 year period called the Younger Dryas, where the earth gets incredibly cold, even though previously it had been coming out of the ice. So it's truly a gigantic event. And then weirdly, all our history, everything we think of as our past begins at the end of the Younger Dryas. Around kicks in 12,980 years ago, ends 11,600 years ago. The earth begins to warm up again. And everything we know about ourselves or can claim we know unfolds in that last 11,600 years. And the period before the Younger Dryas, we really blank on so much of it. It's so fascinating. I said it again, shit. It's amazing that all this information keeps coming up to support this. And it's amazing if we do consider the possibility that it is true that everything can be essentially shut back down to zero with some rocks from the sky. And that's something that we really need to get in our head. That could happen. There is a very distinct possibility that we could be hit by something. The NASA photographs of the, I think they call it the Black Diamond, the Earth at night. Okay. What you see is certain areas of the world are brightly lit up, Europe, North America, for example. On the other hand, Africa and large parts of South America are dark because there's no electrification in those areas. And those photographs are often taken to say, to speak of our achievement, look how we can light up the planet like a Christmas tree so that it can be viewed from, viewed from space. But I would say it also says another thing that if we had, if we were to confront again, the same sort of cataclysm that hit the Earth 12,980 years ago, then the people who would survive and carry the human story forward would be those very people who live in the dark areas, the areas that aren't electrified. And we who live in the glowing lights that show up on those NASA photographs who've become so specialized, who most of us are unable even to know how to plant a vegetable or hunt an animal, we're the ones who would be gone. And the whole order of the world would be reversed. Wow. So the world would become like an ayahuasca culture. You'd have all these fucking people from the Amazon that would be fine. Because they're fine. They'd be absolutely fine. They know how to survive. They know. They know how to do it. So again, I think the message of this is we shouldn't be arrogant and complacent in the achievements of our civilization. We have done wonderful and amazing things as well as terrible things. But we shouldn't be arrogant or complacent about it. We should recognize it's all very fragile. It can be taken away from us at any time. We can take it away from ourselves. Without a doubt, the information is something to consider. Just the information about these impacts. It's something to consider. And it's also something to consider that if that's correct, boy, what a magical time it must have been back when they had developed some sort of technology that was enabling them to make structures like go backly tapades. Why? The coalier magicians of the gods because there's something magical. Something about it that we would call magic. But perhaps was just another form of science. Whatever they were able to do, I mean, it's amazing that we haven't figured it out yet. But we're so arrogant in our assumptions that it had to be all the ways that we've already figured out. So silly. Isn't there some shit we haven't figured out yet? Exactly. Like this new ability that they've just found out that they've taken people and they've used the internet to send information from one person's mind or another person's mind. I've seen that 5,000 miles away. It's incredible. But nobody else did that before that. So we didn't really think that that was it. We thought maybe it'd be a possibility. But now we know it's a possibility. Whatever the fuck they did to make these pyramids. Just because we haven't figured it out yet. I mean, they were using wooden rollers. I think it had some really incredible technology that just we don't have a trace of it anymore. We're looking at the form of technology that we don't recognize as well. Exactly. Because we're programmed to thinking about entirely in our own terms. And it's almost like the universe is giving us a puzzle that's so incredibly in your face with its most obvious results. And because we have these preconceived notions that we're not willing to accept that as a possibility. When people look at the pyramids they go, well, you know what the thing is, they build ramps and they use stone rollers and like, there's a whole faction who look for the most boring meaningless place. They might have died of that. They might have died of that way. But the fact that there are large groups of people whose mission is to look for the most boring rather than the most extraordinary possibility. It's good. That's how we have bodies in our society. We do need to look, we do need to look with a skeptical eye and say that there could be mundane explanations for this. But we also need to keep a tiny fraction of our research effort, perhaps a very small fraction indeed, to explore our turn to explore our turning. To exploring alternative ideas. Because every night, if they do come out right, they change everything in the way that the mundane things don't. And it's really worthwhile. The only thing I understand why I've been subjected to so much criticism. But I welcome it. I've learned a great deal from that criticism. But is it wise for us to live in a society which is hostile to the exploration of extraordinary possibilities? Shouldn't we actually protect that and make that something which we encourage those who wish to do so in our society to do just on the off chance that they might come up with something utterly well-changing? Especially if it's done with careful consideration. Like you've done or especially like what Randall Carlson's done with asteroid Olympics is absolutely stunning and fascinating. I mean, and what he's done is done with very careful considerations. Randall's real, he's a real scholar, real thorough researcher and investigator. And he was awesome in the podcast. He was one of my all-time favorites. Yet these ideas are fascinating. But what I was going to say was that it's almost like the number is so large, like 2,300,000 stones in the Great Pyramid. Which is so bizarre. The number is... 6,000 tons. Yeah, the number... Lots of 50 to 70 tons. Oh, yeah. Things chamber elevated to heights of 300 feet above the ground. It's almost perfectly aligned to true north-south, eastern west, within a fraction of a single degree. So crazy that if they could come back from the past and if they'd come to our time today and go, wait a minute, how did you guys think we did this? Do you think we used slaves? Oh my God, that's so funny. I might come over here, man. Tell them how you think we made the pyramid. Just on wood. Get the fuck out of here, are you really saying that? Exactly. It'd be like laugh and like you guys haven't invented this Magneto thing yet. No, something that allows you to turn it into stone. You mean you don't know how to move things with that with sound? Yeah, you don't know how to manifest things out of the air. You don't know how to exercise the majestic and incredible power of your mind. We're running out of time. We are. And if we're running out of time, can I say again? Yes, please. Because I am a good example of a list. Please. Please. If anybody out there would like to take me up in this offer, just go to Graham Hancock dot com, go to the war god page, which you'll find easily scroll down and see what to write to me. But I have to repeat again. I will send you the book plates, but I can't correspond. Correspond and it will be November before I'm in a position to send the book plates because I'm on the road continuously until 27th. Graham Hancock dot com. Graham Hancock dot com. I'm my goal is to make this so successful that you never make another offer ever again. I want to ruin you. That's such a, you can't sign all these things. There are too many coming in and you're like, what the fuck am I doing? Why am I, I can't do this. This is my whole life now. So, you know, it's just to be the last one. I think it'll probably be the last one. By the way, there's chapters to read free online on the war god page. Oh, so I'm not asking people to buy sight unseen. Like, and have a beautiful and your book fingerprints of the gods. I've said it before when you've been on the podcast for changed my single-handedly changed my ideas about history. Change my ideas not just not in any way discounting the amazing work that traditional historians have done, but just that these things exist that defy explanation and that I didn't know. Just the fact that there is a guy from Boston University named Robert Shaw, who's a prominent geologist who said, this is clear erosion and there was last time there was a road that was 9,000 BC. Yeah. Like you're talking about an insane amount of time has passed since there was thousands of years of that rainfall, by the way. You needed thousands of years to do what we see on this. This isn't wind. Yeah. Like, this is some crazy shit. And the crazy thing in fingerprints was to bring together people like John Anthony West, who brought Robert Shaw to this thing. Yes. So I wrote it by Val, like, Rand and Rose Flemmath. A lot of researchers were working in the field and coming out with extraordinary information. And part of what I did in that book was to bring all that information together into a kind of synthesis, I suppose. It's such an interesting theory. And it's such an interesting subject. And now that it keeps getting substantiated by places like Go Backly Tapi or these micro meteors, it's sort of like, peace the puzzle together slowly, but surely. Yeah. And then we're going to find there's going to be a bunch of civilizations that we uncover. Those ones that they were finding in Mexico and then of course there's ones that they're finding in the Amazon where they think, just like we're talking about the other thing. They find a hill and they think it's a hill and then someone realizes like, oh, you shit, this is a building, guys. Huge earthworks in the Amazon stone circles. You know, that's another place to look for a lost civilization. We're out of time. That's it, right? We're dying. We're dying how much time we have. It's counting down. How much time? Give me less than a second. Less than a second. Thank you, Graham Hancock. Thanks for your sponsors. Thanks to me, undies. Thanks to Ting and thanks to DraftKings.com. Go there and do that and use those codes. They were all earlier. I said them earlier. It's fucking rewinded, but thank you also to everybody tuning into this podcast and thanks for all the positive feedback and everything. Go to GrahamHackock.com. GrahamHankock.com and order the book. Thank you, sir. Appreciate it, Brian. Thanks, Joe. It's been fun. Say bye. Bye, everybody.