Go Roman 1, the Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast my night, all day. All right, Mr. Paulin. Yeah, hey, see you man. Good to be here. Good to be back. Good to see you again. And good to see you in the, you done with the headphones on. I've done with the headphones. In and out instantaneously. Your new book, this is your mind on plans. Yeah, right here. Yeah, I like it. Since you've been on, I have to say that at all of the people that have discussed psychedelics, I think you've been one of the most important ones because you were a respected, esteemed journalist. You're like a real writer already. And for you to introduce the world of psychedelics to people that maybe would have been skeptical of someone's intentions. Like there's a lot of folks that like you read something about drugs and even if it's from someone that has credentials, you sort of assume that they're trying to justify. Yeah, so having an agenda when they're starting out. I think you're right. I think that made a huge difference. I was coming at that world from outside. I'd had very little experience of psychedelics, virtually none as a kid. I'd heard about this research. I was curious. I was skeptical. And so I went on this journey that brought me into this community. And I think that allowed people to follow me to come with me. I think people would much rather go on a journey with you than have you lecture at them. Oh, for sure. And so I always, in all my journalism, that's what I try to do. I start out as unknowing or ignorant as the reader and then gradually work my way into the world of whether it's food and agriculture or psychedelics. And so in all my books, I kind of start out like an idiot and gradually move toward toward a state of knowledge or more knowledge. I think that's incredibly relatable to people because it just lets people know what you're learning, how you're learning it, why you're learning and how you come to your conclusions. Yeah. That it's a result of having these experiences or talking to these people. And they see the all the armature of journalism. They see how it works because you're letting them, you know, you're being very transparent about the process. And also, you know, I think that, you know, there are lots of, most of the stuff that've been written about psychedelics and most of the stuff I was reading was written from like inside the world already convinced that these were great things that were going to change human consciousness. And that's a turn off to people, especially if you have this resistance, which many, many people do. there's so much cultural baggage around psychedelics left over from the 60s, you know, people, you know, the risks, the, how disruptive it was to society and people still hold these ideas in their head. People say, well, don't people like jump off of buildings? I mean, I hear the, or doesn't it scramble your chromosomes? These are, these are urban legends by and large. Although there were some people who jumped off of buildings. But the chromosome thing was not true. The staring at the sun till you go blind was not true. But it's amazing. The power of these memes and it just lingering in our culture. Well, there's a great fear of losing your mind. I mean, you know, about the guy from Pink Floyd and people here about, you know, some guy in the neighborhood did too much acid. The thing is they are real. There are real. Yeah. There are casualties. Yeah. And I think we have to acknowledge that. And I think unless we're really frank about the risks, we risk another backlash. Because bad shit will happen. Yes. You know, if you're trialing, you know, a couple thousand people for depression, which they're doing, these clinical trials to see if suicide can help with depression, some of those people are going to commit suicide. That's what depressed people do. And you know, especially if you get them off their SSRIs, you know, that increases the risk. But that narrative, when someone in a clinical trial for depression with psychedelics gets out there, it'll plug into this old narrative about people jumping off of buildings. Whereas people routinely commit suicide on SSRIs and it doesn't make the news. Right. So there are these, it's when a story plugs into an existing narrative in the culture that it really takes off. It has this, you know, incredible power. And that could happen. So I think we should be, I think the way you inoculate the culture is talking about risk. And say that there were casualties. There are people who, you know, did, you know, I don't want to say fry their brains. Because it's, it's, it's pretty imprecise. But people had some psychotic breaks on psychedelics. Would they have had them anyway? There's reason to believe they would. It's not like schizophrenia rates went up during the 60s. Do you think a trigger skits a friend of yours? Yeah. I think that's probably what happens. Any kind of, kind of traumatic experience can do it. Divorce of parents can do it. You know, if you're at that age and you have that vulnerability going to graduate school for a certain number of people does it. You know, extreme stress. And it can be an extreme experience. So there is a good reason that people, even second degree relatives who have schizophrenia, you can't participate in any of these trials. They're screening people and also for manic depression. They're screening you out. And there are good reasons for that. Yeah. There, um, there's this discussion about cannabis that's been going on for a while now. Like what happens to people when they, particularly when they eat edibles? Um, like is, is it something that triggers schizophrenia? And I think that the numbers as you're saying, they really do mirror the numbers that just happened in a general population. Like it's one out of a hundred and one out of a hundred people seem to have a significant problem. Yeah. I mean, people, certain number of people are at risk. They're bound to get schizophrenia at those windows. I think it's in, you know, right around 20 and right around 30 years old seems to be the window. Really? But yeah, very specific. Oh, yeah. No, it happens at a very specific time. Do they think it's like transitionary periods in your life with additional stress? Like you have a breaking point or something? It isn't really clear. It may be a developmental issue. Um, you know, boys or men are still developing into their 20s. Right? They're brain development. I think it's in their 50s. Well, yeah. That's true. But, um, but there's certain brain structures that are not, you know, finished at that age. Honestly, I don't know. I'm out of my depth here. Yeah. Um, what was the motivation to write this new book? So the motivation for this book grew out of a long standing interest in our relationship to plants. I've been obsessed with plants since I was like an eight year old gardener. And, um, and I've written a lot about, uh, how we use plants and how plants use us. And that relationship has been of keen interest. And I looked at food, uh, eating plants is obviously one of the big things we do with them. And a big part of our relationship. Um, and, uh, and then when I started working on psychedelics, I was really struck by the fact that, um, one of the things humans have used plants for forever is to change consciousness. And that seemed like a very curious phenomenon. Um, but every, there is every culture on earth with one notable exception has some plant or fungus that they use regularly and often ceremonially to change consciousness. The exception or the inuit, the Eskimos, and it's only because nothing's good plants. Nothing good grows where they live. That's interesting. Do they change their consciousness at all? Do they use breathing exercises? They may well. I don't know. Um, because there are many ways to change your consciousness. If you're right, breathing can do it. Uh, fasting can do it. Ex extreme exertion can do it. Um, so there are other tools for doing it. But most humans have used plants, uh, you know, and of course there's alcohol too, which changes consciousness. It's, it's alcohol is not produced by plants. It's actually produced by a fungus. But, um, so I was, I've always wanted to explore this issue of why do we do this? What good is it to change consciousness? Cause you would think from an evolutionary point of view, it might be a bad idea. You know, when you change consciousness, you're more likely to have accidents, you're more vulnerable to predators. Um, and, you know, so you would think that if it, that it would be kind of edited out by natural selection, but it hasn't been. Yeah. If drug taking were really bad, the drug takers would be gone from evolution. And they're not. And so I started thinking, well, what are they good for? How do we use drugs? Why are they part of our lives? And we're at this very interesting moment where the drug war is starting to end. I think we can see the end of the drug war. Um, the voters have spoken and they've essentially sued for peace. You know, we've had all these, um, ballot initiatives, what happened in Oregon last fall was amazing. I think something just happened in California. Yes. The California State Senate voted to legalize psychedelics and also MVM. Legalize or decriminalize? You know, they, they sell it as a decriminalize, but if you read the bill, it's legalized. So what is the specifics? Well, the specifics are that those, the substance in the bill, which are LSD, MVM, a psilocybin, I became, which is troubling given the specific risks associated with I became, which we can talk about. Um, uh, DMT, yeah, DMT's in there. I don't know if I've MEO DMT's in there. I don't think it is. A MESCALIN-producing cacti, um, uh, and basically, um, personal use, growing and social sharing is legal. No commercialization. Um, although that, that gets a little weird because if a guide, let's say an underground guide charges you $1,500 for her services and just gives you the psilocybin. Is that commercialization or not? Right. Is that, is it legal to be a guide? Like that seems commercial. Well, even if someone brings their own, yeah, right. I mean, you're sort of propped it off of the ice. Frankly, some aspects of this bill do not strike me as being completely well thought out. I mean, including I began where you really should have a health examination before you use it. Why, why is that? Well, I began as shown some, this is an African shrub that is a psychedelic used in Africa for a long time. Um, which is apparently phenomenal for people will be it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So because in addition to giving you the psychedelic experience, it removes the craving for opium. So it's been, there's a lot of clinics in Mexico who are using it. However, the, the, the, the medical advice is you should be on a heart monitor the whole time you're using it because it can lead to various, um, cardiovascular events. And, um, so it's, it's not, it's not as benign as some other psychedelics in terms of the physiology. Um, anyway, this still has to get through the assembly. Um, it's amazing. It got passed. Uh, this just happened June 1st. Um, and then we had, you know, we also had a whole bunch of decriminalization, uh, initiatives, Washington, DC voted to decriminalize plant medicines and entheogens. Um, so we're getting to this new place where the public is had it with the drug war. Neither party really wants to fight it anymore. Even the Republicans are backing off on drug war. It's not part of the culture wars now, which is fascinating. We, we were recognizing how much damage was done. Um, you know, how many people's lives were ruined, how many people have, you know, we've incarcerated around the drug war. And it hasn't worked. We, you know, we have more overdoses now than we had before the opiate crisis. Um, you know, the biggest health problem related to the drug war has been, uh, I'm sorry, the biggest problem since we started this drug war. public health problem has been the opiate crisis. 800,000 people have overdosed. Most of them started on legal opiates. Purdue Pharma, you know, didn't a lot more damage than any illicit drug, um, you know, economy. It doesn't Johnson and Johnson just got to get out of the opiate game. Yeah. They settled with the governments that they're going to stop. For billions. Yeah. And it sounds like, you know, $230 million, whatever. No. I know. That's nothing. Yeah. So, so we're at this new moment where we have to figure out, okay, if we're not going to just make them illegal, what are we going to do with them? How do we fold them into our culture? Right. And one of the things I wanted to do in this book was start this conversation, this kind of more grown up conversation about how we use drugs in our lives, how we've used them in the past, uh, remind people that most of us do have a relationship with the plant drug caffeine being, you know, which I'm enjoying right here. Um, just a small amount of caffeine. Yeah. Relatively small. This is a black rifle. That's a free. That's a 300 milligrams. You didn't offer me any of that. You want one? No, I think it'd be a bad idea, but thank you. Three hundred milligrams. That's a serious tea toteller. Yeah. I'm a lightweight on caffeine, but I am dependent as I learned in the course of the book. So I wanted to learn, I wanted to talk a little bit about our relationship drugs. What's a healthy relationship? I mean, drug abuse is real. A drug abuse is a bad relationship to a drug. Right. It's not about breaking the law. It's a bad relationship. What do you think are the motivations for keeping these drugs illegal? I mean, clearly there's got to be some influence by the pharmaceutical companies. There has to be because there are alternative treatments to a lot of different things. And if they looked at their bottom line and if they were being shrewd, like very cold, calculated, money assassins, yeah, they would probably say, you know, it's not a good idea for us for all these drugs to be legal. But they don't have a leg to stand on after starting the opiate crisis. But it doesn't matter if they have a leg to stand on. If there's no moral, correct, you know, argument for their stance, they're still doing it to make money. Yeah. And they may be outlaw being to keep these laws. But it's interesting, it's the citizens who are overturning them. A lot of these are ballot initiatives that you can't lobby. And what happened in Oregon, I mean, there were two things there. One was decriminalizing personal use of all drugs, even hard drugs, and directing people who are busted into, you know, treatment, harm reduction approach. And then even more interesting was this Proposition 109, which legalizes psilocybin therapies specifically. But does it in a very thoughtful way? There, the proposition basically obligates the state health department to set up an institution that will regulate guides, train, regulate, and certify guides, and regulate the growing of psilocybin. It's kind of an amazing idea that the state will do this. And so far, the governor has been very cooperative. Whether the FDA will put up with it, you know, it's kind of usurping their power to regulate drugs. There's a whole lot of complications, but it's going to be really interesting to watch. But it's the beginning of this process of figuring out a culture around drugs, rather than just say no. And I think it's going to be the cultural work that we're going to be doing over the next couple decades. And so, if we're going to be figuring out a safe way, a productive way to use these substances instead of simply banning them. Yeah, I think that's really important is people do have to understand the risks involved in all these different things. And it's not simple. It's not clean. And we have to understand dosages. We have to understand the set and setting. What's the right way to use them when not to use them? Certain people will be vulnerable, especially people that are psychologically vulnerable. They shouldn't be experimenting with these things. Because of all of the years of suppression, unfortunately, we don't have a lot to go on exactly. Exactly. Exactly. Exactly. And that's why it's going to be hard work. And that's one of the reasons in the third section of this book on Mescal and I spent a lot of time looking at the Native American Church. Because I think indigenous use of psychedelics has a lot to teach us. I don't think we can just borrow it. Their methods lock stock and barrel. But there are certain principles that are really interesting and helpful. One is you seldom do it alone. You always do it with intention, purpose. There is usually an elder involved to guide you. And it's always surrounded by ritual. And I think that's really significant. And people who use drugs in a ritual way seldom get into trouble. Even alcohol. Alcohols does more damage than any of these drugs we're talking about. And so people who use alcohol in a ritual way, which is to say, think of the social rituals we have. You don't drink till the evening. You don't start off in the morning drinking. You're toast to a wedding or something like that. Right. Yeah. That's a ritual that we have. And then also that we have alcohol with food very often. We don't drive after we drink. It's a social thing. People who drink that way are not the ones who get in serious trouble with it if they can stick to those rituals and rules. And that's true across the board. So I spent a lot of time interviewing Native Americans about the peyote ceremony and how they use it. And we think psychedelics is incredibly disruptive to society. In some ways it was in the 60s. I mean, it fed the anti-war movement. It led to the generation gap. And lots of tensions came out. A lot of productive things came out of it too. But we think of it as very disruptive. But in the Native American community, you have this model of drug use. That's incredibly conservative and moral. It's this very rigid ceremony. Everybody sits around the fire, stares at the fire, their rules about which way the basket of peyote passes around the room. There's songs you sing in certain ways. There's drumming. Did you do it? No, I didn't. And I'll tell you why in a second. And the focus is on healing somebody. And somebody who's got trauma, someone who has alcoholism, spousal abuse, or a big right of passage, someone's going off to the army or whatever it is. Everyone's attention is focused on that person. And Native Americans say it is incredibly therapeutic and it has been vital to the survival of Indian culture, which as you know, we tried to stamp out. We meaning white Americans tried to crush in the 19th century. And that's when payotism arose is when Indian culture was on the verge of complete collapse. It was a really dark moment. They were forcing Indian zantar reservations in Oklahoma. They were taking boys, young boys, cutting their hair and sending them off to boarding school with the explicit goal of this was what the superintendent of one of these schools said to kill the Indian and save the man. And payotism arose at this moment as a way to hold on to culture and heal trauma and it worked. Yeah, I don't think there's a particularly long history of payotism. Not ancient. Well, with North American Indians, payotism really begins in the 1880s, which is when they're really. Yeah. And the church is not actually established till 1918. But it's in the 1880s. However, there were Indians in Texas and many more in Mexico that had been using payoty continually for thousands of years. Do you know what specific tribes? The Weachal in Mexico. I don't know which the Texas tribes were. But and they were using it in the same ritual found out. I don't know exactly what the ritual was, but they were using it. So the oldest archaeological evidence is from Texas. It's on the Rio Grande. There's something called the Shumla Caves, which is an archaeological dig that was discovered a few decades ago. And they found their payoty effigies, little dolls made out of payoty and evidence that they were being used ceremonially. So it's the oldest psychedelic. So even though that chain was broken with some North American tribes, because it only grows by the way in Texas, there's a very small band of near-la-rado where the payoty gardens are. And so it was kind of rediscovered and moved up to Oklahoma and then it spread around the country from there. When you say it's the oldest psychedelic, do you mean that we know of that we have evidence it was being used 6,000 years ago? Really? There may be older ones, but I haven't seen the record. What is the evidence? It's the North American? It's the Native American. Oh, so that's 6,000 years old? 6,000 years ago. I mean, I don't know which group it was, but there were evidence that there were these religious objects that they created and they actually made them out of payoty. And they tested it and it was payoty. So it's been around even if it hasn't been in continuous use among American Indians. I just think that's such an interesting model for how to think about it. We have to come up with our own cultural container. We're not going to just take the Indian container. It doesn't feel right to us and it would be cultural appropriation. But that's what we have to figure out. What are the proper rituals in which to use psychedelics? Do you wear the book, the immortality key, Brian Murrow, who's book? Fascinating. Fascinating. And he's writing about evidence of very early use in the old world of psychedelic compounds, Ergot, which is the fungus from which LSD is derived, was found in some communion cups in Spain. That's kind of wild. And the idea that the Eucharist may have involved psychedelic. There was also cannabis found in some Jewish sites from that period. And I've always wondered about wine and grease that they would talk about these wild Dionysian revels and they drank wine out of glasses like this big. They had to be something else. Oh for sure. And also did you know wine back then at a very low alcohol content? I didn't know that. Also in the region to expect that they were spiking it with something. We don't know what. I mean, and we don't know how you would use Ergot because Ergot can also give you gangrene icky. Really? I don't know. Well, I don't know how else you take it. But people, so Ergotism was this disease people got when they ate, you know, in a wet year, the rye crop would get all this Ergot on it. But people were desperate. They would still make bread from it. And it would make people kind of crazy. Well they think that that is the Salem Rich Trial. Right. That's one theory. And then you have these outbreaks of what was called witchcraft, which is just people having visions and tripping. Tripping. Yeah. And so, and there are episodes all through European history of these outbreaks, St. Baitis Danch was another term that was used for this. And so it was outbreaks coincide with core samples that show like particularly. Yeah. And especially when years, when you've got lots of fungus. But the other effect you can get from eating this stuff is gangrene. So if it was consumed as a drug, it was processed in some way to make it safe. And the L.E.U.S.ian Mysteries that Brian talks about in that book too, which was this right in Greece that went on for thousands of years. And every great Greek writer, politician participated in this. There was a potion that they would take called a kicky-on. Everyone was sworn to secrecy. So no one talked about this. But they would take this potion and cooky on. Cooky on a kicky on. I don't know if my Greek is shitty. K-Y-K-E-O. And they would go to the underworld and visit with their ancestors and have these visions. And it kind of makes sense when you think of Plato's idea that there's an unseen realm right next to this one where the real table is. Yeah. This is just the secondary table. So but how do we prove these things? The work, these archaeologists are doing interesting work. And there's going to be a new institute at Harvard working on some of these questions. Yeah. And it was all sparked by Brian's work. And Brian's appearance on this podcast, in fact, really led to this. And this she hated these discussions because they realized like when you hear him talk about it and you understand the amount of research this guy has done for over a decade. Pursuing this. And it's a really it was a big risk because until they found the samples that indicated there was ergot inside these vessels, they really didn't know if the suspect is this a horseshoe, they didn't know and now they do know. And it all makes sense, right? It makes sense. It makes sense. It makes sense. It makes sense. I think psychedelics have had a very profound effect on cultural evolution in many, many ways. The encounter of these molecules with a certain mind produces memes, new ideas, metaphors, theories, and visions. Sometimes not always ends up changing everything. 99% of the things people, insights people have on psychedelics are probably not that valuable. I mean, they may be personally useful. You know, love is everything, whatever it is. But every now and then in a certain mind, there is an idea. And it might be a vision of an after world. It might be the idea of an unseen other world, a beyond. And then that person tells that story. And suddenly the center's culture. They asked somebody had a vision. They went up on a mountain and they saw God. It's a very plausible explanation for how religion might get started. It completely makes sense to me. And in fact, wasn't there, there's been some work at one of the universities in Israel where they were, they're trying to connect the Akisha tree with the burning bush that Moses saw. Because the Akisha tree apparently is rich in DMT. And they're trying to, the connection they're making is the burning bush being God was consuming smoked DMT. And that they were having this vision that Moses was having, it makes sense if you're translating things from ancient Hebrew to Latin to Greek to whatever the fuck they're doing. You're going to lose a lot of whatever they're trying to say. And especially when you talk about what's a metaphor and what's literal. Exactly. Exactly. And that's what they think. That's fascinating. I haven't heard about that. I'm very interested in the role that psychedelics have played. And it's true in science too, right? I mean, we just took a PCR test, I think, you know, COVID test. And who invented PCR, a scientist named Kerry Mollis who got the idea on an LSD trip in Northern California. Yeah. And he's talked about it. And he said, LSD allowed me to sit on the molecule and watch and see what was going on. And so that encounter of that molecule with that mind gave us this amazing tool that all of genetics depends on. Yeah. We took a rapid antigen test by the way. Oh, okay. I'm a PCR test. All right. Yeah. He spoke an out about that. And he just said it's not what it's for. It shouldn't be using that regard. Interesting. Yeah. But anyway, it's been- But he found it again, figured it out. And there's, you know, there are many stories through history. I mean, I think, you know, the human imagination has a natural history, right? It has to. Everything is a natural history. So what is that natural history? Well, I think drugs of all kinds played a very important role at certain key moments in the evolution of that thing we call the imagination. Well, I think the last time you were here, we talked about Terence. We kind of stoned apetry, which is the most fascinating. I know. And the one I have the most trouble getting my head around. Have you talked to Dennis about it? Dennis? Yeah. Oh, yeah. We've talked about it. We're doing an event together, actually, in a couple of weeks. Dennis is the most convincing when he discusses it. I haven't heard his whole rap on it, but I need to. I'll send you a video of him saying it from this podcast because Dennis is brilliant. And he also totally agree. He's well versed in the world of psychedelics. Yeah. And in the world of his brother. Yes. Yes. And good and bad, right? And, you know, his brother was just such an important figure in the psychedelic world of just spreading the gospel. Because he's so regret. I had, I got into it too late to meet him. I mean, to have him on this podcast with him. Oh my God. Yeah. Well, I'll stop for eternity. That would be the guy. Yeah. People always say, like, who, like, living or dead, who's a person you wish it could have got? Is that how to be sound the last deterrence? Yeah. Bill Hicks and Terrence McKenna, those have been my two guys. So, you know, the issue with that is that how I understand how the impact of psychedelics finds its way into cultural evolution pretty easily. Yeah. He's saying it's part of genetic evolution. And that it actually changed the genome as I understand it. And that people's and accounts for the growth of the size of the human brain. And, and, you know, the idea that people were exposed to psychedelics on the on the savannah, which they probably were in the form of mushrooms. And that it was a form of synesthesia in that sound's got associated with ideas and meanings. were in the form of mushrooms. And that it was a form of synesthesia in that sounds got associated with ideas and meanings in the same way when you take a psychedelic often you can see musical notes or taste them or whatever. And so this is what gave us language. I still don't get. So the people who had this tool were more likely to reproduce. How does it actually get into being? There's a bunch of things that he, I mean obviously this is purely speculative right he's trying to figure out and connect the dots. And Dennis does a better job I think of explaining it from a scientific perspective. But Terrence's position was there was a bunch of things that are happening that coincided with climate change. So these jungles, these tropical rainforests were receding in the grasslands. As they were receding in the grasslands the primates were climbing out of trees and experimenting with new food sources. One of the things that they've recognized is that primates in the presence of undulates will flip over their manure and look for these cow patties and look for beetles and grubs because they know that there's always something that's under bugs oftentimes around there and of course mushrooms are growing up. So they would experiment by trying these different things to see if they're edible. In consuming silosive and particularly in low doses silosive and positively affects visual acuity. So it makes sure they were better hunters. Better hunters more accurate in edge detection. So there's been studies where if you have two parallel lines, if the parallel lines shift slightly, the people who are on silosive and are far more likely to be able to detect that than people that are on the match. Fascinating. So that's one. There's some cultures that give silosive into their hunting dogs. It makes sense. It makes sense. There's a clarity involved in consumption of silosive and where it sort of eliminates anxiety. It focuses you on tasks at hand, specifically in lower doses. One of the things that people are doing that I have a lot of friends are doing it right now is micro dosing. It's very very popular and their perspective is that there's something about micro dosing that allows them to be more present. It allows them to feel better and be less anxious. Or better and more creative. Yeah. The other thing about silosive and is that it enhances community. So the idea that all these primates were doing it together, they were more loving, more connected, more loyal to each other. And this might have enforced tribal behavior. So that might have been a protective issue. So there were better hunters, more tribal, and it makes some horny. So they're more likely to have sex, more likely to breed. And then with the creativity involved, the idea is the creativity might have also enhanced their hunting. Might have also enhanced tool making. And then of course the the line counts of innovation. The connection of sounds to objects that it might have initiated that. That's a very good restatement. Excellent. That's the better than the version in Terrence's book. Well, it's over the course of two million years that the human brain size doubled, which is crazy. I mean, that is a but there are other explanations. I don't know. There's only one. No, and it may have been several things happening at the same time. Have you heard about the cooking hypothesis? Yes. Yeah. So Richard rang on a Harvard primatologist. And his his argument is that is when we learned to cook, which essentially meant we had to spend less metabolic capital digesting food chewing especially, you know, chimps spend like six hours a day chewing because they're eating all this uncooked plant material. And when we moved to cook meat in particular, but cooked food of all kinds, we didn't need as big a gut and we could afford to run a bigger brain. And I find that theory. And there's some evidence for that. I mean, like if you feed snakes, you know, some uncooked food, some on uncooked food, they grow much faster on the cooked food. One of the reasons our dogs are so fat these days is we're giving them cooked food when they're not off for it because most of the stuffing cans has been cooked. So anyway, it's, you know, there's a lot of speculation in this whole area, but it's fascinating. It is fascinating. And there is a long history of human use of psychedelics. Yeah. And it kind of makes sense that if you'd probably keep going, you're going to deal with ancient man using it somewhere along the line. Yeah, there's no historical record, but there's no reason to think people just figured it out six thousand years ago. People eat everything. They do accept things that are connected to psychedelics. And this is where it gets really weird when you get cultures that are really, they don't have a lot of food, but yet they worship cows. Yeah. You know, and why would they worship cows? Well, the speculation is cows, the cow matter. Yeah. And then still a sivant grows in the manure. Yeah, there's several cultures where cows are different. My friend Duncan, he grew up in Asheville, North Carolina, and they used to put some kind of something in the feed of cows to try to get cows to stop producing psychedelic mushrooms, because there were so many psychedelic mushrooms in these college kids were running out onto the fields just picking them and tripping balls all the time. Did it work? I don't know if it worked, but it's a terrible tragedy, even the fact that they did it. Like, what are you doing? Like, it's just some anti-fungal or something. I don't know what they're doing, but it, you know, he said that they would all go out to the fields and find cows shit. And it was apparently just insanely common. Yeah. It is in the Pacific Northwest. I have a brother-in-law who grew up in Vancouver and he said, yeah, they were out there all the time finding them. But I've, you know, I spent a lot of time hiking in Northern California, and I go through a lot of cattle and I've never found one. Really? It may have to be moist, very moist conditions. Yeah. Well, how bad he's get kind of desiccated mushrooms are interesting, right? They have like different kind of specific conditions that they like, morale mushrooms are really, really delicious. And apparently they favor places where it's been burned. Yeah. I went hunting for them a couple years ago for my last book. And after fires, big forest fires, you can reliably go out in the spring just as the snow is melting. They pop up in huge quantities. We found, you know, we were like 10, 20, 30 pounds of murals. And you know, wow, that's a lot of murals. That's crazy. It was always on firelands. And the reason the theory is that, you know, these fungi, first of all, most of them, you know, live underground, right? I mean, the part we see is just the fruiting body. It's like the apple on the tree. Everything else is underground, that they're happily doing their thing. And then suddenly there's a crisis and they've lost their hosts. Their hosts are dead. So they have to get out of the forest. So they put up these fruiting bodies and hope that their spores will move them to a place that hasn't burned. Oh, that's what it is. So there, yeah, it's their escape strategy. And we're helping them by picking it and moving them around. Oh, wow. That's fascinating. Did you dehydrate them and save them? Yeah, we dried as a, and we ate a lot of them. I was hunting with a guy who hunts for restaurants in Northern California. He sold most of them. I took a couple pounds home. But I didn't, I didn't dehydrate. I've done that with porcini when I found too many porcini. But I didn't do it in Moreles. I just ate them really quickly. The only way I've ever gotten them is buy them from distributors online that sell them dried out. Yeah, they're so good though. They're fantastic, but fresh is, they're amazing. And I haven't had too many occasions. So, but, you know, we had a lot of fires last year in California. So there'll be a lot of Moreles. It's the one good thing you can see. Is there a place where the Amini to mascara reliably grows, where it does have a psychedelic property to it, because that's one of those really debatable, really debatable mushrooms, really debatable fungi, because some people don't put any faith in the idea that it was involved in Christianity or in Santa Claus or any of that stuff. And some people put all their money on them. They put it all on red. And there's, you know, there is a way to process it, even drying it apparently gets rid of the toxins. But there's a specific way that they think it was processed that made it a usable hallucinogen. Paul Stameth knows a lot more about this than I do. Yeah. And he's had an experience with it that he said he would never repeat. That would never repeat it. Yeah. It was such a bad experience. Oh, not repeat like verbally. No, no, no, no, it's not a secret. So he had a bad experience. Yeah, he did. That it was very toxic and he had a really excruciating day. It was, it was psychedelic, but had a lot of other gastrointestinal. I'm not sure exactly what it was. I remember when I was interviewing him for the last book, he talked about it, because I've always been curious about this is this is, you know, the mushroom of the old world, in particular, that is associated with lots of shamanic rituals and the imagery, you know, from, you know, Lewis Carroll to the Santa Claus idea. It just keeps showing up that you would think it had some use or religious, you know, value. But I don't maybe, maybe the method of maybe like ergot, the method of processing has just been lost to history. Yeah, I can't believe that it was different, that it varied genetically and it also varied seasonably. And then it possibly varied dependent upon the environment or just substrate. Yeah. Well, that that's possible. I mean, mushrooms produce different metabolites depending on what they're growing on to some extent. The other thing that I want to say was like in some cultures in the absence of psychedelics, they would do something called ordeal poisoning. What is that? You know, it's like, you would almost go through a near death experience that you could get out of. Like it was reliable. Now through this poison, through some sort of plant toxin or some, see if you can google or deal poisoning. So what they would do is in the absence of psychedelics, they'd put themselves through this ritual, a meaning that on the other end of it, there would be some kind of life changing revelation just sort of like a near death experience. But this was a reliably repeatable because this poison didn't kill you. But if fucked you up so bad, you thought you were going to die and in the middle of these sweats and these like, like Stamets was talking about with amanita mascara. Some cultures such as the oh boy, you want to try that one? A-bic. B-bic. B-bic. B-bic. Two people. A present day Nigeria would administer poisonous calibar bean known as a seri in epic, which contains physo's stigmine. Physo's stigmine in an attempt to detect guilt, a defendant who vomited up the bean was innocent, a defendant who became ill or died was considered guilty. Residents of Madagascar could acute. Well, I don't think this is the same. This is it. Did you google or deal poisoning? Yeah. Or deal poisoning rituals? These are all, this seems to be, this is a whole Wikipedia trial board deal. This is the part about poisoning. So this is a trial. I think it's a trial by ordeal. Or deal poisoning as, I don't know, how would you google that as a psychedelic ritual? Well, it wouldn't be psychedelic. There's poison in Google. It makes sure it brings up a lot of stuff. I just sort of found out on this because it looked like it was a official Wikipedia. I think they used to do things like that to try to figure out whether or not someone was hiding things, like whether or not they had knowledge of a crime or whether they were guilty. But I think they also did it as rights of passage. For certain cultures, it didn't have access to psychedelics. But they recognized that it was important to have some sort of a moment. Right. Some sort of a liminal experience. A definable moment where you got through it and you can congratulations, Michael, you're, you know, you pass through the gate. Well, you know, look, I mean, for a lot of people, that is the psychedelic experience. It becomes a sort of rehearsal for death. Right? I mean, they feel like they're dying or they're, you know, I had an experience in my ego completely detonating and it was gone. And it's a death you come back from. And there's something that teaches you a lot of things. And so it's interesting, you know, people have put their bodies in these extreme places with, whether it's with chemicals fasting too, you know, the people who go or isolation, right? People who go out on vision quests, right? And they go five days without food. Yeah. They enter an altered state of consciousness and that becomes part of the right. Even just staying awake. Yeah. Yeah. So it's, it's part of human nature. And I think it's a really interesting part of human nature. The desire for these transcendent experiences that talk about enough or acknowledge or teach our children about that they're going to have these desires and that they're safe ways to obtain them and unsafe ways to obtain them. And, but I really do think that, you know, the kind of cultural container you build around them is, is the best assurance of safety. It's one of the problems that we have in this culture is that we've suppressed this information for so long and live. Yeah. And lied about the effects of it while we were supporting drugs that did irreparable damage. Yeah. I agree. I think that there's so much misinformation that came out of the drug war. It's still coming out of the drug war. I mean, on the nature of addiction, for example, that it's all about chemicals. It's not all about chemicals. There are many people who can use an addictive drug without getting addicted. When, you know, when we were in Vietnam, 20% of the soldiers had a heroin addiction in country while they were there. 20% okay. They were all using heroin or a lot of them were and 20% were addicted. When they got home, 95% just stopped using no treatment. Just stopped because the environment had changed. They didn't need it. They weren't they didn't need to medicate themselves anymore. The withdrawal from opiate addiction is not as it's depicted in the drug war. It's it's a bad flu. It's actually withdrawal from alcohol is a lot worse withdrawal from alcohol can kill you and banzles, right? Yeah. Oh, yeah. That's a really dangerous one too. But addiction is is, you know, as I mean, look at the look at the geography of the opiate crisis, right? I mean, these are places where the opportunities have dried up, you know, there are no jobs. People's prospects are terrible. And they're, you know, they're rightly called deaths of despair. And whereas people in other environments can use opiates without a problem. And we don't pay enough attention to that. That, you know, that it's contextual whether people get addicted or not or it's a it's a function of their history that they're people very most addicts according to a lot of research were had trauma in their lives at some point and they're dealing with that. Have you talked to Dr. Crowheart? Yes, I have. Well, I've exchanged email with them and I just read his book. Yeah, drug use for grown up. It's a really interesting and courageous book. He's a fascinating person. Yeah. And brilliant. And because of his brilliance and because of the fact that he's a professor at Columbia, but yet has the courage to talk about regular use of drugs. Yeah. Hard drugs. He loves heroin. Yeah. He sniffs heroin. He said it makes him closer to his wife. It makes him a kinder person. Yeah. And it's so easy to dismiss coming from someone, you know, who maybe is not an academic and someone is not just so articulate. And when it comes from a guy like him, you got to go, what wait? Yeah. I know. You can can heroin like heroin. I mean, we've learned that heroin is just the most evil chemical going. He loves Coke. He loves Coke. Yeah. He likes things to say about math. He said it's very similar to MDM. I know it's pretty wild book to read. And it should talk to him because he should fascinating God. It's actually interesting. So open. Yeah. He's so open with it all and a genuinely good person. And he's trying to open this same conversation. Yeah. Right. And like how these substances are going to become decriminalized? How do we fold them into our culture? What are our models? Yes. And you know, a lot of people think cannabis is the model and I really don't think that's true. You know, that a lot of people in the cannabis business who say silosibin is the next cannabis and they imagine it being sold next to the THC gummy bears, you know, in these dispensaries. And I just think psychedelics are a much more consequential serious experience that has to be handled with more care and needs every drug. I mean, one of the problems of the drug war is to put all illicit drugs in the same basket. Right. And they're not. They're so different. Psychedelics are different than the opiates and the opiates are different than cannabis. And we have to, we would never lump anything else together the way we've lump these drugs. And so we're going to have to look at each of them on their own terms. And that process, you know, is, I think it's beginning. And I think Carl's book is part of that. I think culturally we're going to deal with an issue if we combine silosibin and cannabis, the way, because cannabis can be used so easily and lightly and recreationally. You can smoke a joint, go see a movie with your friends, laugh and giggle. Mushrooms can be used that way if you'd micro dose. Micro dosing, you know, I wouldn't have an issue with tripping balls like full on a seat a bag. Go to another dimension. That is, that's a life changing experience. And I just, I when I go to a pot store in LA and I, you know, see the purple haze right next to the AK 47 or Alaskan Thunderfuck. And like, I just, it's used weird to have mushrooms right there too. It's like, do you know what you're selling these people? You're literally selling the gateway to God. Like we should be a little more careful with this. Or at least an approach to the little more reference. Yes. That's what I would like. But I would like is in the problem with this is of course the cult of personality. I would love like psychedelic centers. If there was some place where people could go to have these experiences. But what I worry is that the person who is giving out these psychedelics and the person who is, you know, maybe setting the set and setting for the becomes a guru or becomes, it becomes cult like. Yeah. Because there's a potential there, special for the unenitiated who's meeting the initiated. Yeah. And they all have, you know, this kind of way of talking that seems a little contrived and they're wearing wouldn't be the answer and they know the key to the universe. That's a weird experience. There's a weird phenomenon with psychedelics. You know, we talk a lot about ego dissolution on psychedelics, but there's also ego inflation. Yes. And that happens. And, you know, we've seen that in the culture and that people who are so, you know, have had a revelation about psychedelics and they want to share it with the world and they become gurus. And that's a, that's a phenomenon to watch out for. I agree. I think someday we will move to, I'm very interested in this process of how psychedelics move into the society and I see three paths. Basically, there is the medical path, which is, you know, we're pretty far down that path. The FDA will probably approve MDMA within what, what is Rick Doblin say two years or something. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe three for psilocybin or four. So it's not far away at all. And catamine is currently in use pretty widely now for many people. that is suggesting a model. So there is, you know, field trip health, you know, this company that's built in ketamine clinics all around the country, very lavish spa-like places where you can get a ketamine experience, you know, with a nurse or a doctor present. They're very expensive. And they're doing this basically to work out the kinks so that they can move to psilocybin and MDMA when it's ready. So that'll be one kind of elite way that people will have the experience because it'll cost thousands of dollars. And then they'll be the medical model. And that'll probably be more clinic based. Nobody's figured out exactly. But, and then they'll be the religious model. And I think that's a really interesting one to watch. In the same way the Native American church and two Iowaosca churches have the constitutional right to use a psychedelic as their sacrament. There are a lot of other new churches forming now. And given this Supreme Court and its expansive, you know, interpretations of religious liberty, basically they're cutting huge amounts of slack that, for reasons of religious conscience, you can be exempted from all sorts of federal regulations and laws. I mean, Hobby Lobby and the decision just the other day, that when some of these psychedelic churches find their way up to the Supreme Court, this Supreme Court's going to have a hard time saying no. And there are, there is a group of psychedelic lawyers who are looking for the right cases to bring through the system. What does that sound like an oxymoron? Yes, psychedelic lawyers. There really is. They call themselves that. I'm not talking about it. I love it. I'd rather out there. They're based as bolder as you would guess. I mean, it's the ultimate jumbo shrimp. Of course, they're based in bolder. I fucking love bolder. It's too good. It's too good. But it's going to be like an exploding cigar for, you know, Justice Alito in one of these cases. Come on. Because they're incredible saying no. Right. Because the precedents are being established. So I think we'll have this religious path, we'll have this retreat center path, and we'll have this medical path. And the most accessible, maybe the medical path, since it'll get presumably if it really works, get covered by insurance. Yeah, especially for people that have PTSD, soldiers, police officers, things on those lines. Women have been people that have been abused. Yes. You're aware what Alex Gray is doing? Not right now. Do you know Alex Gray is the artist? He has formed a church. He has religious tax exempt status. And he's building this insane spectacular chapel in upstate New York. He bought a bunch of land. And he was in some sort of a dispute with the town. But I think they've settled that because he's not paying any taxes. Because he's a church. But I mean, if anybody can do that, it's the iconography. Oh my God. You got to see what the place looks like. Have you been there? No, I have. But I must go. Well, I spent part of the year in that part of the world. So I will check it out. I've had Alex on a couple of times and he's a genuine gem of a human being. And just to... I've never met him. Oh, he's the real deal, man. When you're around him, like he first of all, he's so kind. And as an artist, he's phenomenal. He's so brilliant as an artist. But that's him. He's walking the walk. So is Alex D. A sacrament in this church? You'd have to ask him. I wouldn't want to speak. I don't want to get him in trouble. I think he's a big fan of the trip to means in particular. But Alex D. Aswell. But the artwork is so the iconography, the imagery that he portrays is the best interpretation of trip to mean experiences that I've ever seen. Because he's figured out how to express the visions as like a normal consciousness. Like you try to repeat what you saw and try to express it with words. Words are the most crude and clumsy tools to express like Alex. But there's something about, like pull up some of it, like the one where there's this weird gold and I think it's golden blue one that I swear I saw something entirely similar to that when I was under an experience. I'm like, oh, I wonder if there's like little rooms you go into or little places you go into based on those. But all those are great. They're all great. There's an Albert Hoffman one there. He's got a great version of the stone. That one in the upper left hand corner is super similar to some stuff I've seen before. Super similar. Like as they expand and move and those things are all constantly moving and shifting, that's what it looks like. He just, so his place is called I think the place in New York City was called the chapel sacred mirrors and I think he's, I think that's what he's calling it. It's calling it. Causum, right? Is that what is the place in the show? I'm not picture of the building. Yeah. It's crazy. Because it's basically his art 3D printed as the out of outside of the building. So like if you would go to like an ancient Egyptian temple, their temple would be covered in all this incredible artwork sculpture. He's doing a similar thing. But with his vision interpreted into 3D sculpture. So it's why I came for this shit. I don't know how he's doing. I mean, I think people are donating. I think there's a lot going on. You know, I think he's, but I have to make a feel to it. He said just so genuine. Yeah. I mean, at all the people, like if everybody who is a proponent of psychedelics or that guy, like this is, okay, this is the image of what it's going on. So see, looks on the outside very similar to his artwork. Yeah. But it also has like these feelings of Egypt in it and like, I don't know. I'm just very Egyptian. Yeah. And like this alien language, he's got scrolled across it. Probably, they probably mean something too. I mean, I don't even know what it means. That's, that interior down there is not the interior. I don't think of the actual place. I can't find pictures. I don't, they might be making it. I don't know. He's amazing. No. And what he does is, oh, there it is. It's called Entheon. That's what it is. Right. Yeah. Hit that video. Let's see what it looks like. Okay. So well, they're in the middle of building it though. I do know that some work has been done. But they've been, last time he was on was how many years ago, Jamie three somewhere around. So, so yeah, okay. So he is in the middle of the building. Yeah. I mean, this got to be crazy expensive. It's probably taken a long last time, but it's going to be a lot of galleries, a lot of- Think of the craftsmen you need to do what we saw in the extreme. Yeah. And again, it's most of it is being done, I think. Right. With 3D printing. But, uh, just glad he's out there. Well, you know, this is kind of one of the benefits of psychedelics coming out of the closet after all this. Right. I mean, the people can use them in their art. They can use them in their architecture. Have you ever heard of a house called a Sito Dorado in Joshua Tree? No. There's an LSD inspired house. You can rent it. Really? Is it on air state? I don't know if it's on air B&B, but you can rent it. And we were shooting for a documentary there. It is so trippy. It's gold and mirrors. Every surface is mirrored. So you don't know what's up and down. It would actually be kind of a scare. Yeah, there it is. Thank you. A Sito Dorado. Anyway, it's on the edge of the desert in Joshua Tree. And I actually can't recommend it as a place to stay. It was to this orienting. Why was it disorienting? The mirrors? Yeah, because you've looked down at the floor and you'd see a reflection of the dining room table in six dimensions. And sounds perfect. I love all the cactus around it too. That's awesome. Anyway, it's pretty cool. Wow. That places so strange. Joshua Tree is so bizarre. It's one of the trip-year landscapes. And in fact, people go to their trip all the time. Oh, yeah. All my friends do. Yeah. My friend Ari. My friend Ari Schafir runs a festival of year. Well, like an informal festival called Shroom Fest. And we'll do it a lot of times out of Joshua Tree, but encourages people to do whatever where they are. You don't have to go to a place. But is that an August? Is that one Ari's a terrible time to go to Joshua Tree? It's awfully hot. I don't know if they're going to Joshua Tree. Ari's living in New York City now. So I don't think he's doing it out there. But a lot of the trips that they've done, they have done out there. But I think we're going to see now, you know, an explosion of writing of art of it's just like people are coming out of the closet talking about their experiences in a way that you just couldn't do a few years ago. Or you did it a great risk to your reputation. And it's going to affect art. It's going to affect culture. Perfect everything. Yeah. And I think in a good way. I think one of the benefits of the cross-affers of these psychedelics is the enhancement of the feeling of love and community, which is what everybody needs right now. Yeah. So I think that's a really interesting theme. And my gut says, yes. I mean, that the nature of the psychedelic experience could make people better people, make them feel more connected, more compassionate. But I don't think we can say that with confidence yet. I think we actually have to do science about that to figure out. I mean, there's... feel more connected, more compassionate. But I don't think we can say that with confidence yet. I think we actually have to do science about that to figure out. I mean, there's some preliminary research, for example, that was done at Imperial College in London, that shows that people's nature connectedness goes up. There's scores of how connected you feel to the natural world. And tolerance for authoritarianism goes down. Openness, a personality goes up. So these are preliminary. But if you think about who is participated in these studies, they tend to be inclined in that direction already. You really have to get the Koch brothers or Trump or somebody who's not inclined to like nature especially. And do it to them and see if it changes their attitudes. Because I think we may be having people on the same side of the culture having reinforcing experiences. But I don't know. And it's something I would love to see research done on. That would be a great thing to do as a therapy for someone who is like maybe you've been a sexual harasser at work. And to make you go to some place and have a psychedelic experience to realize the error of your ways. It would be much gentler than the chemical castration that used to talk about. Well, we don't have to get that far. But I mean, maybe that's even a bad example. But maybe someone who's been accused of fraud or maybe someone who's embezzling money. Or maybe someone who's done something are really unethical. And you get poor. And say, listen, this is the choice. You're harming you. And you don't even realize it's harming you. You think you're getting away with these things and having these psychedelic experiences maybe. Because that's one of the more confusing, but illuminating things that you do learn from psychedelics is that things that you've done to other people have also harmed you. And you don't think about it until you're forced into reflection. And one of the things about psychedelics is the ruthlessly introspective nature of some of the journeys that you go on, where you really are forced to look at yourself and your actions. And come to Jesus with it. You really have to. Because they don't allow you. And people call it bad trips. And when they try to fight it. Right term. Yeah. So that was a very interesting theme that came up with interviewing Native Americans. They would talk about psychedelics as if the peyote had a gaze. And it saw right into them. And they also used the metaphor of a mirror that in the same way this one Native American had this beautiful image. He said in the same way, you step up to the mirror to make sure you don't have spinach in your teeth or something like that. And you check and make sure you're ready to go out into society. The peyote allows us to see ourselves and see what's wrong and correct it. And I thought that was a very powerful idea. And the idea that peyote had a gaze. And they teach their children this, that the peyote can see into you. And they're socialized in this belief. And that it's sort of like a super ego. It becomes a conscience. And that's also a very powerful idea. Just fascinating that it was so late in their history. And at a very good time, really. Incredible desperate time for their culture, which is eradicated by these intruding Europeans. Which is why I just one point on that too. I would hate if my discussion of peyote Native Americans started a fad for using peyote. There's just not enough peyote. And are they rolling? Yeah, no. It's in very short supply. The peyote lands. They're ranching on it. They're building windmills. There's poaching that's going on. And you asked me earlier whether I was saying peyote. A peyote is going. Yeah. No, not San Pedro. Peyote. Peyote Cack. What is a San Pedro, girl? I'll talk about that in a second. It's a different cactus that's not endangered at all. Is that, do you get masculine from that? Yes. Okay, so masculine. So there's another way if you're interested. And I'll talk about that. But masculine and peyote are really similar. So masculine is the chemical produced both by peyote and San Pedro. Okay, so they're two very different cacti that happened to produce the same alkaloid, which is called mescaline. So there is a big effort underway in the Native American community to save peyote. It's a conservation movement. It's something called the indigenous peyote conservation initiative, IPCI, and they really deserve our support. And they're trying to buy up these ranch lands so that the Native Americans can pilgrimage down there, pick their own peyote. There's a very safe way to cut it to harvest it, where it will regenerate, and there's another way that's often used where it doesn't regenerate. And it takes 15 years from seed to button, usable button. Wow. So cultivating it is a challenge. And Indians don't believe the cultivated peyote is the same or is good as wild grown peyote. So I finally decided after interviewing quite a few Native Americans that I shouldn't use it, and that non-Native should stay away from peyote, because we've taken so much from Native Americans. And this is a tool that's been really helpful to them in healing their cultures. And there are other ways to get mescaline. So I decided that would be my tiny contribution, is not using it. Is there an effort to reintroduce it in terms of like to plant it places? Part of this initiative is that they're starting peyote in nurseries and then planting it in the wild. And we'll see how that works. It's a pokey. I grew it in my garden for a while. It is the pokeyest plant. It just doesn't do anything. It just sits there. It's very slow growing. It looks like a stone. It's very low to the ground. It's quite beautiful. You pull up? I don't know what it looks like. I know what the sand page looks like. And check out if there's flowering peyote it flowers beautifully. But it's just so precious. There's more on the Mexican side of the border. But even that is under threat from mining and all these tomato greenhouses that they're building. So they're just kind of, we need to take care of it. Well, it's crazy that it's so slow growing. I know. It's crazy years. I mean, that is nuts. I know. Well, it grows in a... Oh, wow. Oh, wow. It looks like a stone. It would be. Or it looks like a pin cushion. Wow. Now that's somebody's growing up. There's a big one with its babies. They spin off these little babies. And if you harvest it correctly, like you cut right underneath the button, there is a taproot. Yeah, you see the taproot's there. And if you preserve the taproot, it'll regenerate. But a lot of poachers and others just pull out the whole plant like a carrot. And then that destroys it. Wow. But you see, it's all the actions underground. In a way, it's like a mushroom, right? It's got a lot of work underground and not much above ground. And it has the, instead of spines, it has this kind of furry flower or furry, I don't know what you call that thing. It's in place of spines. What a fascinating looking creature. Yeah. It almost looks like a sea creature. Yeah. Cactus alone. It cactus. Tectonics are wild. I've just started growing them. So I have a lot of sand patero in my garden now, which is legal to grow. I should point out also, it's a legal to grow. Illegal. Illegal to grow. Yeah. So you're breaking law, you're manufacturing a schedule of one substance. But sand pager is weirdly enough. Sand pagero is illegal. I think it's just illegal. It's legal to grow. It just escaped notice. They just never... It's part of it, is that? Yeah, kind of like that. The taxonomy of sand pagero is a mess. They're three or four different species. They've all interbred. And they'd have to pin down the species to make it illegal. But I think it was just not on their radar when they were drawing up the schedules. So it's grown as an ornamental. You can buy it in nurseries. You can buy it online. It grows very quickly compared to other cacti. It's very pretty. It's much more vertical. It's a column of cactus. The point at which you break the law is when you start preparing the tea, which is a pretty simple process of essentially making... It's like a vegetable stock. You remove all the thorns and slice it, and you get these beautiful stars because it's a six spine thing. And then you boil it for like three days. Three days. Yeah. Why'd I have to boil it for so long? I don't know. I think it may be... I can't believe you can't get all the pestle... All the mess going out of it and less than that. But I was told three days. That was the recipe. What do they do once they boil it? After you boil it, then it kind of turns to mush. You have to filter it and then you have this tea. And it's a fairly mild psychedelic, I would say. And pay out of you, too. They're not... It's a very different phenomenology than other psychedelics. Have you ever used a mess going? No, I have. So I did. I used synthetic mess going and for writing this book in the name of research with... And I also used San Pedro. Messklin, I got interested in messklin in part because everybody I knew in the psychedelic community when I was researching how to change your mind, I'd say, so what's your favorite psychedelic? And I was so surprised to hear how many people said messklin because it's not around. Nobody's doing research with it. It's like, what happened to messklin? It's like the orphan psychedelic. So I wanted to figure out what that was all about. And there are a couple reasons. A big problem with it is it takes about 14 hours. Oh, wow. And you're done with messklin before messklin is done with you. And so I just remember at the end of this very long day, I was like, I just want to have some dinner go to bed, but it wasn't happening. Wow. So it was for me, it was like 12 hours. And what was the experience like? What did it... So it was a really interesting experience. There were not hallucinations. And in the same way some psychedelics take you out of yourself and out of this world to another world. This one immersed you more deeply in the world in front of you than you ever have been before. So that you get completely absorbed in material life. And you could spend an hour thinking about this cup or looking at a flower or, Huxley famously, I'll just Huxley stared at the folds of his trousers for an hour and had all these revelations. It's about the here and now, this intense experience of the present moment. That's like nothing I'd ever have. And it's almost overwhelming. There's this sense of the immensity of existence. And like there's like, oh my God, stuff, existence. And but a lot of it is just very contemplative. You're very lucid. It's fairly gentle. I didn't have any gastrointestinal upset or anything. I had periods at the peak where I felt a little out of control mentally. I remember trying to meditate to calm down and whoever was meditating was someone else. And someone else was in my mind meditating. I was like, that's not working. In what way? I just closed my eyes and I was this like South American woman, peasant woman meditating. It's like where did she come from? You know, it was the, I mean, I've been doing research on San Pedro. And it's a South American cactus from Peru. And it was this Peruvian woman who just showed up. Do you think that was just like you had this idea of who used it? And that was imprinted in your memories. And I'm guessing. Yeah, I'm guessing that I had an association of masculine with the, I've been interviewing people in Peru who used it ceremonially. And I had this image of this woman. And I work with this healer who works with San Pedro. And she was kind of cut into that image too. It's a little bit of her too. You know, we kind of had a really weird idea about psychedelic experiences that we always want to think of each individual psychedelic experience we have as being our experience. But he believed that there was a database connected to each and theogen. And so each one of these substances, you weren't just experiencing it. You were experiencing the trips of millions of people over thousands of years. It's like Carl Young's idea of collective unconscious, right? That there's this imagery that is now hardwired in our bodies. And that's why cultures produce art that has all these kind of recurring motifs. Well, we know the DMT story, right? With the machine elves and the various, you know, a lot of people have the same imagery on that drug. Now, whether that, whether Terrence McKenna started that, because that was a meme he introduced to the culture, you'd have to find some innocent culture and see if they have the same experience that had never heard about that idea. I did not have machine elves in my conscience, but I did hear literally, in an, not even hearing it. Like when you, they would say thanks to you. But one of the things they said was do not give into astonishment, which was exactly what McKenna used to always say, do not give into astonishment. And then the other thing was I love you. They would be, they're like, but I look a child like I love you. Six hundred million five hundred thousand times. They would say it in this crazy way and then they would go, look at this. And look at that. And every time they would go, look at this, they'd show you something more spectacular than you had seen before. Like every time the visuals, I like you would think these visuals are impossible to pass. And they would look at this. And it would be even more insane. Now why not give into astonishment? What's the idea behind that? I think the idea is you could be so blown away by what's in front of you. And this is from McKenna's word. So again, I don't know how much of what I was experiencing was these things communicating with me. Because I never heard anybody say that they said, look at this or I love you six million five hundred thousand times. Because they were talking like a child says, I love you a billion, a trillion times. You know what I mean? Like one of my daughters would say something like that. But it was, I wasn't sure if I was hearing this because I was preparing because I'd read and listen to McKenna talk about it. Or if what was going on was try some sort of a concerted effort to get you to just pay attention to this and don't freak out. Don't go, oh my god, this is too much. I can't do this. I can't do this. Because it's so mind-blowing. Barry, you've had the protect yourself. Yeah, no, I'm no. It's so freaky that don't give into astonishment is almost like it's a good primer, a good code to follow. Like let's just let it happen. Just give into it. Don't whatever you don't try to fight it and give it to us. Well, that's key. I mean, I think the most important lesson I learned from both my experience and all the teachers that I work with is surrender. And the psychedelics teach us how to surrender, which is useful in a lot of other contexts too. But when you surrender to the experience is when you're least likely to have a bad time, when you're not going to fight, you know, when you feel your ego dissolving, your natural reaction, your ego's natural reaction is to hold on, right? And defend itself. But when I learn that, no, you just got to go with that. If you're going crazy, if you think you're going to melt or die, go with it. And you'll pass through into something better. And that reliably works. The last time I did it, there was like a fractal of gestures. There was like an infinite number of gestures. Give me the finger like this. And I was like, what, really on a trip? Yeah. Fuck you. And then I realized what they were trying to say to me, I was realizing they're saying, you take yourself too seriously. And then I went, oh, and then they went like this, like, they're like, not me. I was like, oh, okay, you're right. I can't beat it. Because thank you. I was like, okay, you're right. You're right. Because like someone saying, fuck you, you're like, no, fuck you. And then they were like, come on. And I was like, oh, you're right. You're right. And they're like, not. So you were having a defensive reaction and they were exactly got over it. Well, they were letting me know what whatever that they is. Yeah. What I say, I don't know if that's your subconscious. I don't know if that's something about your imagination, your visual cortex, interacting with these alkaloids. Or if what's really going on is it's a pathway to something else. Like it's a way to experience consciousness or some thing, some, some force that's around us all the time. You could pretend that you have the answer, but I don't know. No, we don't know. We really don't know. I mean, I tend to think that these are creations of our minds, but that's just hypothesis. You know, I mean, you know, when the Dalai Lama sat down with a bunch of neuroscientists, you know, they started this dialogue and the neuroscientists started from the assumption that consciousness is produced by the brain. And the Dalai Lama very commonly said, well, that's an interesting hypothesis. And he's right. That's all it is. Yeah. The hypothesis consciousness could be fields. It could be something. I'll just huxally believe and other people on rebirth on the philosopher that we should think of our minds as like radio receivers or TV receivers and that the consciousness we have what our brains do is tune in to frequencies of consciousness that exist outside of us. Yeah. And in the same way you wouldn't look in the TV to find the woman giving you the weather report. You know, she's not there. Our assumption that all the action is there may be wrong. Yeah. There's a lot of people that want to attach consciousness to inanimate objects as well, which is very strange. Consciousness and even memories. I think it was Sheldrick. I think group of children. Yes. Well, yeah. I mean, he believes consciousness is a field, morphogenetic fields. Yeah. And that the communication you see, say around fish, you know, schools of fish and other journals or flocks of birds. Yeah. That they're communicating, they're participating in a field of consciousness in some way. I don't totally understand. He's a very interesting thinker. Yeah. And you know his son Merlin. No. What a great name. You should get him on Merlin. He named his kids Merlin and Cosmo. Well, I've had him on. He was great. He's fascinating. Merlin wrote a beautiful book called Entangled Life about fungi. He's a scientist. Oh, yeah. And it's all about the relations that fungi create among other species. Other than being a magician, what are your other choices? Yeah. I know. My college is Merlin. But you know what? I love about psychedelics is they raise these questions of consciousness. You know, this thing we just take for granted, we have this everyday ordinary consciousness. We don't think about it. Right. And they kind of distance ourselves from it. And suddenly you're you're asking questions about consciousness. I've been really struck by how many neuroscientists got into their field because of psychedelic experience that it suddenly made them think, Hey, this is interesting. And we shouldn't assume what we assume. Yeah. So I'm very interested in that whole conversation around neuroscientists and psychedelics. Well, I'm really interested in more people experiencing that are these brilliant people that maybe have these bring something to you. So like Dawkins has never had a psychedelic experience, which to me is crazy. Yeah. I think you could use one. Yeah. I think so. I have a list of people who could use one. But see, I think this is this is another, you know, we talked about this effluorescence of art that may come out of this unclositing of psychedelics. The other thing is getting really good scientific minds involved who haven't been who've been afraid to. And you know, there is this core of scientists. You've had some of them on the show who promoted psychedelic research, got it off the ground, you know, brilliant people like Roland Griffith and Matt Johnson at Hopkins and I'm a grow Charles Grove and UCLA. And but then there's this other kind of scientists who are not so much committed to psychedelics, but committed to understanding consciousness in the brain who have not had psychedelic experience or haven't had the opportunity to do research on psychedelics. And now they want to. So at Berkeley, last year we started a psychedelic science center to study psychedelics. And we're not going to be doing the kind of clinical research that people are doing, you know, at Hopkins and NYU, which is really important, but we don't have medical school. We don't do medical research at Berkeley. We're going to be doing basic science. We're going to be trying to use psychedelics to understand real basics about how we construct visual perception, the mechanisms by way they work. And what's really struck me is some really top rate neuroscience who never touched psychedelics. Well, they probably have in their lives, but not in their work, are going to work on it and bring their tools and their analytical chops. And so I think we're going to learn a lot. And that psychedelics is going to teach us things about consciousness, teach us things about how to bring constructs. It's picture of reality that we don't know now. So I think it's a really exciting initiative. I'm very excited about all this. And I think we have a unique opportunity to form an operating manual for how to use these things based on real science, based on people with experiences with these psychedelic compounds. And also now I think more so than ever based on a real understanding of human psychology. Right. And these things have never been really applied in a form where we have a possibility specifically because of the work of maps and and Dublin and some of the amazing people that he works with. We have a possibility of setting up centers, like real legit places where people can go and have an actual way to get out of whatever mental funk they're in. And there's a real pathway. It's possible. It could help you. Oh, without question, look, we have a mental health crisis in this country. Right. The numbers, the numbers around depression and with the pandemic, it's gone a lot worse. Anxiety, suicide. And one of the big surprises that I had after how to change your mind came out, I expected a lot of pushback. I expected, you know, mainstream psychiatry, the American Psychological Association, all these kind of groups to like, well, psychedelics very dangerous. We don't mess around. I had the opposite experience. They were so engaged. They would invite me to speak. They reached out to me. And I realized at a certain time, and it was actually talking to Tom Insol, psychiatrist formerly head of the National Institute of Mental Health. And he said, well, you don't understand how broken our field is that we don't have good tools that we're not healing people. We're helping with symptoms at best. And that we're desperate for new tools. And along comes this one, which has the potential not just to address symptoms, but to actually heal and across many different mental disorders. And I think that that embrace, embrace may be too strong a word, but that openness to what psychedelics has to contribute is, is going to hasten its, its acceptance. You know, there are a lot of problems to work out. You know, it's a weird thing to fit into the system we have now. Is it a drug? Is it talk therapy? Well, it's a package of both because you really, it isn't just the psychedelic right? It's psychedelic assisted psychotherapy or therapy. So how do you do that? The FDA doesn't regulate therapy. So how do they, how do they attach the approval of psilocybin with the need for a guide and somebody to prepare you and help you integrate? There are a lot of really hard questions to work out here. But your point about operating manual is, is really right because I think the problem in our culture with psychedelics was that when they, when they showed up, there was no instruction manual, right? And we did some really stupid things in the 60s. You know, we would dose people without their permission. We put it in the punch bowl, LSD in the punch bowl. That's like unbelievably crazy and cruel. It was reckless. And a lot of people had great experiences anyway, but many people crashed in burn too. And now's the time to write that instruction manual. We have more experience and we're studying these indigenous cultures who have a lot to teach us about how to use them safely. And that's, it's a really interesting project. And it's, you know, and, and one of the things I'm trying to do with, this is your mind on plants is start that post drug war conversation about drugs, which is one of the reasons I included caffeine, you know, a totally legal drug that everybody uses. Um, but is that have to teach us in a way, one of the most powerful drug experiences I've had in my life was the first cup of coffee after three months off. Really? It was psychedelic. It was incredible. Come on. Try it. Try getting off caffeine. Three months? Three months without caffeine. How am I going to do a podcast? You may have to take a hit. And then I'll run out of things to talk about. I'll fall sleep. It was really hard. I did it actually. It's a suggestion of Roland Griffith, who, you know, the psychedelic researcher, who before that was the world's leading expert on caffeine. Um, and, uh, and I was interviewing him about caffeine for this chapter. And he said, well, you're never going to understand your relationship to caffeine until you get off it. So it was kind of a dare. And it was really hard. It was one of the hardest things I've done. Really? I was a mess for how long? Three months. You're a mess until he's functional after a month. Um, the first week I was not functional at all. I felt like I had contracted ADD. I could not stay on track. Everything, the periphery just kept intruding on my thinking. I couldn't write. I mean, writing is the most linear thing you can do, right? Right. And it's all about concentration, obviously. And, um, and I couldn't concentrate. And I felt like there was this veil between me and reality that, you know, I was not quite seeing, getting, feeling. And it was weird. I didn't feel myself for the whole time. And, and I thought, what does that mean? It means yourself he's caffeinated. And, and that is baseline consciousness for me. And for many people. And that's not a bad thing. But I think we have a debt to these plants that we owe them. Um, and so I spent a lot of time in that researching that chapter looking back in history for when caffeine enters the West. And it doesn't happen till the 1650s in Europe. So we actually have a before and after, which we don't with a lot of drugs, because they just go back, you know, millennia. Um, and before caffeine, it was a very different world and a very different consciousness. People were drunk a lot of the time, buzzed almost all of the time. People drank morning, noon and night because it was safer than water. Right? Water was really how you got diseases. If you fermented things, even low, you know, low alcohol, it killed a lot of the microbes. Um, so people, even kids, you gave your kids hard cider for breakfast. Wow. And this was true in America up until the 1800s, up until prohibition. But anyway, um, caffeine comes along in the 1650s and tea and chocolate and coffee all arrived in the same decade in England, which is kind of like great decade. Right? And, um, uh, and things start to change in the form of coffee, coffee, and tea, and chocolate, which also has caffeine in it. And so what would they did never experience coffee before the 1600s? That's right. They had in the Arab world. They had it from like 1200 or something like that. Supposedly it was discovered in 800s by a herder in like Ethiopia who noticed that his goats were getting very frisky when they ate this particular berry and would stay up all night. And so he, yeah, so he kind of like started experimenting or he brought it to these monks and they made a drink and it was like, it makes sense that, uh, it was in the Arab world because if you think about all the science that was being done in the Arab world, all the literature back then. So all the right theory is that the Arab world had coffee first and had this incredible golden age. Yes. And there is a historian of, of, um, psychoactives named Wolfgang Shivobush and he caught a name. Isn't that wonderful? German, of course. Wolfgang Shivobush. It's a great book. It's called Tays of Paradise. Highly recommend it. Um, and he said this was the perfect drug for the culture that invented mathematics and had this incredible, um, and it helped the culture in two ways. One was as safe as alcohol made water, boiling it, made it much safer and coffee and tea, of course, both require boiling water. No one ate a drink boiling water or hot beverages before. So this gave this incredible. and coffee and tea of course both require boiling water. No one ate a drank boiling water or hot beverages before. So this gave this incredible public health boost to these places and then you have the drug that basically fosters a kind of more linear rational focused way of thinking. And so there's a lot of evidence linking coffee and tea consumption with the enlightenment in France and with the age of reason. And people in the 1600s started writing about it. So they're like, wow people, you know we have this new civil and sober drink that we that and it was so popular because it was new that people drank less and they used more caffeine. And that I think makes possible things like the Industrial Revolution because you know when you're doing physical labor outdoors which was most of history, right? You could be buzzed. You didn't have to know what time it was. You work from sun up to sundown. There were beer breaks actually on farms in England. They would give you beer because it gave you calories and made you happy. But when you start moving into like running machines and doing double entry bookkeeping, you need a clearer head. And when you start moving toward night shifts and overnight shifts, you couldn't do that without caffeine. And that's when it begins. There's a whole new like it freed us from the rhythms of the sun which dictated everything in Western culture. You can only work till the sun went down. So it had a profound effect on capitalism, the rise of capitalism and the clearest illustration of that that I came across is the coffee break. The coffee break actually has a history. We know the company that came up with it. And it was a neck time manufacturer Denver called wigwam weavers. And wigwam weavers made these very intricate silk neck ties. And during World War II, they lost all their best loom operators to the war effort. So they hired these old guys to do it who weren't getting drafted and they couldn't do it very well. Then they hired these women to do it. And they could do it beautifully. And they were very intricate patterns, very complicated looms. I mean you've seen how the patterns on neck ties. And the women could do it really well but only for about four or five hours. So they called a meeting. And the owners said to the workers, what could we do? We have to improve your efficiency and we need more output. And the women said, well give us a coffee break. They didn't call it that initially. And give us some time at like 10 in the morning and four in the afternoon and give us some coffee and tea. So we started doing it and overnight like their productivity and efficiency goes up. Quality control goes up. And so he institutes the coffee break. And think about it. Your employer gives you a drug and then gives you time off in which to ingest it during the workday. Why would they do that? Because it contributes mightily. The coffee break might seem like it's something your boss is giving you but it's a way to extract more value from you. And I'm sure employees that have little breaks and get to enjoy just a little bit of free time. They'll be more. They'll be happier employees. They'll probably be more productive. Like the car into their business. And he should inst... I don't know if he has coffee break. He wants to be an Adderall. 247 running to the next package. Tell me about your experience. What your experience was like with the three months off and then having the caffeine. So I had this three months that was really unpleasant. The only things that were positive about it was I slept like a teenager. It really did improve my sleep. And I had some great sleeps like I remember from when I was a teenager. You can sleep 14 hours. That was really good. I also felt... And I'm not proud of this. Self-righteous. So, you know... And I remember one morning having to get a 6 a.m. flight. And I had to get up and get myself moving on mint tea. And I get to the airport. And it's just when they're opening the pizza and the Starbucks. And the line is like snaking. For those people getting on 6 a.m. flights. And I'm looking at these people. And they look like junkies you see in Amsterdam. They look so pathetic. And you know that they were hooked. And they needed their fix. And they look kind of miserable. And withdrawal was starting. Because that first cup of coffee is not about the pleasure it gives us. It's really about stopping with draw symptoms which are beginning overnight. Because we haven't had it for 24 hours. And I felt self-righteous. I'm not proud of that. And I knew that I was going to rejoin them as soon as I could. So, when I hit the 3 month mark, I decided and I needed for the ending of the piece to have a cup. And see, this was going to tell me, you know, because drugs are very different the first time you take them. Right? Before your body is accustomed to them. So, I had this first cup. And I gave a lot of thought to where I would have it. I thought about the original pizzas in my neighborhood, the very first pizz. But I don't love their coffee. It can be kind of burnt tasting. And so, I went to a place called the cheese board which is a cafe bakery in my neighborhood. And they have a little pocket park out on the street. And I got a cup, got a special. Which is, it's sort of like a cappuccino, but more coffee and less milk. Like a flat white in Australia. And we sat, my wife and I drew it to sat there. And I drank the strength. And it was so good. I mean, I just felt these waves of well-being. And then it turned into euphoria. And I was like, wow, this is such a strong drug. I had no idea. It was like cocaine or something. And that lasted for maybe 20 minutes. But then something turned. That was kind of interesting. Across the street there was a garbage truck that was grabbing hold of two garbage, plastic garbage cans shaking them like this and making this horrible racket. And it really got under my skin. I was getting kind of irritable. And I said to Judith, can we go home? And I felt like I kind of get something done. I felt kind of compulsive. Wow. And so we walked home and I went to my office. And I just had this desire to get you done. And so what I did was, this is really weird. I unsubscribed from like 100 listservs that I was getting on my email that were really annoying. I just killed them one after another. And after that, and then after I finished that, I went through the sweater in my closet. And I threw out some, I gave some away. And I... This sounds like meth behavior. This is what I hear. I have a friend of mine. I don't know. I'm able to grow his on meth. And she always would clean. She would come home and organize and clean things. He's like, so if your girl starts cleaning incessantly, she might be on a bed problem. Yeah. I was really compulsive and very productive. And I said to my kid drinking throughout the day. Well, this is... No, but I was tempted to. So I said to myself, how can I hold on to this power that this drug has? Because if I start using it every day, I'm going to lose it. I'm just going to be another caffeine addict. And I came up with this idea. Only do it on Saturdays once a week. And I did that for a while. So that very day after cleaning out my closet, I worked in the garden. And there were some plants that needed replacement. And so I started driving down to this garden center called the Flowerland. And I realized, why did I pick that flower? Why did I pick that nursery and say, oh, they have this air stream where they sell espresso drinks right out in front. And it was like, it was the voice of the addict putting me in position to get another cup. The same day. And so I resisted that. And I did this Saturday thing for a while. And it worked pretty well. I really look forward to Saturdays. And I got a lot done on Saturday. On Saturday. But I wasn't addicted anymore. So I could get through the week. But then gradually it was like, you know, it's Thursday. And I got a deadline. And this would really help me get over the deadline. So I started making exceptions. It was complete addict thinking. Right. Did you try any other forms of caffeine? I would, yeah, I would, I would do green tea as I'm drinking now. Green tea is a very good source of caffeine because it's really even. There's another alkaloid in it that stretches out the effect. So you don't get a jolt, but it kind of keeps you nicely titrated. What is the caffeine content of green tea? Yeah, average cup. It's probably a third of what you get in a cup of coffee. It varies amazingly. Like if the, if the tips were plucked, you know, when they're brand new, you know, first flush green tea, that has a lot more caffeine and it's a lot more valuable. So there's a lot of variables that go into it. The plant is producing caffeine, of course, as a pesticide. Right. And that was a whole question I looked at. It's like, why do plants produce these things that have these effects on our minds? How did that, isn't that amazing that a plant could devise a chemical that can unlock a receptor in your brain? That's astonishing. Um, so I started looking at that question. And it's, uh, most of these alkaloids began as defenses. They're all very bitter, which is discouraging insects. And they fuck with their minds. Basically. I mean, if you think about it, I always thought, well, if you're creating a pesticide, just make it lethal, right? Right. But plants don't do that. That's not a great. I mean, some of them do. But if you think about it, if you put out a lethal pesticide and you kill whoever's eating you, whether it's a deer or a beetle, um, you're going to select for resistant members of the pest population. Natural selection will, you know, there'll be some that won't be affected and then they'll take over. and then your pest is no longer works. Much cleverer strategy is to just mess with their minds and ruin their appetites. And think about it. How hungry are you on psychedelics? Not the last thing. It's the last thing you think about. So, so getting your pest to trip or, um, and the other thing you do, if you, let's say you're, you're worried about insects. This is the plant's point of view right now. Um, I'm going to give you a drug that makes you act really recklessly and dance around and, uh, lose control of your sense of survival. You're going to get picked off by a bird. So that's really clever. What made me realize this and, you know, this is my theory. Um, I, I don't have any science to point to you. And I'm not a scientist. Um, but I had a cat named Frank who had a problem with, um, catnip. And, um, I mean, I should say it was a problem. You love catnip. But he had to have some every day. Yeah. And, um, I had this, uh, we used to live in rural Connecticut. And I had this fenced in vegetable garden. And every evening in the summer, I'd go down to harvest some lettuce or, you know, food for dinner. And Frank would follow me into the garden and look up at me. And the reason he was looking at me is he'd forgotten where the catnip was. It was in this garden. He was there every day. He would go over. He'd have some catnip get really fucked up and roll in the dirt for a while. And then, you know, go back to the house. Go back to the cat. It's got a chemical that's very close to a sex hormone. Um, and that it has this psychoactive effect on cats. It doesn't work on anybody else. Um, but it made me realize that how clever this plant was to make its past, which the cat was, forget where it was. And a lot of drugs make us forgetful cannabis is a great example. Cannabis may work by making its pests forget where they saw it or tasted it. So anyway, this idea that, that, that, um, plants have developed really neuro chemistry to mess with our minds is a product of evolution. And it's, and it's an amazing, um, skill. And the fact that these pesticides turn into attractants that, you know, at, at high doses, create problems that low doses do these interesting things in our minds has also been an evolutionary strategy. Cause look what we've done with coffee and tea. We've spread their seeds all over the world. We've made them precious commodities or cannabis. I mean, these plants were stuck in their little center of origin. Orage and now they're everywhere. So this dance of, uh, plant chemicals and human brains has been very much to the advantage of both parties, I think. Um, and, uh, it's quite an astonishing, uh, factive evolution that, that plants should have figured out how to mess with our minds to the extent that they have. How much have you studied when plants change their flavor profile because they're aware that other plants near them are being eaten? Right. Yeah. I have, I have looked at that. It's really amazing. So, you know, farce say oak trees, if they're being beset by some caterpillar or something, it'll usually start on the edges. And those plants will send signals through the air and, um, alert other members, other oak trees to actually start producing these defense chemicals, alkaloids that have bad taste and ruin the taste of, um, of, you know, for the past. There's a lot of communication that goes on among plants. It goes on, uh, through the air with these volatiles. And then it goes on under the ground. And this is where the, um, mycelium, uh, are connecting trees in a forest. Suzanne Samar just wrote this really interesting book about this called Searching for the Mother Tree. She's a forest, she's an arborist or, uh, a forest scientist in, in British Columbia. And she has shown how the trees in a forest are actually connected by these threads of mycelium. And the trees can use that passageway to send nutrients to other trees. So a mother tree can take care of baby trees and actually send carbon through this network. And even two species of different trees can swap nutrients. So a deciduous tree that loses all its leaves, um, needs maximum nutrients in the spring to get started. And it can borrow from the bank of, uh, evergreen tree. And so there's this whole communications network going on underground that, uh, she showed. And, and she did it by, um, she, she'd give radioactive isotopes to one tree and watch sugar, you know, with a radioactive isotope and, and follow it with a gaggard counter through the forest and follow the trail. Wow. So I've written about plant intelligence before. I did a piece on it for the New Yorker several years ago. I see intelligent plant. It comes up. And, um, I got a new respect for how clever plants are. I mean, they're, they're geniuses in their own way. You know, we got good at language and consciousness and, and, uh, our, we do all these cool and tool making. And we think that's the height of evolution. That whole time, actually longer, because they've been around longer than we have, they were working on biochemistry. And they are the masters of biochemistry. We cannot produce drugs as good as what plants can produce. Yeah. I don't think we think of them as intelligent because they're not mobile. That's right. It's just a limitation of our own biology, the way we perceive things. Exactly. No. We think, uh, I mean, our standards of for what constitutes intelligence are based on us. Yes. But there are other ways to be intelligent. If you define intelligence as the ability to solve the problems that confront you in life, they're really intelligent. Um, or communication. Yeah. Because they, they clearly communicate. They communicate in, in many different ways. And they send signals when they're being preyed upon. Yeah. And not just signals in terms of like you're saying they sent them through the air. There's also studies that they've done with, they've played sounds of caterpillars chewing leaves. Yes. I know the guy who does that work. Yeah. Which is even more insane. Yeah. So somehow they can hear and they can recognize a very specific pattern. So they hear the sounds of the caterpillar. Just a recording. Yeah. So it's not a real, right. This is what's where it gets really crazy. It's not real caterpillars actually eating real leaves with the trees that communicate through the brain. Right. It's a sound. Yeah. And they're like, oh, we know what this is. Trouble. And then they send them to change. And they produce a chemical. Yeah. Which is wild. I know. I know. Well, the reason that plants got so good at this is because they couldn't move. Right. Yeah. You can't run away. And if you can't go to what you want, you have to make it come to you or repel it. Yeah. And that's all chemistry. And so that's where all their ingenuity went. And it's just a limitation of our imagination that we can't see this. Although if you've ever looked at time lapse of plants, you suddenly get out an appreciation for them as active agents. There was a, when I was doing the intelligent plant, the scientist in Italy showed me this video of two beans competing for a stake. Mm. And it was in time lapse. And you see them and they're like fighting with each other and they're going like this. And then one of them wins. And the other one gets limp and just depressed. And you see them as personalities. You know, with life experiences, successes and failures in a way you never do. It's just a timeline issue. It is. We live in a dimension, a very specific dimension of time. And other creatures live in different dimensions of time. And you know, so we need to be able to imagine these other dimensions. But the tool of time lapse photography is a powerful one for showing this. David Attenborough did a secret life of plants kind of show once where he tons of time lapse. And suddenly, you know, you've seen the ones of the Venus fly traps and stuff like that. But suddenly you realize, oh, they're thinking. And they're not thinking the way we think. But they do think. I mean, they, you know, there has been research also showing that they can learn. There's a woman named Monica Gagliano who's a botanist who's done really cool experiments with sensitive plants. You know, the sensitive plants that looks like a fern and you touch it and it goes limp. And it does this whenever it's touched. And she would take a bunch of sensitive plants and drop them a couple inches in their pots. And at first, they thought that drop was a touch. And they would, you know, shrink down collapse. And then after she did it five or six times, they realize it was a false signal. And they stopped doing it. And they permanently learned not to respond to that. So how are they remembering that? Where do they store that information? It's pretty mind-blowing. Kind of so wild. Yeah. So there are other ways to be on this planet, right? The way animals do it. And plants deserve our respect. And that's why I've spent so many decades thinking about them and writing about them and growing them. And this is a relationship that we have with them too where they change your perception. Like if I go outside and I see trees and everything's green and lush, I have a feeling. A feeling like hits you. Where whatever it is that is about being a person, when a person is around something that's like green and vivid, I guess it represents life. I guess it represents... Just gonna say that. ...bounty potential food. Health. Yes. And you gravitate towards that. And I feel like that's how people are with forests. You know, and treat, you see all these trees. And there's a feeling you get when you're in, you know, air quotes nature, right? You go out there and it's like, oh, like it's a nourishing feeling. You know, your body has a great reaction to it. Yeah. I mean, I think we're wired for it. Yeah. I think it connotes a sense of health. And, you know, when nature is healthy, there's probably food to be found, you know, that all these trees are producing things you might eat. And I'm very interested in this forest bathing movement, you know, where people go into the forest and just kind of meditate there. Yeah. And it's a powerful experience. So, yeah. Plants are amazing. One more example. So, caffeine, you know, I said as a pesticide. Yes. They recently discovered this really surprising kind of anomaly, which is that there are certain kinds of plants that produce caffeine in their nectar. Now, nectar is an attractant, right? You want it to be, you want it to taste good and you want it to draw things to you because you want your pollinators to show up. So, why would you put a pesticide in your nectar? Well, it's in such tiny quantities that bees really like it. And it turns out that bees are attracted to caffeine the way we are and that they will, this woman named Geraldine Wright, an American working in England, did this study. And she found that bees will prefer plants that give them caffeine. And they will remember those plants, more likely to remember those plants and go back to them. And they will be more faithful pollinators of that plant. So, which is suggesting that basically the plant is using caffeine the way we do. I mean, to get better work out of its pollinators. I mean, in a way, it's sort of like the coffee break story. Jamie, we talked about this before and I never did anything about it. How do I get a hold of that mad honey? You can buy that psychedelic honey? You know, you know, there's a site, is it Tibet Nepal? There's a psychedelic honey that's very difficult to obtain. It grows these bees grow it on the side of cliffs. And so, these people, they have this perilous route where they have to like dangle off the side of the cliff in a rope to gather up this, look at this. This is the psychedelic honey. And this psychedelic honey, as they're gathering this stuff up, apparently, it's phenomenal stuff that makes you trip balls. So, what's the plant that they're getting that pollen and that's what they're doing from? That's it right there. I mean, this guy's just hanging on. We should start with the plant. Mad honey, the loosening genic honey that can sell for over $60 a pound on the black market. Yeah, let's find out what they do. I'm sure you get us on Amazon. So, this matte, I think you can. This is all the stuff. This is mad honey. We need to like do it and see what it does. What does it say that says 300 grams of it, but it doesn't say what is this potent mad honey available? Why don't you google what is the psychoactive component? What's mad honey? What's the alkaloid in a great name, by the way, mad honey? It's the abandoned. There it is. It's an alkaloid. Here it is. Okay, bees that collect pollen and nectar from gray and no toxins. Oxygenoxin containing plants. Often produce honey that also contains granotoxin, so-called mad honey is the most common use of granotoxin poisoning in humans. Poisoning. How dare you? Well, it's about dose. Yes. I mean, like all drugs. Mad honey in Turkey is known as deli ball. It's also used as a recreational drug and traditional medicine. Rototendrens. Rototendrens. Wow. So, it's made by days of feed on rotodendron flowers, which give it psychoactive effects. But again, it's one of those things where I think it's only in Nepal where they find this stuff and harvest stuff. But rotodendrens are here. Yeah, you can. Yeah. So, if you put some bee boxes in a rotodendron nursery, you could try that. See if you can find a video on it because when you watch these guys collect it, it is wild. Yeah. Well, it must be worth it. But it must be worth it. But how did they ever figure this out? Because it's on the side of cliffs. They have to literally risk their life and dangle off cliffs. And you gotta assume they're doing this with like, I mean, how long have they been doing it? They start with homemade ropes. You gotta really trust a rope maker. Well, the lengths people go to collect honey. I mean, we did a documentary based on cooked. And based on cooked, cooked, it was a book I wrote a few years ago about cooking and the cooking hypothesis. And we went to Africa to shoot it. I didn't go, but the crew went to Africa to shoot it. And the hunt for honey is like more prestigious than the hunt for animals. And people, and they would send these young boys, you know, ridiculously high trees to get it. I mean, look, you know, sweetness is a driver for human society, right? We do a lot for sugar. I mean, we started the slave trade for sugar, right? I mean, it was insane what we would do together. They started the slave trade for sugar. The slave trade began with sugar plantations in the Caribbean. And yeah. And so sugar and the sugar trade was driven in large part by the tea trade. because the English would put so much sugar in their tea. Because they had kind of very bitter tea. So, and it became a big source of calories in the English diet is the sugar you would put in your tea. And because it was hot water, it could absorb a lot more sugar. So anyway, the dark side of coffee and tea is these industries are built on the back of incredible exploitation. Slavery. And I mean, just, you know, the people who grow our caffeine are historically have been treated really badly. Well, historically, whenever there's been a commodity, people of ours abused other people in order to either harness that commodity, achieve it, like salt. Like how many wars were, how many people were murdered for salt? Which is true. Sounds insane. Because you go to the store. Or in the spice trade. Yeah. It's right there. Or you go to a diner. It's on the table. It's rare in nature. Yeah. That's one of the reasons we love it. It's those things that are rare in nature, salt, sugar, fat. And that's why we crave them. Because they were special occasions. And now we can get them, of course, anytime we want. And you can get them all in one source. And that's why we're so fat. What did that do? The rotary dendron is the national flower of Nepal. The hills and mountainside ranges in Nepal are decorated with different colors and shapes. The genus and species, which is the dark red color and rotary dendron, which is called the loli gurans in Nepali. So there's over 1,000 different kinds of rotary dendron, though. Oh, well. Also, girl, you can get mad honey for the Pacific Northwest. Oh, really? According to the starters. See if you can get a video of them collecting the mad honey, though. Because the video is wild. When you see these guys swarmed by bees, trying to harvest these. And they're very strange-looking honey cones. Yeah, they don't look neat or organized through all of them. Well, they're all. Tripp and balls while they're making them. And you wonder what effect it's having on the bees. I bet nobody's studied that. Yes, right. That's the same way we figured out that they like caffeine. Yeah, so they may like this stuff. Yeah, so these guys have a ladder. And they send this rope ladder off the top of a cliff. And as they're climbing down, I mean, it is just the possibility of death is always there. Yeah, and look at the swarms of bees. So they cut the nest off and they attach it to a rope. And they slowly load it down. I think he is. He's being stunned like crazy, for sure. I think they just develop an ability to tolerate a low. The way he's wearing. Oh, look what the thing he's wearing. Well, either way he's getting lit up. Let's be honest. There's no way he's going to get through this without any stings. They're probably trying to mitigate the amount of stings. But yeah, they are using smoke, just like a normal bee keeper would do. Look how they're doing it. This is wild, man. I wonder if he's bringing embers with him or he's bringing, doesn't seem like he has anything on him. God, this is so risky. He's hanging off of that thing. Look at the dude up there holding onto the round. I'm trusting that motherfucker. Jesus Christ, he's people are risking so much. I know, it's wide so crazy. Look at the guy on the top. He's literally holding the rope that is helping this guy. this guy. Oh my god, it's so crazy. And now he's going to raise up the honey. And the latter just tied to a tree or something. That latter doesn't look, doesn't look like terrible ladders. Yeah. And if you follow your fucked and I bet a lot of people fall. Yeah. Really amazing. So you think this is being driven by the desire for the honey or the money that you can get for the honey. I wonder. Well, now I'm probably sure. Yeah. I bet initially the way they found out about it was the honey. Yeah. And they were using it. And these guys are eating it. Yeah. They're jumping down. And you know, honey and honey combs is there's a lot of, there's a lot of nutrients in that as well. Look in there eating the pollen. They don't seem to be tripping or maybe they are. Maybe that's given 20 minutes. Yeah. Look how cool those honey combs look to. Like really strange looking, you know, they're not. You can see though, they're not very neat, which you just maybe it is psychoactive on the beach. Have you ever seen those experiments? NASA did giving spiders? Look, and strange looking, you know, they're not you can see though. They're not very neat, which you just maybe it is psychoactive on the Yeah, you ever seen those experiments NASA did giving spiders Various drugs to see what their webs would look like. No. Oh, I did so So they gave And but the weirdest worst One was caffeine really yeah, well look at the NASA spider web caffeine It was just a mess. It was like there were holes that a bug could get through it. So wow So the normal marijuana looks like a guy telling you a stoned idea Benzodrine looks similar to marijuana But look at caffeine it's complete gas. Yeah, what's chlorohydrate? I don't know Whatever it is. It's really lazy Yeah, anyway, that's a really weird. I don't see the LSD one, but that's a very strange And so that suggests that caffeine is disordering the minds of the insects that eat it. Well kills dogs Caffeine does yeah, if they that's why you can't give a dog chocolate It's the caffeine. Yeah Yeah, I mean it takes quite a bit. Yeah, but if you if you give a dog chocolate Yeah, I've heard you never should do that, but I didn't I didn't that's why yeah, it's caffeine really fucks dogs up Caffeine is a strong chemical. I mean, I think we you know, we don't really appreciate it We never think of coffee. Oh, excuse me of chocolate. It's being a significant. No, it's it's not a great quantity of caffeine It's enough to kill a dog. Yeah. I'm surprised. Maybe there's something else. Maybe I've been misled There are a few other alkaloids in chocolate, but yeah, I don't know. I haven't studied that that closely But yeah other animals are not really big on caffeine No, we figured out Yeah, and you know the dose makes the poison is this yeah, so the same thing that can be I mean This is a key thing to understand about all drugs You know the Greeks had this word for them They called them pharmacom and that word meant both blessing and curse And they could hold these two conflicting ideas in their head and we have to do the same thing We have to realize that you know that These drugs are powerful their tools and they can be used well or used badly and a lot of the work of culture is figuring out which and how yeah, it seems like we're just learning over the last few decades About the content what not only call it consciousness about the intelligence of plants I mean, would you call it consciousness? How would you know? I don't think I would I mean I would I'm more comfortable with intelligence. I mean maybe we'll find there's something like consciousness Because this implies a self-awareness in that and I am perceiving I so Let's call it intelligence so So we're this wasn't even a concept a few decades when when was the concept of plant intelligence? When did it first emerge in the literature? Well, there was a group that got started in the early Auts called the Institute or Center for Plant Neurobiology it was a very aggressive name because there are no neurons and it pissed off so many botanists and And and this is a group of people stuff in among kusos involved Monica Gagliano Handful of others. I wrote I wrote this piece about them years ago And this is when you first started getting a lot of research into plant communication Plant problem solving, you know, they were working with these um, what is the creature? There's a slime mold that Can navigate a labyrinth Okay Really yeah So that's not that's not a plan obviously that's a fungus, but yeah, they would put food here in a mold here The slime mold that kind of grows in this hello, I'm going to take I don't know I didn't stick around to watch it Wow, but so I would date it to 2000 or so and you get a lot more attention there was that book written in the 70s I don't even remember the secret life of plants Mm-hmm and that where they were using plants as lie detectors They would bring criminals in to see if they got an electrical or something was all bullshit I mean that book has like been completely discredited and that slowed down research into plant intelligence It was interesting like nobody wanted to touch it when that Oh, that's exposed But now it's kind of coming back and it's respectable subject and And I think we're gonna learn a lot more in the next few years Is it real data on using music and talking to plants and the change that it has in the way they grow? Now that I know of not real data that was part of the secret life of plants. Yeah, if you played Beethoven Yeah, or Mozart they had preferences. I wonder if there's something to that though. I think don't like They don't like to be touched most plants would rather you didn't touch them And they think you know they take it as a threat. I don't write You know, maybe like the dropping ferns. Maybe they get a cost to it if you pet your Yeah, if you touch them when you spray them with mist and water and moisten them or associate it with fertilizer Yeah, yeah, yeah, I wonder if that I don't know I don't know if they're Pavlov's dogs type situations. It's a good question That'd be wild it would be But we've also learned though that they are not solitary creatures I mean as we're learning we're not solitary creatures. It's so interesting that you know We now know that plants that have a symbiotic relationship with fungus do much better And if you if you put them in like I don't know, you know Just water you know grow them hydroponically or grow them in a sterile soil They will never do as well as plants that grow with fungus and there's a wonderful relationship between the mushrooms and the plants where the plants produce sugars that they exude from their roots that the fungus needs and in exchange the fungus which can go down and Burrow through rock and stuff like that. They're very those little mycelium are incredibly strong They give minerals to the plant and so they have this swap and You know when you hear about using plants just sequester carbon in the soil which is a big conversation around climate change You know we think oh you're growing trees and that holds a lot of carbon But in fact what's happening is about 40% of the sugars that are produced during photosynthesis Go down through the plant into the roots and out into the soil They're giving it away and that carbon goes into the soil food chain and gets eaten by various microbes and mycelium and Stays in the soil in the form of the dead bodies of all those microbes And that's how you can sequester large amounts of of carbon by growing the right crops So they're they're somehow another sharing. Yeah, or giving it's a more cooperative relationship You know we learned the original take on Darwin was nature red and tooth and claw even though that wasn't his phrase and then it was all about competition but Science of the last 50 years or so keeps finding more evidence for cooperation as being key in evolution Taking care of your kin but also your community and so now we've seen this on the individual plant being dependent on the Fungus and now we're seeing in the forest that all these trees have a social life essentially they're all connected to one another So it's not every plant for itself in the same way it isn't really any person for itself, right? We are fundamentally social beings we do not do well alone and And so I think that the role of cooperation in nature is is finally getting the attention it deserves is there a way to measure Like the health of a plant that is potted alone versus the health of a plant that is out in nature in a garden like I wonder if a Plant that's in a pot is similar to like a polar bear that's at the zoo Like yeah, it's alive But it's not supposed to be there at trap like that You could I could imagine an experiment where you'd get at that Which is keep a potted plant in the same environment as you have a plant growing in the garden I mean I have both potted plants and then plants that are in my garden and my senses the ones in the garden do a lot better Yeah, they're more likely to get whatever they need because they have they can put their roots where they want to they're not limited I wonder if there's a communication issue going on too because if the mycelium is really Somehow another facilitating communication between all these plants and there's some sort of a network that's going on The way it's broken by the pot itself. Yeah. They're not getting through the pot So it's like again like a polar bear in a zoo like yeah, it's alive You familiar with the rat park experiments. Yes. Yeah. Yeah, it reminds me of that Please talk about those because they're it's really amazing because people have this perception about rats and cocaine and rats and heroin and because of this But so most of what we think we know about drugs and addiction comes from these rat experiments Right, and they would take a caged rat and this went on all through the 60s 70s 80s And they would give it a choice and it and it was hooked up with IVs And they could press a lever and get either you know sucrose sugar Which was a nutrient or they could get a drug they could get cocaine or heroin or meth whatever you put in there And these cage rats would just keep hitting the the lever for the cocaine or heroin till they died or got addicted The cocaine killed them and the opiates addicted them and this was like proof that You know the chemicals have these hooks and if you take you know that addictions and disease you catch from these chemicals basically That was the model and then this clever Psychologist named Bruce Alexander up in British Columbia thought well maybe it's because These these rats have such shitty lives that they're taking these drugs So he um he designed another experiment called the rat park and he built a bigger cage and he put toys in it and you know Plants and other rats to you know To have sex with or play with and really good food and then gave him a choice between Water laced with morphine and clean water They would still have a little morphine But instead of like 25 milligrams they'd have five milligrams You know they'd have a safe amount basically and this was You know a really strong evidence for the fact that addiction is an adaptation to conditions to the quality of your cage if you mmm and And that if you could improve people's circumstances If you could create a park for them or something like a park they would be much less likely to get addicted And I think that's a really telling example I mean it was just our blindness that we just assume rats and cages natural, you know But I mean they were in solitary confinement. Yeah. They were miserable. They were probably suicidal Um So it makes sense with people you don't see people at the top of their life They're doing fantastic that wasted all the way with drugs. It's usually there's some sort of depression and some You know abuse or yeah, we were saying earlier about the opioid crisis. Yeah, it's not everywhere It's in these really disadvantaged areas these areas that were once doing well. Yes There are yes and people's sense of their life prospects are are so dim that The you know end as Karl Hart makes the point They do get pleasure from these drugs. Yes, they get something. They're not getting in their life that there is this sense of warmth and comfort and and and even connectedness for some people and You know, it's not a healthy adaptation, but it is an adaptation and so It raises questions on whether we should think about Addiction as a disease. That's a very common idea and it And it's useful in the sense that it takes away the shame and that's a healthy thing I think the shame of being addicted or the guilt of being addicted But I think it may get things wrong too because it may be that the addiction is more of a symptom of the disease and the disease may be trauma poverty racial discrimination I mean all the stresses that people deal with That's good more Monte's take yeah trauma. Yeah, and I think he makes a very good case. Yeah You know if you interview Addx you will often find that there is some trauma in their past Yeah, it's uh, it's an interest that the rat Park study is so interesting because imagine if that guy had not put those two pieces together We would still have the narrative That cocaine and heroin are so addictive because of science We've proven that people that get it. They just take it until their life falls apart So keep it out of your life. Yeah, exactly and then it's all biology and it's predestined inevitable and I think addictions a lot more complicated and I think you know some of these harm reduction Strategies going on you know in Portugal and Switzerland is an interesting case They you know if you're a heroin addict there and you enter into their system They will write you a prescription for heroin So you'll get it at the drugstore which removes the risk of overdose Because you know what you're getting. There's not going to be any fentanyl on it And you're not going to be using a dirty needle so you're not going to have the contamination issues I mean a lot of the harms of using these drugs come from the fact they're illegal Yeah, and the black market and sharing noodles and everything and then they'll go to work on making sure you have a good job Giving you therapy essentially improving your cage and And then they try to get you off the drug but they realize they have to get the life circumstance right Before you can attack the problem the only way we're going to figure out how to do that here is to make it super profitable Yeah, good luck I mean right we were such we're so hell bent on Profit and so hell bent on capitalism. It's and we're such more to the idea that we would Reward addicts by improving their lives giving them good jobs while we gave them prescription I don't see Americans sitting for that idea. Well think of the self-righteousness. You had walking through the airport No caffeine here's this to say Everybody has that we didn't losers hooked on drugs. Yeah, you should together like me But if the thing is like everybody's path is different Everyone's path is different, but we do moralize drug addiction. Yes in a way that just does not helpful. No, it's not and we we also We lose sight of the big picture like all these You know America first people you know, they're these hard-nosed sort of People that think that you know, we need to just people need to pull themselves up by the bootstraps and you know We need to emphasize hard work and discipline all that stuff's great But if you can help people the more people that can get out of this trap The more people we can educate and provide therapy and provide a helping hand the more they can get out of that The less losers will have which means the better America will be over all more people who are contributing Well, have more people contributing and more competition more competition among such which will elevate everybody It's good for everybody. It's good for the people that are competitive Capitalistic people should be embracing this because it's better for the market overall you'll have more contributors Right and more consumers. Yes. Yeah. No, I think unless crime. Yeah, well, that's a big thing Yes, and of course, you know so much crime is the result of drugs being illegal right and I mean all we're doing are feeding the cartels. Yes, which is insane. I mean everyone wants to go overseas to deal with these These criminals, you know and these foreign lands that are doing terrible things. I'll look at what the drug war is done to Mexico Look what it's done to Columbia. I mean, it's it's just destroyed these governments. Yeah Yeah, anyway, there are a lot of reasons to and the drug war. I think people see it I don't see the right even defending it anymore and It's and you know one of the things I'm trying to do with this work and this book is let's start this post drug war Conversation and yeah and figure out a better way to deal with it because addiction will always be with us There will still be overdoses, you know, look we we legalize Tobacco in alcohol and I think about 80,000 people die from alcohol every year and that's a cost that we've just decided We were in a bear as a society. We do our best with these rituals and and and and caffeine We're you know, we're we're kind of desocializing the use of caffeine in a way that is lowering it's it's number of people smoking and that's been helpful but this has to happen in the culture. Yeah, and And it's not going to be perfect. It's going to be an uneasy piece Well, there's also personal responsibility and choice Cigarettes are a big one, right cigarettes kill a half a million people every year in this country They die prematurely because of the use of cigarettes, but you know, that's a act cigarettes are really or tobacco is a very interesting Example of how contextual though drug uses so I have it in this book. I did a tobacco ceremony Which is really interesting, you know many traditional cultures in the new world used tobacco as a sacred Plant medicine some people think it's the most powerful plant medicine of all They don't smoke them every day They use them ceremonially on special occasions. They're not addicted to them to it and It's a powerful drug when used that way. So so this tobacco ceremony I was working with this healer this current era and Basically it's liquefied tobacco. They take a tobacco rustica which grows in South America, I guess and they make this Brown liquid from it. I don't know they cook it. I don't know how they make it and she You close one nostril and she has a syringe and she shoots it up the other nostril And oh it is So it's like a snuff and you just feel this wave of flame like starting in the On your forehead and then moving back through your head and then down your spine It's like whoa and you start moving in this involuntary way and you know shaking out your legs and your arms You look kind of spastic. I did this in front of a camera I regret to say And I'm working on a documentary about psychedelics, but we can't I'm not gonna trip on camera. It's just too dangerous and it's Bad idea so but it's a back-o-cere morning we could do because it's legal. It's totally legal and It only lasts about 10 or 20 minutes, but it is such a powerful Pergative like I just felt like emptyed out and refreshed when it was over really and It's just like everything just went whatever I was worrying about whatever was on my mind and I felt like physically that I had just been purged and This is tobacco. This is the same drug that kills 500,000 people that you know Millions of us are addicted to and it's done so much damage But that was how westerners took this plant when they got to the new world and they turned it into cigarettes and they decided to smoke it Rather than use it the way the indigenous people could have taught them to use it But the indigenous people also out of pipe right is that post? I don't know you got colonization. That's a good question I don't know when they started Smoking at the piece pipe and the use of it by Native Americans. I don't know that history at all But even then I think it was in it was an occasion. It was not Right a habit a daily habit right and there you have the example of a drug leaving a social context and then becoming highly individualized where you're alone with this thing and you're You know smoking all your body is telling you to smoke and the idea that and I was so negative on this idea of doing it to Backo ceremony I mean I smoked when I was younger and it was really hard to quit and I'm really happy I quit and then I didn't want to go near it and the smell of tobacco You know I have negative associations and in fact the the the worst thing in this experience was a little bit of it got down My nasal passages and I swallowed it and I felt like I had swallowed the contents of an ashtray It was really nasty And that lasted all night, but that was my mistake. I should not have swallowed but But it really taught me that set and setting you know It's not just about psychedelics is about all drugs and that even a drug we regard as evil as tobacco in the proper context could be very positive I think tobacco The the real issue is people smoking at all the time and the real issue is the fact that it costs its long cancer or all these different things But tobacco itself like I've smoked cigarettes before shows and I like to do it I like to smoke a cigarette before show it. It sparks my brain. Yeah And it is seen it does some very positive things for your cognition. Yeah, it gives you a weird head rush like a very unusual If you're not using it habitually. Yes if you're not using it habitually. Yeah Yeah, I don't think it gives that head rush to people that are constantly on it But I know a lot of writers that have had a real problem quitting when I quit I had a relearn how to write involved a lot of coffee and Sucking on sucking candies and all sorts of other oral fixation different nicotine candies. No, I never did that That wasn't really in use then but an interesting fact about that is that you would think if it was strictly a chemical addiction to nicotine That patches would work and they only work for 17% of people So that means that you have all these other people a majority of tobacco users that it isn't just about the the drug It's about the experience the association the feeling. I don't know I mean they're getting their nicotine, but they still want their cigarettes and And that's that's an interesting finding because if if addiction was all about the molecule It should work 90% of the time. Yeah Nothing it doesn't work that good is a chew like Nicking gum. Yeah. Well not just gums with the like chewing tobacco and the stuff they put what's that shit called? What they call dip dip A friend of mine gave me one of these little packets. You put a packet like Yeah, these are little tea bag. It was fucking disgusting It made me nauseous. I got nervous. I was like, oh, what does this people do get oral cancers from those things? Oh, I'm sure yeah, no, I knew there was a Doctor minner about a guy who was traveling around to all these different schools because he had had extreme facial cancer Really Part of his tongue removed part of his jaw removed and he was like this handsome strapping guy and then you know It was disfigured afterwards because it's like literally that it'll remove a bunch of his bone for his jaw And it's like me Freud that happened to him did it really yeah, he had jaw cancer And it was just the last I don't know how many years of his life and had a big piece of his jaw removed what did What did he was he'd smoke? Yeah, he was a big Well the classic him in the pipe pipe. Yeah. Yeah, there's so many of those intellectuals from that day like Bertrand Russell was a Gigantic I think it was do regura if you were like an academic of a certain generation Yeah, you had a smoke a pipe or you wouldn't be taken seriously. Yeah, but it's less Cancerous as ours cigar is less cancerous and cigarettes. Yeah, but probably because you just not taking in the same amount of chemical Yeah, you're not inhaling as much. Yeah, and then less like that. It's a lung cancer. Yeah anyway, it's It's just more fascinating and complicated than we then we think yeah, and and but as a writer I love moving toward the ambiguities moving toward the uncertainties and the and this idea of that you have to be able to hold these contradictory ideas in your head Is something I'm always trying to teach in my writing? Hmm. What was there anything? In studying this book and preparing to do this book was anything that was surprising to you about what you learned There were a lot of things that were surprising Well one that bees like caffeine Yeah, that's pretty correct and it improves their memory and it does improve our memory by the way if you Study if you learn a subject or study something and then have a cup of coffee or tea after you're more likely to remember it So there's a reason to use it in college One of the most surprising facts is that the largest source of antioxidants in the American diet comes from coffee and tea Really now that just tells American diet American diet that just tells you how few vegetables were eating That you know that's just a measure of how bad our diet is You know we're eating you know meat and sugar and and we're just not getting plants because the only thing that produces antioxidants Which we need for our health which we need to prevent cancer? plants produce antioxidants And so we're getting a lot of them from coffee and tea that may explain a lot of the health benefits of coffee and tea that you know Coffee has been shown to be protective against several cancers against Parkinson's disease against Cardiovascular problems and it may not be the caffeine. It may be the antioxidants Wow, so that was a big surprise. How much the antioxidants are in coffee? I mean, I know there's resveratrol that's in wine. Yeah, I don't know I don't know how many are which ones but it is the biggest source and so if you're not eating vegetables you should You know bottoms up on your coffee. That's pretty crazy. Yeah, it is. I mean they're You know we should probably be getting them from from from plants eating plants. Yeah, or at least supplementing Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's a I just imagine that whatever you're getting from coffee like you're just up It's just a little bean. Yeah, I know I know that it has so much and you're not getting the leaves and their antioxidants You get from the leaves of plants of course you get that in tea Right, so with tea you're eating your drinking leaves and with Coffee it's the seed has this book affected the way you eat or Affected the way you think about what you eat, you know because you know you're you're You're talking about all the positive and negative benefits of plants all the I'm pretty much down to a plant based diet at this point. I have a little bit of fish from time to time I haven't had meat in two years probably What made you make that decision? It was a combination of health. I was dealing with some health issues and Also what I was learning about the meat industry which you know I've done a lot of writing on the cattle industry and pork and I've worked on documentaries about that and It's just a hard industry to support. I mean it's just so brutal both to the workers and the animals That I don't really want to have anything to do with it There are farmers growing meat in really sustainable ways animals that have good lives on farms and one bad day as they say And I support that kind of agriculture But in general, you know the average meat you find is comes at the end of a food chain I just don't want to support and then the third reason is climate change You know I've learned a lot about how our dietary choices affect the climate and meat eating is is The biggest part of your climate footprint if you're a big meat eater is the biggest part of your climate footprint. It's what about transportation? transportation and and the food system are about the same and around 18 to 20 percent and But it's the and it's the hardest for a lot of us to change Or in some ways it's the easiest because it's just a different kind of choices But you know you can buy your electric car, you know you make these big moves but beef eating in particular Has it tremendous impact on the climate? Have you looked at all into these? regenerative farms and what are they're scalable? Yeah, the evidence is that they are it's gonna take some work and some different agricultural policies We have to give farmers incentives which we already do of course right now We give them incentive incentives to grow corn and soy. That's it And they grow a lot of that and that's the raw material for all the crap we're eating You know that gets turned into process food or it's fed to animals and turned into meat and that's Basically how the food system is organized right now We could change those incentives and reward farmers instead for practices that sequester carbon and For practices that improve the diet so even if you added one crop to that corn soy rotation You know, I don't know pigeon peas or something like that that are being used to make these meat substitutes You would have a huge positive effect on the soil microbiome on carbon sequestration cover cropping planting trees in your On your farms. There's a lot that could be done and that it could make a substantial difference to climate change if we worked on our agriculture One of the weirdest things about psychedelic experiences is that different compounds or different different types of experiences have different almost like standard icons or standard narratives like one of them is With the with trip to means particularly with ayahuasca you get a lot of Protect nature protect mother earth some sort of weird connection and with psychedelic mushrooms you almost get There's almost like Like an announcement that there's an other out there. Yes. Yes You almost get, there's almost like an announcement that there's an other out there. Yes, exactly. Right? Yeah, I had that on SoulSibin. I had an experience that I described in how to change your mind of being in my garden in Connecticut. And I've always, as we've been talking about, I've always given plants a lot of credit for being actors, agents, having their own subjectivity, their own point of view. But it was an intellectual idea. I understood it intellectually. On this SoulSibin experience, I was in my garden, it was August, there were like, you know, dragonflies everywhere and bees everywhere and birds. And I saw my plants as more alive than I'd ever seen them before. And they were like returning my gaze. And I know that sounds crazy. But they were regarding me as I was regarding them. And I had never felt more part of nature than I did that time. You know, normally as humans, we feel like we've got one foot in nature and one foot definitely out of nature. You know, we even talk about having a relationship to nature. That's fucked up, right? I mean, we are nature. Yeah, we have a relationship to nature. Yeah. But that's how we think. That was all gone. I was just one species among many and they all had their own subjecthood, their own personalities. And my plants were, you know, really well disposed to me. They were very positive. There was no negative energies going back and forth. And then the dragonflies were, you know, connecting us all. And it was amazing. So it was that kind of announcement you're describing. And a lot of people have nature experiences like that on SoulSibin. You're right about ayahuasca too. The imagery is right out of the Amazon, right? I have a feeling we are bringing that to the experience that Jaguars and pythons have been part of like ayahuasca trip reports for a very long time. So but also dragons. Dragons too. Dragons. That one is not that I've never seen those in the Amazon. And also UFOs. Yeah. Like sometimes people literally see flying saucers and, you know, they get beamed aboard. Yeah. I know. And a lot of flying imagery on ayahuasca. And that's common too. I had this really weird imagery on ayahuasca that stays with me as kind of like this visual call-in. And I find one of the things that happens in psychedelic experiences that sometimes there's an image you can take with you and use in your meditation or just when you're just daydreaming. And this is one for me. I was, it was a weird ayahuasca circle because it took place during the day because our shaman was losing her sight and wanted to do it during the day. And so we were wearing eye shades. And I was with a group of women. I was the only man there. And the eye shades they had were really tight. And there were black eye shades with these three bands of black elastic going around my head. And at the height of this experience, I felt like these bars encircling my head that the things became bars. And then they started reproducing and there were bars going all the way down my body. And I was in this tight little cage. And I was like, how am I going to get out of this? And it really was scary. And then I looked down and I see a little bit of green. And it's the first two leaves of a vine. And the vine starts climbing up the cage, round and around and around and gets to the top and leaves and reaches out to the sun. And I kept saying to myself, plants can't be caged. Plants can't be caged. And I don't know what this means. It made me nothing at all. But that image, that difference between us and the plants and our limitation and the fact that they can take a cage and use it for their own purposes and reach to the sun and go where they need to go unimpeded was it was just a powerful image for me. And sometimes I could always just give you things you chew on. And I've mentioned this in interviews before and people write me with interpretations of you're actually the vine. You're showing us how to get out of the cage. Barred. Thank you. But I don't know. If people always have their own wacky interpretations of what you've experienced. I know. I know. I mean, imagine like, you know the people that like interpret dreams. Yeah. Imagine people that interpret trips. Like that kind of shenanigans, those kind of shisters, they're coming. They're coming. It's a pretty good job, I guess. Oh, for sure. Just like psychic colors. Just like psychic colors. Yeah. I mean, there's healers out there. That's what they do. I mean, psychic healer. And that's how they pay their rent, you know, which is just... It's true. Yeah. I know. Watch out for those charlatans. But I have to say the whole, I've had a very interesting experience as a writer writing about trips. I mean, it's really risky and hard. And I really was nervous about doing it. I think you've gotten through the net, though. Maybe. I think you have. I think I found a way to do it. It was very... It was challenging at first. Because you know, we've all read boring trip reports and heard people and hearing people's dreams is like always put suitously. So I approached those chapters both in this book and in how to change your mind with a lot of nervousness. This is a writing challenge I've never met before. And everybody says these experiences are ineffable. Beyond language. But I was going to eff them. And you know, I was going to try or fail trying. And it turned out to be the most fun I've ever had as a writer, which I didn't expect at all. Once I found the voice, and I knew I was writing for people who had in trip, as well as for people who had. Because I'm trying to reach the general reader. I'm not just writing for second odds. But I found a way to do it, which partly involved acknowledging how insane it sounded. You know, so I would tell an image like that or say something that happened or discovering how important love is and say, look, I know how banal that sounds. But remember, banalities are just truths that have been drained of any kind of emotion from overuse. It doesn't mean they're false. That's a great way to describe it. And we need to relearn these banalities. And psychedelics takes us there. So I would just kind of turn, it was like turning to the audience in a play and say, I know how this sounds to you, but consider. And I do that repeatedly when I'm doing one of these trip reports. And so once I could let go that fear that the reader thought I was absolutely nuts, I could really get into it. And it came sort of like what I imagine novelists get to do, which is essentially transcribe the fantasies in their head without having to worry about fact checkers or plausibility. And I was just, I had these memories. And as you know, the memories stay with you for a long time. It's not like dreams in that sense where dreams are constantly like you're trying to hold onto it as it flees. But they were still very vivid to me. And telling those stories actually became my favorite thing. I mean, in the writing of the book and the masculine story here that I tell was just, I don't know, it just takes you to really interesting places or writer. And I'm looking forward to more people doing it. I think you will, I think we will see it. And you know, I paid no penalty for telling my trip reports and two books so far. Well, I think it's because you establish yourself again as a real writer before that. Or in the omnivores dilemma and all your other books. It's like you're, you're a guy who investigates topics and thoroughly researches them and then gives an accurate and intelligent, intelligent assessment of what's going on. And they trusted you because of your previous work to apply the same sort of strategy. I think you're probably right. I think I did bring a certain credibility. I had my first book been about psychedelics. I think things would have gone very differently. Yeah. It's funny. The whole time I was working on psychedelics and interviewing all these people in the scientific community and the underground community, they would say to me, you know, so I think you're going to do for psychedelics what you did for food. And I'm like, I don't think so. This is a different kind of topic. I thought it was really silly actually. Really before you got involved, you thought it was silly. Didn't imagine the potential for this field to become so legitimate. What year was that? I published that book three years ago. What year was it when you started thinking about writing? 2013, 2014 I started writing about psychedelics. I did a piece for the New Yorker and what psychedelic experiences, if any, had you had before that? I had had a couple of psilocybin experiences in my 20s. They were not high dose. I now know having had high dose. They were kind of, you know, some people sometimes call museum experiences where everything just looks kind of filmic or interesting or already. They were pleasant. Well, one was pleasant. It was in a rural situation with my wife and that was wonderful. And then the other was, you know, on Riverside Drive in Manhattan, it was like, no, you don't do it there. And that was not pleasant. And then I fell away from it. I had no interest. But I didn't do them in college. It was weird. I went to a college where there was no psychedelics. And this is in the 70s. I don't know what I did wrong. What college? Bennington College in Vermont. And there was like one pothead and everyone else drank. And it was an odd place that way. And they had been a lot of LSD on campus I heard years before. And then after I was there, but I was in this little window of like no psychedelics. But frankly, I was too afraid. I did not think I was stable enough to take LSD. And I had absorbed all the cultural fear. You know, the story is about your genes and what would happen. And you know, because this is, I didn't get to college in 1973. So in 1968 when the backlash begins, I'm only 15. So, you know, I'm 13. So I brought all this fear. And I didn't think of myself as a stable enough person to take a chance. And I didn't want to explore my mind. I was afraid of what I'd find there. And I mean, the mind is a very scary place to go for most of us, I think. But it was particularly scary when I was that age. So I stayed away. I remember writing a short story when I was in 10th grade about a kid who took LSD and broke a bottle and slid his wrist. You wrote a story about this? Wow. Yeah. So that's what was in my head about it. What was that based on? Just folklore? Yeah, stuff that was out there and fears that I had. So I was coming to it fresh. I didn't really start till I was in my late 50s. I didn't do it at the age-appropriate time. But on the other hand, I came to appreciate that there's a special value to psychedelics late in life. And that I said and how to change your mind that it could be that psychedelics are wasted on the young. And that they offer special things to people when you are not just older but more set in your ways. When you've developed all these habits, as we get older, we develop these algorithms to get us through any situation dealing with our kids or our employer. We know what works. We go right to the script. We have a script for everything. But that kind of dulls us to reality. We're not taking in information. We're going right to the solution or the script we want to use. And one of the things I think psychedelics are really good for is melting those habits and creating a space where new narratives can form. We're the victim of these narratives that our ego tells us. And a lot of them are very critical. Your work shit, your unworthy. You didn't deserve the success. Our ego is a rehectoring us with that kind of stuff all the time. Psychedelics tunes that down. Sometimes it turns it off completely. We know all about the default mode network and the part of the brain where those stories are originating and how they go offline during a still-asignment experience or LSD. And then there is an opportunity once you've softened the hold of those narratives, once you've gotten out of those grooves to start new narratives. And I think that's what happens in many cases. There's a wonderful metaphor that someone I interviewed for the book said. He's a Dutch neuroscientist. And his image of what psychedelics do is like imagine a hillside. He would have said a mountain, but he's never seen a mountain. He's in Holland. It's a flat country. Imagine a hillside, covered in snow. And imagine your thoughts as sleds going down that hill. Every time the grooves created by those sleds get deeper and deeper. And over time it's impossible to go down that hillside without falling into those grooves. They're attractors. They'll just suck you right in. What the psychedelic experience does is it's like a new snowfall, fresh snow. It fills all the grooves. And that allows you to go down the hill in a new way. That was a beautiful image. That is beautiful. Yeah. Let's end with that. That's perfect. That's good. Book is out July 6th. Audio as well. Audio as well. And Kindle. This is your mind on plants. The great and powerful. Micro pollen. Thanks for the really beautiful shade that very much. It was awesome. I really enjoyed it. Bye, everybody.