100 Biden. Thank you for doing this. I haven't seen you in 11 years. Though I've talked about you. Yeah, as you know, in the meantime. Big time. And then I wake up in morning and you're doing Candace Owens. I love Candace. I do too. I do too. I've taken a lot of abuse for saying that, but I know where and I do. I think she's a great person. As a person, yeah, I forget the politics and anything. And largely why I'm sitting here, we've known each other for, you know, quite tangentially for 30 years. Yes. Is that she is a human being is a really, really good person. And it's thoughtful and generous and has a deep faith. And, and I just vehemently disagree with some of her positions. And it used to be that way. I remember. Remember, I mean, when you and I knew each other, it wasn't as if our politics were much different. Right. And, but everything has everything changed. And I attributed to one thing. We can get to that. But what's the one thing? I took Donald Trump. I think he I think he I think he I everybody says, you know, he's a symptom of the disease. And the reality is, is that I think he's one of the most transformational. Individuals in our political history for offer offer for ill. And I think he had such an opportunity to do great things. And he just decided that all he was going to do was for himself. And. But anyway, regardless, we have to. We have to. We have to. I mean, from the same place. Yeah. And I grew up with your with your high school girlfriend, I think. So, I mean, I, you know, where I'm very familiar with the world that you're from. Because I'm sort of from it too. And I noticed the change during Obama. And I'm not blaming Obama. I'm not blaming any. But the society changed. It was like all of a sudden, if you didn't like Obama, you were a racist. Yeah. And I felt like in our neighborhood, that was the advice you couldn't say anything about Obama that wasn't positive. Do you remember that? No, I mean, I, and I think that I had a completely. Probably different perspective on that. But I don't. I know discount if you say that you felt that way. Well, it was before that. Like if it was Clinton. Yeah. I know I knew a lot of Clinton staffers and you could be like really Monica Lewinsky and they'd be like, I'm Monica Lewinsky or Bush, you know, really the Iraq war. Yeah. The Iraq, you know, it's like, but people seem to lose their sense of humor in 2008. At least my neighbors did it was like, what did you, I'm sorry. Do you see something about Obama that's not flattering? And that to me. Yeah, I could see how you would get that. You know what I mean? I mean, you're a public figure. You're, you're on the dinner. No, I mean, dinner. Yeah, no, I know. I mean, and it was the ladies. Yeah. All about Obama. And remember that it's like all the, this whole thing of like, you're well educated, humorless, rich white ladies. That all began during that maybe the case. That wasn't it understandably was not my experience. No, that it wasn't. And so how did you wind up deciding to speak in public and with first of all with Canvas, which I strongly approve of, but I just want to kind of that happen. So the first interview that I did was with Andrew Callian and who is a brilliant, in my opinion, journalist and documentarian. And I didn't know anything about him, but I had a lawyer that had done some work for him that had also done some work for me. And he said, hey, you should check this guy out. And, and I did. And I, what I noticed about Andrew is that I believe he has a real finger on the pulse of what's happening, particularly to a certain demographic like draft age 18 to 35 year olds. And, and he has a wider audience also. And it's funny that you say draft age. That's an interesting way to put it. Yeah. We may, we may be coming up to. And anyway, do you think we're going to get a draft? No, no, I don't think that they have the. I know I don't think because that's what I like. I physically joined the protest at that. I mean, that's so crazy. Well, I think you should physically join the protest now. I mean, you're already there. And, but anyway, I met with I, I watched a lot of stuff that Andrew did. I, I really liked it in. And, and I went on and, you know, I think that the thing that kind of shocked people was my willingness to be completely open about all of the. I know that every two is that I don't. I welcome any question. I always say that addiction is. He's never an excuse, but it's often an explanation for, for some of the things that people. The narrative that they've been told about me. And they did a beautiful thing to me that was, that was ugly in the moment, which was they completely exposed me in a way that I don't know of any public figure. Or, or a person associated with public figure, particularly family has ever been exposed. I mean, they literally stole 22 years of my entire digital footprint from every deleted image to every deleted text to everything. And, and in that total exposure, there was nowhere to hide. And, and for me, I realized is that the only way to out was through. And I was owning the things that were true and and speaking truth to the things that were false. And, and I did that with Andrew and I thought it would just be a one off. But then I, I, I, the guy named, well, you, you're close with him and I, I consider him a friend by text. I want to sell his reputation. Yeah. And I, and I sat down with him and I, and, and Sean is kind of, you know, magga adjacent. He was between 2020 and 2024 and he had checked some pretty rough things about my dad, not so much about me, but about my dad that I vehemently disagree with into the state vehemently disagree with. But I thought that Sean was a great listener. And, and, and I really appreciated his willingness to not allow what he had been instructed to believe to infect the way in which he listened. And, and I sat down with him and we did close to six hours. And he, he kind of, I know that it's like seems like this is a very public thing by virtue of everybody watching here. But the fact of the matter is, is these experiences in this long format can be very intimate. Oh, big time. And, and, and, and, and that was my experience with, with Sean. And we, and we connected on the thing that I have been able to connect with, with, with almost everyone, like universally, which is addiction. And for me, I think it's recovery. And I, and I've been sober, clean sober for somebody said stop sitting clean. So I've been substance free in sober for, for over seven years now. And I don't think people knew that. I think people conflated my, my past addiction with my, my father's presidency and just assumed that I was still using because, you know, I mean, New York Post, you know, I think that they, they, they printed a 1.5 articles about me a day for, on close to four years. And, and none of a good in all of it with not positive. No, not, not, not much that was positive. No, not at all. Anyway, long story, long story a lot longer is having that experience the New York Post at the moment. Yeah. By the way, welcome, welcome to my world. I'm not naked. Yeah, hopefully, hopefully, hopefully naked pictures don't come out. I could cost them or our friends. Yeah. Yeah. I didn't want to see those. Yeah. Well, I didn't think so either. But apparently they do. So anyway, long story short, it, long story longer. I go, and I do this with Sean and Sean call and, and this is public now. I can say it is Sean had dinner with Candice. They live in the same neighborhood down there in Nashville. And he said, you know, I really, really like her. And, and she told my wife that one of the interviews that she most wanted to do was with me with, Hunter Biden. I'm not referring myself in the third question. I haven't gotten to that point yet. And, you know, I thought about it. And like you, and we've talked, it talked about this a little bit. But like you, the Candice is just some really, really awful things. I don't know just about me, but also about my dad. You know, the whole Biden crime family thing, but really, really kind of pointed things. And I believe that I, if I could sit down with her, not to convince her of anything, but to see that I was just as human as she was, and that I own my feelings. And I've been incredibly transparent about them. I've been, I have, and I thought that if we could find that, you know, commonality that we could have an actual conversation. And that's what occurred. And, and, and I don't agree with Candice still on a lot of stuff. And I almost feel like like, why do I have to make that, you know, caveat as a really so, because I never used to have to make that caveat. Going all the way back to the beginning of our conversation, how did it change? I truly believe that the level of vitriol, meanness, and cruelty in our politics has always been there. But never like this. Never in a way in which it is, it is practiced with impunity. And, and that to me, as I mean, I think that I can mark it. Now, it's interesting that you say that, that your experience is that, that, that kind of division started in 2008. But nothing like this, Tucker. You know, a lot of people hit that afternoon slump, but immediately reached for another cup of coffee, guilty. But is the answer always more caffeine? Well, sometimes you just need hydration. Thing is a lot of people are already drinking a ton of water, but they are not fully hydrated, because water alone isn't always enough. Your body needs something called electrolytes, salts, help absorb the water, and use the water. And that's where realite comes in. Realite is made by Redmond, the company behind Redmond Real Solve. They've been harvesting mineral salts in Utah since 1958, a state famous for salt. And they are totally transparent. You can visit their mind if you want, if you ever show up, but there you can go to the mind and see where it comes from. So, realite's ingredient list is completely clean. There's no sugar, no chemical preservatives, no artificial colors, flavors, sweeteners, just sodium, potassium, magnesium, calcium, chloride, and coconut water powder. That's it. So, whether you're working out spending time outside or just trying to stay sharp throughout a day, or even start throughout a day, realite is an easy way to replenish your electrolytes, which again you need. Flavors like Lemon Lime, mixed berries, strawberry lemonade, watermelon lime, mango, peanut clotted, making a hungry, reading the list. They've got it. All of it. So, if you're ready to give it a try, visit redman.com slash Tucker. Use the code Tucker for 15% off your first order. Redman.com slash Tucker code Tucker, 15% off your first order. Or click the link in the video description, or you can even scan the QR code on the screen, or check the pin comment. Many ways to get it, and you should. Not going to be like, let's have it in a minute. Not even on partisan lines. I mean, the divisions are so intense. I always thought of divisions as racial or religious. You're Protestant marrying a Catholic, or black person marrying a white person. I feel like the divisions now are ideological and political. And that's, I mean this morning I texted Erica Kirk and Candace Owens, both within like an hour of each other, not related to each other. But just because I really like them both. And I'm not embarrassed of that. And that's my right. By the way, I get to like people whether or not I'm fully aligned with their program. That's my view. I've taken so much abuse for that. It's like how could you be friends with two people who disagree with each other. Well, I don't know. I am. Right? What world do we live in? Well, that's kind of how I feel. That's strongly how I feel. First of all, I decide who I like. You don't get to decide who I like. Yeah. Don't you feel that? I do. And I think that what it is, it's a reflection of this. Is that who are you getting that from? You're getting that from other people with niche audiences with big microphones in front of them. You're getting that from the comments section that I know you don't read. No. But other people in your organization read from, you know, on X. You're getting that. I think we have literally been torn apart on purpose because not because it was the, I don't think that the people that created the social media platforms that rule our lives to this day. So this is what we're going to do. We're going to create something just to tear people apart. What I think that they did was they created a monster in which they realized that it is fueled by division and vitriol and conflict and making you question yourself. I mean, let me give you an example. Remember that the whistleblower for Facebook when I think Facebook was still Facebook. It happened like in 2022. She was a senior executive at Facebook and she came up to the Hill. And this is a nonpartisan thing. And she came up to the Hill and she had all of that documentation of internal studies within Facebook that showed that they, that there had been something like, and I forget the numbers don't hold me to it. But an exponential increase in the number of teenage suicide among girls between the ages of 13 and 17 years old. So exponential that began with the inception of Instagram. And then not only an exponential increase in actual suicides among teenage girls, but a even greater increase. If that, if suicides went up triple, girls reporting self-harm went up by like 300% over the course of like a, the inception of Instagram until, you know, 2022. When this woman walks in with all the document. And Instagram knew that and knew that it was literally directly related to their algorithm. Sending these messages to girls that they are not worth that they need more that they that they that they, that they're, whether it's about their bodies or body shaming and continuing to send it over to the other knowing the negative impact of this having, but it's because it made the money. It's because you become addicted to that, you know, that response and that, that Instagram would get with that bag of heroin in your pocket known as an iPhone. And you know what they did? Nothing. They buried the report. They literally did nothing. I mean, nothing. So my question and then what happened? This woman whistleblower close forward. She brings all of the evidence that that Facebook meta knows about this. And she said, like, now what do we do about it? And you know what Congress did Senate House? No, you know what they did? Nothing. We have done absolutely what's just not besides of our people. I mean, not a big deal. But I'm trying to conquer. So I think it's really important. And as it relates to our politics is the same thing. We are being fed the, the equivalent of a suicide pact by organizations and companies that are run by by the way, literally handful of very, very, very not just generationally, but wealthy people to the degree that we haven't seen since the rubber bands at the turn of the in 1900s and at least 1800s. And those people I'm not saying are evil, but what they have created is a tool. And a tool can be either a, a hammer can can build a home or it can tear down a your house. And they build a tool and they're make more money by tearing people down. They make more money by dividing people. They make more money. And so they just let the algorithm roll. And it's, and it's tearing us apart. And I'm not saying that's the only problem. Not my up, enough to say that all of all of the issues that we have, but going back to Donald Trump, because for me, the one existential threat that I think that we face as a country is Donald Trump. I'm not this believer that Trump is a, is merely the symptom of a disease. I believe that Trump is, is central to why this disease has gone from a local epidemic to a pandemic in the United States of America. And if there's a defensive Trump to ask then why on the big failures of the Trump administration, the real ones, the ones that, you know, history will record like this war. There's been no pushback from the other side at all. So that tells you, I mean, I, you know, you could say lots of things about Trump are bad. Getting us into a war we can't win in which Americans are dying in Iran that will only diminish America's power and bankrupt us. I mean, that's the only exit really. And make Iran stronger. And like no Chuck Schumer is like, it's bad, but of course he endorses like the whole leadership structure endorses that. So like can't really say like they like Trump now. Yeah. I don't know if they like Trump. I mean, maybe it's like a little bit of a civil war. He's doing what they want. I think it's a little bit of a, well, by the way, I don't disagree that there's an enormous failure of the, of what I call the, the elite oligarch Epstein class of Washington DC. Yes, that are that you and I both know very well. Yes. And that have that are as interested in protecting their, their, their corporate overlords as they are in protecting anything. And I mean, just take like the, the issue of stock trading. Okay. Yeah. My dad in 1972 took a vow that he would never own a stalker bond. And he kept that bow since 1972 in food over 50 years of public life. And he retired from the presidency as having probably the lowest net worth of anyone that ever entered the presidency. And meanwhile, he got tagged with this idea that he, you know, is the Biden crime family and that, you know, all of that crap. But my point being is this, is it, how is it that we have not been able to pass a law? I couldn't agree more. I know you do agree. But how is it possible? And it's not just Republicans that pass a law that prohibits members of Congress. Yes, of course. It's just the most common sense thing in the world and to be in the administration too. It should be anybody with the access to the most valuable insider information of all. And meanwhile, not only are we not passing the law, Donald Trump is selling $100,000 early access to his true social tweets, which is just a front running for insider trading. Literally in the open. And that's what I mean, the quantitative qualitative difference of Donald Trump as compared to anything I've ever experienced in politics before is the sense that the rule of law is is is only applies as a as a weapon rather than as the prophylactic for the constitution to be able to operate in a way in which the founders envisioned it. Everybody knows that bleach is powerful and you know that by the smell and the warnings and the gloves and it makes sense if something can clean a surface may not want to be in the room while it's being cleaned. It's got to be a better way and there is curative of Bay's Cura Clean Home disinfectant. It's a powerful EPA register disinfectant. But here's the interesting part. It's what powers it hypoclorous acid HOCL and that's not some weird mystery chemical you're going to find in your potato chips. It is the most organic of all it's molecule your own white blood cells naturally produces part of your body's immune response. So cura team of Bay stabilizes it from ultra purified water natural sea salt electricity and that's it. So it's a very different thing than dragging on a bottle of bleach every time you need to clean your countertop. You can get the health freedom bundle and that includes home disinfectant food spray skins. Brays sailing nose cleaner for daily nasal hygiene. You can find it like cura team of bay dot com slash Tucker. The 15% Tucker offers automatically applied when you check out again cura team of bay dot com slash Tucker. It's serious cleaning that doesn't make your house feel like a chemical plant. There's almost no arguing with your point. That's true. I would just say I think it's been that way for a long time and this is open now. It's open. It's just obvious if you're selling truth social access. It's like like come on. I saw this guy. There's this incredible guy on TikTok and he's a professor but he goes inside. It's a red cup garage. He's like a and he have you ever seen this? Well, you don't have any of this. He explains things by using red cola solo cups. Yeah, and he has this thing. Everybody go look at it. It's all of the money that every president. In the 45 that came before Donald Trump made in the presidency. Okay, and it's for blue solo cups. Okay, and then all of the money that Donald Trump has openly said that he made in his financial report in the first 500 days of the presidency. And it is over $3 billion and it takes the entire wall. Yeah, just like, and I mean, you can't argue that I mean, President shouldn't make any money in office. Like what is this? No. And by the way, this whole idea of a bunch. And so that's what I mean by the qualitative and the quantitative difference and the idea that that there are still a group of people out there that voted for Donald Trump because they thought that they were going to be able to change things. It talked about this a little bit. And before we came on, but my hero and I know that you are a to as it relates in public life people that is one of them with all of his faults was Teddy Roosevelt. Okay. And Teddy Roosevelt picture them over there. Yeah, great. Great father. Yeah. I got something for you. By the way, but the Teddy Roosevelt. By all accounts came very close to abusing the power of the executive. Oh, you think he certainly did. But he did it because he realized that in order for this experiment to be able to continue, you could not have a unfettered oligarch class that drained all of the wealth. All of the wealth of a country and put it into their pockets. While the other 99. And by the way, and people don't understand this, I'm not talking 1%. I'm talking the point. 0 1%. Yes. There are only nine that like a little over 9,000 families in this country who are billionaires at a 350 million people. You know what the I this is shocking to me. You know what puts you in the top 1% of income earners in this country. No, annual $750,000. That's a top 1% 1%. So the people that I'm talking, I'm not talking about tax and or redistributing wealth among the top 1%. I'm not talking about it even in the top 0.5%, which would be like $10 million. I'm talking about the point 0 1%. Literally about a little under 10,000 individuals in this country that control and that have almost like 40% of the entire wealth of a nation who decide 9,000 families have 40% of the entire world. I think somebody do the numbers for me. I probably screwed that up completely. But in an ordinate amount of the entire considered wealth of this country. Well, you can't have democracy under those circumstances. No, you can. And Teddy Roosevelt knew that. And what he did is he went out and he used the power of the executive to be able to go out and bust the trust and redistribute that wealth. It was called it the square deal. And then he used the power of the executive to do things that are every single one of us to benefits from today, which is for instance the national park system. Yes. The entire national park system was the brainchild of one person as it related to one island, which was Audubon. And he came to Teddy Roosevelt and he said, Hey, look, we're losing a this magnificent place. This island off the in the Gulf off the coast of Florida. And because it has a bird habitat that has I don't know like. Like half the species of wild birds and he comes to Teddy Roosevelt and Teddy Roosevelt just goes out and he says, Okay. And he turns it into an at the first national park, I think. And and then he went out and he did that across the country. I mean, can you imagine doing that today? No, no. And but you can you even imagine the people in not the people Donald Trump having a thought about using the power of the executive to benefit benefit anyone but himself first. No, no, and that's the thing. But I also look back on the last 25 years, 20 years anyway. And I can't really think of many big executive initiatives that like benefited the majority. No, I neither do I and that may be a question about the the unitary executive and and and but no one has ever done it in a way in which the there. You know, where literally I believe that everything that he has done contains not just a you know an underlying current of how does it benefit him personally it is the first thought of everything that he has. Yeah, I think that's true. Yeah. I have with focusing on Trump and I'm trying not to be defensive because obviously I campaigned for Trump and with Trump and spoke at the Republican official convention and defended Trump for a decade on Fox News. So I'm definitely implicated it. Obviously. I think two things one focusing on Trump as the source of all evil in the world drives you crazy. Like I saw that happen. I don't believe that just you know, I don't believe that he is the source of all evil. You know people who feel that way literally I had one of my closest friends winner. Off the. crazy. Like I saw that happen to my I don't believe that just you know, I don't believe that he's the source of all evil. But I mean, you know, people who feel that way, literally I had one of my closest friends when off the deep end. Yeah, just like, Trump and all of a sudden, Trump's under the bed and it's like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, it's Montamania. But I also think it's it's like he was under my bed. Just that is funny. Hey, along with some of his friends. It's so good. Oh, yeah. But second it's like exculpatory to the rest of us. It's like, I don't know. I watched a lot of crappy stuff happen in DC went over the 35 years ago. If there and I didn't even recognize it as crappy at the time. And we're all kind of implicated in this. We've had a lot of bad leaders actually or mediocre leaders. I don't know we've had a flamboyantly corrupt leader like this. And we haven't ever. That's true. We've had a lot of low grade kind of like what's in it for me leadership. And we tolerated it. And we celebrated things that were not impressive at all and pretended they were impressive and whoa, show a brave and all. This is like, it was all crap actually. We're kind of this is the end of like a long cycle of mediocrity. That's all I'm saying. Okay. So I I've owned up. Yep. Okay. To like, for instance, is I I'm absolutely certain that my engagement in Washington DC as you know, when I took on Briezma when my dad was vice president as fine at the end of the year is like it was a stupid thing to do. You know, because I wasn't fully aware of the of what Islam it was and and the narrative that would be able to be spun. It was it was it was a horrible idea. Now I had my reasons. Okay, but they're not good enough. I own that. I own the idea that I do believe that there is this revolving door in Washington DC that needs to be shut in which people come in and out of administrations. We know them all. They're trading on acts and they're not bad people that are trading on access. I did not trade on access. You can look through 22 years of my but I know this. I know that I received incredible privileges that no one else in the world, including to to the point of my pardon. No, literally there's no one else in the world that was in my position that their father happened to have the authority and the power to do it. And I realize how privileged I am. But I think that there is a I think that there needs to be reckoning with if I'm willing to do that. I think that you and I saw the the and I like Thomas Massey. I like where where and uh, Margaret cello Green is going. I like that there are people that have kind of woken up to the but a lot of the reason that we're here is because of of Fox News. A lot of it has to do well, we're in a war right now because of that we're losing the as a Fox News. I couldn't agree more. And so I I just think that I don't think that every problem that this country faces is because of Donald Trump. I don't think that he is the you know the source of all evil. I don't even remotely believe that. I do believe this though. We are at an inflection point in this country. Whether you it's because of the technology that is relates to AI. And as it relates to our debt and the fact that Donald Trump is responsible for what 20% of the entire debt of the entire nation over the course of the you know, since its inception. Yeah, it's the first. Yeah, it bonkers. Yeah. And we are in desperate desperate need of leadership. I agree. And so I am I want I want to reach cross to everybody and say like look, let's figure out what the things that we can agree on. Instead of like pointing at you know, the in constantly. And one of the things that I think that we can agree on is that we are we have the exact wrong with leadership at the exact wrong time. Homeownership has always been at the center of the American dream. It is an actual asset a place people work their entire lives to build a place of stability and security and real value. Right now though, too many homeowners are stuck sweeping credit cards to cover groceries. There's basically a survival tax of 20% interest or more. So why keep handing your money to the banks when you could keep it for your family? Interest is what kills you. Our friends in American financing of a better way, they're helping homeowners use their hard-earned equity and they're supporting Americans looking fulfill the dream of owning a home with mortgage rates currently in the fives. American financing saves its customers an average of $800 a month. That's about 10 grand a year. It's not just a loan. It's a true financial reset. We recommend American financing. They're called America's home for home loans for a reason. So get out of credit card debt. I mean, it is just crazy to borrow money. No judgment, but it's just making any sense to borrow money at that rate. If you want out call 800-685-5696 800-68555696 or visit American financing.net slash Tucker. So I think you're kind of making my point, which is that finger pointing is unhelpful, except when we point fingers at ourselves. That is very helpful, very important to say. That's kind of what I was in our particularly trying to express to you, which is like it gets the rest of us off the hook to point to one guy and be like it's all his fault. It's like actually it's all of our fault, including mine. And I famously advocated for the Iraq war and thought that was the last stupid thing I was ever going to do. It turns out it wasn't. I advocated for all kinds of things that I now regret advocating for. Particularly the things that you said about me is deep regret. No, I do actually, I mean, I mean, I regret in the sense that as someone who has dealt with addiction, not quite as in exciting ways you did, but I've been there for sure. Extend grace to people who were out of their minds. You would think I would do that. I shipped on that more. So I do regret that. But no, what I'm saying is like you look back and like I really thought that I could influence Trump in talking about not going into this war. Yeah, I think that that's a really interesting question. No, I mean, that's that's the core of it right there. Because you said the things that you said about Trump after 2020, which are famously out there. Oh, and I got pissed in a text with a producer and then Fox at a contest and all that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. One wonderful organization you worked for really ridiculous. And so and talk about how you came around in 2024, not as it relates to like you just knee jerk reaction to being opposed to Democrats. But what, what was that? Oh, no, it was a very specific trajectory. I was, I was, this is like such an impossible which guy I think is a bit of a fact. I was in Europe with my kids on the med, the August of 2023, I think. And more or longer got raided. And that was like, that was ridiculous on the documents charge really. And I'm from the city. So like, I know a lot about the documents stuff. And it was like transparently absurd. They're literally sending armed FBI agents into his bathroom like no. And so to me what that said was Trump is actually being persecuted by the unit party. Therefore he is at sincere opponent. And my overriding feelings since I wrote a whole book on this 10 years ago is that the problem in Washington is that on the big questions of the economy and foreign policy, both parties agree, it's the agreement that is the threat, not the disagreement. So I thought that and I thought well, Trump is clear. They're trying to put him in jail on these nonsense charges and they are not. They were nonsense. We'll do nuclear secrets. That's not true. And I was like, so he clearly is there opponent. So I thought, and this is my sin, I can have an effect in my goal literally from that moment up until February 28th was, I don't want to go to North Iran. Because I really saw that as the end of a lot of stuff of the well, the post-war order, which is kind of ridiculous, but compared to what, you know, I'm kind of against the post-war order. On the other hand, I'm not sure what follows will be better. So I was really focused on the surrounding thing. And I knew that both parties report Schumer's totally for it. Lindsey Graham's totally for it. They're all colluding against America to start this regime change where we're with Iran. And I was like, I'm in a single mindedly focusing on this. All I'm going to do with my life is I'm going to, and I knew a lot of people in the least. And I thought, oh man, I can do this. And I realized on February 28th, first of all, I had zero power, okay? But it was mostly vanity. I was like, I have a mission. I could do this. And it was, it was, I overstated my own influence like dramatically in a very embarrassing way. And my own importance. And like, I thought I could do things that like, I had no control over any of this stuff. And I was humiliated correctly. I was humiliated in front of my wife. I was like, we're doing a good thing. And so yeah, I was mad at Trump, but I was also really mad at myself. And so that's, that's the story. And I, I actually am really grateful I went through that. Yeah. Because it puts your own power in context. You think like, you've got all this, you know, whatever, SWAT and you have zero. So what next? I have no idea. But I mean, I mean, really, what for me? Yeah, not not just for you. But what next for all of us? Like, I am, I've been out talking to people and a completely different audiences, you know, cross the board and, and the most significant reason why I've decided to go out and talk is that, what I realize is that my experience is not only not unique. It's almost universal. Now, to the degree that my experience, my addiction, yeah, overwhelm me is sometimes often exaggerated by virtue of how much attention has been paid to it. That, you know, there's two years of my life. Some people noticed. Yeah, some people noticed. Yeah, exactly. God, it was awful. I mean, noticed to the degree that, you know, my wife and I were living in the hills in LA and we had this little place. And I was just early in, in my recovery and Trump from the Oval Office and fight it in these right wing influencers, these maggot influencers online and this is back in 2019. And, and he started the Wears Hunter thing. And the next day, the New York Post printed an aerial photograph of the house that I live in, where you could stand on the street below to be able to look through the, the floor and ceiling windows and a group of men with bull horns and maggot showed up at the door, banging on the door with my then pregnant wife who was home alone, who literally fled the house. They chased her in a car and literally ran her off the road. And that was my experience for like a two year period of time until my dad was elected. And then we got secret service and we, we, we'd left that house because we're in the middle of the night. And a, and the next house we went to, they found us in this documentary filmmaker and ended up being like a, he wrote a whole scripted film. He parked a billboard truck where in LA, in LA, in Venice, I was right on South Venice Boulevard. He parked a, a, one of those digital billboard trucks in front of my house that ran all of the nude pictures of me, smoking crack, actually for a week straight. And then sat on the canal with bull horns in a canoe and just shouted at my house over and over again for week. Then we had to leave that house. Did you know him? Yeah. No, no, God, no. So crazy. You know, I mean, it was not crazy. He was, you know, he then went on to make a, like a whole movie about me. But anyway, my point, did you see that? What? Did you see? No, I didn't. I did not see it. Do not go see that movie. I did not exist. But, you know, my, my point is that I have the total exposure that I've had has given me this incredible gift. And number one is that, by the, that, that transparency is that I don't have any more secrets and the secrets that, that I felt ashamed of. Like just the word crack. Like, you know, I mean, it's, it's so heavy. It, it shocks people. All of the associations that people make out of, particularly of our generation. Yes. And, um, and, uh, to be able to speak about it openly. And what I've found is, is this deep connection with people. There's no wall between me and them anymore. And, uh, because they know all of my flaws. Once you would never want to show anyone. And, and they know I'm willing to talk about them. And in that, they're able to come up to me and say, I mean, everywhere I go, I've got off the plane of the airport. Someone came up to me, told me about their, uh, their experience and recovery. Thanks for what I'm doing. You know, they're, uh, you know, they get their brother just got arrested though. It's in jail. You know, that you got to do something about the fentanyl deaths here. It's it, everybody. And it's been an incredibly beautiful, beautiful experience. And I said to everybody is that I'll talk about the politics. But it's really the bait to be able to talk about the thing that connects us. And so, all the way back, sitting down with Candace, is that the thing that Candace and I were able to connect on in a very human way was her own experience, not personally, but with her family and, and addiction and the people that she loved. And I don't know anyone that hasn't been impacted by it. That's for sure. Yeah. And what I guess what my point is, is that by starting there for me, I feel like, like our connection has released to it. I'm known you've been sober for, for over well over 20 years now. 24 years this month, 24 years this month. And, um, and, and so you're, um, uh, your capacity to be able to understand it at that level and also at a family level is makes it a lot easier to like, you know, see the, see the hunter that you thought that you knew. And I think, and by the way, I'm not putting words into your mouth. No, I think that's, that's 100% true. But the thing for me is that with, with, with you, I, the transformation, not transformation because it's not a transformation. Anybody that knows you realize this is not a transformation is out on your own now and not understandably like anybody that has a job being beholden to corporate structure. Yeah. Fox news is that I, I feel as if that combined with the incredible ultimate betrayal and I want to mean by betrayal of the, of the promise, the singular promise that was important to you as it related to Trump. Yes. That we would not get into the potential of ending up in a war, a war war three or another incredibly devastating, protracted war in that region that would expand clearly with the entire global oil supply in jeopardy. So it's so crazy. I cannot even believe it happened is that it has given an opening for us to be able to have a, a, a conversation that is more constructive about a way forward. That's my feeling. I strongly agree with that. You know, one thing that might be, you feel a little better about your life is buying life insurance because life ends. And the last thing you want is to leave the ones you love hanging. There's nothing worse than that. If you're providing for a spouse or children or parents, it makes a lot of sense. In fact, it's your obligation to think about what would happen if you left. Well, life insurance for our partners at ethos is a very easy way to solve that nagging problem. Ethos makes the process super fast and simple. It's a hundred percent online. You get a quote in seconds. You apply in minutes. And in some cases, you get coverage the very same day. There is no medical exam. This answer a few simple health questions, nothing too invasive. You can get up to three million dollars in coverage. Some policies started as low as 30 bucks a month. Ethos also has a 4.8 out of five star rating on trust pilot over 4000 reviews. That is pretty good. So for 10 minutes investment, you can figure out if ethos is the right plan for you. You get a free quote today at ethos.com slash Tucker ethos. Ths.com slash Tucker application times and rates obviously very, but we think they're pretty darn good. And always my, I mean, I've certainly talked about you and all the drama you went through a lot. I have really only one question, one thing that has bothered me for years now. He years or whatever six years, whatever it's been. And so I just want to ask you directly about it. So the laptop comes out or doesn't come out. I hear that it's in circulation. I get calls from people in that kind of shadowy way that you're from where you're from right. I can't, you know, I can't remember. Yeah. So much drama has happened. But you know, if you're in the news business or politics like you, you know, people call you, there's this thing and you hear everything all the time and like how much is true? You don't know. I heard about the laptop. And then I heard, unless you don't know if it's real. And then I heard somebody calls me, goes, you're on the laptop. And because you would written a letter of recommendation for college for my son. Yeah. Who didn't end up going to the school or even getting whatever it didn't help. It turns out. Thanks. But anyway, I knew that it was real because who would know that we knew each other? Right? No one could fake that. And there are wise friends and all stuff. So but it's Washington. Everybody there. So then I hear this story about how then the official story comes out about how the laptop was left. You left a couple of laptops in the laptop repair store in Greenville, Delaware, which I'm a town I'm very familiar with. So and the guy was blind. Then I interview the guy who seemed to totally believe the story, John Macguys it. I mean, he seemed to be telling the truth. But the story did not make sense. Meanwhile, I'm getting, we get approached by Israelis connected to Benjamin Netanyahu. Like I know that. Yeah. Who are shopping this stuff to me at Fox News. Yeah. And I'm like, I don't think that that part of the story. The laptop is real. I thought that from day one. But the way that it entered the bloodstream, exactly American media was not real. So I just want to ask you point blank, did you drop off? No. And this is the thing that I've said over and over again. I have literally zero recollection and memory of ever dropping off a laptop at Jump Alma Gysic. No, the answer is no. And jump on the guy. So John Paul Macguysic, who's legally blind. Yeah. So on the day when the laptop became public sat in outside of a shopping game interview. And flat out says that he doesn't remember seeing me. He couldn't identify me. And also that his security cameras that he has don't have any footage from that time. And so regardless though, regardless of anything, just this, the laptop, according to the lead partners under oath in his testimony before the House Oversight Committee was being sought by Rudy Giuliani in Ukraine in all the way back in 2018. And so Rudy Giuliani is working with a guy named Andre Derkatch, who was an MP in Ukraine in a known Russian GRU agent. So Rudy goes over there and basically takes his dossier and receives information that Hunter Biden's hard drive, not laptop is for sale. And the person that they can go to is this Ukrainian Russian oligarch who is living in Austria. That's what lead partners in either of ruin we're doing getting on the plane before they were arrested. So how did this before jump on Macguysic was ever a twinkle in anybody's eye? I believe that. The story that was always the weak part of the story like he drops off of a tough person. Even John Paul Macguysic, okay, from there is no such thing as a laptop. The laptop that he turned and eventually turns over year later, 18 months later to the FBI. The thing that he that is distributed and disseminated that John Paul Macguysic claims that he got off of a device was a hard drive. And that hard drive had a limited amount of information. A limited amount of like gigabytes. I don't know the difference between a gigabyte and whatever. And that goes into the hands. He somehow can't find anybody. You can't throw a stone in trolley square without hitting someone that knows me personally. Right. And he knows that. He's living there his whole life. Instead, what he finds through this guy, Apple bomb and is Rudy Giuliani's lawyer, Bob Costello, who turns over this hard drive. The hard drive becomes the platform from which all of the other stolen information from, which by the way, every single forensic expert has made it clear is that there's no possible all of the information that was eventually labeled as my laptop came from one laptop. It's way too large. Came off the cloud. Exactly. They hacked my cloud. I've read about this in this book. So on sub stack, I'm laying all of this out. And there's a whole, you know, the NDI, the whole thing about there's these different silos. There's the Netanyahu silo that is really side. There is a Russian Ukrainian side of it. And then there are the US actors that include Steve Bannon, Rudy Giuliani, Miles Gao, and a whole bunch of, you know, led harness and Igor Fruman and all of these. Well, once the material starts circulating, the data from the cloud, you know, all kinds of people get involved and they're shopping in for different reasons. And I agree. Yes. And so if, but my point is, who stole it? Well, from the cloud. Yeah. Well, I don't know. You have as good a guess as mine in terms of actually who was the original hacker of that information, who has the capacity to be able to do it. And so, you know, I have evidence. I don't have a forensic, a digital forensic evidence that it was hacked by this person or this entity or this organization that it was Mossad or that it was the GRU or that it was, or that it was some kid and his basement in, it figured it out. But here's the point. Overall, here's the thing is I get caught in these conversations about all of this. But the reality is this of what was distributed that was authentic, it's all mine. All those emails. Yeah. Yeah. I got it. And you know what? You know what? Not a single one of them proves of any criminality of my father whatsoever of any way in which I ever sent an email saying, hey, dad, I need you to get this done on behalf of a client of mine. Now, I think that's dispositive and I challenge anybody because it's all out there, the entire digital foreboding. And I'm not just talking about my emails. I'm talking about or 20 years of emails. I'm talking about 20 years of text messages. I'm talking about a raised voicemails, like deleted voicemails, deleted photograph. They don't actually delete, what you're saying. They clearly don't. I mean, voicemails from my dad to me. And but that's not the only voicemail that was out there. But not a single one of them in which I say, hey, when my dad is in office or in power as vice president or president in which I say, hey, dad, I need you to do this for me or or even contacting one of his staffers. So either I'm incredibly incredibly incredibly good. You know, in active addiction is a crack addict or it doesn't exist. It truly literally doesn't exist. The entire narrative of the Biden crime family. I mean, I literally unlike anybody else is like, I say to everybody, okay, show me your phone because I'll show you mine and you didn't find a goddamn thing. Now, one thing, every investigative body in the United States of America has investigated me for over 10 years at that point and not one single thing of criminal activity other than use of drugs and all of the things that are associated with addiction is proved by the laptop. So as the world getting more stable or less stable, that's a rhetorical question. We're not in charge of the world, but you are in charge of in fact responsible for your own family and your savings. The dollars lost nearly a third of its purchasing power in six years. That's crazy. You know, it hasn't gold. That's one reason you should think about gold right now. It's about 25% below it's high from earlier this year, which is amazing. Gold relative to its power and endurance is pretty cheap right now. Central banks reducing their reliance on treasuries and increasing their holdings of yes, gold. Ray Daliow, founder of the world's largest hedge fund in a friend of ours recommends holding up to 15% of your portfolio in gold. We started battalion metals to give Americans an honest fair priced way to buy metals, battalion metals dot com slash tuckers the place to go to learn more about buying metals, sold in silver precious metals, IRAs secure storage, all of it, battalion metals dot com slash tucker. When did you find out that the contents of your digital life for in circulation? That day that New York Post released it. You had no idea. No idea. None. What were you doing that day? How did you find out? So it was like two weeks before the election, right? October. So up until the day you had no clue because you know I had the manual. None. No clue. Zero. Zero. I'm sorry. I stepped on your answers. What were you doing that day when you found out? I was with Melissa and Bo was let's see about six months old and a friend of ours, we were in LA and a friend of ours said, hey, come out to Palm Springs. I got an Airbnb on like a golf course there and it's really cool. You guys never been out there and it's like we're in the home stretch now. It's like, you know, I have survived the, I mean, because being before the laptop, remember, I mean, they were beating the shit out of me. That's when Donald Trump was doing the where's kind of thing. I didn't have any, you know, security like I don't have today, but I didn't have them is, you know, it was just me and Melissa and a baby. And with any time we went outside the house is like people would follow us everywhere and not just to follow us but to harass us. And because Donald Trump was going to his rallies and his big line was and they were selling shirts where's Hunter. So everybody felt it was incumbent upon them if they supported Trump and Magga to find Hunter, you know, to go and find where. big line was and they were selling shirts where's Hunter so everybody felt it was incumbent upon them if they supported trump and magga to find hunter. You know to go and find where's on it. And so we drive out to pump springs and. We get there and we unpack. You know put my bag in the room and there's like a little plunge pool out of the back of this little house. And I get a call and it's a friend of mine who was also my lawyer at the time and he said some guy saying that new puts in somebody has your laptop. And you know it took me years to piece it all together. And so one of the things that I've done over the course of the last seven years other than paint which became literally the I'm always painted but literally the thing that saved my life. And it just allowed me to focus and occupy my hands in a productive way in which I felt that I was. creating and also allowed me to get out of myself and not be consumed by the by the shame and of of my addiction and all the failings that I perceived in myself at that moment in time which you know in early addiction and not just through your own experience but through the experience of watching others is a really tenuous time. And I've done a lot of writing and and it took me a long time to figure this out like what happened how did this and who was involved and there's all of these names and there's like a you know a list of twenty Russian names and twenty you know I mean all of this stuff. And and so I decided on sub stack what I could do is I can basically do the first draft of that and get the audience potentially to participate in it give me more information. So I'm doing that on sub stack now and the thing about it is this is that it was a complete and utter surprise to me I had like we had I that I was. You know a little over a year into my my recovery I kind of made it through the that like what I thought that was the worst of it and then we were just literally thrown in the middle of it. And the worst thing happened was is that because they were new pictures. And this is the only reason the Twitter took them down in Facebook to them is they violated their own internal rules as relates to revenge porn you're not allowed to. And so I'm not allowed to publish new photograph of anyone without their consent no matter what for whatever reason. And so that's why on the front page of the New York Post in the story associated in the digital with all of the links were like a ton of new photos with me of me I'm just barely blurred out of the women that were in it all. legal all the those things would of course they don't make that point. And and that's why they took it down but then that became the story. You know the suppression in this idea that 40 former intelligence officer said it all it had all the home home marks of a Russian disinformation claim pin no one in that 40 regardless of what you think of them. But I know you don't but no one in that 40 ever said that the laptop wasn't real. But that's what everybody on the right decided to say that first of all yeah you know the intel people are the most dishonest people and also by the way I'm not going to argue I'm be having anybody all I know is that's just stick to me. But I'm just saying like the point of that statement was to suggest that the contents were not real. Well you may think that but it's it definitely did not say that and all I know is this when it was it became completely out of my control. So therefore now I was not arguing about what was on it remember what Rudy doing on he did he went to the the literally the courthouse steps in Newcastle County. Yeah with Bernie karaoke and he held a laptop which there's no existing laptop he had taken a hard driver thumbdriver and put it and pretend it like there was a laptop and the one thing he said was this contains images of minor children. Bullshit I mean an absolute complete and utter effing lie. And that's what he did because you know what it didn't have on it it had no evidence and they had it for over a year at this point. It had no evidence of anything other than I was a drug user but the problem was and not only drug user crack that addict. and the problem was is that I had gone about nine months before and I had done an interview with the New Yorker. And I admitted everything as it relates to my addiction is probably one of the smartest decisions I made not in conjunction with anybody but literally me and Melissa sitting there and I said I'm going to I'm going to tell this guy everything. I have to get it off my chest I can't have this hanging out there as as we my dad moves through a presidential campaign and let the chips forward they may. and it totally scooped them and and so what they had to do is create another narrative around it that is evidence of corruption so when anybody says Hunter Biden what's your first thought laptop. Can I just say one thing though that this is what I experienced during that time. The allegation that there was abusive minors. Yeah on the laptop that came from the Israelis I'm just telling you that they came to me with that so I know that. And one of the things that enraged me about the statement from those sleazy Intel guys is that they blame the Russians for now maybe the Russians had a hand in it but it was these Rayleys who are pushing that fact fact. I mean literally to me yeah so and you've gone through it but there are also anything that just I'm going to clear with with your entire like you know. Not a single thing in my anything that is in any way true about that. Well that's such a serious crime that I think it's just common sense that if there was evidence of that you think that it's common sense. But tell you what about about 40 million people on on on X don't think that you know I mean it's like there was an abusive minors in there if there was evidence. You know how many people call me pedophile to this day anyway. I'll I'll spare you but I'm not and what I but I agree with you that's exactly right and you know it's um. But they were pushing that so hard and all day. I'll go with Russia it's like you lie you lie because they called me I sent one of my producers out to go meet with. One of the guy with collectison that Yahoo they were they were behind that and I felt that everybody in DC knew that. But there was so much pressure never to criticize Israel in any way that they were just like it's the Russians the Russians they're the ones penetrating our political system it's like you lie. Everyone knows what's actually happening that this was my perspective and it drove me insane. By the way I didn't say that on Fox News all admit it I didn't yeah I didn't you're right I just want to say I'm was part of the problem also but I knew it. But that's a thing the Tucker yeah great is it I so so we're here now yeah no I'm saying what what what what I'm saying but we're here now yeah. And that's one of the reasons why just an appeal selfish basis for me. Is it like I don't know how you could possibly have thought that of me and by not saying it I thought that you thought that of me I mean it's like it's like I am it it is that the job the most station thing or whatever yeah all the stuff they were seeing or any of it you know I mean like the the well people addicted to drugs especially cocaine I know for a fact. Get pretty dark that's just a fact they do they do they definitely do in it oh yeah and the cocaine by the way it's all there. I guess I can't you can watch it all I guess I don't you can see that I told you that you can see that I told you that you're not the only person I've seen this exactly but there's a big difference up here sex yeah there's a big difference between that and in the reality of what's out there which is the worst thing that you can possibly say about any and that's my point my point is is that. I thought I was over I was in my spring so there for about three hours was the first time that Melissa and I gone away because remember you're still not kind of COVID period and people and so. we're we're out there and I get this column and it just like your whole world kind of like you know you just like this kind of void opens up it's just like think that you're about to get sucked into it because what's the worst thing that you could ever say about someone in my opinion is that is that is the reality that you're and that's what Rudy Giuliani was saying. and you ever close to going back on drugs during this period no no and because I knew this is that I don't want to give people the impression that it's not available to them that that but it was a miracle the miracle of my life at that moment despite that despite all of these. consequences like like just not not I mean landing like nuclear bombs in my life. Is that I was in a better place and continue to be in a better place and I've ever been in my life. I would think you know I've been stripped to the bone there's nothing there is no there was no facade like you have to the entirety of my ego. Was was destroyed like all of those things that you protect it out of fear what you don't realize that they're out of fear but almost all of them are out of fear it's like what you talking about. the vanity yeah I believe that you could change the course of the of this administration of history of being there and that you could overlook all of the things that you know of him in order to save the world like. that's a beautiful thing to hear someone admit to be being that introspective to be able to do that in the same way I was so. I'm a masculine that I had to make a decision to live or die and in the living I had to live in that in that that a masculation that. completely stripping of ego and and it didn't it wasn't instant and it wasn't like I. woke up the next morning and didn't think like the sun would ever come up which I kind of felt yeah but then but we woke up. You know and those little nine month older six months old at the time and I look at this amazingly magnificent woman that has saved me that is lying there. and and I thought you know what I have to choose to live like like like I I want this life. I want this love. I don't want to be afraid I'm going to choose to live and I would and then just became a matter of. moment by moment having to make that. your wife and get sober. It's crazy story and I read a wrote about it and I like I said if any of my children came to me and and. and told me this story I would probably have them committed. but it was truly love it for a site yeah a long story that what that I've written about but. And I was in active addiction and staying in a hotel and where the petite dermatologist in West Hollywood at the time. I know, well. I know. I was at the pool. I kicked out the next day, but on the roof. On the roof. And these two people sat down next to me where I was alone, because reading the book. And they struck up a conversation as the pool kind of filled up during the day. And at one point they turned into the... No, never met them before. I said, you have to meet our friend Melissa. And I said, sure, sure. And I had no intention of meeting anyone. I'd gone to LA basically to choose the cowards way out of suicide, which was I knew that the drugs in the drinking would eventually take me. And I had broken all contact with anyone that cared for me or loved me. And they called every day. And I just didn't answer. Now, and I'm sitting there and it was an incredibly incredibly dark moment in my life and the darkest. And for some reason, I did the same. I said, yeah, yeah, just give me your number. I'll call because they insist. They insist that I call this woman. And I said, I can remember any number. If you tell me a number, I can remember it. And of course I can't remember. But it was my way of getting out of the situation. And I had left my book there. So like two hours later, I came back to pick up my book, got on the chaise lines and I looked at it. And the woman said, what's the number? And she said, I knew you were lying. And she had a pen in her hand. And she wrote it on my hand. And that night was taking the shower. And I think I could, the difference between nine o'clock at night and two thirty in the morning, I mean, I literally was staying up ten days at a time. I mean, it was awful. And I'm about to wash this off my hand. And I think I should probably really call this woman. So I texted that number. And I said, hey, your friends gave me your number. We'd like to get a drink in two thirty in the morning. And the response I got back was the paraphrasing. But it was like, who the F is this? And it's two thirty in the morning. No. And for some reason, I in the morning, I felt like I was in the morning. Like that was really, that's rude to do to a woman. Like it's not just like funny like you made a mistake or like that you, like that was really rude. And I don't know where that it came from in me. The feeling that I needed to apologize and say I would, I would like to by lunch, I didn't realize the time. And she had no idea who I was. I mean none. And except for her friends met this guy at a pool. And so she says that they said you really need to go meet him. And she said she'd be over for lunch and then it was one o'clock and then it was two o'clock and then it was, you know, she'd be there in half an hour and then it was four o'clock and then six. And finally, sometimes we're thinking about this. What? Did you know that? Did you know that? Did you know that? Yeah. And that's it. Nothing. Not a picture, not anything. And I walk up and now I'm over at the sunset marquee, which is up the hill because every hotel I would say I didn't want to do anything wrong. It was just like the cast of characters that would be in and out of my room. They decided that, you know, in the morning, we don't have another, we don't have a bill. The hotel looks empty to me. Well, so I had moved to over to the southern hotel. And this when I stole a little bit of money to be able to pay hotel bills and I wasn't in the, you know, the super eight. I walk up and there's this outdoor seating area and I see this woman and she was wearing a denim shirt to take this and I walk up to the table and I know this sounds melodramatic and like I'm making it up. But I looked in her eyes and I saw eyes that saw me and I said, I know that this is was crazy, but I'm in love with you. That's the first thing you said to a woman you never met before, the first thing. And again, I know it's crazy. And the crazy part is the miracle of it is that she didn't run. She saw through me. I mean, she saw it not through me. She saw me. And within three hours, I had told her everything that I had not told the people that tried to love me back into existence for the previous two years. She literally was and I said, you've had two hours in. I said, I have a, I'm addicted to crack cocaine. Like I'm, I'm, I'm killing myself. She said that ends today. And it didn't end that day. It ended that crack ended within a week and then the alcohol and yeah, and the alcohol ended within within like 20 days at tapering. And June, I count June 1st as my sobriety date. And you know, from that moment, I said that to her. We were married 10 days later. That's one of the craziest stories I've ever heard of my life. And it remains a miracle. You know my daughters and there's nothing that I love more in the world than them. And the, and they spent, I always say the greatest sin of my addiction was my absence from my children. As you know, the one thing about my dad always taught me about is that they're being available is, and, and during a time in their life when they love their uncle, they love their uncle, bow as much as I loved them. And he was like a second father to them. And then his, and after bow died and then they, they lost me for a period of time. And there's an enormous trauma in that. And my point about talking about the girls is that like, I don't like my father, my dad family, my sister, my uncle, my aunt, my Aunt Valerie, my mom, they all tried to save me. I mean, I have the most incredible family in the world, but it took a stranger to see the love left in me. And, and I don't know why, but it was it to me, and I love to think of it this way, by the way, that it was a miracle, that there was something divine about it. And I'm, I'm a firm believer in that, in that faith that sometimes the things that we cannot explain are God acting in our life in a way in which it might as well, it, it tried to get to us in every other way possible. And then finally they have to smack you over the head. Yes, with a hammer. I believe that so strongly. That is true. And for me, that is the truth about all of this is that I think that I've been given a gift, and the gift of my addiction that brought me to that point where it could totally break me, not for me to go out in a grand eyes myself in a way in which I tell a different story than what actually happened, but to tell the actual story. That's why I hate talking about the, you know, the laptop or this or the, you know, defending myself. But the story that I get to tell is that there are such, there is such a thing as redemption. And that's not the outward redemption. This is not like some, I mean, this is the inward that you can find the person that is worthy of love in yourself. All of the things, and all of the mistakes that I made in my life. And when I don't mean, you know, all of the narrative that has been out there, but the mistakes that I've made in my life in terms of relationships, in terms of, you know, has all been based in fear, fear not being enough, fear not, fear of not living up to some expectation, fear of being found out, fear of being embarrassed. And I mean, everything from as something as trivial as like, you know, fear of, you know, asking the girl to dance. Yeah. You know, and I drank over that and I used over that or fear of, you know, having to come to terms with the trauma of losing my mother and my sister or facing it in any way, or a fear of being found out that I, you know, like that I'm not really as good as I think that I am, that I am that person that people, you know, want to view as the privileged fails and that's never done anything with this life. And all of that fear as evaporating is not without fear. I still, but in a very different way. And there's no way that I could have gotten here without having gone through that. And that's the promise of, of at least not picking up a drink or a drug today, is that maybe I can get there or say to somebody, I was talking before, I don't think that there's anything that has more guidance in my life than the serenity prayer is being able to really truly understand the things that you can change as compared to the things that you have no control over. And that's not about feeling powerless. But for instance, what it made me think of is what you just said. Yeah, I know. I agree completely. And you, you had the vanity to think that you can change certain, like you're in charge of the world now, you're God. Yeah. And no, you're not. Yeah. And there's that incredible, and I don't know if it's a popular, if it's true, that quote from Mother Teresa and what she says, if you want to change the world, go home and love your family. Exactly. And loving my family, what I also realize is my family is much larger than my, my immediate blood. And beyond just my first circle of friends, my family is a group of people that are still sick and suffering that are literally the step out that door that are, that are, that feel that there is no hope and no way out for them and that they are caught in the cycle of degradation and demoralization and violence because of the drug or the alcohol, which is the worst in my opinion, worst drug that there is. I'll call it. I'll call it. Yeah. I agree with that. Yeah. And, and, but it starts, you know, in the immediate, and then hopefully it radiates out. If it's done with sincere, you're not the intensity and, and you're not living a, a double life, you know, for whatever reason, you're not working on behalf of a corporate chill. You're not working on, I'm not, I'm not pursuing a goal of which, you know, I'm a consultant in Washington, D.C. And I, you know, you know, I mean, like what, what, what, it was all bullshit. What was I adding to the conversation? What was I adding to the, to the, to the discourse? What, what purpose was, you know, any of that at the time? And I do it anymore. And that's why I'm an artist and that's why I write and that's why I'm speaking out. And that's why I, I, I work with an organization called Peak Path Health, which is a great rehab in, in L.A. but I'm helping set up a foundation for them for aftercare. I work with an organization called Boston Universal, which does homeless prevention and, and tenants rights advocacy in, in L.A. And that's not to say, oh, I'm such a good guy. I mean, because I get paid and, and I enjoy the work and I think that they're really good people. And I, and I'm ready to sub stack because I, I hope to get paid. I hope people go read it so that I can make a living, you know, I was telling you before my, you know, I really believe in cryptocurrency. I really believe in those things. I want to do something in that space and, you know, not because of any other thing. Then I believe in it. But you know what? I also want to make some money. Yeah. And that's my life now. I get to say that and say, but this is me. I'm not running for anything. You gave me a platform. I'm going to use it. And not only am I going to use it to benefit myself and my family, but hopefully benefit people along the way. And I would ask the same with you, which I think right now, and not this is like who might ask is that I think that we have such an opportunity to find common ground to do this a different way. You are, if not the most, in my estimation, the most talented communicator of your generation. And whatever anybody has to say about you is that there is no doubt is that you are a incredibly effective communicator as is Kansas, by the way. Yes. And I think that you have an opportunity to, and this isn't like, you know, train all, you know, ammunition on the administrative, I'm saying the opportunity to find that common purpose. You wonder if it's if it's in the without the vanity of it. And I mean, no, no, I strongly agree. I mean, we're here for a reason. And once you're past, once you get out of debt, it's like what's the point of accumulating money? I really feel that's exactly the way I feel. Just get me out of the debt. And that's the other thing. People don't like, oh, you know, you like, I mean, millions of dollars that I owe, you know, law firms and others. And yeah, anyway, so yeah, you know about that. I wonder if like there, nothing you have said, you grew up in a very famous political family. I know you grew up in Delaware, but your world revolved from Washington. You went to school there. You live there with the college city. Yeah. Yeah, went to college there. You know, the political stability. Well, you've said nothing about it basically. You haven't suggested a political solution to any of this. I don't think that's an accident because I think there probably isn't a immediate, I mean, you can make things better in the margins. But like the problems that people face are mostly not political problems. Right. So I think that we overstate the importance of like voting for this or that guy. I mean, to me, that's the lesson of Trump. Like I campaign for the guy. There are things about him. I still like, I don't think he's like, you know, he's complicated. Like everybody is complicated. But it didn't work. It didn't work. It didn't matter that you voted for me. You got the same thing that you're going to get if you voted for. I'm a Harris. Like that's my perspective on it. And so what does that tell you? It tells you that you're putting your faith in the wrong thing, which is in a political system, whereas there's got to be a real solution that begins with changing people's hearts. That's what I think. Exactly. Exactly. Because it comes from us. We're trying to find the... inching people's hearts. That's what I think. Exactly. Exactly. Because it comes from us. We're trying to find the problem out there. Exactly. And it's here. We're the problem. Yes. Right. No, I just covered that about myself. And so all the people out there that have such a problem with me sitting down with you or sitting down with Candace and like what the, and like, I'm not hard enough on you. you got to apologize for this. And you got to do this. It's like, you know what? F them. Here's my, here's my point. It starts with us. Like, I'm not going to ever change. Like, like, I can get into the whole debate about the Democratic Party and whether you're not going to label something in Democratic Social or is this, you know what I think? I like people who believe in what they have a conviction. Yeah. And they, and they're honest about it. Like total. So I don't agree with everything that, uh, as long as I'm on Donnie's us, but you know what? He has conviction. He has confidence and, you know, like, I mean, he balanced the budget. Primers at record low in New York right now. And regardless of what you think about him is that like, so from a political perspective, I don't care if it's as long as I'm Donnie or Thomas Massey. And I don't agree with 90% of the stuff that that in turn, what I think I don't, but I don't think that matters in this moment in time. I don't think any of those labels matter in time. I want someone with the courage of the conviction principles that is, uh, uh, but it's all starts here. All starts here. And everybody else can nitpick around whether, you know, all of the labels that we applied to each other and, and all of the vitriol and there has to be like, I think there needs to be, uh, you know, accountability for the people that are literally robbing us, uh, F in blind that I think that will be accountability for that. I think that that, but my point is is in this moment, can we not all see that we are about to, uh, uh, reach a point in, in the evolution of, of humanity that is, uh, will be a larger step than in the, in the entirety of the existence of this earth. Right. And like, so what is all of a matter? If you have people that drive me crazy like Elon Musk and every other person that has a, um, a hand in, which is a handful of them and what's happening with AI right now, telling us in, in, easily within the next five years, if they haven't already done it, that we're going to reach AGI. And if we reach AGI, then we're not more than a, a, maximum of another five years, more likely two or three away from super intelligence. And once that happens, we literally have taken a step in the evolution of, of humanity and, of, of humankind and the largest singular step that will ever be taken in our, the exponential way in which things will advance from there is completely outside of our control. And the only thing that we can hope for is that we have leaders that are, that have humanity's best interest in mind. And I don't know. I think one, I'd say, I don't know. I do know. I think we have the exact wrong leadership. I am totally agree. So I've seen it. Do you know anybody in your life who you talk to who's like very excited about AI? Because I don't. I don't really know anyone who's really for this. Who wears the constituency for this? It seems like the population doesn't want it at all. Yeah. I don't know why anyone would want the, um, uh, want it in the way that it's being offered to us. Look, the, what the thing I say is this, it's not theirs. What they're building is off the back of the output of, of all of humanity. I agree. It's ours. It belongs to me. It belongs to me just as much as it belongs to a Sam Bushman in the Kalhari. It belongs to us from the moment that there was a cave painting that was put into a digital database and the, and in a context to the poetry of Shakespeare to the book that you wrote to, um, you know, to my last podcast, take it transcript. That is what is AI. It's all of ours. Every scientific discovery, every single public dollar, all of it is, we own it. And we somehow are going to make like five or six individuals in this country, trillionaires, by allowing them to literally rob us of that and make it theirs and them decide, like, do you trust Sam Ollman to be the, to decide the fate of humanity or, um, or any of them for that. I've done, you know, thousands of interviews over 35 years and I've never had the feeling of wanting to run out of a room more strongly than I had when I talked to Sam Ollman. So he's, he's out of 350 million Americans. He's probably 350 millionth of who I'd trust. Yet to control the future of humanity. Yet yet here we are. Right. Yeah. Here we are. And, and, and, and you know what we're doing is I'm supposed to hate Tucker Carlson because he's an anti semi and he's this, I know you're not, you're not an incisomite. I mean 100% know you're not an incisomite. No. No. That's what my point being is that that would just say so. My point being is, is that like, if it's anti semitic to point out that BB net in Yahoo is evil incarnating, then you know what? I don't know what to say to, I don't know what to say to people anymore. I mean, all you have to do is just open your eyes. This literally opened your eyes, opened your heart for one minute. Yeah. Then realize, you know, I, such an obvious lie. It's like who's even intimidated by that. My point is, is like, how is it possible that they're dividing us on things like that? Right. Great. And I can tell you you how it's possible. It's the distraction that is being created by a handful of individuals and the people that work for them to keep us divided through our algorithm. And as much as you're not addicted to your phone because you're not on social media and things like that, the vast, vast, vast majority of us are myself included is everyone who has a pocket full of heroin and they access it literally a thousand times a day. You're saying you got off crack and more impressively alcohol? Yeah. No, I'm not, I'm not that bad. All I'm saying out of your phone. No, no, I am, I'm very, I'm not nearly, I'm, I'm very wary of it. I'm very wary of anything like that. But what I'm trying to say to people is that I'm no better than anybody else. I look at my phone just as, you know, as much as anybody else. I don't feel that it is necessarily a problem. But what I do find is like, for instance, is that you gravitate towards the negative things people say about you. Yes. Way more than you ever graduated to the, to the beautiful things that I feel say about that. That is so true. So I'm on X. And the amazing thing was is that I go on X and I start talking about addiction. But I also start talking about, you know, the absurdity of the moment that we live in and some of the players that are, that are outside characters in this, in this morality tale we're living through. And there's these beautiful messages from people about their own struggle and their own addiction. And you're my sister, I showed my sister what you wrote about X, Y, or Z. And you know, she said a gaver to the strength to make it through one more day. And these beautiful things where people would say, Hey, I'm a three time Trump voter, but I just want to say keep on keeping on brother. Like, I love you for your, you know, for your recovery. It gives me hope. And there's thousands of those messages. But you know what happens is that, you know, the one that catches your eye, the one that says, you know, your, you shut up, you know, you crack head pedophile, you know, you're, you know, criminal and you stole from it. Like it's like, and it was a great lesson for me in the experience that everyone is having, not just on X, but across the board in which we're all being and it's, and it's purposeful. The thing that I never fully believed and until I've read all this whistleblower is how intentional it is. And as long as we're looking at each other, as long as we're trying to find all of the things that are wrong with our life in the other. And by the way, whether it's the other that's the immigrant or whether it's the other that's our neighbor is we're not looking at ourselves. And we're not focused on the things that really matter. And one of the things that really matters is we better wake up, wake up to the way in which we're being led by the nose and have to believe that we all hate each other. And it's making us worse. I mean, there's just one of my favorite scenes in the Gospel of Luke is, you know, that the parable to geostorate Jesus tells about the two men who go to pray, the temple, and ones the Pharisee and ones the tax collector and the Pharisee looks over and says, God, thank you for not making me that guy because he is a pig. He's a center unlike, you know, righteous good person with me. And the tax collector who knows he's a center because he's a thief and he knows he's a thief and everyone knows he's a thief doesn't even look up. He can't even look at God and just says, have mercy on me. And Jesus says, who is justified before God? It's not the man who turns to the guy next to him and says, I'm better than you. It's the man who knows it. He's not better than anybody. That's the man who's justified before God. And I just feel like all of life is that story. When you stop looking at other people and being like, you suck and look inside and realize that I suck, that's where wisdom and peace come from. There's a scene in the Gnostic Ospols and I forget what you actually forget, I forget, X of Philip or something anyway. You know, every word of the Gnostic Ospols and really what we got to, the whole of trove of Gospels. I mean, a lot of people would say that it's heresy. But it's the Emperor, you know, when Constantine unified the church under and declared Catholicism, the Christianity, the state religion overall. The state religion of Rome, they basically effectively chose four Gospels and banned all the other ones. And they found in, I forget the in harmony and harmony, these 2000 year old texts, which were the other Gospels written by Mary Magdalene and written by Philip and written by, and anyway, there's part of one, is this, Jesus is speaking to the disciples and this is before, and he says, learn to suffer as I do. And that is everything that all wisdom comes through suffering. That is true. And in that suffering, you're able to love. In that suffering, you're able to see the other. It's the exact, exactly what you were saying in Luke. Is that is being able to not being the person's casting judgment? Rather. And by the way, it doesn't mean that you are without discretion. It means is that as much as I'm not going to in, what is the idea of like my empathy overwhelms my my critical thinking. Yes. Is not that, I'm not talking about that. I'm talking about, however, is if I can feel this strongly about what they're doing to kids and detention centers in the United States of America. I can also feel, just as strongly about, have as much empathy for for someone who feels like they have been completely left out and without any options that are living in Bethel Main that feels that every, that this country has completely let them down. And it's looking for a hope, something, an object for their anger. I want to bring them into the fold. You know, I want to be able to talk to them. Those people that I think voted out of anger and that are still looking for, you know, someone to be their retribution for people who are dependent on alcohol, which is a lot of people. I think you're absolutely right to say it's the scariest of all drugs because it's the most insidious. It's just, you pick with everywhere. How do you get off it? Exactly. You said you got off crack in three days or something like that. Yeah. But that's the thing. Is it how do you get off alcohol? Yeah. Alcohol is the, and I mean this in this sense and people push back on me, but I, I, alcohol is the most destructive that there is, not just by virtue of the fact that it is as ubiquitous as this, it is in physiologically impact your body. It impacts every organ, every major organ and in particular, every major pleasure center of your brain. It's the only drug other than business diasapam's that you can die from what you're off from. Because everybody always, you know, or, you know, there's the Hollywood version of, you know, how horrible it is to come off of opiates or, you know, or cocaine. And the reality is it's, it's really painful and it's uncomfortable. And you think you are going to die, but particularly as it relates to cocaine. It's out of your system in 72 hours. There is no more physiological need for it. And you won't die if I'm withdrawing from it. Alcohol, you'll die. You'll go into seizures. And it stays in your body, not just for three days, it stays in your body for at least 30, if not more. And, and you've created these, you know, neurotransmitters in your brain that your brain is still crying, you know, 30, 60, 90 days later, still crying for you to, to drink. And the worst part is, I got a two-spoke at your door. And usually it's not more than, you know, particularly if you live in an urban environment, you know, the court of a mile from wherever you know, one looks at you funny when you have a cocktail. No, exactly. And it's encouraged. And so for me, it was hard, hard work. And is it I, this time, I've been a number of rehabs. And in, in 2019, after I met Melissa, and she said, the sense is it, I started, I tapered. She had me taper. How did she know to do that? Got it completely intuitive. And I mean, it was really, you know, incredible. And she tapered me. And then at one point, it got really bad. And I had the, like, true delirary tremens and she called a doctor to come over. What's that like? Literally the feeling that you, if you don't, if you don't remove yourself from your own body that that you're going to die, because you, you are, you know, I mean, there's the real potential of you dying from seizures. And it's most excruciating feeling that I've ever had of any kind of pain. And, and I'd gone through it before. But I had done it in a clinical environment in which they just, you know, usually use benzodiazepamps to work. Yeah. And so I had weaned enough, but not enough to, to stop that. And so I had to go through it. Where were you? I was, Melissa had run into house this little house for us in them, you know, up in the hills. I mean, hard to get to from anywhere. Like I couldn't walk. She took my keys, took my wallet, she took my phone, she raised every number from it. She that didn't have the name Biden in it. She, you know, I mean, she had to do the hardest thing for anyone that is that loves someone is for a period of time, she had to be my jailer. And, and my nurse and a, and literally, you know, nurse me back to life. And it is, you know, it was incredibly intense at the beginning, you know, 24, seven, you have to be there, you know, because you literally could, the particular alcohol, not particularly, singularly, without call, you could, you could die. How long did it take you to feel better? And that is just 10 days before I could ever really eat anything and taste it. Actually, yeah, you know, I mean, there have any interest in not being forced to eat something. And then, and then you start to, you know, you have this kind of, everything is kind of grayscale, you know, for even after you get a little bit of a boost around 30 days, and then you try to ride that as long as possible. But what happens in your brain is that somebody explained it to me this way is that you have these little messengers that alcohol sends to your pleasure, synergy of your brain. And so the messengers imagine with little birds, you know, a normal person, bird flies up to the birdhouse. And that's your dopamine or whatever it is, and like a normal, you know, in a normal source of it. Like, you have a happy experience. And, you know, sends two birds up, you know, to live in the, in the birdhouse. And the maximum that you're supposed to ever have is like 10, it's like the hobbies. What alcohol does is it sends 20 birds at a time. And so it creates 20 birdhouses. And then, and the next time you use it, you want to get, you got to get to 30 birdhouses. And then it builds 40 birdhouses. And then you have, you know, there's a thousand birdhouses. And when you take the alcohol away, and you have a normal, happy experience, like a cup of coffee in the morning, it only sends two birds. And your brain says there are 998 other birdhouses that you have to feel for me to feel normal. And you don't have it. And there's nothing in a normal experience that can possibly produce that except the drug. And so your brain, the thing that you think that everyone, of course, has to believe is providing you with rational logical information, is saying, if you don't get this, you're going to die. Yeah. And in the case of alcohol, it means it. If you don't get this, you're going to die. And by the way, not only can die, you're going to feel like this for the rest of your life. So fix me. And so your brain's telling you, and so the first time that you face a trauma or an obstacle or a, or something good happens, your brain says, I know how to make it better. I know how to fix it. I know how to make you not feel this way. I know how to make you not have this anxiety. I know how to make you not have this fear. We've done it before. Do it. And that's, that is the, what alcohol at least did as it relates to to me, but also I'm positive the science of it is anyways, to me the most dangerous thing. I've lived it. And that's an amazing description in an accurate one, I think. How do you stay sober for seven years? Almost everything that I do is no longer with the idea that I am like living on a knife sedge. And the early days though, you really do have to really protect yourself, not put yourself in positions of, you know, I people always say to me like, well, can I still go to the bar with my friends? Well, not, no, you know, getting clean so it was really easy. All you have to do is change everything. And that everything. And what I really mean by that is that don't go back and put yourself in the same exact circumstances that you were in where you're saying group of friends if they are heavy drinkers or, you know, or your family, like, if you, if you can't go to Thanksgiving without everybody getting drunk, maybe don't go to Thanksgiving this year trying to get sober. And so that in terms of changing everything, but staying, I promise you everybody, it gets not only easier, but there's this thing in the program that I practice in which they call the promises in which you will know and experience an ease by which life happens as you are able to live life on life's terms and which like everything, it doesn't fix everything. It's look at me, you know, six, you know, six felony charges in two trials later and a, you know, and it, it, it, it didn't, it didn't solve anything. It didn't solve all the consequences that I had the face, but you know what? Can you imagine what my life would be like? I'd be dead. I'm 100% long dead. If I had decided the only way to be able to fix this is to an exercise myself. I mean, I would be long dead. And, um, and that's what they were hoping. And I truly, truly do believe that I believe that they knew that the, the, um, the singular what they perceived as my father's Achilles heel was his family that where he are, there's one anybody says about Joe Biden, that there was nothing more important to him than his family and that he had just lost Bo and, um, and that the idea that that I truly believe that they want to be real. Which was equivalent to death. My mom, I'm positive they did. What does that tell you about? I mean, why would one thing I noticed just being living in Georgetown as a kid and knowing, you know, million people from political families is the families were all dealing with tragedies that on a bigger scale than normal people. Like there's something about that environment that is really hard on the, on families. And you see it in the most famous political families. They're all okay. Well, I don't know. See that, that's one of the things that, um, well number one is I, I really truly didn't grow up in DC. Um, right. Yeah. And, you know, we, we really were in Delaware. And, um, which is different. And, but to your point is that what I found is this is that I lived it publicly. But, you know, Tucker, I, what I found is, is that, um, I was in a, um, uh, I forget what I was in a stranger, somebody driving me and it told me a story and it told me about their life and their addiction and that they're, you know, their brother was in jail and their father, um, uh, you know, just got arrested and, and addicts. And I think everybody has those stories. Everybody, that's for sure. Except my played out on the front page of the New York Post in a way that literally I don't think it had it for anybody, any political family. It wasn't even the kind of just to the degree in which they, you know, uh, and I really mean that like, um, I mean the total, um, evisceration of anything or even the notion that I deserved any privacy. I mean, I, I really like, I, I look at some people and I say, like, just put yourself in my shoes for one minute. And what level on what level is it, do you think that that was right? You know, I, I look like somebody like Miranda divine and just on what level could, would, if that was, if that was Ivanka. And I'm not talking about like, and just take her existing 20 year digital footprint, everything that she's ever done. It's like, I can't see you and I don't know. I can't see you. Everybody has a nude. Everybody has an friction that they don't want to see. Everybody has a text message out of context. Everybody has a voicemail. They wish that they hadn't left. Everybody has a, um, uh, an email and which it doesn't have the entirety of the email chain. Like, you know how many conspiracies there is were born out of the fact that I wrote Buckley a, uh, a recommendation to a school of what you reminded me he didn't get into. You know what I mean? Like, like out of context, you are able to do some and how is that in any way fair. However, that's what happened. And, um, what's your wife think? I mean, I just think about like, like, she's like, talk about she didn't sign up for this. Yeah. Like, talk about like, you know, yeah, she is so tough. She's like, she is a, a, she is a warrior. You know, amazing. She is absolutely amazing. I mean, look, I mean, I wasn't, there's no way that I could even prepare for it. And I, and this has been my life. None that I could prepare for it. In fact, she didn't run. It says everything that you need to know about her because there wasn't much other upside. Well, this truth is that, but we'd be, but we used to, the ultimate upside. So, but she is, she is one amazing person. What's your plan? You're on a path. Yeah. It seems like you kind of moved into it sideways, maybe not with a plan. I don't know. No, you're clearly moving in some direction. Where is the head of? I don't know. And that's one of of the things is that I don't, I know the things that I care about. I care about reaching people that are still sick and suffering. I really do because, by the way, not because I'm a hero, because I'm some saint and I want, you know why? Because it's the most rewarding thing that I've ever done in my life. It gives me sustenance. It makes me feel good about myself. I mean, it, like, it makes it easier for me to make it through the day. And so it's purely selfish. And that's one of the things about sobriety that I tell everybody is that the ultimate goal is to get to the end, and particularly as related to the program that I practice as you get to the end of the steps. And the whole thing is so that you can be of service to somebody else. And not because you are sainted at the end. And all of a sudden, you're saying, Francis, walking among the, you know, the forest, it's because it's the thing that saves you. The only way to truly get out of yourself is to do for somebody else is to, you know, to sit here and, and, and, and for me, the easy, the easiest is to find other people that have had, you know, same similar experience. And, and it's not like you have to For me, the easiest is to find other people that have had, you know, same similar experience. And it's not like you have to look far. No. I mean, it's around every single corner. There's somebody. And that's was the beautiful discovery that I had. So there's that. I want to reach a million people in recovery. And I want, I've created this thing at 100biden.com backslash recovery in which anonymously for nothing other than to create a storyboard, a story core. Is people get this share their experience, strength and hope? Because what helped save me was realizing I wasn't alone. And I want to write about it. And I'm going to put it on on sub stack and part of it's free and part of a subscription. And I want to continue to practice my art. And ultimately at the end of the day, is that like anybody else is that, you know, I want to have the financial security to be able to, you know, to not constantly feel as if I have to make, you know, choices that I don't want to have to make. Like anybody else, like anybody else in their life, how close are you to financial security? Like, I'm a million miles away. I'm several million miles away. I am. But, yeah, you know, my, which is strong once they're money. Lawyers. Yeah, it's all legal bills. Yeah. And, and, anyway, like tens of thousands of dollars. Oh, no, millions of dollars, millions of dollars, millions. I mean, just the, I don't know exactly what it is. I think it's between four and six million that Winston Sean says I, that I owe them for, for my couple of convictions. And anyway, yeah, yeah, it's a lot of money. How do you, how does that affect you? I don't know. I, I would hope that they, oh, how does it affect me? It affects me in this way is that I have to find a sense of a solution in a way through. I really am, I've wanted to avoid bankruptcy because the road back from that is just so long, and I'm 56 years old. But I don't allow it to consume me. You know what I mean? I really don't. I, and I can't. It is, I don't want it to be the principal motivating factor for, for everything I do, because it truth of the matter is the mountain. So it's such a long climb that I don't, I don't see the solution to it right now. But one won't present itself. And I think cooler heads will prevail and, and, you know, and I'll be able to, I just step face. I don't know. And I just step face, and not blind face. Just work hard. I mean, I'm, I'm, I'm really working my asshole. I mean, everybody says, oh, go get a job. I have two jobs. I have two jobs. And then I'm top of that. I've, all of this is what I'm trying to do. And then I'm, you know, a whole thing that I've been trying to build is released in, in, in, and that I, and I'm, I'm working my butt off and, and doing that. You know, that they took away my law license, which means that that avenue that I spent, you know, 25 years working towards to graduate from Yale Law School is not open to me right now. And so I have to in many ways, you know, reinvent myself, but not out of whole cloth. And spending the past seven years, you know, I'm really, really dedicated to my art. I'm really dedicated to the, to the, to the work of, of writing, you know, you're a brilliant writer. And you, you know, this better than anybody. It's, it is, it is, it is a practice as much as in an art. It's an off discipline as much as a lovely. And, and, and, and so I've been practicing that discipline since I wrote my first book. And, and so I have a lot to say and, and, and there's ways to be able to do that now. And I've ways to be able to do that that can, you know, that, like I think it's really important for me to be authentic about everything. There are also the ways in which I can do it, in which I hopefully can put food on the table. Last question is about faith. How is this affected? How you feel about God and changed your, your relationship? I don't know whether I would say that it's changed, but it is deep in my, and belief in whether you want to call it, that I do as God is the, the absolute certainty of this. There is literally in both the theological, but also metaphysical sense, no distance between me and you or anyone. We are all literally connected. And that connection, that universal connection to everything is what I refer to as God, is us realizing that all of our fears, the delusion is being separated. It's it's all the idea. And so my faith is in the fact that I know that that there is not a, that there's not a sentient being that is not that literally is me. And, and I don't know if that makes sense to you, but, but I truly believe that there are, there has been a, a real thing in my life that has saved me time and time and time again. And that has taught me hard lessons, and that I believe that I cannot explain by other than what I choose to call God. No question about that. And we do get glimpses of the connection between people, all people. I think that's what we refer to as a transcendent moment when we like rise above all the things we're concerned with and sort of look down just for a split second, but this happens to people throughout life and you're like, oh wait a second. Yeah, you know, people are really connected to each other on a real way. Yeah. Yeah. And when you, when you start to get honest with yourself, like really, really get honest with yourself. And I'm not talking about everybody has to go through what I went through to be able to get honest with themselves. I wasn't watching them. I wore this enemy. But, you know, I think that there are spiritual practices that I did not, either have the courage of the patients to endure. You know, I say it's not like I was moving a reishi cash to sit in the cave and meditate for seven years. Instead, what I got is a trial by fire. And, and, and like I said, the complete eradication of an ego not by courage or conviction on my part, but by necessary choice to survive. I had to choose to either stay in bed or get out and live. And if I was going to live, I had to let go of that. Yes. And I did. And for now, today, it's a beautiful, beautiful thing. It's a beautiful thing. It doesn't solve everything. It doesn't solve my debt. It doesn't solve my, you know, I still got to, you know, put on my pants like everybody else. And, and, and I still have, you know, to deal with a relationship that, you know, I'd like anybody else. And in a family that I love, drives me crazy. And I love, it's like everybody else. But I don't have to live a lie. I don't know, Brad. Thank you very much. Thanks.