You know, Tom O'Neill is who wrote the chaos book or have you ever just represented what did you think about that story told about Manson about paper sense that was before I met Manson and so he met a different Manson because he met the Manson that was like Mm-hmm. You know into doing some wild stuff. That's the man that I would want to meet I don't really that's like I don't like it's I feel like that with all musicians do they even like like Gucci Man I don't I like I want the Gucci the old Gucci before he went to prison when he was up on drugs all the time See I liked I liked both I liked the old Gucci and I liked the old Manson But I'm happy that they're healthy now and that they're getting like good as I still think Gucci's putting on good music And I said yeah, this record is my one of my favorites of his But like yeah, I mean 90s Manson is peak yeah art for me That's how I grew up on that stuff. Yeah, but his band is amazing. He's got the drummer from Dolan Druske plan Is that that young dude Gil Sherone? I think his name on drums. You played on Ironworks on Dolan, Jerm So they're like live this band is insane. It's the heaviest. He sounded really like it's like the 90s Manson But now with like people from bands I listened to like 10 years ago that like The name seen like horse of band and Dillinger and yeah, that good stuff. I love it Yeah, he's like he looks great. He definitely looks skinnier It was a great show. Yeah, he killed it live. I was I was really impressed and the audience is it was like I think I saw his second show back after everything that's happened He's been silent the whole time So yeah, yeah, there that story Tom told just sounded like Like a dream come true, you know like I wouldn't need to I my life would be complete after doing drinking tequila and doing coke with Manson all night I know it's like the perfect the perfect way to be Manson probably the real downfall he went through everything like they just attacked this dude Yeah, obviously for years and I don't know He dances the guy who kind of taught me at a young age to not trust a media You know like how how they came after him. I'm 39 when I was an eighth grade calm-bine happened And all of a sudden I'm like this person I listen to all the time is now like this devil and views I'm like that's they're not they're portraying him in a totally different way So from there I'm like well, I can't trust these people Mm-hmm talking heads are trying to sell me on idea that this person Why I find his art like interesting and engaging that he's a demon who Like made these kids kill people Which is so do you think this is peak Manson or do you think do you think it's tough? Because I think there's different arrows of peak Manson. I like I love mechanical animals. I love super star I love American portrait American family. They're all really good. There's some there's some moments in there We're not peak. We'll say that. You know like there were some times. I'm like there's good songs But the albums weren't great, but this is a really good album. I love this new album. I was listening to it on the way I'm not to give it another shot. It's great. It's heavy. It's huge course is it's and it's he's saying something like it's his way You know, I was upset for a while because I was writing about him during this whole like oh, were you when they were like trying to just cancel him Whatever yeah, the deferential wood stuff. Does that one he's so weird up during the whole period? I think so. Yeah. Yeah, I'd probably sometime after you know they came after him But like I was thinking like why isn't this guy is the best that coming out and just speaking his mind and putting everyone down You know, and he was quite the whole time. I was upset and I'm like, yeah, you know I think now in retrospect his art is his greatest weapon and that's what this is like it's not it might not be So blatant saying you know through these people, you know that this and that but he is definitely speaking out against everything that happened to him And all these other people I'm sure he knows that's happened to you know Yeah, I survived what was the out? What was the actual outcome of it because there's been no like big reporting on it It sucks ended because it's like they settled all the headlines happen when he got accused And then it kind of just fizzled out she won in the court of public opinion But she's a total liar fraud, you know, like she ever in the right. Yeah, she she forged an FBI letter Yeah, so get like which eventually got to his house being raided. They took all his stuff in LA And she she like kidnapped her own kid right from her father and took him to Tennessee Because of Manson because she was telling the kid like this guy's gonna get us so she was creating a boogeyman For her little kid, which is abuse in my opinion Right, it's never met him, you know, he's no idea who man since but he's drawing pictures of this like monster Yeah, her that his mom is telling about No, at the end I think he won it's just in the court of public opinion. It's kind of like how it's always been for him Right, he did you can never win like you're all you've always lost once you had to go through that kind of stuff Yeah, yeah, yeah, but no, he's guy. He seems awesome. The lot shows are great dude. I highly recommend it Right, oh, yeah, I don't know if her to run down here, but let me say if they did this is his home area Right, he was Florida for a little for a lot of now. Yeah after Ohio. He might go into a Sephora. Yeah, you know what fun. You know how did you see the guy out in the lobby? We're apparently computer. I did Yeah, we want to hear a funny story. Yes his dad was the manager of a Furniture store in Fort Lauderdale and worked with Manson's dad of the furniture store. No, what they were both Confernite sales like his dad sounded like a wild dude, dude Like dressing up like a kiss out this is the stuff. You know, this is why we got Manson because his dad's like in the kiss army Right, right, right. That's hilarious. Yeah, I love that. But yeah, now it's sick But I think I think what happens now is like the fans understood what happened and like they've been through so many cycles of Whatever you want to I hate to wear cancel. I hate cancelization. It's just a dumb word It's like watered down like all these other words in the news, but He's been through it for so long and through the all the battles that uh, you know He won he's like telling out tours now killing it Europe in Europe and all this stuff so how how did For people that don't know you you started working with with Tim pool a few years ago And like so you're you're like a journalist sort of like music journalist and then you started like participating in podcast Yeah, you did a piece on Kanye like a Yeah, I've been a little bit of a sort of like bio thing I was I was a professor for a while like for like almost 10 years I taught like English and journalism and stuff like that And I was also freelancing at the time as a music journalist and all types of stuff I wrote about history and whatnot. I wrote for pitchfork a few times and So I was kind of doing everything and not political stuff at all But then like when lockdowns happened I felt like I was gonna puke if I didn't actually say what I was experiencing New York where I had a You know governor who was like a genocidal maniac. You know murdering all these old people So I had to say something and then I kind of like losing my job It can't be professor anymore because I'm refusing to get the shot there I'm gonna take all these things and so I quit and I had nothing lined up But I had forgotten like six months prior I applied to something at Tim said right And I he had something he had to show it night and I didn't do it all the time Well, I tuned in one day. I'm like oh, he's asking for a writer who does exactly what I was doing because I did a little bit Everything true crime weird conspiracy stuff music a little bit at all that and so after I quit this professor job a week or two later Tim hit me up thought it was fake. I was like I'm so desperate I'm going to just go to West Virginia I forgot West Virginia was a state. I was like that's a real thing so we're down to West Virginia and I was hired that day and so I started off just doing the inverted world Show, but it was like a serialized stories You know, true stories about different events. You know, conspiracy's ghost stories paranormal stuff That kind of morphed into books and then that morphed into like me doing the weekly show But throughout all that I just had all these crazy opportunities because a Kanye came by that What was it like December? No November 2022 and it didn't go well People probably remember yeah walked out of the studio Tim was like I don't know what he was saying but Kanye was not feeling it and he got up and walked out I happened to be there because Tim told me the day prior that was gonna happen and I've been like a giant Kanye fan I would be a Kanye fan if I wasn't for a Manson fan Right, because I see them as very similar. Yeah, they're both like you know testing this like guys come constantly so I was there and He walked down after he walked out of the studio Now's right there and I tried to get him to go back up Sarah's I was like yo People want to know what you're talking about like I believe what you're saying like it's crazy But it's like go up there and just tell people what you're saying because you know it'd be great he was like not into it and Then I'm like I can tell by his body language. He just doesn't want to talk about that That is done now. Whatever was upstairs in the studio. Yeah, I'm glad he actually walked out It was something about like I think Tim was rehashing Conversations he had had about you know like the contracts and the Jewish lawyers that he'd had all week long about like Lex Freeman And I think he was like Rehashing that and Kanye kept saying like I don't want to talk about something like that I forget exactly what it was but When he left, you know, that's where the whole thing like who is they though came from that conversation so it was like it was pretty wild time and He came downstairs and I'm like all right. Let's just talk about music So we talked about music real quick. I bought up his opera that no one talks about which is a great. He wrote a great opera and He invited me to LA and I went to LA and then I spent the weekend with him going to church and Going to church at the church went to Bible study The first day we were at his at the easy headquarters because I was just gonna profile And I thought it's just just gonna be the one day and I've been a fan of his for so long like in June of that year I just tweeted out like I'm gonna interview Kanye one day and a few months later just like The CIA might be behind it. I don't know like who knows how this happened But I was out there for the day and we had a great conversation about politics religion parenthood and it was like funny because the whole world was on fire because this is like the day after he went out Strones and said I love Hitler so now the whole world is on fire I'm in the airport as he's saying that and people are telling me not to go And I'm like there's no way I'm not going like I this is it's important to me But I want to hear like from him like what's this all about? Yeah, I think my whole interpretation was it's like Andy Kaufman You know, I think he means a lot of this stuff, but I know he's a good husband. He was like a great performative comedian comedians kind of like He was like that's an elf for a while, but he did a lot of he was known for like We're like he doesn't acknowledge that he's been doing like he's performing No one really leans into it. So this real. Yeah, no one really knew if it was a This is this is nothing. This is old stuff. Is that Andy Kaufman from the past? Yeah, that must be the coffee And there you go ashes. I love Andy Kaufman So and I knew Kanye like Andy Kaufman so I wanted to go and get his perspective on it So it was like funny though the whole world's on fire because of him, you know Elon had just banned him off Twitter All these things were happening, but inside that headquarters It was like totally normal everything's fine. We were laughing come out art really and it's just like I think I think there's more to this You know, I think he's definitely coming from a place of honesty with a lot of it But a lot of it's also like I want to push every possible button right now. It's what happens, you know Which is reminding you of like a man did he acknowledge this? Yeah, when I asked him about that I said as this Andy Kaufman he said it's Andy Kaufman and Bruce Lee together So we had a good talk and And then he invited me to go to church next day And I didn't think that was actually gonna happen, but he sent me the address and I showed up He shows up all alone Oh, well two guys he had a driver and a homeless man that he picked up off the street Who he called his biblical scholar and straight up his dude biblical scholar He had like a jungle or a local bill homes scholar. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah We sat next to both those guys in church and then and then I wrote some lyrics and we said a good time and I thought that was it and then I went home and wrote my story and You know people are not happy some people who are like this guy, you know is a anti-semlint for even talking to Kanye West You you're an anti-semlint. It was like a media matter. So I shoot Jewish Yeah, I was raised Jewish I'm Christian now, but I was raised Jewish That's why I was talking to him out there because I'm like, you know my experience growing up I had a Catholic dad and a Jewish mother so I was raised like a real messed up, you know and Unlike what you're talking about with a lot of people is so foreign to how I grew up like poor on a farm But I also understand like what you're saying because there's a lot of people in the industry who have power who treat you wrong But I'm like I'm just trying to say like it's also like this as well right by the time I was actually like really thinking about being baptized and I you know had been since oh yeah Oh, yeah after years of being militantly atheist Wow. Oh, yeah Christianity is in Vogue right now, man It is. It's really it's really what says you land or line. It's really in right now podcast hosts are getting baptized left and right on Actually brought my holy water we can do when we're doing really I know now Yeah, I had a guy bring holy holy oil in here one time, but I was I was thinking about Being baptized at that point and for a year prior to me meeting Kanye I'd done a podcast with a friend a friend of mine And I'm mostly talked about how I don't know how to pray and I was really interested in praying and I didn't know how I felt like a fraud praying and after years and years of just straight up mocking God all the time Like you know, it's just like an atheist and just Didn't know any better and that's you know, it's whatever but that the atheism was a form of religion. Yes, and When I went to Kanye it was funny because when I got home the stories published I thought that was it with Kanye he would call me all the time So we were on the phone now like constantly every day multiple times a day And what he wants me to do is to help him write prayers So it was hilarious to me that after a year of me like publicly saying like I want help writing prayers I didn't know how to pray Now he's like we're writing prayers and he's like we're like it's like a creative writing workshop Or I'm texting him prayers and he's texting back criticisms of how to make this better stronger prayers You know like we did that like right lyrics So you know it was profound for me just because I was already in the mindset of like religion being important to me I was sudden because I wanted I knew I wanted my kids to have some religion He really I was like oh yeah, even though I was like I was like I don't need it But I want my kids to have just I felt like the Moral structure of society was disintegrating and then needed some kind of foundation To inherit the future that's going to be depraved and all futures You know, it's always depraved. Yeah, the world is like a crazy world and you're always gonna have You know bad things out there, but for me and my wife we were like Religion is gonna be like an anchor for them So I took it seriously for them at first and then for me it became serious I took them more seriously like later on So yeah, it was it was a weird turn of events So like I do all those in terms like the stories and writing with him You know the Kanye thing was like such a Different change of pace from all the inverted world stuff. Right. There's like why is Shane even going to LA to talk to Kanye It made no sense right to anyone else I was working with unless they knew I was a Kanye fan Because it wasn't like a ghost story. It wasn't aliens. It wasn't anything Right, it was like the perfect story for me and it gave me a lot of opportunities after that to then write a lot of different profiles of people Impolitics and outside of politics and the music that We're really like awesome to do. You know I got to talk to mma and Billy Corgan Stuff like that and then politicians went now which are not as much fun Because there are liars. Yeah, it was interesting to see his the little video he did with academics where he like showed up at the hotel And he just seemed like totally normal guy and then all of a sudden he's like hold on let me get my let me get my costume Put it my backpack. That was a perfect example of an accomplishment because If you watch that interview, he shows up It's super normal like how's explaining in the easy headquarters. Yeah, and then he tells academics I'll be right back and if you look at that exact moment He looks at the camera and smiles. He smirks. Yo Steve is your address 6 9 6 9 been wrote Yeah, and your kid's name is Please don't share that with the internet bro. The internet already knows that's my point I just found that out by Googling it. Can you unGoogle it? I Don't like this kind of stuff being out there any more than you and that's what today's episode is sponsored By aura or is an identity protection service ever wonder how scammers and robots can get your email and phone number so easily That's because there are these companies that are data brokers that sell all of your information They are legally required to remove your info if asked but they make it difficult or finds these information stores Takes care of the hard part and deletes it data scraping is a constant battle from your devices and websites giving your information away Which is why I recommend aura services to all my friends and family But but not Steve your producer. I need to use you as an example Steve I cannot tell you how much of my whole entire life was just freely available floating around the internet I had them scrape all my social home addresses kids names everything their entire brand is personal security from dark web alerts to VPN to five million in identity theft protection contained in an all-in-one easy to use interface It's one app for every layer of protection and it's super easy for me Which is why I choose aura just click the link in the description to try aura free for 14 days It'll be enough time for them to start scrubbing your info from these data broker websites again Click the link in the description for a free 14 days of aura and make that the easiest click you've ever done for your personal security I'm not leaving myself vulnerable and neither should you and you're like oh wow He it's funny to him like he and he comes out. It's like it's like a curb. He enthuses him episode Yeah, it comes out. It's like literally Yes, it's complaining about all the the hood in my Klansman how it's hiding my swastika Yeah, yeah, he puts on Tim's you know, it's hilarious The only thing I'll say is different with Andy Coffin is you never knew when he was being honest I do think Kanye saying things he does probably believe the Twitter is a different story I think he's just pushing every like nuclear button at the same time But he definitely has issues with these people in the industry and he'd like the way he sees Sure, you know the things operating behind the scenes with the Kendrick and the Super Bowl and like how you take out these celebrities is When I was with him we were talking a lot about Prince and Michael Jackson and he was worried that that was his future Right really and they're both kind of in my opinion and his murder right like Prince was given fentanyl Mm-hmm. He didn't know his fentanyl he thought it was taking a painkiller and that person I don't think they even found that person you know and Michael Jackson's doctor went to jail for like two years All right for giving them propof all propof all. Yeah, you know and and Kanye having had that experience of being put away Years prior I really put him into ideas like I'm K. Ultra Yeah, having a crazy story with that dude Harley Pastor and yeah, it was like his trainer and he's like a trainer lots of messages were being spooky dude I would as a father I would not take that lightly like it was who's threatening your family. Oh, yeah And and you're like, you know Kanye's late dates will never be the same insane and it's kind of what happened like I'll say like It is kind of what happened Kanye didn't make it easy for himself by doing certain things You know when it comes to the family and stuff because it's easy for them to play that against him be like see like he's he's crazy He's stuff like that So it's like hard you know I have issues sometimes with some some of the things he does in terms of Sacrificing the innocence of his children, you know with things that he brings around them And you know what is the story with that Harley guy? Is he just some personal trainer or what do we know his background? He's like a Canadian like handler It's kind of maybe in from what I understand. Yeah, I don't know too much about him But like I know he kind of oversees lots of celebrities. I think Justin Bieber's one of them as well And a lot of these people who you see under his umbrella have issues Like big tone like beavers and I don't know what his deal is but people are saying he's like MK ultra now I think it's possible, you know I think totally possible. I think after celebrities. They create celebrities. They drug celebrities. Mm-hmm. You know Why was it weird scenes from Laurel Canyon? Do you ever read that one? No, it's a good book to read after you've read something like chaos Okay, what's it called weird like it's weird or wild scenes from Laurel Canyon Mm-hmm, and it's I'm gonna say it's not really well written, but it's got great information and interesting connections And it's all about how basically like the counterculture was created in Laurel Canyon From like the mamas on the pop is Frank Zappa and how a lot of them might have been CIA connections Weird weird scenes inside the canyon. I think the author's gone now unfortunately But it's good people like talking talk about this a lot when they come up when they talk about chaos It's it's not as well written. It's cases like a masterpiece. I love that right But this is really good to read after that or and also reading with like a Poisoner and chief that's a great book as well. Yeah Laurel Canyon covert ops and the dark heart of the hippie dream Yeah, and they talk about like creating characters out of actors I forget how I forget the guys name them. There was one actor who was like the first guy to be arrested for having weed Like the 50s or 60s. I'm free in his name Some kind of like you know, he's a megastar. Yeah, but in the book They talk about how this is all pre planned because they want to create a certain type of vibe for this guy Right because it's like how do we make him look like a bad guy in the public? And so you know and it goes into a lot of connections with like on Morrison's father You know and Vietnam and stuff like that and zap as father I think you're like a bio warfare type guy or some kind of chemical warfare guy. Holy shit There's weird connections and you can just be like well, there's quinses, you know Yeah, I don't really believe in a lot of quinses especially when it comes to this stuff Yeah, because we know they pump out these people like like little Canyon if you read this book sounds like it was an assembly line and also Mountain look observatories up there one. That's where they say they filmed moon landing. It's like a giant CIA underground Really headquarters. It's huge. Jared let our own mountain wood mountain look. I think I think it's not on look observatory Is that what Bart told us where they said bar said it was somewhere in Nevada, I think maybe I don't remember whatever he said it was an imposome air force base whatever goes on there They say like tens of thousands of propaganda films were pushed out of this place and like major stars would go there and Hang out and no one really I don't know like I don't know what came out of it, you know, but that it's there dude I saw a photo yesterday of Stanley Kubrick in Somewhere in Europe where they were filming 2001 space Odyssey and he was like walking from the studio to like another building or whatever and Fucking jolly West. Oh standing right behind him. No No, yeah find it. The Google Stanley Kubrick jolly West Holy crap. I think it was Brett from the doobie had in here last week. Who was who made that video? Oh, that's crazy dude Seeing that guy surely West is everywhere. Yeah. Yeah. That's insane turn on the volume The landing I've said this in other lives before there's a picture of Stanley Kubrick When he's doing 2001 and he's in England They called the studio's NASA East which is hilarious And he's doing his shoot there and there's a picture of him walking with a group of guys in there and they have them all identified Except for one guy behind them. He's in a row behind them walking That guy that they didn't identify that has never been identified is Lewis jolly and west of MKL Chr- in West was a specialist in controlling people creating cults There's a large portion of his information that's never made it out into the public that he was working a lot with UFO people and witches and Satanists and all that to create those subcultures jolly and west was running one of the free clinics in One of the counterculture areas of San Francisco jolly and west was running it at the time clandestinely and Manson was there getting treatment with the Manson family and So jolly and west was involved with that jolly and west was involved with jack ruby jolly and west was involved with sir had sir had jolly and west was involved with wittly streamer the UFO guy Didn't know that jolly and west was involved with It stands for research remote viewing experiments jolly and west was involved with a lot of things guys if that's where the moon landing this guy's this guy's awesome Yeah, brand follows got he uh he like covers all the craziest conspiracies, but he like He like calls out all the bullshit online That's good because there's because all of these like like the you at the whole UFO religion that exists and all these other like psychedelic religion that like he calls out all the like The crazy just bias that happens online with these people and like how stupid it's becoming yeah people in every industry Including the conspiracy world want confirmation bias. Yeah, they're willing to accept anything if it you know It confirms their narrative that they want to believe in I wonder of jolly west Onshore the astronauts like personally Was he alive still mine? Oh, yeah, find out when did jolly west die? Because those guys look crazy Like I think I think they might have altered the the women who went to fake space yesterday 1999 oh my goodness what he lived that long that's a lot of people that's wild Yeah, look at that's crazy dude. I would love to see I haven't read a book on him or anything I just seen what what Tom O'Neill has written about him Like the tertiary stuff, you know, with her hand sir hand. I didn't know about what Lee striber But that's I had no idea about what Lee streamer either. Yeah, these people These are like the psychomigitions, you know, but this I think they talk about it in poison or in chief You know when right they they literally hired magicians to help them figure out how to control people's brains and create illusions Yeah, and they did that with the help of who's an eugenics and stuff and right, you know, Ruby It's it's you see the interview of jolly west right after he came he had that meeting with Ruby No, he went to prison or whatever He came out and he was just like I have us immediately I don't know if you can find the actual video of it It's kind of hard to find but it was in Tom's new documentary on Netflix the new okay. I was talking about he watched it dude It's so good and he comes out and he's basically like he's mentally unstable and he's unfit for a trial really Oh, yeah, like with it with like within Three hours of visiting him he comes out and just basically makes the claim that he's completely unfit and mentally unhealthy And they say in the book that he seemed fine up until jolly showed up right right like everything was cool Yeah, and all of a sudden like that's why I feel like the scarecrow from Batman is jolly west You know, he goes in and scares these people with some type of drug and then they all of a sudden lose their minds right That's what this guy is Yeah, man, it's crazy shit nice I don't think about like who's who's the jolly west today It's not even it's probably not even a person. It's just a bunch of things working together to slowly dose you out of your mind Nice low dose out of the out of the sky or whatever they're putting it in your way Yeah, they don't need drugs to control minds anymore They got computers to do that They got social media and all this all this stuff to do all that work for him Yeah, they're definitely doing that I was the whistleblower from a Facebook you see this from yesterday They had x crazy whistleblower about Facebook before the Senate and she was talking about how Facebook secretly Watches like they can target specific age groups and in particular she was saying Facebook was looking at 17 to 18 year old girls And if they delete a selfie it might mean they're a little depressed and they send that data to Advertisers because they believe that when you're sad you're more willing to buy something Real yeah, and like she had this whole thing about it like it's insane You know and like they're just harvesting all the days was yesterday. She came out. Yeah. Yeah She's she's saying and she's you know who knows they feel like everyone lies when they're testifying But she's saying that he you know Zuckaberg was lying under oath about all that years ago Because they're worried about this back in 2018 right how they target people either individually to censor them or Like large groups of people to see if they can sell to advertisers Right so that's just like one type of group. You know the young teenagers Yeah, who seemed depressed and they're like well they might need this new handbag We're gonna send this information to this so and then we're gonna get this ad now and they're monitoring it that closely That's crazy, dude. That's dark. Dude. That is dark. That is very very dark world I like I don't want my kids that's social media. No, I mean either. I don't like it to have a smartphone Yeah, no for sure. I'm gonna get my kid like a telephone booth You're Superman now. I really I just don't trust. I think it's very harmful. I think it's there's um there's like this kind of like Small movement of tech company is trying to like dumb dumb down technology to make it more primitive Like there's this company that I have this this thing right here. This thing is called a daylight computer It's basically like a computer slash iPad Yeah, and there's like there's no blue light in it at all like that So like the blue lights like really fucks up the the chemicals in your brain Oh, yeah, when you do it in it's super addictive and it's like a dopamine slot machine like when you're staring at a phone And this thing has none of it. It's only like the red amber light and And it's like really good for reading so like if I if I sit up at night And I like will read a PDF or read a Kindle book on this thing. Yeah, I Literally I'm asleep within 30 minutes. I can't sit up and read like with a Kindle or with a phone You could sit up for hours and scroll through stuff and it next thing you know, it's one in the morning in this The red light. Yeah, it's not it's not as good. Yeah. It helps not definitely help dicked it And I'm not really like a crazy person all this stuff and uh, yeah, it definitely has helped but like I prefer that's awesome Yeah, dude this thing's incredible And there's also companies that are some like phones that are like super dumb down with like no connection and like you know The only calls and texts. I just keep telling my wife we're gonna be on this. I'm Removing every piece of technology from my house until we're she works out and we're on this like welcome back Like I grew up on a farm dude without like anything. I mean we had things, but we didn't have a computer growing up Yeah Didn't have we had a TV at a certain point, but that even that TV only had a few channels So like I realized I have like weird blood-eyed capabilities like in me already just from like Not having air conditioning not having internet and like having to have special permission to like handwrite my essays to hand into Cool because they're like oh shame poor shame doesn't have a computer Shaking scratch is now being handed in and like I uh, so like I learned about computers way later than everyone else Like obviously, you know, I go to friends houses and be like oh wow, it's cool I can use napster here or something. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I'm reading magazines and stuff as I know what's going on I wasn't completely under rock, but pretty under rock But like I just see There's so many He's an aptor here or something. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'm reading magazines and stuff. I know what's going on. I wasn't completely under a rock, but pretty under a rock. Um, but like I just see there's so many so many positives come out of this stuff, but it's I think the negative stuff always the positives, especially when you're seeing kids who are raised in that world. Yeah. Um, and like I think it's good that they're trying to dumb down technology and get it back to its core. But there's so many kids who were who were trapped in like this fake digital life means more to them than their real life. Yeah. Which is why I think we have more nihilism today and people with meaninglessness. And there's like, you know, violence is a human. It's always been here. But there just seems to be like a different type of recklessness in nihilism today. Yeah. With kids like, you know, killing themselves by actually making selfies. Yeah. It's all for the digital, you know, for the likes and stuff. And knowing that those companies like Facebook was just telling you, then take advantage of that. Mm hmm. So they're they're like steering you, which is then what you were saying, MK Ultra, but we're MK ultraing ourselves. Yeah. But like is it is it futile to try to fight it? Or is this just the way we go? We have like fundamental like like with human beings where we are human beings because of technology. Yeah. Like if it wasn't for fire, we wouldn't look the way we look today. Right. I mean, I don't want to be anti tech because I love that we get to do this. Yeah. This is amazing. I got the fly here. You know, if I drove here 24 hours, this is amazing. I'm not anti tech and I think that's the lead. I kind of get a bad rap because they're not really they weren't anti tech either. They were anti being they were anti like the tyranny of mass autonomy. So like they were using the technology of the day in 18 10 or 18 11 like the weavers, you know, the make textiles. But when factories were being built and being filled with those machines and displacing those people's jobs is when they started attacking the machine or so they weren't technically anti tech. You know, I feel like although I'm against the violence aspect, I'm I'm against being, you know, autonomy out of work at a work and that's going to happen across the world. So it's inevitable. I just futile. I think it's a thing is going to come down to like society having more ethics. You'll build into it, but it's going to be on an individual level because the companies that are doing it like Facebook like Google like they have their ethics aren't a thing. You know, they're working directly like Zuckerberg, they're saying that whistleblower thing the other day he's working directly with China to build a censorship regime and they're censoring people at Zuckerberg. Yeah. For years, they called a censorship regime and they called the person over what who was the chief editor. It's like so Orwellian. So this person would oversee all these things. If anything got certain about the likes, the chief editor would come to this desk and be like, okay, we got a debuces or whatever. So just nuke it out of a blip into oblivion. And they would and the Chinese government through these, you know, leaks that they're getting with the emails and stuff. They would say like, Hey, this is someone on American soil, but he's saying stuff we don't like here in China. So you got to like get rid of that account and they would do it. So like they have no ethics. I think like Zuckerberg's a complete fraud. You know, he has his rebrand lately. It was like I'm pro Trump and I have a pro now. So unnatural. The chain. I understand like yeah, he looks like a little dicky. I don't buy a thing this guy says at all. I feel like they read the comments of his broken. Oh, so bad. I felt I was cringing for him. I was like when Rogan asked him about the the bone arrow. He's like, you know, Rogan knows about his bows. Yeah, I saw that clip. I saw first like he's like you can see him malfunctioning. It's old. It's spark so It's definitely old. It's got a short point at the Or it's not like it's funny because people buy into it because when it comes to politics, you know, lately everyone's so like they want to be like so bad by the people they think they hate like when it comes to like a rich Like wealthy famous person. The right who seems to be so against it lately, you know, the second Elan or Zuckerberg Does a rebrand. They're like we love him. They share great memes and he like serves and where is American flags Like Zuckerberg is a straight off surfing. He's doing whatever. He's doing electronic foil boards like a duper Stupid that video is ridiculous But but only something billion air would think was cool Right, so yeah, I don't know these people have no ethics Yeah, seeing allegedly now that Zuckerberg's working so closely with like the Chinese government which is in direct opposition to our government It's like okay, we can't trust these people and he's probably he's probably light under oath And I think that kind of extends to all these guys who are running the government currently It feels weird right now like it the whole like the whole way the whole podcast landscape is is like so In lockstep with the current and like presidential administration is gross and how they all were like there at the inauguration together was so weird to me. Yeah, I think I think it's the end of that world I think we're gonna see this whole space is gonna go through like a real tectonic shift. Yeah I think so to not make it people are gonna you know get better But this administration totally I mean and rightfully so it was smart to use the podcast world right because the side wasn't Like a homologize little kid, you know the what was the color daddy people they paid for a fake studio You know and that that showed that showed didn't really get numbers. Right. No one cared right? That host I'm sure she's got some fans out there, but like it wasn't a cultural shift You know Trump doing a Rogan was a huge moment. Yeah, everyone watched that episode. Yeah, there's pretty hilarious You know, I enjoy seeing him do interviews But like now that they've gotten to office watching the what I would call the the dissident voices from the so-called right Whatever that is the podcast space now. They're so in lockstep with the establishment without questioning anything I'm like this is how we get back into more problems guys And then they really don't like when you criticize them because they're like well We got it we the guys are in office or doing the best they can it's only been three months I'm like yeah, but they they're only allowing people around them right now who ask either illegitimate Criticisms like from like the corporate press and their questions don't mean anything or people who are Asking just nice easy questions, you know, and I think there's like real legitimate concerns That this administration should be asked like these questions about all the people around it What they're doing I understand it still early, but like yeah, you know, it's if you're looking at from the political side of things They only have a little bit of time before the midterms So like people are gonna want to see real change in like a year Right before the niggas they have to go vote again for the people, you know for the midterms for senators and all that stuff Yeah, Congressman so you know right now he's kind of got everyone almost at his disposal But it's gonna change quickly and then like the I've been calling it the day like independent media died was the binder date thing When everyone got the Epstein binders Use that God that was the most embarrassing thing and like I know a lot of those people who are there I'm not mad at them per se like I'm mad at the administration Unless they knew about it. They all say they don't so like I don't know that but at the administration in my opinion Set up a photo op and walked them out for this stunt right? Yeah, cuz they're like, you know, someone will be like oh we didn't know okay fair Then then you know they just gave us a bunch of like they printed out a prop to put in your hand And then walked you out into a lawn where the photographers were they'll say well They were there for so and so who was visiting from another we know another whoever was here from another country Mm-hmm and they're like but there's other ways you can have left left the White House You know, why did they give you a prop to hold and walk you out in front of the photographers and it's not about just anything This is about one of the most De darkest most sinister things that it climbs that hurt children. Yeah, and now you're condensed it down to you dancing with a binder I was like this is a bad look for in a media, you know I think independent media has all the same problems as corporate press Because it's just like a human nature thing. There's there's greed. There's narcissism. You know all that ego all that stuff So it's gonna be interesting to see like how these people navigate that world now now that they've got their guy in office Because it's you know, I'm seeing a lot of people just post on Selfies, you know at the special events and then you know, I'll get this stuff like oh Shane's jealous. He's not there I'm like I would love to go and ask the question, but I know the questions. I'm asking I won't be invited back Yeah, so I love that I'll go I'll ask the questions But they're not let me back after that because I'm I got bigger problems at play here because it's about our future And like the future that our kids are inheriting and they're building like a dystopia around us So yeah, and there's all these like Huge people on on social media and on podcasts like Chamoth be saying like like not jokingly talking about like Trump needs a third term. I know, you know It's crazy. It's it's the end and then Steve Bannon like I love I love Bannon too But like I don't want that and I'm not gonna vote for Vance like I don't like dance I think he's really smart. I like I he says things I really like but he's got connections to Peter Thiel Which is someone like another one of these tech guys, you know, a fantastic that he was born out of Peter Thiel You know, that's his mentor He created him, you know, and he's Vance saw teal talk at a I think was Yale love the speech And then Thiel you know, helped him start his own venture capitalist firm and funding stuff and they're in rumble and all that stuff and All these types of things and I think Thiel is one of the most like nefarious actors Really and he's like deeply embedded in the right because he's one of Trump's biggest don't have you seen what he's been doing with Silicon Valley And like and vampire and he's been he's behind this huge new effort to basically Map Christianity onto everything that's happening in Silicon Valley, and he's like pro- he's part of the church and they're doing these huge Conferences I haven't seen that. Oh, he claims to be Christian. He's he's strange guy. He's gay Christian billionaire Mary gay Christian He is a trans human as vampire though They all are but like he says things I think are he's extremely smart dude like and he's been around for a minute He's he unfortunately he helped build the surveillance state post 9-11 with Palantir and all these things and you know I'm really against the surveillance day. I'm really think that is super dystopian and he's made I'm sure billions of dollars off War, you know on all the wars right plus the surveillance day here and around the world And like he's part of Facebook, you know, he helped create face. Yeah, he funded Facebook So and they're all in Palantir was funded by ink Utech which is a CIA in Qtel right? That's like that's a venture capitalist firm from the CIA So like all that stuff is very alarming to me and like they don't like being questioned about that I didn't know about the the Christian mapping thing Yeah, but I've seen him talk about religion You can find the article Steve just type in just type in Christianity in Silicon Valley and there's like there'll be a ton of fucking articles. It's like this new This new phenomenon that's happening and like you know in the past with Christian or Silicon Valley has been like the opposite of Religious place 11 years ago. Elon is saying he's with AI summoning demon But recently he says we're it's a digital god So they've rebranded even that Yeah, I didn't see this but like he is just one article Yeah, there's there's so there's been a lot of people writing about this lately Interesting on freaking pay walls. Yeah, it's ridiculous Yeah, this is the one that I read right here interesting Christianity is borderline It was borderline illegal in Silicon Valley and now it's the new religion and what I think I think it has something to do with national security I don't know. I don't know exactly I don't think it's ideology I think it's some sort of 4d chess these guys are playing these these leaders of these military industrial complex companies Yeah, that are that are really pushing Christianity to all the people that work inside Silicon Valley Yeah, and I think it had I mean it's speculation obviously right like no, we don't know but like Who knows how these people think but what if they think that you look at all these other countries that you know they in the Middle East for just one example like You have all these people that ascribe to a certain religious worldview, right? You have religious extremists that are willing to go as far as dropping a bomb they're just and detonated in a fucking public place Yeah, and here it's it's the opposite of that you have this crazy diverse array There's not like one solid foundational worldview people have in America So it might be some sort of thing that they're trying to do to bolster America or make America stronger Yeah, I don't I honestly have a hard time believing anything he says although there's he does say he's things I agree with like I think he also understands that the universities are like ideological death camps I'd you know I saw it's crazy what they're doing in kids minds He says a lot of things I think are neat, but like sometimes when I see this stuff I'm like I think it's he misses just my theory is their way of trying to get the people on their side that they need Right Because for so long a lot of these guys were part of the so-called left Left and right really doesn't eat anything anymore because Trump's not even really right No, right leaning although he appears to be to the people on the left, but like they were dull Darlings of the left for so long everyone loved Elon I mean you go back ten years and look at Elon on Colbert They're oh, we love you so much. We love they're clapping for Teslas So same people are probably keen as Teslas today, right? We're selling their own Teslas But I think a lot of this stuff is like so like something I hear a lot when I criticize some like Elon or or teal Because rumble and then X they'll say like oh well He's looking to do it for freedom of speech. I think that's amazing. I agree X is a lot better It's a lot of problems and rumbles pretty cool But like my opinion is they're doing this to kind of and dear themselves to the dissident voices So now you're not like what we're saying earlier with like an independent media a lot of these voices I'm seeing be reluctant to question these people now at all like you don't hear much about Like negative stuff like legitimate like concerns about these people from the right or the so-called Disident voices I think that's a that's like the most important conversation. There's a few people both very few You're like when you web Kyle Kalinsky's been going hard as he oh, yeah, I never listened to but I think he's the guy who came out of Rogan I mean he was literally created by Rogan What do you think is like legitimate concerns about Elon? Is he just be like I mean He's a very critical of Rogan and Trump and he wanted all these people and calling out Like all the part I think some of it is pretty is pretty reasonable and I think a lot of it is like is like just super toxic and biased and just you know That's what's a little bit out of control because I'll see the left Hate a lot of these people for the wrong reasons. Yeah, you know like it's like a lot of like knee-jerk reactions things that I think kind of watered down the real problems And then the right just refuses to see the problems at all right because they're so happy that they won You know with the help of these people for sure the field teals want to trust biggest donors since 2015 and she and Alex carb donated millions dollars to Kamala. How's money is that? That's why these people have no moral center No, they're only they're only path and they're only going life is power over us and money right like they they make money off of these crises Right like COVID Lotta build my money off that a lot of the social media companies made money off that will also destroyed people's lives Yeah, small businesses went out Like New York. We lost thousands of small businesses, but these major companies We're fine. Yeah, so like you see the things that they're creating It's like the military industrial complex You know what pound tier does what and you will I came to Andrew. Oh, that's a weird company Clearview AIs when the scary ones to me with the facial recognition app because it's like It's inescapable right. That's why the only thing I don't know what to do other than like try to have ethics from the bottom up because these companies are not going to be like Well, you know, we're not going to use it for bad reasons, but the idea of what's bad is different every day In politics, you know something that was acceptable last year is now not acceptable. You know, they're always moving the goalposts And that these people are very open about how this world is going to just crush humanity You know, but they're but they say you know someone like Mark Andreessen would say it's a techno religious techno optimist manifesto. It's like the opposite of the unibarmors manifesto You know, it's a very joyous outlook which is like look I'm very against the violence with the unibarmor But that manifesto says a lot of things that are really interesting in terms of like universities and politics like he saw a lot of problems Back then wasn't he in K. Ultra? They say he was in Harvard Harvard study, right? Yeah, that's crazy, right? Find out find Google that I think it was when he was a kid or something. I think Ted Kazinski Harvard experiments Yeah, it's wild. Yeah Um, what was I gonna say to you? I was saying tech tech come off the missed like manifesto Yeah, it's just like the way like they're they're building this world where we're gonna have machines and it's gonna be really really great With no problems right right right right right um I was gonna say Elon is is the thing the thing about Elon is like you know how you know his famous story About how in 2000 and I think it was maybe 2000 is When I think it was maybe December of 2000 or 2008 maybe it was 2008 December of 2008 He told the story about how like he needed to make payroll or whatever and like the His accountants came to him and said you got a bankrupt to either Tesla or SpaceX We're not gonna be able to we're gonna lose both right and he's like he was like I'd rather die than lose one of those companies Like they'll make it happen. I mean he had a lot of money from the military and then he ended up and then there's this Story that this guy John Kerry Ocker this CIA agent tells how in like like two months later He was at this big dinner and Elon was there. Oh, well this like government dinner with a bunch of fucking CIA and NSA people Makes sense. So if you're fucking it just it doesn't seem it doesn't feel it doesn't seem right right if you're going through that Trying to fucking make your company survive your billion dollar company survive What are you doing at some Washington dinner with a bunch of CIA and NSA people making bank? Right make your bank. I mean yeah, he is helping sustain the surveillance state right now with Starlink You know, yeah, all these contracts with using Starlink satellites to you know put up all the Lockheed Martin type satellites maybe his own who knows yeah All the things he just can't talk about yeah because he should probably sign its kind of NDAs You know, that's why I always find that we were talking about aliens and it always seems so forced and the moon and the moon yeah We definitely went to the moon. Yeah, okay, dude Look some things up there. It might be like something that looks like the moon But I don't know if we've been told it is But like I everything that these people him to you like the whole PayPal like mafia Yeah Is very strange to me and now they're completely infiltrated the government like they've probably they've been a part of all the Administration's presence. I'm degree, but now it's like really like it's Trump another like outwardly like We're building this dystopia. I mean, I think it's a utopia But like you know so they they're creating this false God They're creating like an omniscience an omniscient presence with the with the spy satellites with the surveillance state So like those are the things that really worry me because like moving forward, you know, it's gonna be it's gonna be super dark Like the thing I was telling about Facebook and what they can do just to like young girls on on Facebook They're going to now Start applying that until like a you know like predictive policing you program at a policing You know which just yesterday. I saw I think it was in UK They just opened up a whole new department for for just that so they're doing it over there really I forget what his call is a good name to scary name like the minority report. It's exactly that's exactly what it is The unibomber participated in a series of psychological experiments at Harvard from 59 to 62. Oh perfect Good time. Those that that was a that was jolly West's peak These experiments led by Henry A. Murray were designed to measure how individuals react under extreme stress And involved mock interrogations that were described as veahment sweeping and personally abusive. Yeah Yeah, that was part of MK Ultra for sure dude. They probably created a lot of the tragedies that we live through In society in history, you know like it's it's insane. I can't take it but like You know what these people are doing now with the social media It's just the evolution of this So yeah, I don't know What's going on right now, but I feel like I feel like Everything that's happening right now with like the combination of like the news cycle and like various debates that you see happen on podcasts and like These people emerging these like these People like this um this martyrmaid guy. Oh, yeah, emerging and all the controversy around him I haven't followed that much. I saw part of his interview with Rogan. Yeah, it feels like it is a bunch of small pieces of this larger plan or larger scheme to like Decay or erode The meaning of truth. Oh, yeah, I like to to make it To where we can't tell what is up or down anymore Yeah, and I think that started with the pandemic and which divided us right when we eat everybody had their own facts They truly believe them would fucking die over. Oh, yeah. It's crazy. I've got it. Yeah, it definitely started I'm I think it started since day one with humanity, but Yeah, probably COVID accelerated it to insane degree. Oh, yeah, you know I started calling it post reality because the internet will allow you to You know what we're saying earlier with the confirmation by a stuff You can do that with anything with the internet. If you want to really believe something whatever it is You go find that website. It'll tell you you're right You know and you and then that will you know bolster you to really believe that But with COVID, you know that came life for death for some people You know, we were dealing with riots and all that stuff So you know in that on top of that the censorship that was happening You were only allowed to say certain things Which is why I'm so skeptical now trying to embrace these tech people because like just a few years ago They said we were like bad people and we should be censored You know not a lot online. They even got rid of the president on Twitter And now all of a sudden just because they're waiting in American flag and they share memes for cool I don't buy it at all. Yeah So I think I think the post reality thing is really really dangerous Because you know I was really seeing it started go down a lot with the beginning of the Israel Gaza stuff because they're sharing like You remember that someone I forget is real Probably new to sent a missile to some hospital in Gaza Or into the way around but that story was completely fake right or or like the ghost of Keith That was a fake story, but people really buy into these things right And so now you're seeing people totally buying in this narrative and now they've just splintered into a completely different reality And if they don't fact check it right where you know fact check I hate that for his two of life It's the most impossible to do that. It's going to be worse now Especially with what they're building with the AI stuff now with deep fakes With you know, you can make anything happen You can have a designer reality So like with the post reality stuff during COVID during the wars You know, you're falling down different avenues and just You know consuming the things that make you feel good about the way you see the world But now we're gonna start seeing people just straight up make up realities all together You know, so all like the weird mental issues and society now You can just go in the metaverse and do all that stuff and never leave your house You know, and that that to me feels like where they're just going like I don't think the dystopia is gonna look like you know the matrix so much I don't think it's gonna be super dystopian like we walk outside like wow, we're here in dystopia I think it's already here You know, I think like it's an inward thing And like it's inside of us is dystopia That you can you know, unshackle yourself from But um, the thing that scares me the most now with it with the way it's going with the technology And with you know, Elon or teal, undereason, all of these people It's like this idea of the technocracy, right? And uh, that is super alarming to me because that's kind of what they're doing now Ever wonder why it's so hard to sleep when you're stressed It's because there's a feedback loop between your sleep and your cortisol levels The less sleep you get the more cortisol your body produces And the more cortisol you have The harder it is to fall asleep and stay asleep It's like this stress sleep negative feedback loop that you cannot escape Most people aren't pulling all nighters. They're just chronically under slept Which means they're walking around with high to mid levels of cortisol all the time And that spills into the night resulting in light sleep and waking up wired at 2 a.m It's not a sleep issue It's a stress physiology issue which is why I use evening being by versa It contains clinically studied ingredients shown in humans to reduce stress and anxiety Lower cortisol, support brain resilience under pressure And regulate your body's natural stress response Together they not only help you feel calmer and improve your mood But they also promote deep restorative sleep So you can finally stop walking through life in a constant state of stress and high cortisol And start feeling like yourself again Just check out some of the incredible benefits some of their customers have seen From feeling calm to undisturbed sleep and even dropping ambient as a result of using evening being And that's what makes this the formula I trust to keep my body in a deep restorative sleep Click the link in the description or head on over to vr.soh-danny And use the coupon code danny at checkout to save 15% on your first order Again, that's vr.soh-danny and use the code d a n n y to save 15% Try a better way of sleeping in this world of constant stimulation And thank you to Verso for sponsoring this episode Where you know the technology being this idea that emerged in like the 1920s 30s kind of like in response to depression You know it kind of emerged out of a crisis How do we fix society and it's like well the government's all wrong So we're going to install experts to run everything experts and engineers to run our society But you know having lived through COVID Who's an expert how do you define expert how do you define any of this stuff because Fauci was like basically a leader of a technocracy during COVID It just outsourced everything to him and now he's basically making everyone shut down So like that was a thing in Canada, you know, I thought this is a funny thing with our you know, Elon's grandfather being Josh Joshua hauled him in So in in Canada, he's he was part of the technocracy ink And they were like really looking to install this government They banned in Canada for some time I think like maybe five years or so But like you couldn't do technocracy ink which I think is ridiculous Like you should just be able to do whatever you want, you know Like I don't agree with communist but you should if you want to do it I want to hear the bad ideas and we can talk about it I don't want to like censor that Yeah, so he was a Holdemann was um Inter technocracy He was a chiropractor. He was a very well-known chiropractor And this is his granddad. Yeah. Yeah. His grandfather Well-known chiropractor. I believe his Elon's great grandma was as well So like a big chiropractor Yeah, I think I don't know where I saw this, but there's like an obituary and a big chiropractor magazine about Holdemann, but um, you know, he was obsessed with this idea of installing engineers and experts whatever that is to run the government on And then I that idea kind of You got like a soft version of the technocracy with FDR's New Deal because it was like widespread micro management of experts To try to fix society. So we saw all these organizations, you know Spread out of the ground for to help fix the depression Um, so you know some people might say it was like a technocracy light You know, it wasn't really technocracy, but because it was in the in the framework of a democracy Allegedly um, he did he maintained power for quite some time Um, and then you know as as it goes with with American history The economy didn't really boom again till would work too Because uh, the people make lots of money on war. I've like these people we're talking about now um, so like his grandfather had a technocracy thing I always thought this was interesting that uh, you know depending where you look and who you read He either was kicked out of Canada or he ran from Canada for the for the technocracy stuff You know, he was a failed politician He was trying to a lot of things in politics in Canada. Yeah, and then set up base in um in Africa and uh, he became obsessed with looking for the lost city of Kalahari. You know about that? No. This is like this this uh, story of the lost city of Kalahari in the south african desert And it supposedly had some kind of treasures below it, you know as as lost cities do um There's like an old story from so I think it was from New York I forget this guy's name But he came up with the story in the first place and you know a few people heard about it And then hold him in became like a uh, a pilot like a successful pilot um and decided to take the whole family to uh To south african so that's where like may musk was I don't think she I don't know if she was born african-n-n-n-n But like Elon's mom. Yeah, um And they would just tour a lot within the plane, you know may musk is a twin which I always think is also I don't know why it's odd to me I think the phrase telegenic actually came from the twins because they were on some TV show at some point on this like as they're touring around their plane and they're on TV and someone said they're Telegenic you're like, you know, it's like photo Jennifer for television. I believe that's connected to may musk You want to come fact check that later. Not be my reality buffet, but um, yeah, so they see you went and look for this lost city So I just think that's so interesting because like I love the idea of risk and adventure and innovation It's amazing, you know and like You know, I don't agree with everything his grandfather was up to but like it's fascinating to me that he I think he died as playing I think he died if you died searching for Kalahari or if he died so for some other reason The story is he actually like was the first person to go from african-n-n-n-n-n Playing his little plane. I keep built the plane. You know, it's really it crazy interesting story Um, but like that's why he long wound up in africa because of the leave in Canada for whatever reason I think it's tied to technocracy thing, but there was other things that happened after that with him He had some like war. I believe in like Coca-Cola. Hold him in the hated Coca-Cola Because I had cocaine in it. He was like this is hurting people. I'm like, all right, that's fair. You know, but like him. He had some like war, I believe in Coca-Cola, Haldeman, the Canadian Coca-Cola, because I had cocaine in it. He was like, this is hurting people. And I'm like, all right, that's fair. But like, he had some theories about Coca-Cola, maybe like hurting people who are not, like, it was like a big, like a big, like a big pharma for Coca-Cola. So I say all that to say it's just interesting to see now Elon to me and his pals are, I think working towards a technocracy. And that Mars is Elon's lost to the Cali-Hark. It's like it doesn't, you know, and like I get it, you know, I'm highly inspired by my grandfather. I totally understand that. And like, you have that in your DNA, senior family. Is that them? Is this them? Actually never looked up pictures of them. Elon must fasten any history with Moose Draw. I don't know, that is, that's good name for Moose Draw. Yeah, Moose Draw is a good name for a bit. Like a tobacco. Like the article, Steve. Oh, let's see. Moose Draw. Elon Musk's grandmother is from Moose Draw. You know how I know this? He said so himself on Twitter. But like that's, that is the concern to me is what they're building now. Yeah. And like this whole idea of efficiency sounds great, but it has its dangers to humanity. Yeah. Um, you know, I think about like, uh, is that his grandfather actually with the twins? So that's, that's the twins. Yeah, this is how old I'm jumping on that, but punching on that a little bit more. They're straight out of the shining. Awesome. Oh, is Jolly Western the background? Oh, my God. That's funny, dude. That's crazy. Yeah. Yeah, I don't understand. Elon is a mystery, man. How does he have time to do all this tweeting? That's the the most obvious question he's lying just like he's lying about being a gamer. I don't think that's I don't think it's all I heard. That was a lot. I think it's real. I think he's a lot like a habitual liar. What? Like, so you think so, so what's he lying about? He's not doing the tweeting? I think every, maybe he's not like he's doing this. I think he's got this. But, uh, I mean, look, he's a smart dude. Uh, I just don't think he's doing all these things. I think he's outsourced a lot of it to AI. I mean, I don't think he's tweeting all that much. That to me is insane. It doesn't make sense. You're, you're doing doge. You're that much of a video gamer. You're doing your companies and SpaceX, Neuralink. You know, I just don't buy, I don't like artificially inseminating all these women. Yeah. Um, that's a whole other thing. I heard he's not fucking half of them. I heard I heard, I heard, I heard, is that true? That's what I hear. Yeah. Because he's a you Genesis. Right. He's, I heard it was like a, I heard somebody call him a rationalist where it's like his idea is, uh, he wants to reproduce with like women who have higher cognitive abilities. Right. And he wants to, it was basically like eugenics. Yeah. Yeah. Rationalist is just a nice way of saying eugenics and he like doesn't get past first base with half these women. I don't doubt it. And he's just artificially inseminating. So like it's weird because going back, I was thinking about Elon, you know, like when did I start even thinking about this guy? And I remember I was actually in Florida. I was walking our son and his stroller. So it was mostly like seven years ago. And I was reading about Nuralink that brought me to like his more stuff. And I was like, I was thinking about what kind of fights am I going to have in the future of my kids? I was going to be different. Right. The fights I have my parents, I like the music I listened to, you know, stuff like that or, you know, just not coming home. Um, like what am I going to fight about with my kid? I'm like, it's going to be him wanting to be immortal through Nuralinks. You know, because the transhumanist by then will like rate curve as well. Just upload your consciousness, you know, like, Timmy down the street is doing it. Um, or going to Mars, you know, and I was like, these are really interesting things. I like in the, I don't think it's going to be that far in the future where people are going to have some kind of designer immortality on putting in quotes where you can have like your digital avatar and people will consider as much as a real you as, you know, as you hear you and me. Um, so I was like really not into that. And like, I think it was probably 2020 I wrote my first thing about his Nuralink trial, uh, where you talk about like the pigs and, uh, you know, he's lost a lot of pigs. He's got the, I think he calls that. I think he calls that. I think he does any land. Have you looked about that? I think he calls it that. It's either he calls it that or like Nuralink calls it that, but it's where some of their like, you know, their brains explode. Uh, it's wild stuff. Um, so like that kind of started me thinking about how I uh, oh yeah, I do not trust what this guy's doing because it's tough because I, I can understand the positives, the short-term positives. It's beautiful that you want to fix someone who's paraplegic, right? If they want to walk like that's amazing. You want to give someone's sight again, who's, who's blind if you want to give someone hearing and his death. You know how you argue against that. It's like that's amazing. But at a certain point, I think it's going to be like, uh, you're kind of left out of society if you don't have those just like these smartphones today. Like you know, if you're not participating in the modern world, you're not, you're not having a phone like this, right? What about like, yeah, imagine being the only one who can't telepathically communicate, right? Right? That's going. I like being the only one who's out of smartphone. Yeah, sounds great. But that's the, that's the, the network they're building. Um, so what? Did you say something? I thought you said something. I'm here. I'm here in shit. It was his neural link. Yeah. Uh, but like so like, I was thinking about that stuff. And then I just started watching him closely because it was hard. Like I enjoyed him buying Twitter. Right. I was like, right. It was optimistic. Yeah. That's great. Twitter was horrible. Um, had a lot of issues. I appreciated his innovation. Uh, I was fascinated by a lot of it. And then when I started really thinking was a liar was when I realized that it sounds like he lied about his first born child dying in his arms, you know, and his wife at the time, she said that that's not true. And he only said that, unless you said it somewhere else, um, first time I saw him say it was when he was, he said it when he was trying to convince people why he didn't want Alex Jones back on Twitter. He, because he at the time believed that Alex Jones hurt kids, not really like him hurting kids, but like what he had done, what he had said was like, uh, you know, rejection of the reality of, you know, it's the same. He hooked that Elon believed it. Right? Yeah. He believed that like his kids were hurt. And Alex didn't believe it. So he said, he, you know, he thinks that way because his child died in his arms. But his wife said at the time, I think that's his first wife said that didn't happen at all. Um, so, you know, I'm like, if you're willing to lie about that, look, I don't know. Right. I'm just saying that this changed my perspective on listening to anything he says. And like if you don't, if you're willing to, if this is true, if you're willing to lie about your child dying your arms, then I, I will be skeptical of everything he said. Sure. Just like how him's skeptical of Zuckerberg and all these other people who are clearly lying as well. Um, so like I think this whole rebrand into being like magga and dark magga. It's just so stupid, but like it's, it's, it's them getting closer to the power that allows them to create the technocracy that I think they want. You know, it's, it's not, I don't think it's too conspiratorial to think that that's what they want. Um, because they see themselves as like gods and they see themselves as they're better than everyone. They, Zuckerberg was happy to censor all of us during COVID. Yeah. Um, uh, Elon has had a lot of changes of heart and that's, but that's, that's possible. You can have a change of heart, you know, I just don't buy it with these people. You know, I think this idea of efficiency is great. You know, doge is, I think is great. I love the idea of making the government much smaller because it's a huge problem. Um, but, uh, what they're going to install after that is probably going to be AI because the future technocracy is probably not going to be quote unquote experts. Like it probably won't be, Elon and then will be like pulling the levers, but they're probably going to install their AI because that will be their opinion of a, um, an objective expert, right? Although it's not objective because it's made by subjective people. Uh, so, you know, that's the thing I'm worried about. And I, you know, with Elon buying Twitter, although I thought it was great, it's clear to me that he's monopolized the collective consciousness. And so he's taking everything off Twitter to feed into his, into Grock to feed into optimus to make his, his spaceship, you know, that she says he's going to fly to Mars using AI. Um, so I think I think that's why a lot of people are doing, like they're data harvesting our thoughts. They're monopolizing our brains. That's like one of that is the new war. It's on our privacy and our thoughts and like meta has been working on things that can actually read your brain, like can translate your brain wavelengths into images and words. So this is, that's the future is them. You is like it's inescapable. They're going to want inside of your brain so they know a bunch of things how to sell you to advertisers, how to make money, you know, on you like that, but also how to prevent crime. Because they're going to be like, well, this person's having bad thoughts. So we need to watch him more closely. Like what they're doing in the UK just yesterday, I saw the article. Um, like they're doing allegedly with the idea for right now using lavender that AI model, which is like the AI is basically allowed to decide who may or may not be a terrorist and allegedly like there's articles about it. So they, the idea has said it doesn't do this. So I think it'll be great and assault. I have a few things probably happening because it sounds like a lot of the stuff the clear view AI would do or, um, or Palantir where it's harvesting a lot of data. Is this lavender? Dude, this is terrifying because it has a huge error rate. Aya lavender AI program were used by allegedly used by the Israeli military to identify potential Hamas militants in Gaza. Wow, this can't be good. Identified over 37,000 people in Gaza's potential targets for military strikes. The program allegedly used military, uh, used machine learning to assist scores to individuals based on factors such as association with suspected and militant and frequent changes in phone numbers. Wow, dude, that's clear. This is not good. Like, no. So, you know, it doesn't matter how you feel about that war. Like no one should have this ability. Dude, did you, um, I just had, um, my buddy Eric Zooliger on here the other day. He was explaining to me how, um, in the Russia Ukraine war, um, I think it was Russia was using an AI to like convince Ukrainian soldier. Like it was an at some sort of an LLM was like able to analyze some of the Ukrainian soldiers like by like analyzing their text messages and their phone calls with their loved ones. And like, and like, you like the LLM was mimicking their family members trying to convince them to basically like lay down their weapons and surrender. That is next level. That's like, that's like the evolution of wake up. You know, like we're gonna pump the voice of God right to this building. This guy, these people right. But now we can just pretend to be your loved ones. Yeah. Yeah. I was also listening. I think it was Eric Prince. The, I think he's a CEO of Black water. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Talking about like facial recognition drones that they're doing in Gaza or not in Gaza and Ukraine. And Ukraine. And they're taking old drones, but fitting them with like AI technology to find your face, you know, it's like that's why I say to me and say, I think he said that at a speech, you see the new Palantir commercial. No, how they're using these swarm drones. Oh, geez. So their new thing is like, so Palantir, which this doesn't seem like it fits up Palantir's sort of like niche of what they do, but they apparently had this new swarm pulpit to the commercial, the this new swarm technology where they have like thousands of these little DJI Mavic drones. And they're using them to like swarm battleships and basically take out battleships, right? Give us some, some audio. Oh, is this what played during the game? Darminevie game? Oh, no, I didn't watch it. Looks like a Transformers movie. Yeah. Is this like a Crenshaw commercial? So it's like this, it's Eric called it, uh, spreadsheet warfare. Yeah. We're basically I love how it pulled up a fucking ancient Maryland man's interview. Um, uh, shall agree with them. Exactly. Where it's like you, uh, you use super cost effective ways up like like, uh, really unbalanced ways to like take out other militaries. Like where you have this billion dollar worship or like a battleship and you're using maybe like $100,000 in drones to swarm. Yeah. I think Palantir probably came, I forget who came with the phrase, but it was, I think from Palatir from their world, the total information awareness. Oh, yeah. That was way before Palantir. Is that, dude, that is insane stuff. Yeah. Because that is like, we just want to know everything at all times. Mm-hmm. I think they do already. Right? Yeah. I guess Palantir probably just uses that. Yeah. You know, because it's like, data is gold. Right? Like that's we're going to take everything from everyone. Yeah. You know, a database. But it's safe. It's fine. We're not just growing bad. The government has it though. Uh, but they have your best, you know, they, they really care about they want the best for you. Like, okay, cool. Um, yeah, the total, any Jacobson wrote about that total information awareness stuff in her DARPA book, the Pentagon's brain. I got to read that. Oh, my God, it's so fucking good. It's like the full history of DARPA, like Jason scientists and the brand corporation and how it all evolved. Um, and like total information awareness, uh, was proposed, I think before 9 11. Oh, wow. Some of those DARPA guys, they wanted to implement the shit way before 9 11. Like, like in the early 90s, I think it was so they must love this world now. Oh, we're moving in that their wet dream. Right. What they wanted. They wanted access to every part of your life. Um, and she even writes in that book that they were, uh, DARPA was working on neural link for soldiers to create, uh, brain chips for soldiers to create super soldiers and like the very early 90s. Right. Yeah. And now that look, I mean, we only learned about neural link how many years ago, that is going to be a interesting future. Like I tried, um, I tried interviewing, uh, the guy with neural link. But, uh, I think Elon got a hold of it. Like, I, Elon and I have talked through people like back when I was trying to, uh, we had middle, I have middle man trying to get me into him. And he definitely is, I think, seeing things that I've said. So I was definitely not going to happen. Right. Hyper critical. And then, uh, to bring about the Kanye real quick, yeah, yeah. Uh, with, with, when I was with Kanye the second day, he was so pissed at Elon that mean him wrote this thing about Elon being a clone and to, and posted it to Kanye was pissed at Elon because he got banned from Twitter. So he went on Instagram and he was like, we wrote this whole thing about how, uh, Elon's a clone. I forget there was articles written about it was ridiculous. Um, so like that, that was OG, uh, Elon beef. And then, and then, you know, I've been very critical on lots of other shows about him. So, and I know I've tried to, uh, do interview with him through front mutual friends and like, it's just there's nothing happening there. But I was really stoked to do his interview with the neural link guy. I have no proof what happened, but I got ghosted right before I was supposed to go to Arizona to interview this guy. Why he was doing a lot of interviews like a ton. I was about to drive it or fly out to where he's at. Wow. Um, it's not like, I don't know. Maybe I'm just a jaded person, but like I've, I've had issues publicly, you know, I'm for a while. Uh, and I just, I just, just really, there's a lot of questions when it comes to neural link. And what that means for the future of humanity is like, he used to go around saying, you know, like I said earlier, we're summoning the demon with AI. Uh, and he would go to the, uh, the Congress and be like, maybe we should have regulation. And I'm not really a regulation person because I don't think that's going to fix anything, right? Like the war on drugs didn't fix anything. Right. Um, but the conversations important, right? And the people, you know, are incompetent leaders in DC should at least be talking about and amplifying that message so that everyone can start talking about it more. Um, but it seems like he abandoned that idea, right? And he doesn't really go around saying, well, he goes, he does go around saying like on Rogan recently, he was like, well, you people be at a jobs, uh, and we'll probably in 20 years be outnumbered by cyborgs. But now it's more of like an optimistic spin on it. I don't see it. Did you see that China was hiring these people, these federal workers that were getting laid off by doing, oh, huh? Are they going? Like, so, you know, I guess the idea is that some of them will have a bad taste on their mouth after they get fired. Right. And, uh, and China is trying to like recruit them and give it like putting them on payroll and all this stuff. But I guess it got outed. And I guess it was, it made headlines. So I guess it must have been a failed operation. I mean, they've got a lot of people working here right now. And I see group police stations. I heard about that just the other day. Is that crazy in New York? And then, uh, it was a San Francisco. It's crazy to like, and it was to like combat dissidents, Chinese dissidents. Yeah. It's amazing. It's amazing. Dude, we're overrun. Like, if that's, that's my problem. Everyone's got like a one bogeyman in their head these days and a you name it, uh, where who's, who's controlling the world and stuff. And it's so much more sinister and bigger than that. I think it's a network of a bunch of evil people and like with ancient money and new money controlling the narrative. Right. So like, you know, when I talk about post reality, I talk about like these people are engineering the narrative for you to believe in this or that, right? Yeah. So when I hear, you know, this Facebook whistleblower talking about the chief editor, oh, well, that's what you call your narrative engineer. You are literally doing it. You are literally creating reality and suppressing reality. Um, so, you know, this stuff is just going to get crazy like that that pound tier commercial is terrifying. Yeah. Because you saw Trump at office first time and you saw Biden in office post January 6th, and now half the country is an enemy to Biden. Right. So whoever is in charge, they could turn that kind of stuff against our own citizens. And that's horrifying. Right. So it's like you might like Trump and his friends right now. And they're going to put this thing in place, whether it's a technocracy or who knows what with this, uh, this techno like dystopia. But then the next person's in charge, and they're going to use it against, you know, I don't, I don't want that use even against people. I don't like in this country. Right. Right. I really disagree with that world. And then someone like Larry Ellison, who's, uh, I guess the CTO of Oracle, um, you seen this guy talk. Yeah. Strange dude. Um, and he's talking about, uh, you know, he does like the police cameras body cams, which I think is okay. Because I want accountability, but it's also now you're turning people into the surveillance state. And now everyone is being picked up by the cameras that will be fed into the clear view AI and to pal into your, you know, and it's just this evil spider web of information sucking. But he was like, uh, you know, talking about police officers wearing the cameras and how, uh, when they want to take a bathroom break, you know, we will not watch, but it will be stored away. And no, he said, yeah. Yeah. And we will only release it under court order. They will be on their best behavior. And then right from that, he transitions into citizens, and they will also be on their best behavior. Like these people see us as like just cogs in this machine that they are building around us. Um, so like the whole, the whole technology thing, you know, I see them infiltrating the, the White House, but I also see that they all, all these guys are building their own little technologies right now. Um, and like their own private cities, uh, have you heard forever, California? Forever, California. I think it's either forever, California or California forever. Um, but that's like, it's last I checked read Hoffman from LinkedIn Mark Andreessen, Substack, you know, smart guys. Um, but they're building this thing, which is our private city in really California. Have you heard a slow jamest and no, it's a country in California. And they classify their, their, uh, their taxes that they have to pay as, um, what did you say? They classify it as, um, basically like national, um, what do they call it? Were there like paying another country? They, they, they, like tariffs. No, they could, they consider their, their taxes to be like donations to the US. So that's hilarious. I have not heard of these people, but the forever California thing is a weird one because they're trying to buy all this farmland to the end of their little private city. And a lot of farmers have refused to sell last I checked. This is fairly recently. And so now they're suing those farmers for refusing to sell. That's insane to me. Right. Like, and so what's that's, that would be one of the questions I would bring up if I were allowed around these people. Yeah. You know, Mark on Driesen's part of Doge, uh, allegedly, Elon and Reid Hoffman, don't get along, but on Driesen and Elon do. And now, on Driesen and Hoffman, all the other people are trying to build this weird private city with their own little rules. And it's going to be like, um, like a bio hacker type of, you know, universe, you know, you look at one of these private cities, forget which one it is, but they're like installing Tesla keys in their hands. Like legit transhumanist stuff. Um, so I really, I'd be like, what are you doing to help the farmers who refuse to sell a farm plant to these insane people who want to build a private city, which is a small version of their technocracy. You know, they probably would call it a utopia, but one person's utopia is another person's dystopia. Uh, but like teals doing that, he's at the seafaring ones where it's a floating cities. Yeah. Um, all these guys are trying to build, I think Milton Freeman's like grandson is a part of that one too. Uh, that, so it's like, I really, the future, that looks like the future, to like that's what's going to take over that kind of thing. And you're either going to be a part of it or not. And like, I don't know, it's going to be like the Amish, you know, like the anti- Amish, where like you just, they all, you know, those people are crazy and they live in their little private city, or just keep expanding. Because if you see them at the top in the White House right now, and that just keeps trickling down. And you see them trying to do private cities across the country, that keeps going up. Where is that leave like normal people who don't want to be in this, like some of these people I was, I forget which city, which private city they were in, but they're like removing all the bacteria from their mouth. They're installing like weird devices in their body. Yeah. Um, it's a big deal. Like they're there. It's, no, this is like the, the burning man 2.0, but forever that's fucking crazy, dude. Yeah. So I'm against that. I got a piss so about I can taste it. Quick break. Are you on every podcast that you do with Tim? Or like, how does that schedule work? Yeah. I do, I do. I typically do his, his night. By the way, we're back from our PPP breaks. We yeah. Oh, and it was also a homicide prediction project. I think is the name of that crazy thing in the UK. So like trying to predict it. Yeah. Is that going to become a murder? We should, uh, you know, harvest all his data on the side. What if you're a true crime writer? I guess the out, I would be like, well, he's just writing about it. But that would be a good cover. I think about it all the time because we, we Google some of the most fucked up shit for the show. Same. I hope that be eyes not watching. They definitely have to be watching us. But yeah, I do, I do, uh, I do, we usually Monday nights, I do IRL with him and then in virtual world is through so my studio is like right next to his studio, um, West Virginia. It's crazy. Cause it's all like no one big building. He's got one big building with like, escaping and stuff. But my, my like, cough in size studios inside of like a haunted house. I'm like a really old crazy looking house for my real 1800s. Dude, the first time I saw him skateboarding, I thought it was fake. Cause I've never ate. I've never seen him like I had never seen him outside of like, you know, this. Well, it tends doesn't have legs. Those are bionic legs. Right. That's what I thought I've mentioned. Of course. Why would I, why would he have legs? And then when I saw him fucking absolutely ripping on a skateboard, I'm like, this is, there's no fucking way. This is real. Yeah. Yeah. It's crazy. It's crazy. It's a crazy seating real life. You know, because like he's down there skating before IRL. And, uh, he's got the giant skate park now. Um, and that warehouse. And so him and his skater friends are just hitting those things. He's got this one ridiculous like vertical. Yeah. I don't know what you call it. Like I don't know much about skating, but it's insane. It's like a death trap. Like I don't know why he even did that. It's ridiculous. But people will try to hit it because you go to the top. Yeah. I think I think someone like really hurt themselves. They're fine now. Really. But it's insane. But yeah, they're, they're down there. Like all the time. You got a half pipe outside. Yeah. And I can just look out my window and my whole life. That Russian money really hit. Yeah. Yeah. That was crazy. That's so crazy. That's so crazy. I was like, I did that was for the culture war show. Right. And that's so that was Tim's, I guess I was on his, he's got so many channels. I can't keep up. But like one of his channels on YouTube, we had the culture war. And so I was like pre tenant before they came in. And what was the story with 10? What was the whole story? How did it all start? It depends. You ask, you know, right? The culture war started, I don't know, two or three years ago. And like, I don't even know if these episodes are still on anymore. But the first one I did was probably episode like four. And it was me, Luke Rucowski, Tim and Alex Jones. I think we're in Austin or something. It was a blast. It was more like a casual than I, Ira was like, you know, you're in a, you're sitting on a table and we're just like the news, did it it up, right? Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Which war we just sit around talking about the certain themes or whatever. At a certain point, he licensed culture war, uh, to tenant, right? And that was like Lauren chatting them, you know, I don't know these people like that licensed it to tenant. So like it was still through his channel, I think like he's, he'd better talk about this. But like where did tenant come from? I don't know. But all of a sudden they came in and I was like, yeah, we want to license your ship for a million dollars. Yeah. I, I, so like they say it was Russians. Yeah. Giving money to like Lauren and then my guess, right? I personally think it was a CIA. I, I really legit. If you like look back at all the things the CIA has hijacked over the years to discredit, right? Uh, because a lot of these people were like, uh, in my opinion, even I'm not fans of that like not really a Dave Rubin listener. But like a lot of these people more distant voices with larger platforms, I don't know. It was weird to me that, uh, they would be given this money to be like, it's a lot of money. And some of those shows were in pulling a lot of stories. The story was that like, he had to create a new YouTube channel. And he was posting videos on this new channel and they were getting like, you know, five to eight thousand views. It was the same channel. It was, I think they created a channel and maybe it's streamed to that, but it wasn't his. And then the clips were remained on his original channel. Um, I think, but like, yeah, but like they were saying that we were told to say certain things. Like no one ever told me what to say. Like help with that show, sometimes I'm not the booker, but I did help book that show. Like I brought like, M. I came on that show. Right. And like it was just a very organic thing. Like, yeah. So no one ever said anything about anyone saying, you know, this or that, you know, some things. But the was the story. I think the story I read was that like, he was getting paid like a hundred grand to do a video that was eight thousand views. It's insane. I wish I was getting that. That's going to be crazy. It was great. Cause it, those, that tenant channel was not getting crazy views. Right. I think he was getting the most of all of them. But like it seems ineffective if you're the Russians. Well, I think I think it was literally just to get the headlines because all of a sudden now everyone who hates Tim and or Dave Rubin, whoever else was on that network, everyone says it's Russia. And all the comments always it's Russia, Russia, Russia. And when I say hi Jack, certain things, like to me, reminded me of how like rap was hijacked by the CIA or like or like how the modern art movement was hijacked by the CIA. Right. When they were trying to go against Russia during the Cold War. So they kept funding like a lot of these like Jackson Pollock perhaps like Roth go, you know, and be like, I don't know about any of this. Like allegedly, the CIA was pumping money to fund these. I don't think the artists knew, I could be wrong. I don't think the artists knew that they were getting money from the CIA. But they from what I've heard were pumping money into it to make this seem like it was more important because in Russia, you couldn't you couldn't express yourself like that. You know, or like like well saying earlier with the weird scenes from Laurel Canyon yeah, they hijacked the counterculture, you know, allegedly, you know, I think of Tom says this in chaos or prison weird scenes, but the anti-war movement really started out as like more like button up do is like short haircuts, you know, and then Laurel Canyon would the argument with that book would be like we put in crazy hippies on LSD to discredit that movement. So when I saw the tenant thing happening in my opinion, it's like you got all the headlines you wanted to go to like just to spread it. Did they fund anyone else besides Tim? Oh, there's a whole bunch of people tenant was like a network, you know, I don't remember I was like Dave Rubin. Oh, David was a part of it too. Yes, I remember that now, but like I don't even know how long he was a part of it, but like there was a bunch it was like five or six people who were part of like bigger names and like the real like political like podcast world. Yeah, it doesn't make sense that if like if these people are already like having dissident voices in the US, why Russia would have the incentive to inject money into that? It doesn't seem like it and it seems extremely like not cost effective. Anything is possible. Like Russia has done weird things where they like, uh, um, I think even I heard one of your recent shows that story where Russia funded both sides of a protest, right? And like so they they've got one side to be like we're gonna go protest on this side of the street and another side. So like they it wasn't an organic at all. Russia was behind the whole thing. So like they do do weird things and like they do try to undermine our society, you know, very best enough thing. Like they do try to collapse society through like the voices and the university stuff. So it's possible. I personally think it was CIA or our own government trying to do it. I don't know, but it was it was very odd. It was very odd because all of a sudden, my boss is in the news under like, I don't know what that was. And now I'm on my mind is saying, well, if they're saying we're attached to Russia now, then that allows the government to open up Pfizer warrants on anyone in that circle. Oh really? Because like it wasn't the Pfizer warrants where like it gives you the ability of government the ability to spy on people that warrant especially okay working with a long government. Oh, yes. So now it's like literally that gives anyone in that orbit. Me, anyone allows them to do that now. And I assume they were doing it beforehand, honestly. If you know about like the Lockheed Martin satellites that are up there and heat mapping the globe in real time. But it definitely gives that incentive to do that. But like nothing's happened. Like if it was if there was something more pressing and they were actually Russian agents or being funneled Russian information, I would have figured it would be more to come out. Like that's If there was something more pressing and they were actually Russian agents or being funneled Russian information I would have figured there'd be more to come out like that's why the headlines to me were that was their goal Was to discredit amongst the people, you know, but it was weird because it was a lot of money to these people And I came out of nowhere, you know, and I know like Tim and them they're all like friends I know each other from way back, you know Who Tim and who like Lauren and all them like Ruby like that that looks like a long those guys have known each other for a Most time I stood anyway back in the day vice. Yeah, I forget the other place I used to write for vice as well But he was like big-time vice. I don't think he started like the political Part of vice, but he was one of the first like people to really do like that on the ground reporting for vice and stuff But yeah, dude, I don't know it was really bizarre. It was very bizarre the whole thing and I think it I really do think that There's probably something we'll find out about it in terms of the government being being behind it I don't know could be wrong though. It's so funny how online It's like everybody suspects everybody of being a fed and working for the feds. We're funded by the feds I mean it's like probably I see how stupid it is just in the comments people think that I'm a fed The offense yeah, and then like I catch myself being like that guys gotta be fucking fifth all the time. He's gotta be massage But you have to kind of think like that. That's why I started calling you gotta catch yourself I know you gotta definitely gotta be skeptical of your skepticism, but like I start calling the fed Fed Internet theory Because like everyone on the Internet there's dead Internet theory Then there's fed in their theory where it's not all bots are a lot of them are fed You see a lot of these accounts pop up on Twitter. Yeah, that person just doesn't seem more game Oh, yeah, all the time all the time and I catch myself I talk to so many people sometimes I'm even real life and I'm like You know interesting interesting, but I know people think about about me as well I could come out of nowhere I was on a farm in New York as a professor and now I'm on like Tim's show right and if you say something someone doesn't like Then they're immediately they'll call you whatever massage Russian Yeah, depends which side they're coming from and for the people who didn't like Tim The Russian thing gave them way more ammunition to be like well He's yeah, he's been told what to say, you know And that does have an effect on some people like I think there are some people out there and be like wow really they don't look into it too much And I would be like wow is he not believing anything, you know and you know because I've seen that happen Throughout like I'm saying with the with certain things about rap or Laurel Canyon Some of these things are just not organic. No, so they don't fit no not a lot of the stuff right now It doesn't feel organic and right now. It's really easy to do that because of the AI stuff, you know and how people are duped So easily, you know like I think half of Biden's Public appearances were probably deep things really dude. He did he was a corpse first of all But they reanimated a corpse to be president and then some of those things just didn't feel right some of those videos And him are weird. Yeah, why why was he getting vaccinated in a fake Oval Office? Right. What was that about? Like his whole presidency just felt fake to me. Yeah, I didn't get it at all but like Yeah, I don't know. I don't know. The whole thing was weird. It seems to have like just gone away Like I think From what I've heard like they're not even pursuing anything with the tennis stuff So really I haven't heard anything yet And everyone else just seems to be following you as that was like a year ago now probably Maybe a year or so ago Um, some of those people have just disappeared though I haven't seen much from them. Maybe they're doing work like the people who were hired to be part of tenant like they've Talking heads if you will But like it just culture war Show one right back to Tim and I think doing just way better now Was on ten it because no one I don't know what it was like why tenant wasn't blowing up How these big names on it and it just wasn't yeah I was like wow we would have you know big names on some shows and just it was like into obscurity Yeah, like not doing as well as like performing like a like IRL or something like that So yeah, I've noticed these weird these weird Comments communities on like on like x in on YouTube where like there's been this crazy thing where like everybody He wants to blame Israel for everything and especially like the JFK stuff comes out I haven't read all those new declassified jay. Hey, dr. Ad thousand dollars. Yeah, I read one of them But it's funny like how how now it's like The consensus of every comment section on every video is like if you're not blaming Israel for killing JFK You're a moron. Yeah, I know in your bed. Yeah, it's like there's yeah It goes back to what I was saying about you having one boogeyman in your mind. Yeah, like Israel is not good There's a government right now. There's any government right? I just don't like any government and Israel is really bad I I judge Israel based off how I judge lots of governments. How are they during covid? They were tyrannical. Yes, I don't like that. So I am very against that But like you look up to lavender thing. I'm also way against that And I do know that they're part of they've been a part of all a bet a lot of bad things A lot of bad things we've been part of so many bad things right so it's really hard to pick a part and just be like that's the boogeyman It really oversimplifies the evil in the world. I think But I'm also not downplaying because they're crazy people like the government is crazy Thinking that you can you if they are using lavender and they have that high of an error rate and you're killing people based on the Predictive policing of AI like that is so crazy to me But yeah, it's become easy for people to just write off everything You know it's in that is a problem because it's like it's gonna stop people from Having real conversations about real like we're not gonna solve real problems and with evil in the world If we're just focusing on one thing because it's unfortunate. It's not just one thing. It's many things Yeah, so yeah, so with the JFK files. It was funny seeing everyone being like Oh, it's gonna be Israel. We know we know and like I saw one comment that said if if If I see one more person talk about JFK without mentioning Israel, though like I'm gonna lose it Will's become a fetish. No for people. Yeah, like it's like it's like they want to be whipped by Israel But you're unfortunately being whipped by everyone With the thing with me and the JFK files. I thought was interesting I haven't read all of them But I read a lot is like the the new operation mongoose files that came out of just like very nonchalant CIA memos about like all right You know we think we should just use a bioweapon to destroy all the crops You know, okay, that sounds good. And that's what they were doing. They're just setting I don't know what chemical was but they would be like all right We'll destroy it with a bioweapon, but it will look natural and nothing it was natural Like well, how long they've been doing that? Where was this in Cuba? Oh, wow. Yeah Dicuba. It's totally insane. So like what we knew about mongoose the files were to me a joke Because like we knew about most that stuff. Mm-hmm. A lot of stuff is just you're getting like new angles on certain things That we already knew about mongoose was just like the sabotage stuff. They were doing over there. Yeah, yeah Yeah, so like we'll just destroy the crops and all these things You know, I think all that's super interesting to me, but like I was looking for anything Military industrial complex wise. Mm-hmm. It's like that might be if I have a boogeyman, right? That's mine. Right? It's like Yeah, well, it's like you know who had the motive to kill J. Okay Well, okay, let's just ignore the fact that the joint chiefs of staff absolutely wanted him fucking gone Yeah, that's just ignore that and think Israel wanted nuclear materials. So they must have done it right? I just think of northwoods right? Yeah, right? The joint chiefs of staff and like London sir and Yeah, that stuff is insane to me like look even RFK Jr says it he doesn't believe that but they get mad at him for He doesn't believe what he said I think he told him this actually when he was on Tim's show He doesn't believe northwoods and the joint chiefs of staff and anything to do with the assassination like him like you have to Turn me down that I was shocked that was that the like I think that's a Libertarian convention whatever but um I was shocked. I'm like really In fact that he wanted to pull everyone out of Vietnam and they wanted to fucking ramp up Vietnam Want to shatter the one exactly so like you know I look at the everybody has their own flavor of JFK Dude the UFO you think it was UFOs It's all of them and it goes back to post reality you go online. You'll find your answer Mm-hmm and maybe it's all of them together the aliens were working in tandem with lemon and so And Fidel Castro and Israel and maybe you know, maybe that's more like the truth, but like the military industrial complex stuff to me is like we are now in the totally in the grips of that I love listening to the Eisenhower speech the last speech he gave before JFK came in the office where he warns the American people about the military industrial complex and like the one thing That Biden ever said that I agreed with on his last day in office was warning the American people about the tech industrial complex I was like why is that? I was his last thing he said and Unlike he's probably just upset because now all these people have turned on him You know like all these people that were in support of the the Biden administration are now pro-Trump and maga suddenly But I think that is a true threat like with everything we were saying earlier Mm-hmm the technological complex, but like now they're married the the military industrial complex is the tech industrial complex like you look at Palette, yes It's a clear example of the marriage of these like this unholy matcha-mo any of these people Mm-hmm well, it's interesting that like there was that story how how Google was using like surveillance satellites or something for War stuff similar to what Palette here's doing. I see that this was a long time ago. I'm not surprised and Google basically like shut down that program saying that we're not willing to work with you know The the war hawks in the government to like took to fucking overtake other countries So then Palette here basically took the ball where they left off Right an Alex carp thought like well if I'm gonna benefit you know and make billions of dollars off of You know developing technology in this amazing country the number one country on earth Why am I not gonna try to push forward our? You know our military capabilities and you know Establish our footprint in the rest of the world. He's like you want to take full advantage of it All those guys teal especially are very against Competition here pro monopoly that's what they say teal is pro monopoly He'll buy up everything and make himself bigger so that makes sense with what you just said and like Altman Sam Altman from opening eyes very inspired by teal and By and it by the quotes about being a monopoly so like we are in like this new Industrial revolution, you know, but it's gonna be the AI stuff and it's gonna be like the new machine age and It's kind of reflective of the old industrial evolution the second one really You know after the Luddites and then Post-Civil war is like we get monopolies eventually You know and we see Rockefeller literally doing what Palette here is doing now But organically like data harvesting through all his competitors to know how to undercut their prices, you know So that's just like an early version of what's going on and it's all tied It's so funny to me because it's it's so similar to how we are now because we also had a new form of journalism back then with like Those her name Ida Tarbell or something But like the muck rakers right and so now she's looking into these monopolies that that would help inform Teddy Roosevelt I'm like he wanted to do to break up these monopolies You know, and I don't know how much I agree with all that like breaking things up because I don't really want the government to have any power over me But um, you know, that's where were there now. Yeah, we're there now like this Facebook stuff I think is I maybe it's not gonna blow up because people don't seem to care You know, they see a tick tack now a UFO video and no one no one cares New York Times in like how many years ago wrote about we have an off World vehicle not made of this earth in this space like no one cared You know the Mexican court the alien corpses that Mexico brought out were a joke So so yeah, yeah, yeah, when I see when I see Zuckerberg you're being basically proven to be a liar under oath I'm like Do people care tomorrow or we're just gonna forget because we're so complacent? Everything as crazy how fast that story of the Trump assassination just disappeared and how like fast like the narrative change to like we jump to the Olympics thing The next day the Butler one Yeah, yeah, that one means that one is like no one talks about it. No one in the media talks about it anymore No, it's it's there was all kinds of weird stuff with that guy, right? Way weird stuff Yeah, I like and they burned his body before he didn't like the whoever handled him They'll say they didn't but there was a senator who went I think was a senator or congressman who went out and did his own Investigation work this really interesting report He even went and looked and see if there was anyone else on the water tower member that theory. Yeah, and he says before he was able to inspect the body They cremated him Really they the other people said that didn't happen, but like I don't know I think the whole thing is super weird There's that story of the guys showing up on the roof and taking pictures and like everyone being like he was like text me Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah I remember seeing those videos reminding me of like the umbrella man to a degree at the JFK You know in the grassy know like just these weird characters now emerge from that like failed assassination attempt I I I personally think like it was a failure of We're in like a pandemic of incompetence because everyone's just failing at their jobs And then through that failure of incompetence the deep state whatever you want to call it was able to sneak in a bad actor and Try to take out Trump. Yeah, my first reaction to it was like there's no way it was like any sort of military Intelligence operation because they wouldn't have missed if it was a CIA they absolutely wouldn't a fucking miss right right like it it seems To me like the most recent explanation is there was maybe some sort of like rogue Group a very small rogue group within the military or a military or government that you know Met with somebody and said we got to make this happen and not many people knew about it And it was just like very discombobulated which is why it failed and then there's the anti-Trump people on the right Like who who think he's a bad actor who will be like it was it was done to a To make him more sympathetic and to like get him elected That's a whole theory out there, you know, and people who think he's the anti-Christ and all that stuff I I personally don't think that like I was reluctant to vote for him this time because of what I'm saying you today about The all these people around him like I really have a hard time supporting that Mm-hmm. I did vote and I'm I actually I don't know how regret it But I don't feel good about it because I don't like these people at all And anywhere near him when I think of Trump I'm like I think he's just he reminds me my grandma when I explained her what hashtags are oh Oh my goodness. This is so amazing. I don't really get it But it's a major it's a future so like when he's seeing the rockets launched from SpaceX It's it's amazing. Mm-hmm. I don't know. I like to think that he doesn't understand that these people are dystopian vampires Building a horrible environment around him and using him Well, maybe he does, you know, I just don't my gut says he doesn't understand Right, but he's just like very impressed with the innovation and that Trump's biggest flaw one of his biggest flaws This is his need to be liked by even the people who hate him Like he hates the corporate press but he loves the corporate press he wants them to like him so badly He wants to be like welcomed back into the fold that he was once a part of now as much as he claims not to be I think in the right with him They want to be accepted by all these people. That's why they all freak out when someone some celebrity Of sudden puts on a red hat right. I'm like, let's not do that, you know Just because they're they're agreeing with you now doesn't mean it's for good intentions But you know I still like to extend grace to them. Yeah, and maybe I'm wrong right, but probably not Yeah, what do you think what do you think? Happens with this whole Elon Trump thing and this whole doge thing. I think this all plays out I don't know so like thinking back to history I think of um, I think his name is Frederick Taylor Taylor. Taylorism. They called it or Scientific management was all about efficiency. It was during that second industrial evolution Where he's like we need to make factories way more efficient. All right, that's awesome efficiency is great But it turned you know there's lots of negative consequences to it. Yeah Like workers were suffering. It was horrible That's why we would eventually get the muck rakers and stuff who saw how these environments were really bad and anti-human That they start to view people as just replaceable parts right and then allegedly Someone like Lenin installing him now They were impressed by Taylorism and that's how cake informed a lot of their Marxist views on how to run a very centralized state That they claim his efficient I'm not saying that's where we're going But that feels like uh There's a lot of people with a lot of money Trying to consolidate power into one place and that will have total control over us whether it's a technocracy Whether it's just like invisible technocracy that's happening right now I'm worried about it because when you have experts in charge Like I said in the beginning how do you define an expert? Mouth thought he was an expert and all his people were experts as they industrialized China But the great leap forward was catastrophic. They had a whole one of the worst famines in the world Because of experts saying many things, but one of them was like we should just kill the sparrows Because the sparrows remind me of freedom in America But then the sparrows were the ones that ate the bugs and the crops and the bugs not being there Oh, then the swallows not being the sparrows not being there the bugs were there The bugs ate the crops killed the crops That's just one aspect of like the four pests campaign that came out of the engineers in the scientists and experts of Mal so it's like that's like the the sick bad version of Taylorism Married to communism. Yeah And it feels like we're heading towards that because When I talk about like dissidents now being reluctant to criticize this administration Yeah, a lot of those dissidents believed in small government as I do like I want to really small government I'm not an artist man. I yet after a bad it's tax day. So I do feel like an anarchist is just I do feel like one today, but um, you know, they're they're going So these dissidents who were so vocal about Small government now are very pro Elon And Elon is literally consolidating everything down just look at the x at x that's his everything app That's consolidating banking Your whole life down into an app. Yeah, which is Antithetical to me say he wanted a model x off of that Chinese company. I wouldn't be surprised. I mean he loves China They're good to him right just good is our military is to him. Mm-hmm. You know he makes a lot of money off all these places So with doge, I think it's great, but like if they it's so like where I live in In West Virginia. We're like an hour and a half outside of DC I talked to a lot of these people who are getting fired because of doge Like commuters right a lot of them are like these Christians church goers Trump voters and like we didn't expect to be like this and I have a hard I've hard done being sympathetic because I like I really hate the government. I really hate these This overly, you know this ballooned government is wasteland You know like I love doge cutting all this stuff But it dawned on me talking this one guy When he's getting those emails about like what are the five things you did this week? You know I'm like who's reading those emails and it's like they're not hiring new people to just read the emails It's going through Grocker. Yeah, and then I'll get like that. Oh, that's a leftest talking point I think it's a fair talking point to make like I don't I don't like the AI overlords running everything and So I'd see that as the future is like they're gonna slowly get rid of humans implement AI as This digital god has Elon calls it and then they're probably gonna fight over which AI has control No, Elon's pretty close so he's there, but teal works with Altman with Angela has They work with open AI to make their ghost drones and all that stuff. So there'll be a war over who's in charge Somebody that's a good thing for us, but yeah, I don't know When I'm analyzing it all I remember when the story first came out about the workers have any email what they got done that week or whatever And like I was arguing my dad I told my dad about and he's like no you're fucking wrong Fox News said that it was only remote workers that have to do it and at the time my dad was at the VA Because he got see he got pneumonia and he he goes to the VA whenever he has you know to go to the hospital And I'm like oh yeah, I'm like well, let's ask your nurses I'm like ask your nurses if they got the email and he did and they're like yeah We got the email all the fucking nurses at the VA. It's great and it just fed right into AI You know, it's like I know people who have a lot of people lost their job recently and now they're up against AI in another way because all these places are now using AI to review resumes and if I If you're thing for whatever reason doesn't check all the AI Not a you're not a human looking at it. You're done. Mm-hmm Like how do you fight so you're losing your job to AI And now you're not able to get a job because of AI and that these people are very open about it Altman, you know All of a sudden all these people are being like yeah, that's the future. You know That's why they want UBI. That's why they're they've had these um private cities You know, they they think it'll be a beautiful future like Elon says where You can have a robot babysitter. You can have your car drive you around what you play video games But that's kind of what you've all heard already said about the useful idiots that refuse that society That total digital society that you'll just drug them and give them video games to be complacent Which is why I'm like, oh, we're there. We're pretty close Um, I just I want I want people to like just reject it You don't want to have to like be anti all this stuff because it's amazing It's fun, but like you have to I mean you have to have everything in moderation Yeah, like you know our kids are inheriting this this really dark dystopian world I think it's you know, it's pretty nightmarish But you know throughout history you can always say that it's always been nightmarish But for now, but right now it's like what makes it different is that it's literally a war in your brain Yeah, they are literally looking to get in your brain And when you you put all these things together pal into your clear view the meta thing with the brain waves um Lavender That's like skiner. Yeah, yeah, at a certain point. That is gonna be skiner And like I said that recently on some show if you're getting like I got pushed back from Tim and some other guest So they won't be like that. I'm like Elon literally just compared it to skiner on a rogan Like he literally just said he just he watched terminator and he's like oh we're almost there. I'm like he's a guy making this Yeah, so like I'm based on my own research, but I'm also listening to these guys talk about every day It's interesting Yeah, because Rogan seems to be one of the guys that's super optimistic about it I mean he's been talking about the nurling and he's like obsessed with this idea of of Nonverbal communication with not into it with like you know being able to See people are basically transmit thoughts back and forth and be able to understand people's intentions like immediately He's not good. He seems to be a really big big fan of it or really interested in this idea Yeah, he has more countries and when he was on recently like How long do we have the AI government? I get it, you know, he's in that world. He's in Austin a lot of these companies are there He's he's talking to these people. He's seeing a lot of the positive aspects You know like um like Tim pool recently interviewed I think David Sachs went the AI like some more and you know Tim was starting to interview with like uh um Talking about more like the consequences of AI and Sacks was just like I'm tired to talk about negative consequences. Yeah, I'm like I'm sorry There's a lot to talk about when I comes in and we're allowed to have concerns over these things Especially when you all go around saying we're gonna be at a jobs. Yeah, like there's there's beauty coming out of it Like a fur fur ever. I've refused to use any AI Yeah, I've never touched it until very recently. I've been asking grock questions Just to see because I feel like I've been criticizing it's like when people criticize a movie they never seen I was like I got it. I got to use it, you know, just see what it's like and it's fascinating. Yeah, yeah Now I'll go back and use Google for the same questions And they suck like grock is way better. Is it really? It's from so far I can ask it certain questions about history and it gives me a way more in-depth look No, obviously I can go read a book or go get a book on on Google books or buy a book, you know This is something there's there's that rap, but just in terms of the AI answers on Google and the AI answers on Grock Really so far Grock is better and like I understand how this is awesome What happens when you start asking Grock and Google different questions about history in the book giving you completely different answers Grock's like who is the villain in World War II Google says Hitler Grock says it was Winston Churchill because now the AI is gonna have its own post reality Mm-hmm And they're gonna be competing right who programmed just like went on well, that's the way that's the that's how you get power As you fucking split the population up. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, and that's where we're so fractured now. Yeah, there's no you can have anything You want any reality you want It's it's that's kind of go back to the how I was saying about I needed religion in my life because I was spinning at control I'm like I want to my kids that some sort of moral center Yeah, cuz I was like look I'm a very flawed person and I know nothing because I'm just a little human being But I need to attach myself to something Ancient but also modern and which is a weird thing for me to think you know after years of not taking seriously Yeah, but a lot of the things I see when I read the Bible I See like that evil is just it's infinite like it's never it's always here It's the same thing we're always up against the same sort of thing. It's always a war for you It's just a different ways of doing it. Yeah So like that that's for me we're coming from at it now because I needed like some sort of shield against the the evil Because I think it's just straight up evil. I think a lot of this stuff is very anti-human Even though they build it as a beautiful thing. Yeah, they say it's positive. They say it's gonna be great for you Um, and that's like you know, they say like when Elon saying you know, you can have you play video games all day It's gonna be great. You're gonna be smarter That hasn't been the case We have we were more connected now than ever but people more isolated Suicides are up. Yeah, the made program in Canada was like 5% of deaths a year ago So you just sign up for suicide in Canada like we're not well right where the kids are not smart They're not smarter. They're dumber. Yeah, I was a professor for a while. Trust me It's not good the public school systems are failing the kids um, so you know I don't get kids in be like they didn't know it even the degree that temperature freezing was Like they just didn't have basic skills So like when they say the AI just can make everything better. I don't think so I don't think so like allegedly the AI just passed the Turing test the other day And I was thinking like does that mean just humans are dumber and getting worse at recognizing AI versus humans You know, they said it was like a 75% success rate or something and I don't doubt it You know when I when I'm reading these the grock things I'm impressed. I'm like this is it's eerie Yeah, I try to test Grock a lot. I'm like I'll put up really dry humor aligned and I like to see what Grock says about it now Like I kind of tricked it yesterday But not really I was like I put up a quote that I said it was from Katy Perry And I put up the picture of the astronaut who was stuck in space for nine months But the quote wasn't from Katy Perry from William Shattner when he was in the Blue Origin thing And I just want to see if Grock would know that this was like super dry because it's caught other really dry humor And it didn't it was like this is a Katy Perry quote from her Blue Origin. I'm like that's nice Now that I say it now it's gonna be like oh now we know right trick But I was curious because um, I'll say one sentence just like jokes on on Twitter It immediately knows it's a joke even though it's very dry Like I'm like that that's impressive to me. The fact that it's concerning to register Sarcasm. Yeah So now that means you know I'm now I'm feeding it. You know we all are and it's gonna get better at everything because it's just been eating everything We do because it's yeah, it's a vampire. Yeah, the the the the neural link Telepathic communication thing is like super crazy to me because it's like you know some people like Rogan think it's a great thing Because you're gonna you're gonna be able to catch people in lies or be able to like tell if people are trying to fucking sell you some Horse shit or whatever and it's gonna make it's gonna make communication better and it's gonna get rid of nefarious or bad actors But like if you think about Thoughts right at least my thoughts my mind is like a horness nest of just crazy shit running around And it's not necessarily things that I want people to know right Like if I'm like for a reason if I'm right if I'm like waiting in line or something And I see something I might have some fucking crazy fucked up thought go through my head that doesn't mean that's what I want to Communicate to that right how does that machine now tell the difference between right a passing just crazy thought Yeah, and you have not real thought right because like think about like when you communicate like when you like you would know better than anybody Like when you write something like you have to go through a lot of refining. Oh, yeah There's like some drafts there's drafts right you have to draft things to distill it down to the most optimal Way to communicate this idea to somebody else But when you're removing all these layers of refining and drafting communication You're just going straight from this fucking horness nest cluster fuck of chaos chaos in your mind straight to somebody else It's gonna be just It seems like just massive miscommunication. It's not gonna be good. It's gonna overwhelm people First of all probably make it so you don't want to go outside If you have that if you have that ability and you're like connected to this network But then also it'll feed into this idea of the like the homicide prediction unit Yeah, this is predictive policing. Yeah within your brain Mm-hmm. How are they gonna parse through bad ideas? Who's looking through the bad ideas? You know like I already don't like you know grueling certain things if I'm writing a story and like it's a crazy thing I thought look up not like oh now they know I look into that, you know I just it's very uncomfortable But that's like that's that is the final frontier is inside your brain Yeah, knowing what you're thinking, you know It should be about body language, you know in person You know and just sharing your thoughts without someone Imagine what it would be like to think while in a conversation, you know right now we could have different There's other thoughts happening while we're talking and there's a screen now that playing the other thoughts That would be kind of interesting actually for the show, but alarming, you know Because and that's what met is doing where it's like We're gonna read the brain waves and translate that into an image So like it's gonna be great for the companies that want to sell you stuff and great for the police who want to police you Great for the war companies that wanted to destroy you But it's just another step in hurting like interpersonal relationships. I just how they should be, you know like I just think it should be A police you great for the war companies that wanted to destroy you. But it's just another step in hurting interpersonal relationships. Like just how they should be. You know, like I just think it should be as at least I'm not of technology as possible. Yeah. I say that as we're surrounded by cameras and TV and the phone, right. But like this is still, you know, it's like it's just radio, you know, to me. And yeah, I really reject that aside. And I really do worry about the kids who are going to grow up and not have that foundation where they really like cherish personal relationships. You know, like the lady who drove me here today, she's been learning English for two years. And she uses her driving to learning. So she immediately, she was like, this lady is really chatty. What's up with that? And she told me eventually, like, I'm learning English right now. And there's a very choppy song. Like now I'm like her data set for a large language model. But like I love that. You know, I love that. Like I get to learn about her history. You know, real quick, 20 minute drive. We're talking about all this stuff. We're talking about music, English, Spanish, all this stuff. And, you know, these are the things I kind of like miss with a lot of the world today. I was, I was very mad when easy pass happened in New York because they, uh, they got rid of all the toll booths. And I'm the psychopath who would have conversations with the toll booth people who really people behind me. But like one of my early stories for inverted world started out of toll booth because the guy, um, my wife's name is Nancy. His wife's name was Nancy. Oh, wow. And, uh, I don't know how that even started, but every time I go to the toll booth, you mean like an extra little bit of information from his life. And like his brother was like shot by the police because the Irish mafia paid them off to do it in Hell's Kitchen in New York City. Crazy story. I was like, this isn't so every time I go through the toll booth, and he was there, uh, he can tell me more of the story. And eventually I go to his house and it had a long, really chat, right? Interview to me. And turn this into a story. I miss that. Now it's just drive right through. I know it's like a small thing. I love that ability to just talk to people. Yeah. People would honk at me. And it wasn't the most polite sometimes. Yeah. I just need to know why you think they buried him underneath this concrete slab. Uh, you know, where they're building a racetrack. The fascinating stories, you know, and I love getting those stories from people. Yeah. So a lot of the stuff that's right today is making us way more isolated. Yeah. It's really rare. And it's, uh, something that I noticed too, like with a lot of the, the media and the reporting and the journalism that goes on nowadays, like, like far less of it is people actually going places and talking to people there and getting first hand experience of it. Most of the, like, I feel like 90% of the reporting and the journalism that comes out nowadays is reporting on, you know, like third, fourth, fifth hand stuff. Oh, yeah. Right. It's, yeah. It's disgusting. It's like the human centipede of information. And this is like, this is debate that Twitter was having just in the past week because of the Douglas Murray. Oh, yeah. That was a, I hate the way that he did that too because he was trying to use that like to discredit Dave. Cause oh, you, you haven't been that. What are you even talking about? Like, and it's like I, I didn't agree with him at that point because right. It doesn't matter. Like it, it's ground on the ground reporting is great. Yes. But it shouldn't be the, like the ultimate thing in your opinions. And like I mentioned the Walter Duranty story where he was going to, you know, the Soviet Union and he was given like the nice pre-packaged tour. He didn't see the famines. And he eventually, I guess he did know, but he didn't report on him. And I want a Pulitzer. So that's on the ground reporting. That's fake. Yeah. You know, you can name any war or going on and they go and they get like just a nice tour from that government who wants you to be a propagandist. And so when I said that people were like, oh, so you don't think on the ground reporting report, I'm like, that's not what I'm saying. I'm saying that this guy is discrediting Dave's opinion because he hasn't been in this place, but it doesn't always matter. Right. However, it is important to go. And I want all the people to go. So I can be all the perspectives. I've done on the ground reporting for a bunch of different things. Like I was able to see like the border wall, Yuma. And it was insane. It was crazy. And I even thought it would be. Nine terms of like people running across the border, just in terms of like how dystopian are the edge of our country is. And there's just this giant like wall that homemade ladders are thrown over, you know, that they climb over. And like the, the border patrol, they're insane. You know, they don't care. The ones I'm at least, they were more worried about me driving around for my story. I was allowed to be there. Then they were about people coming over the border. Yeah. And they met fentanyl coming through like millions of pounds coming over the border and tunnels or through drones. You know, and I thought that was fascinating. So like I got that, but you know, I'm always, I always say like, don't just trust me. I'm just one person with a whole lot of baggage in my brain. You know, read as much as you can, whether it's on the ground or not. Right. Cause there's also books, you know, so that was a really interesting debate for me. But also like a really important one to have, especially right now, what we're talking about with media and everything going on. Look at all these influencers in the White House. They're on the ground. I'm like, I don't feel like I'm getting the full story from them. You know, like they're right there. And they're not asking the questions. I think are important. Yeah. I think it could. And they'll be like, well, it's still early. But I'm like, I don't know. There's a lot going on right now that I think we should be talking about. You know, I don't, I'm not in my life when I'm talking to these people in West Virginia. A lot of this awesome stuff coming out of doge. It's, it's awesome. But it's like an abstract joy because everyone's still suffering. Right. There's still like broad poor and like the gas prices haven't dropped yet by us at least the food's still expensive. Everyone's looking paid a check to paycheck. So while it's amazing that we're cutting all this stuff with doge, you know, there hasn't yet been real like improvement to people's lives. And then I guess the argument would be like, well, it takes time. Totally. But it's just sucks that in the inverse, it can be overnight for you than the ruin your life. Yeah. You know, like when Biden got in with the pipeline, I hit was like a keystone pipeline. Like he cut that and like immediately whatever pipeline it was and that had a direct impact on everyone. Yeah. In prices. Yeah. So I wish it could be the opposite now. I'm just, I'm seeing a lot of people not really getting on board with it. And I've seen a lot of people really disenchanted like not to tie all this AI stuff and Trump together. And then with Maja, like the AI movement and these tech billionaire vampires are in direct conflict with Maja and day two of Trump of him being in office right now, he announced Project Stargate. Right? Did you see that? No. 500 billion dollars to AI. Sam Altman's there. Larry Alson. Like 500 billion. Yes. And why they call it a Stargate. Interesting. Right. Cause I don't think Stargate ever ended. I think this is just like a continuation of, you know, ESP mind. We were talking about teleconicis. Mm hmm. This is just a continuation of that. We got it. Dude, this is a lot of money. This is the second day in office. You have to remember deep seek was that it was that, was that China's AI thing? Yeah. Yeah. It was like that day. Right. So we're in like a cold war with this stuff and AI race. And then when deep sea came out, Mark Andreessen was like, this is a sputnik moment. And I agree. This is big. But but why say it's in direct conflict with Maja is that at this press conference, Altman and Ellison go up and be and they're like, we're going to make, we're going to use AI to take your blood samples and see if you have any like weird cancer. And if we find your cancer, we will make designer 48 hour mRNA vaccines. Yeah. And like you hear that. And then all the maja moms like we meet. Yeah. And so when they see RFK junior, not like, you know, kind of being a little more pro and then right vaccines. Then you see this. People are reluctant now to really, you know, the maja, I'm not quite at least I'm talking to. I mean, there's some who are still in support. Obviously. But I see this is a direct slap in the face to maja. There's a lot of people who think RFK junior is like a Trojan horse for the pharmaceutical companies. There's a lot of people who think he's like, M Assad or controlled by M Assad. No, yeah. There was that crazy story that came out. Yeah. It was the one who was a Candace Owens. Oh, yeah. And Ian. Carol. And Ian. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And he's done this show. We've got on my show. Yeah. And some pretty crazy conversations with Ian. I like Ian. And, but he, you know, I don't know if that's a whole story. It goes back to what I'm saying with Boogie, the boogeyman. Yeah. It's very possible though, because I, the Kennedy's, in my opinion, are the gen hurts. I like, I liked the idea of JFK, but like if we're talking just like on a moral level, I just don't vibe with that. Right. They're, they're like cheating on their wives. It's all kind of gross to me, like perverted. I'm not into that. Yeah. But like, look, like I could separate art from the artist. I tried it with politicians, but it's different because they're actually creating laws that are a lot. So weird thing, like, maybe it's like, that's the kind of person you have to be in politics and be in Washington. And that's maybe there's maybe they can get good stuff done, but maybe they're like, you know, morally, they're pieces of shit. Yeah. And they most of the most of the most choice. No, you know, he's not great either. Yeah. Right. So it's why it's funny to me when it's the other purity test going around. Yeah. DC, I almost called it Hollywood. It was like a Freudian. It is like, what did no difference him? Dylan called a DC, the Hollywood for ugly people. I love to know that's amazing. But it's true. And like, so I'm saying all that to be like, it's very possible that there's blackmail on RFK Jr. Yeah. He's got a crazy life. He's like the capitating way old. He's literally had like 35 fucking names and addresses in the black book. Yeah. It's weird. And then there's a whole story. Like how do you ignore that? He had the one reporter who was like, texting him, like just recently, right? Yeah. That whole story was weird to me because I'm like, if that were me getting those types of messages from some strange lady or whatever she was to him, you're blocked and we're not talking again. Yeah. Allegedly, he's opening up the, he keeps opening up the messages, right? He's blocked. She's blocked. She's not blocked. So this says a lot to me. If that's true, right? I don't know. He's never really addressed it. But like I think it's very possible that they do have something on him. But, uh, or if he's a Trojan horse, possible, they say the same for Trump. Because in my mind, he's kind of a Trojan horse with AI people. He just gave him $500 billion to build things that I think are insane. I'm not taking a marinade shots. I'm not like, if it goes back to the whole thing of like, it sounds amazing. But like, this is all like an accelerationism, right? It sounds amazing is how Elon talks about terraforming Mars. Like he's like, you know, to terraform Mars, we'll just, we have to drop thermonuclear bombs on the poles of Mars. So like, that's how I see this stuff. It's like, they say it's for the good, but a lot of destruction has to take place first. Did he really say he dropped thermonuclear bombs? Yeah. I think he turns a cold bear. Yeah, like years ago, really? Yeah. And he might have changed his minds instead. But he was like, he said, well, he said there was a fast way in a slow way. I don't remember what the slow way was, but the fast way was dropping thermonuclear bombs on the poles of Mars to make it habitable. Have you heard the story about how there's like, they found isotopes on Mars that like are so rare. It's like they match the exact isotopes they found in like the nuclear, the thermonuclear tests on Earth. Yeah. And it's like, they have people think that there was like an ancient thermonuclear war on Mars or something. Well, this goes, this will connect to my fringe theory. This is just a fringe theory for my brain now that I'll take outside of it. But like Elan's a from a breakaway civilization. He's descendant of an ancient civilization that left Earth many, many years ago. Maybe maybe that's why his grandfather was looking for the lost civilization of Calhari. They're from, you know, and they went to Mars. And that's where he was doing a lot of the stuff or had information passed down to him from an ancient species. I mean, look, anything's possible now. And I only say that because like Elan's quote is so good. You know, what's the most likely outcome is the most entertaining. So for me, the most likely outcome is the most how it goes. Yeah. Yeah. So for me, the most entertaining outcome would be him being from a breakaway civilization. And that's why he has all these technologies to rule the world and go back to Mars his home planet. Yeah. And he's hopped up on ketamine, right? So they say he's, I mean, if he is doing all this stuff, he's got to be hopped up on something. Yeah. Just like, you know, JFK was hopped up on stuff too. Yeah. Give it to him. Was it? I forgot what you're having. You're not a fed of means. I've heard the story of JFK and Timothy Leary. No. Was it Timothy Leary? There was a story how this one lady named Mary, I forget her last name, but she was one of his like lovers. And she went to Timothy Leary and she's like, Hey, I need some LSD. I have a really powerful friend that wants to try it, but she wouldn't tell him who it was. And he's like, I want to go with you. I can, you know, give it to him and, you know, explain it to him and all this stuff. She's like, no, you can't even know. I can't tell you anything about it. And the story is that she like gave Kennedy the LSD, they did LSD together. And that was like the precipice of him wanting to like back out of Vietnam and do all this stuff. And then that lady was whacked while she was on a run like a year later. What? This is who it was. Yeah. Mary Pinchock. Timothy Leary was associated with Mary Pinchock, my, um, and she, oh, her husband was in the CIA too. Of course, Lear Leary supplied her with LSD and she used it with her lover, JFK. There's a whole book about it. It's called Mary's mosaic. And Leary later claimed that Meyer helped influence Kennedy's views on nuclear disarmament and reproachment with Cuba. They am pale, Richard him. Yeah. That's her. Yeah. That's crazy. Yeah. That's a, that's a, that's a really wild story. Pretty sure him and, and Jackie were on him. Fettomain's too. Went through getting like some kind of crazy drug injecting to them. I don't know. Yeah. Like I think it was in Fettomain's, they called it like the happy doctor. Really? Yeah. I'm pretty sure. Yeah. And he ended and he stopped it at one point. But I'm pretty sure he was on something. But they all are. Yeah. You kind of have to be. I always wonder what trumps on. It's like, guys, like a fucking machine that he can be clean. He'll be clean too. Like a lot of stuff like something. I know you've talked about Kanye too. How he's just like a work of haul. Yeah. And this was like, I saw him eat nothing. Like I think I saw him eat once in like 24 hours. Really? It's crazy watching these people. They're just a fame like that level. Fame you almost become an alien. Like you're a different species. And like watching Kanye, you know, I'm watching him do fashion, architecture, politics. He's trying to rewrite the constitution in the night with Reddit and then making music all like in one space. And like how was he trying to rewrite the concept? Oh, he thought he thought he could weaponize the artists online to rewrite the constitution to fit what he thought would be more like Christian based views. Oh, wow. And like he wanted to put blast for me logs in place, which I get. But I'm like, I don't want that because I'm like, because we're totally deranged society. But I'm like, dude, you put blast for me laws in place. And there's no you, but you can't exist. No, there's no young Kanye. Yeah. There's no Manson. Despite my, like I have my own thing going on, I think I also believe in free will. Right. So this is like a way of installing like a determinist worldview onto people, which is what AI is doing too. If you're predictive policing and stuff like that. Yeah. So I'm against all of that. Right. Like he was really trying to rewrite the constitution, which is a hilarious thing to think. And I'd be like, you know what? I went everywhere at the constitution. Yeah. Holarius. He and he hired a constitutional lawyer. I talked to him. I know that. Like he is talked about two serious people like about this. Because the founding fathers went out of their way to make sure that religion and Christianity was in no way tied to the constitution. Like those guys, a lot of those guys were anti-cristian. Yeah. Something like pagans, I guess. And like something were Christian, but like it's masons. It's B. There's a lot of that too. A lot of masons still today. Have you heard the original national anthem? No. It's like an ode to Baucus. No. Yeah. The wine god. Of course. I had no idea. Yeah. That's a wild. Yeah. The masons like I, that's another boogeyman for people. They think it's all the masons, all the illuminates and masons. I don't think it's that simple, but there's certainly super dark masons out there. Yeah. And doing weird stuff. And I've known some people who've become masons and they've said like, yeah, when you enter, you can become a light mason or a dark mason. This is one of these things I haven't looked into all that much, but like it's always been weird to me. How many presidents have been masons and how much architecture has been informed by masonry, obviously, but like in DC in particular. So like I don't know, but it just seems like another one of those things. Like it's just another weird dark cog in this like machine that's just grinding away that at America and the world and all this stuff. But like my only real experience with with going to one of those places, not the masons, but the odd fellows was I went to an odd fellows to play a show with my old band. We're like a death metal show and we show up and dies in odd fellows. And I see a door in the wall and I pull it open. It's just a skeleton inside. That's interesting. That's very interesting. A real one. Yeah. Wow. I put beer in its mouth and then our van exploded. Oh wow. Yeah. Not fully, but we were we were on the side. Did you say you played with horse, the band? We might open for them, but I know John Carroll, who was their drummer over the while. Yeah. He's now he's in the Salt Tooth grin, which is like one of my favorite bands. Okay. Okay. But yeah, horse band. But yeah, I was like playing in shows with like those bands for years, like for 10 years, all around like the country and not like for half the country. We didn't make it really out West much, but during my space days, just booking tours on my space. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I remember those days. They go to Alabama, you know, for the night for it was always the best. Florida and Virginia, like our favorite places to go. Tampa, Florida is the death metal capital of the world. Yeah. Is it what? Cannibal Corps here or six? Yeah. Cannibal can't canable corps. A lot of them. Yeah. Great metal in Florida. Mm hmm. Shuy Helude came from here. Great hardware band that left Florida and then moved to my neck of the woods in New York and the kibsy. Like I said, Manson. Yeah, I always love coming to Florida. Mm hmm. I almost died in Tampa though. I went really back in my drug days. I had bad issues with drugs and bought some things I shouldn't have bought. What kind of drugs? It was like OxyContin, I think. Mm hmm. And I was on a bad pill phase in my life. I broke both knees. Oh really? At shows. One knee playing a show where it was somewhere in New York. The whole thing just, that was horrible. And then a few months later, I had a deal in a skate playing show. Well, I know they were playing 43% burnt in the chance of pikipsi. Someone jumped off the balcony above me. And I landed on my knee and broke during that break out of the song. But that sucked. But so I got addicted to pills. I was in my early 20s. It was real shame and a very horrible thing. So it came down here. Still into that stuff. And a friend was like, we can get some good pills. And we went and I actually thought of this as I was driving here because I'm like, ooh, I kind of like had like an after taste of the pill. Like being here. Oh, God. Yeah, I know. It's not like a diet from pills. Oh, it's horrible. But pills from a dude outside of the thing. I think like a dog track or something. Mm hmm. And there's a dog track. And this guy had an OD. He had OD'd years prior and lost all his fingers. So I picked the pills off of his mitten skin head. That had no fingers. It was like a balloon knots attached to his little fat skin hand. Oh, yeah. I'm just like, and we snorted it. And I had never gotten so sick. I thought I was going to die. Yeah. It was the worst I've ever felt. And I was typically not doing stuff like that. After the pills, yeah, but like not snorting stuff. Yeah. And that was really disgusting throwing up for like days. Yeah. But it was the highest I've ever been like it was insane. How, you know, how that wasn't right to my brain. I'll never forget that guy's hand in the dark. Jesus Christ. I should have known from that. Like me should not touch anything. Yeah. After you know, these is like giant bear claw. So that's my memory of Tampa and playing shows down here. Yeah. A lot of drugs around here, man. Yeah. It's just like us. No, a lot of people who died. I thought I was talking to my buddy their day. I was like, dude, it's a miracle we made it through. Seriously. Because we know so many like so there's been so many casualties of fucking pills and opiates. That's how me and my friends feel too. Just like because we were doing a lot of stuff, you know, and horrible things like robot, robot tripping. Yeah. Yeah. You know, core seating and like, you can't even do that anymore, though, not that you should. But I'm drinking like, you know, taking these pills and drinking 40s of old English, like just ridiculous things. Listening to a band's like earth crisis, we're straight edge singing along like, I am straight edge while taking swigs of like crazy things. You know, and like I look back a lot and like how do we make it? Yeah. Because we were very lucky. Oh, very lucky. Yeah. There's something weird about drugs and music where it's like the best music comes out of people who are on a lot of drugs. Yeah. Or like have fake time drug problems. That's why the government gave the doors acid. You know, that's why everyone got acid. Look really? I mean, just look what acid did to music. Yeah. With the Beatles, with the Beach Boys. Like I love the Beach Boys. A big time Beach Boys fam. When Brian Wilson started doing drugs, they got way really good. That's how we got pet sounds. That's my favorite favorite. Really? God only knows is my favorite song. All my children who were born to that song and my wife walked down the aisle because that song I'm obsessed with that song. I love that such a beautiful song. But like him doing drugs really changed the way he viewed music. I guess he has synesthesia, synesthesia as well. Where you can see, you correlate sounds and colors. He has a two. But he hears these voices. And then the drugs accelerated that. Yeah. He sent Beach Boys out on tour. And he's like, I'm not touring in warm school. Stay home and like crazy music. Yeah. And Pet sounds is crazy. And I mean, he might have been MK Ultra, honestly. Because he had a bad his life was crazy. After Pet sounds, he did on Smile, which is a great record. But that was like putting a vault for a long time and picked a part in other songs. The songs from Smile, as he intended them to be, part of the records. That's how we got good vibrations is from Smile. And if you listen to good vibrations, how it came out initially how he envisioned it, it was like this path of the American history leading up to good vibrations. And it's such a beautiful crescendo. But he's on massive drugs. And while recording that, he's thinking he's manifesting fires. Like there's a part on Smile where he's saying, it's about Elie Lee's cow. She caught a fire and stuff. And he starts a fire in the studio. And they're all wearing fireman hats. And I actually talked to the lady who played bass on that song. She's still alive. And she's amazing. She's part of the wrecking crew. She's part of that group that played a lot of tracks on studio. And a fire started on some down the road or something across town. And he was like, I did it. I started that fire with my brain. So drugs were interesting. But that's all to say. Shouldn't do drugs. But it definitely made it music way interesting. And so he's doing that and making that. And now the Beatles are competing with him. Because the Beatles are seeing, like, he sees the Beatles. And he's like, I need to do something better. And the Beatles see him. And then now they're competing. And like, I'm not the biggest. I like the Beatles, I'm not the biggest fan. And but it's amazing to see that competition. And then how the drugs were injected into either camp. And then all of them. But like, I'm very glad I don't do drugs anymore. Yeah. And then you see like when artists get off drugs and they sober up, like the music's just not the same. There's like this intangible thing that disappears. That doesn't always work. Yeah, I'm trying to think like maybe with a little wing. I got a jail, like it kind of stunk. I'm a big fan of Wayne. Like I like the Korean stuff. But he's probably not sober now. But like, yeah, it doesn't always happen. They lose whatever that is. Like it's like a recklessness or it opens up. But it's sad because like a lot of artists. I think Gucci man is the best example. Like he said, his stuff's still good. But like there was something about that moment, that period in time where he was just cranking out. That Gucci track. Yeah, fat fucking beer belly Gucci. It was a good time. Cranking out multiple tracks per day. Then coming out on that piff. But yeah, I miss those rap blog days. Yeah, dude. I sort of not write dot com all the time. It's like my favorite blog. Yeah. Forget rap songs. But like now he got a jail and he's like, he's ripped and he looks good. Yeah. He's put out some good songs. But like no, I agree with like that song Lemonade, old school, good. Yeah, it's a great, great song. First day out. Oh, God, that's the best one. I'm going to probably listen to that tonight now. So think about being warm weather too. Always makes you want to hear Gucci. He's Georgia, right? Atlanta. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I love that stuff though. But yeah, I don't know. Like the drugs, like we did it and it definitely influenced our music because we were writing some like real trippy, like weird death metal with jazz. But it was fun to like just get an abasement and be like crazy. You know, I'm just crazy stuff. You know, I always have like a four track recorder with a task cam. You know, and then somehow go out into the world all high and do crazy things and not go to jail. And not die. I don't know how. I really don't know how we somehow sidestepped it. I mean, some of us went to jail. Some of us didn't make it. My core group of friends are still, thankfully, alive. Despite the debauchery that we went through for many, many years. Yeah. Yeah, it's always curious to see like what like how also the government is still using drugs. You know, like, like, because the government obviously tries to weaponize everything they could get their hands on and try to like that. That's like the most innovation and the most money goes into stuff for war. Right. Like technology for war, drugs for war, like during the Cold War and stuff like that. Big Pharma is part of the military industrial complex. Yes. It's part of the media industrial complex. Like if you watch TV and like every commercial is for a big world drug, which is why they're freaking out. I think that R.F.K.C.C.C.C. is going to ban those. And like if he does, I think that's great. You know, I don't think these corporations should have free speech. Right. Like clear view AI is a good example of this. People really upset when clear view took all everyone's faces off the internet. It's just scraped internet of everyone's face. Yeah. And then their CEO at the time was like, our corporation has the ability to have a freedom of speech. It's our expression. I'm like, wait, that doesn't extend to you. Yeah. That was his argument. I think it was like on ABC or CBS something like that where he said that. But I don't agree with that. And we're the only country other than New Zealand, I believe, that has these commercials. Yeah. And they're a joke to me. And I don't think they're safe. Yeah. Everyone has like a crazy half of size. Half of the commercial has to list the side effects. Death, diarrhea, occasional pregnancy. Yeah. Yeah. Loss of limbs. Wow. But like, they're certainly dragging us. Yeah. I think it's in our water and the sky. Yeah. I think it's coming out of every, they get you in every possible place. Yeah. Our grocery stores are filled with poison. Yeah. You know, we're very careful with what we give our kids. Just because like, I wish I was raised that way. but I wasn't. You know, my parents just gave us TV dinners that I'm microwaved. Right. And I'm halfway OK. I have like a caveman skull and some really problematic thoughts. But like, you know, now that we know this stuff like that, we are conscientious about like plastic and the water we drink. And like the fluoride and the water is an issue. You know, I really do think that. And like, I remember talking to the guy in our town who does the water department. And he was, I forget why he was there. He was there to count like our water to make our pipe was working where the city water was coming in. I'm like, I was telling him about like filtering the water. He's like, before I was not bad for you. Right. I'm like, all right. Like, why do you think that he's like, well, you know, it's only a little bit, it's only a very small amount. And we'll have any effect. And he's the whole cavity spiel. Right. It's good for your teeth, which is making me say right, right. But cool dude. Then he tells me, like we go on, he tells me, I, he says, I will be fined by the county if I stop putting fluoride in the water. Yeah. And I have to pay some ridiculous amount for mouthwash for the public schools. I'm like, huh. That's interesting. And then he was like, and then honestly, he's like, I've like tested fluoride in water. And it just like has this insane shelf life. It just doesn't go away. And he was like, well, that was weird. I'm like, that's what I'm saying, dude. So they find any way to get this stuff into it. It's like almost nothing is safe. Because every part of your life has been infiltrated by this stuff. It's coming out of the sky. It's coming in the ground. You just do your best. If you're not going to, I'm not going to live in a bubble to avoid this stuff. Like I know, I've got plastic all up in this body. Yeah. You know, a lot of reasons. And like I'm covered in tattoos. That's pile is not great. Right. So like I do my best now and also teach our kids, you know, the dangers. But sometimes it is funny. Like we try out to eat salmon too much. Like salmon's like part bug. You're seeing that like the bioengineered salmon. It means like the farm raised salmon. Yeah, that they like, it's a bioengineered and the FDA approved it back in the 90s. And they've got all these salmon farms, bioengineered salmon farms at West that keep breaking out into the wild population. Oh, no, I haven't seen this for years. So like salmon rake out. Oh, it's been a ton of like just collapses of the nets. And they're just like, they're part of the real thing now. So like they're pro creating with on normal wild salmon. So like you don't know what salmon is. Really. But that you can say that for lots of things. Yeah. But you've we've watched the color of salmon change. Oh, yeah. It's weird. Yeah. It's not supposed to be, it's not supposed to be that pink color. Oh, it's super weird. Yeah. And I used to love salmon. So you know what we tell our kids this. And sometimes I forget like I tell our eight girl that I don't tell our four girl that we'll be at we were at a party recently and some dinner thing. They gave out salmon. I was just gonna be respectful of me. I'm not going to stop the party and be like, this is bug that person. Yeah. But my son does. He's like, oh, I already stand. And this is like bug. I'm like, oh man, I'm proud. But maybe we got to teach him not to say it in public all the time. Yeah. But I do, you know, there's certain things we talk about. I think it's good for kids to know in early age and just be careful because it is a crazy to pray for world. And everyone's out to get you. But you don't want to make a parent know it. Yeah. I mean, you can really tell the difference. Like if we go, if we go in like a trip to like Costa Rica or something for a week and we're just, I can eat fucking anything. Cheats of burgers, tacos, drink beer. And I feel fucking great. I feel light. And then you come back home and you realize like, just going to Chipotle, you feel like you just ate a pound of concrete after it affects your whole body. It's a great idea. I mean, the difference is crazy that you can feel it. Yeah. It's gross to me. Yeah. I really, that's why it's like this. It's this weird controversial topic these days. We were talking about in like in the political world about like if food stamps should allow people to buy the boys and stuff. Right. My take is no because it's our money. Like these days we were talking about in the political world about like if food stamps should allow people to buy this poison stuff. My take is no because it's our money and I'd rather not poison people. I also don't want my money going to like abortions or stinger missiles. Palantir or like people getting killed with the death penalty. Like I don't want to support anything like that. So that falls in mind on how I feel but people are like people just have that option. I'm like you have the option with your own money. I'd rather not. So it's hard thing to talk about with people where they want to tell companies don't make that stuff. But that all stopped there though. Because I'm like I don't want to really tell the companies what the Kenna can't do. But it's all like a gray area. Because that's in conflict with my idea of the monopolies now. And what are we going to do with these giant tech companies that are taking over? As I said, it's reflective of what happened with the monopolies with Teddy Roosevelt and the trust busting and a lot of stuff. So I don't really agree with it. Someone like Milton Friedman would say competition is the best way to take care of the monopoly. I think that's probably the best way because there's really no taking care of monopolies. Like Standard Oil was broken up and they eventually just started like reemerging. Like they'd be like okay ExxonMobil is now back together. They're still a network of them. Standard Oil is not here but it is here. It's just been fractured across the country. So it's not as powerful. It's probably still doing the same things. Yeah. So yeah, it's tough. It's just not one right answer. I think it's a lot of this stuff. And the only way to really think there's some time stuff. Sometimes the reaction can be overreaction. It can be too much. I always worry about that with the vaccine stuff. The COVID vaccine is coming up. Now people think and me, I don't know. Maybe all vaccines are bad. But maybe not. Maybe that's totally wrong. Maybe a lot of them are really fucking good. We know a bunch of ancient people were using ancient versions of vaccines, anti-bodies and using that stuff to cure ailments and plague and stuff like this. I think there was something to those older vaccines. Yeah. I got just like those, but like the ones we had when we were kids, but it's also ones like the vaccine schedules were ridiculous. Yeah. All that's insane. I'm glad we're having that conversation as a society. But yeah, the backlash we could overcompensate into a blip being first. Sure. So you got to be careful. Yeah. I've got one of our kids has nothing. And Jesus got the best health immune system of all of our kids. Our oldest has a few. And we delayed his schedule because we were at that point even pre COVID, everything. Yeah. I was already distressing my wife more so, right? She was like, we're going to just hold off on a few of these things. It's like, it's a lot to give a kid at once. Yeah. And I never really thought about it. So I was like, all right, cool. We got to get out of different practices for not doing all of them at once. And then COVID happened. And it was like a crazy stressful time for obviously everyone. But for me personally, it was like losing the job. Wife was pregnant for our second. We had closed on our first house the day New York state shut down. Wow. So I was experiencing stress to a whole new degree. Like honestly, the pandemic was at least my problems. Like it was like all this other stuff is crazy. So I go to my doctor who had been going through for years. And like, hey, my heart just feels crazy. Like I'm just like stressed. Like what should I do? I'm like, I'm just looking for like, we're going to change your diet. We're going to do this in that. Yeah, yeah. I didn't realize she had gone so unhinged where she was like, the best thing you can do for yourself is take the COVID shot right now. And I was like, oh, yeah. Yeah. And she told me like, I made my husband do it. I made my little kids do it. You know, I make my husband mask up at the gym. And I was like, oh, wow, I'm surrounded by a crazy person. Like it happened to be the day that New York lifted the mask band. And they said you'd have to wear mask in public anymore, which we weren't doing. And then Nancy and I weren't doing it, but like the hospitals made you do it. And the doctor practiced me to do it. And the doctor, the practice was running around like crazy. They were like, what are we going to do with a mask? So I'm like, there are so scared. That should have been like an inkling as what I was getting into. But I was shocked. That was her excuse. That was her like thing to me. Yeah. And I was like, well, she was like, it would alleviate your stress with the pandemic. I'm like, that is literally like, I'm like, I just need to know how to do a stress better. I've always been a stressed out person. Yeah. Who's peak stress that time. Yeah. So that's, you know, tie all that in with the technocracy and all this stuff like experts and charge. She's she's allegedly an expert. But she's lost her mind. Mm. So how am I supposed to have any trust in these institutions? You know, when I'm seeing them lose their minds. But like, and then that her response is now just crediting real problems. You know, like, you could you do need a vaccine perhaps if you go to some crazy place. Right. And then you got something breaking up. But like I'll I'm more into the old school ones. Yeah. Then these new like technological like mRNA stuff. Yeah. That just is too experimental now. So that's that's gonna be interesting way to navigate the future too. Yeah. And like for my kids, our pediatrician is like they kicked us out because we said we didn't want to do the vaccines. Like they're like, you can't come here anymore because you're gonna put all the other people at risk. So and we went around everywhere. We've been looking for like holistic doctors that don't push those things. And they all suck. Yeah. Yeah. It's all garbage. None of them give a fuck. That's our problem. Not that they're too woo. It's just like they don't fucking pay attention. We really love the fucking lady doctor pediatrician who is pushing the vaccine to she like pays the most attention to the kids. She's like the most affectionate. She like gives them the time of day. Yeah. So now we're like to the point where we're just trying to like, oh, we're gonna delay. We're gonna delay. We're gonna delay and like not saying no because like she's the only one who seems to care. Right. But at like the same time, we don't want to, you know, do that fucking full schedule of vaccines all at once with these young kids. Yeah. It's weird. I think it's it's a lot, you know, it's weird about a lot of different diseases and who knows where what they're gonna attribute to like RFK said, he's gonna give us like the the answer to where autism like a lot of autism is coming from. Yeah. Because I kind of like the boogeyman thing. It's a lot of things. Yeah. You know, it's our diet is terrible. The sky filled with trash. You know, I got this whole thing. I talk about fake clouds and like I there's fake clouds like I mean and I mean like there's real clouds up there. But they also filled with a lot of weird forever chemicals that are I've seen the videos of the people making clouds, the machines that make clouds are machine clouds, machine made clouds, there's chem trails, there's there's clouds that are just made up mutilated with forever chemicals. Dude, we had we just had two crazy hurricanes. And half my friends all believed that the CIA made the hurricanes. Yeah. We're in the future. There's a video of me too cock who talking about this like 10 years ago. Oh yeah. I know talking about how we created thunderstorms in Vietnam, I think. Yeah. Operation Popeye. Is that what it was? Yeah. Yeah. Vietnam, they were they decided to get to Viet Cong, washed out of their tunnels. They were going to accelerate the tsunami season with seeding. Yeah. Look at that cloud machine. Oh, here's the video of the cloud machine. Dude, this thing is nuts. That is insane, bro. What have they, what is the explanation for this? The way, here, tell me if you can't hear what I'm saying. I couldn't be confused. Here for itself. This is the loudest sound you could possibly conceive. And as it turns out, the clearest. The clearest. Wow. Now, the most amazing thing is that that cloud up there which was generated by the engine is just a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen. It's water vapor. And in about an hour's time, someone in Mississippi is going to get wet washing. It will actually rain. Yep. Wow. It's going to rain good stuff. But this is like, and that's got to be a problem. I'll look at this guy who's getting fake rain on from the fake cloud. Right. So it's probably got three arms now and losses, I said. But like the things are doing in the sky are so alarming. You know, Bill Gates wants to block out the summit dust. Oh, I saw that. Yeah. And so that seems like a fringe idea that he keeps getting turned down, I guess, for funding, but they did Operation C spray back in the day off the coast of San Francisco where they're shooting bio warfare into the air over the city to see how it affects people. Because they're like, how do we counter bio terrorism? Let's do bio terrorism. Get people sick. And then figure it out. But now I think they're actually doing a sort of scope-back situation in San Francisco where the military is spraying like dust in the air to reflect the sunlight back up. I read about this. Yeah. Bill Gates got his dream. Jesus Christ. Dude, I had somebody explain it to me the best way ever. They're explaining to me like how, how technology, like how we're surrounded by screens all the time under artificial light and inside all day. It's like turning us, it's like you've heard the stories of what happens to the orcas at sea world when they live their lives. They spend decades inside these tanks. How horrible they go crazy. They go crazy and they kill the trainers. He's like, that's basically what's happening to us. We're the orcas inside those tanks and sea world. We're not in the ocean anymore. I don't know if you were seeing it down here, but like I am experiencing a rise in mental illness in people I know like from back home in New York or just on the road. Like it just seems people are more on the edge than it ever been. And it has to do with all these things. Politics is driving people crazy. Yeah. Because it's a disease. But yeah, like normal people, like threatening my life, like not just like, you know, like we do public things in New York kind of on the news. Sometimes people hear things you say they don't like and you send me a death rate online. I got people in real life for like stalkers. I've got like, yeah, dude, it's crazy. And like it's nuts. Like I know, I know these people, you know, like friends people, not, I want to say friends, but like people have known more like a associate. So I'll say like people have known and it's just I'm watching people lose their minds. Yeah. I'm catching old friends in lives that we haven't seen in a long time. Like big lies, like like maybe they're not married lies. And they've been telling us for years. We haven't seen them right. So we can get out of lives. Yeah. And it's just it's all happening at the same time, you know. And it's like all over the place. Yeah. And then you're seeing like all these really crazy, depraved crimes happening in the cities. Like people lighting themselves on fire. So like I knew you are who was the corpse. No, I did not see that. I think the corpse, I think someone died. I think someone then robbed the corpse and I believe another person went and that corpse. What? I was like, what is this? Like a day or a few days. What? Look up corpse. That's a good name for band and Florida. Yeah. It's a good name. It sounds like a title to a title track for handle corpse. Right. NYPD search for manicuse of sexually violating a corpse and on a Manhattan subway. What is going on? What is going on? Yeah. It was Joe Biden. Yeah. It was Hunter. Yeah. Dude, it's so crazy. And like look, this is stuff that's been going off. a long time unfortunately. Like, you know, about Ed Gaines stuff and like weird serial killer stuff. But this is like like nonchalant daylight. Yeah. Like Raphelia. Why? So I don't know. It was on fentanyl. Yeah. The rise in mental illness is going to be crazy. You know, like you see like Luigi Man, Gianni stuff. Yeah. I guess there was a copycat today that they didn't do anything, but I think they showed up to, you know, the health headquarters looking to the same thing. Really? See people calling for violence. I'm like very anti that. You know, I oppose a lot of these things that I totally, I even understand man, Gianni's problem, allegedly that he has with this system because it sucks. I don't want to go kill people, right? I don't want to do that. I don't like the same way like the unibomber might say things is manifest with I really agree with. I don't want to promote the violence. Yeah. But you're seeing a lot of people like prominent people like embraced the violence. And so that's going to turn into something way, way too dark. You know, I don't know where that goes. You know, like, you know, everyone makes fun of Tim for talking about civil war and stuff. That makes fun of them for all because he says like every episode, oh, that's going to be a civil war. Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh. He's looking at like how society has been breaking down and politics has driven this divide between us and that people are willing to do violence. We saw a lot of that during like the riots in 2020. We saw assassinations. We saw assassination attempts on on presence. Yeah. I think they assassinated, assassinated 23 of their own presidential. Yeah. You know, people running for president. Dude, that's insane. And that's just right there. You know, so this willingness to violence is really picking up steam. And you're seeing a lot of people like understand violence. How does he think a civil war will play out in the US? I think his idea would be like it's not going to be like everyone's, I think when he says it, people expect it to be like we're going to march towards each other. He's going to be like Grant Lincoln. I think he sees like pockets of violence across the country that will be ideological. Right. And it would be whatever camps, the left versus right. That's a vague descriptor of these days because they're all fractured. But I think I think it's like a willingness for political violence. And I also think it'll be in my opinion. I don't think I don't think he thinks this, but like in my opinion, a lot of it will be bolstered by the government. Right. And if you know North Woods is possible, or at least they thought of it, then I will be skeptical of most things. And like there was basically a civil war in Italy. You know about the years of lead. So in Italy, I want to say this is like from the 60s to the 80s. There was just insane false flag operations against opposing political sides. And so it was like real things, real violence, bombs, shootings, kidnappings. People died, but a lot of it was done as false flags from like the opposing side. You know, to what North Woods would have done, right? It would have blown people, shoot around people to convince them that we have to go to war with Cuba. And that was Leningzer, right? The guy who brought that idea to Kennedy and Kennedy fired. Leningzer's next job was NATO. And a lot of people say NATO might have had a hand in the false flag operations during the years of lead mentally. And they're very similar to what he proposed with North Woods. So like, you know, I think a lot of things are possible knowing that if we're moving towards violence and the people in charge, I think it's beyond bipartisan. Like it's not just like a right verse left thing. I think there's like a uniparty for lack of a better way. And they are deeply entrenched. And it's the bureaucratic state that's been there forever, right? That has a lot of power. Mm hmm. It's what he's talking heads. He's figure heads. They come and go. Yeah. Or a job is seen in or whatever. Or newsmax, you know, but like these people who are there for so long, they want that power. They want the power over us. They love the self-appound here and clear of you. And they totally have this idea, the idea of false lives that they're disposal. So if we're moving towards some type of sustained violence in this country against one another, like a civil war, but more fragmented, you know, pockets of the country like the years of lead and Italy. It does, it does seem like it's possible. And I'm just basing that off what I saw during the 2020 summer riots. You know, you're seeing cities burn. You're seeing politicians donate money to bail out arsonists like Kamala. You know, like she had people, staff don't any money to arsonist, they got a jail. And like in my opinion, I see a lot of this is this violence is terrorism, domestic terrorism being born out of the universities, because they're like ideological death camps that produce a lot of mental illness. Yeah. It's stuck being a part of that university. The college were for so long and you're totally powerless. Like you can do your best. I want to just teach kids things like how to read, you know, how to write, have good skills, but then you're watching professors all around you being like, Marxism. So like when I'm saying it's come out of the universities, I'm saying like, this is the line I see in my mind from to war now as we see it or like the pockets of real domestic terrorism during 2020. The weather underground domestic terrorists, Marxists from like the 60s and 70s, they I don't think they killed a lot of people, but they killed something. I think they killed themselves by action. They were building bombs and stuff. They're Marxist. They believe in we should destroy this system. And a lot of them became fugitives and a lot of them with a jail. And then Bill Clinton pardoned one of his let's say in office straight up the Mexican terrorist, Susan Rosenberg, and then mild genocidal maniac governor Cuomo pardoned whether underground person or his let's say in office. And you'll see like a bunch of them that were let out. And what do they end up doing? I forget that one guy's name who was pardoned early on with the Clinton as well, Bill something. They all become professors. You know, and they all start to infiltrate the universities because that then goes in hand and hand with what Yuri Bezmann was saying about taking care of how you ideologically subvert this society. Yeah. This country has said you need to go to college. We're going to take that over and totally destroy your brains now and turn you into soldiers for us. So I see a lot of the issues. A lot of the violence, a lot of the nihilism being born out of the universities and then to connect that to the summer of what they call a summer of love. Act blue was funneling a lot of that money to the organizations on the ground doing the protesting. Act blue was part of 1000 currents. And this was on the board was Susan Rosenberg. So it's like a domestic terrorist who's been pardoned working with laundry money to today's domestic terrorists. And they both had and the BLM, those two women said they were Marxist. So it's like a very clear line in my mind of domestic terrorism and war and against the American people. So I don't know how you fight that. You know, because I don't want to censor those ideas. You know, that's some people would say, what we just get rid of them. Exile them. I don't think that's the way to do it because evil will always come back. It's always going to pop back up. It's going to have to teach like the kids had to have a better foundation. I had a counter that in there as they grew up and helping out with the surveillance state. But that'll be there too. Yeah. Because there's no escaping it. But yeah, I don't know. That's I guess the way Tim would see it in terms of fragmented civil war. I guess I feel like we've been the government's been at war with the American people for decades. I think we've been like an invisible war, like a war on a reality, a war on our brains. I think like the technocracy has probably already been in place. You know, in many ways, like people argued like like I think I said FDR was kind of like that was like a soft technocracy. But like, you know, we started talking about JFK being an episode. That's a very symbolic day that he died. Obviously. He died is a very symbolic day. But it's interesting in my mind, like symbolically because two other people died that day, who were also very opposed to the technological state. And that's Aldis Huxley who wrote Brave New World. Although he was a eugenicist, a eugenicist, you know, Brave New World is kind of like a cautionary tale of this insane world. And CS Lewis also died that day same day. And he wrote one of the greatest essays here. The fears of this technological state called the, what is it, a willing slaves of the welfare state. Two writers I really look up to, but it's just very interesting, you know, that JFK and, you know, I think he was taken up by the military industrial complex, whatever that is, and you know, and so I think like there's been a war on the American people since definitely that day, outwardly. So probably started, you could say you go back to Woodrow Wilson and all this stuff. And so it started then too for sure. But I think it accelerated that day and it never stopped. And whatever's happening now is part of this like giant umbrella of war that our governments are waging against us forever. But I'm, I'm optimistic. I'm optimistic. I still have to move to the Amazon. Yeah. I might not be safe there either. Yeah. They're taken over everywhere. They're cutting down the trees. But no, I, I, I despite all the darkness in the world, I saw like hope for the future. Yeah. You know, I hope for the kids. And, you know, I don't think it's, it's inescapable, but it's just, you know, life moves on no matter what. It'll be, it'll be fine. You know, just, they just might read your thoughts. Right. So you set the train yourself better at thinking. Yeah. Sleep tight. Shane Cashman. Thanks brother. Thanks. This was fucking fascinating conversation. Tell people where they can find your shit, where they can read your work, your podcast, all that. Also, two years of pleasure. Yeah. Watch so many shows. Yeah. This is, you're one of the last podcasts in the studio. No way. We're ready to move. Yeah. The newsroom looks amazing. Oh, yeah. Yeah. That's awesome. But yeah, dude, it's so awesome to be here and talk. I love it. You can find me online at Shane Cashman, all the, all the places and the shows in Virtual Live. That's every Sunday at 6 p.m. Eastern Time on YouTube and on Peter Thiel's Rumble. And yeah. And that's, that's about it. I'll buy books for action and cashman.com. Oh hell yeah. Cool man. I'll link it all below. Sick.