Thanks so much for doing this. Armenia is famous extent it's famous. Armenians are famous for, well, being successful in business and quite cohesive as a community and very sincerely Christian observant. But probably they're most famous for being exterminated by the Ottoman Turks at the end of the First World War. The Armenian genocide. And... I think... most people don't fully appreciate the extent to which that was religious persecution... That was a religious genocide and they were murdered because they were Christians. Tell us how we know that. the... At the end of the rule of Ottoman Empire. Yes. The after Balkan wars Ottoman Turks saw... that some Balkan countries like Bulgari and part of Greece became independent and the Christian countries... in Balkans became independent. After that they filled some, you know. big risk in Christian population of Ottoman Empire like Armenians... Pontus Greeks... became independent... and they started... to persecute the Christian population of Ottoman Empire or to convert them to Islam. How it went on yes when the when the war started between Antanta and Ottoman Empire. Germany and Austria, Hungary. Hungary. The Ottoman army came to all villages of Armenians... in Ottoman Empire and... asked two questions. Just the villagers or the people who lived in towns... The first question was will you convert to Islam? Like 98% of the population... Armenian population of Ottoman Empire denied. Said no. Said no. And the second question... is if you don't convert to Islam, you will go... from here... to desert of Deir zor. It's like 800 km, 600 km from Armenian Highlands and... all the men were killed and all the women were taken with children to Desert of desert of Deir zor... And we have lost the 70% of the population... of our nation because the everyone, one and a half million people said no to converting to other religion. We want... everyone to know about this story, not just about the dark side... of the history. It has a bright message to... that Christian... in the 20th century were... very. you know, they went in a way of Christ and they were sacrificed. And we hope... they all this sacrificial will bring the Christians of our days... to more faith... to that what we have... the biggest and most humanistic religion that we accept... and we must live with it. So I didn't, I did not understand until we just had breakfast that the Armenian yes The victims of the Armenian genocide, who've been talked about a lot... There's been a debate in the congress for many years whether we can call it a genocide, whether that's somehow trademarked, but it was a genocide. But I didn't understand that they were Christian martyrs. They died not because of their ethnicity but because of their religious Faith, There were no any problem with ethnicity. There were Armenians like 2% of Armenians in Ottoman Empire were... Muslim... And just these 2%... are living till now in the north of Ottoman Empire without any trouble. Interesting. The other 98%, the every Christian Armenian... who... were asked this question, who answered that he will not convert to Islam were killed. That's amazing. And so that, that kind of defines 20th century, 21st century Armenian culture. You know, we, we stood steadfast in our faith and were murdered for it... So Christianity is at the center of Armenian culture. Is that fair to say? It's the first nation who has ever converted to Christian... In 301... was an Armenian kingdom. So in 301 before Constantine, before the Roman Empire, 11 years before Constantine, before... Milan Edict ... it was 312, I guess Armenia like 11 years before Armenian... King Tiridad III... converted... to Christian religion and... convert all our population to Christian religion... And we are the oldest eldest Christian nation... in the world... That's why... our church and our identity... are so already it's the same thing. You know, the 80% or 70% of our identity... comes from Christian values and our church... values of our church. Well that's fascinating... Um, and it's, I mean the state of California where I'm originally from, you know the Armenian community is... very extremely successful but very cohesive. Like they, they have a sense of themselves in a great way I think. And that's why... obviously. So over the past 30 years Armenia has been involved in a number of conflicts, really a sort of long running sporadic war with Azerbaijan, which is an Islamic country... How many Armenians were killed in that war? Almost... 20,000 people were killed for defending a Christian population of Nagorno Karabakh. Yep. And at the end of the war, the last war. the Christian population of Nagorno Karabakh exceed like we, they, everyone... came to Armenia. And now after 2000 years of living... in this region, there is no any Christian... in region of Nagorno Karabakh. So there are none? There is no any. What I don't understand... is why nobody said anything is that was going on and why Christian leaders in the west didn't say anything... while that was going on. That I heard. I think it's a matter of real politics, you know, Real politics. We have a very, we have allies with like, we have a very close relationship with Greek nation, with Greece, we have close relationship with Cyprus. But even from there we felt that we had... support... But... not. you know, the support was just with words, not any actions. I know that real politics and the help of Turkey to Azerbaijan make the many... countries that were... allies with us or were in a good relationship with us to avoid. yes They didn't want to get crossways with power powerful countries like Turkey. I understand that. And this is what we have. Like this is... the problem we face all over our history because... the Armenian nation is in the center of a region where like Turkey, Azerbaijan, Iran and... the only religious, only Christian nation of this... from these three countries and... always we had... this oppression... from the empires like Ottoman Empire, there is Qajar empire and other empires... And... the only thing... made us to be unite and to save our culture was the church and education from the church. Yes, the schools. That church was built all over the country to educate us, to be Christian... and to be... an Armenian Christian. Streaming November 16th on Paramount plus it is the return of Landman, a product of the co creator of Yellowstone. This show's television's biggest phenomenon and for good reason. Academy Award winner Billy Bob Thornton is back as Tommy Norris... and managing higher stakes than ever before. Featuring a loaded cast including Academy award nominees Demi Moore, Andy Garcia, Sam Elliott, Landman is... pretty exciting for a TV show, honestly. In the wake of his former boss's passing, tensions come to a head as Tommy and Debbie Moore's Cammy Miller struggle to maintain control of Emtech's oil, the company at the center of the drama. And with his father coming back into his life, Tommy must juggle both his role as an oil man and a family man as worlds collide. A familiar story but never better told than in this... hit series. A lot of people are watching this and for good reason. Landman new season streaming November 16th only on Paramount plus. I was and remain confused by the role of Israel in this in this war. Azerbaijan Islamic Nation vs Armenia, Christian Nation and the cleansing of Christians for Nagorno Karnabakh that the region you just mentioned. Israel took a very aggressive position on the side of Azerbaijan against the Christians using American tax dollars to do it... So Israel was a participant in this war. The participation Israel was the support of Azerbaijan by weapons and it was a part of real politics. But you know the problem. What kind of weapons? Drones like... aircraft. Aircraft and other. It's like not just defense and attack. But offensive weapons offensive Azerbaijan received from Israel. and offensive drones, many of drones and many of them were operated by as we have read in media, by operators from these companies of Israeli companies. So. Wow. So you think they were Israeli drone operators? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Because as many media told like it was in many magazines and that. So that would mean that... Israelis... were killing Christians in this war with U.S. Tax dollars. I mean, because the Israeli defense sector is supported... billions and billions a year by the United States. You know, the issue is about the real politics. They were. They are getting gas from Azerbaijan. Gasoline. Gasoline. They buy gasoline... I think the 70% of Israel gasoline is coming from Azerbaijan. And they have some type of... economic ally. They are allies... economically. The main issue is... today real politics sometimes... is... like make a big problem for the nations who wants to defend themselves alone in the regions we are a minority. Yeah, I mean, of course. And that's how the world works. I just suppose from an American perspective, it's like, why are my tax dollars being used to murder Christians around the world? Cleanse the Christians from Iraq, Cleanse the Christians from Nagorno Karabakh. Murder Armenian Christians. Like why am I paying for this? It is a problem. It is a problem problem for me. Yeah. So now you have a lull in the fighting... with Azerbaijan, but you have a prime minister of Armenia who seems to be intent on destroying traditional Christianity or the church. Tell me what this is. Yeah. The after, like last two, three years... after losing the war in Nagorno Karabakh and after making like... all the people, Christians from Nagorno Karabakh have moved to Armenia... Our... new prime minister decides to have a better relationship with Azerbaijan... Better relationship with everyone is always welcomed... by Armenian society. We are okay with this. But what we feel, we feel that... Turkey or Azerbaijan had a mission like made him to change the narratives of the church. And he wants to change the narratives of the church to forget the issue of genocide, forget our history. And our prime minister, six months ago he started attack Armenian church. And head of Armenian church, he wants to dethrone him and he wants to dethrone... to change the structure of Armenian church that is like 1,700 years old. Because of taking control of the church. It's the main institution in our country. Like 90%, 95% of our population are the members of Armenian Apostolic Church. And when he started to attack against the church, our society was shocked because nobody have done it before him. Even, you know, just at Ottoman time. And many... people in Armenian society, they were against them, against it. But they couldn't say anything. Why? Because they were afraid of some oppression from the. From government side. You know, Armenia is a democratic country. It's. I think it's one of the last democratic countries... in this region... in the last 30 years. We have elections, we have new... leaders... It's not authoritarian country... But this prime minister evolves from democratic leader... every year we see his changing to more authoritarian style of ruling because of decreasing of his reputation in Armenia. And now he attacked the church... He took to prison... three archbishops. He put archbishops in prison? Yeah. Archbishop for you to understand, it's not shock. We were why? the one of archbishop were took to prison? Because four years ago in an interview he said that this prime minister must be changed. The second archbishop was in prison, was taken to prison... because of like three years ago or five years ago... he went into a protest against the. The... prime minister. And it's, you know, and nobody like from influential part of Armenian society. Everyone were afraid of... to talk about this. Yeah, the, you know, the city, everyone could talk who had a business, who had an influence. But influential part didn't want to do it. And the one man who started talk about this was my uncle, Samuel Karapitian. He is the one of the wealthiest Armenian in the world and... biggest Armenian philanthropist of last 15 years. 15 years. He is the biggest philanthropist in Armenia... So very many hospitals, kindergartens, schools. And when he came to Armenia, he lives out of Armenia. He came to Armenia... and at the 40 days of his father's grave, you know, and we have a tradition to go to church at liturgy. In 40 days of someone grave. Good for you. So when someone dies, an Armenian dies. The family mourns for 40 days. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And goes to liturgy. And when he came to Armenia and he was in liturgy, after liturgy, after mass... in the church, the journalist came to him and said, what do you think about the attacks from the side of... government attacks against the church?.. And he said... like it was 37 seconds. What can I think if a small group of people forgetting Armenian history, forgetting history of our church is attacking Armenian church and Armenian people. If the politician will not handle the situation, we will take part of handling it by ourselves our way. Good. It was 37 seconds. Do you know what's going on after it? What happened? Like after... 30 minutes of this interview. our... prime minister posted in Facebook that this philanthropist... must shut his mouth. After three hours he sent police special forces to a residence of Samuel Karapitian, who is the most famous philanthropist of the country, you know. And everyone was shocked. We were shocked too. And these police forces came to his residence without a judge order. Armenia is a democratic country. We never saw something like this... And everything was going on was... like cameras showed everything... So everyone knows that he said it... 37 seconds. Then the prime minister was in parliament... He posted something like this in Facebook. And policemen came to the residence of Samuel Karapetyan But what happened then? The demonstrators came to the resident of Samuel Karapetyan to defend him. Thousands of people came... to his house to defend him from police. And... that day usually when police come like it's five minutes to take someone to jail... to police station. It was 14 hours. The demonstrators didn't want to let him go to police station. And they were like bring order of judge. We let. the demonstrators told that to the policeman and then he decided to go himself to police station to not cause a clash between policemen and demonstrators. And after that he was arrested and... I was arrested too... And my father, his brother was arrested. What were you arrested for? I don't know. just being his nephew, just being there, I don't know. And I remember we were in police station eight hours and they were looking for an article to charge... because there is no article in 37 seconds... I... remember... investigator came to the room and say oh, I found one article and then the other said no, it doesn't work. And after seven hours they found an article and charged it, that he said... that... the prime minister must be dethroned. But in this 37 second interview, you can watch it in YouTube. everyone can do it. There were no any word about non prime minister and no anything. And he is now in jail still they took him to jail five months... and the jail name do know what is the jail name? No KGB basement. So there is... that old Soviet time communist time prison where the communists like send... the people who were not agree with communist ideas. And he's there in 12 square meters for defending the church and for this... 37 second. He's still in jail? He's still in jail. Well, Grand Canyon University is not like most American colleges. It focuses on the things that actually... matter... It is not a ripoff... It is the real thing. It's private, affordable Christian... university located in the heart of Phoenix... One of the largest universities in the country actually... At Grand Canyon University education is more than academics. It is about opportunity. The chance for every student to live out the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Rights are not given by the government... They were bestowed at birth, at conception, by God. That's just a fact. And Grand Canyon University is not going to lie to your kids and claim otherwise. It tells the truth. So you know, you're thinking a quality education is rare. So this probably costs a fortune. Colleges constantly jack up their costs. They probably do the same. Well, they don't actually. GCU has maintained the same tuition... for 17... straight years. They're not in education to get rich at the expense of students. The whole thing is actually about learning. How refreshing. With flexible online classes, hybrid learning options, GCU offers 340 academic programs. Students benefit from a collaborative learning environment. Dedicated faculty, personalized support help them achieve their goals. The pursuit to serve is yours. Let it flourish. Find your purpose at Grand Canyon University. Private Christian, affordable gcu.Edu so this prime minister, who's clearly authoritarian by definition, is against the church. So the idea is to break the back of orthodox Christianity in. Of traditional Christianity in Armenia and to use the police to do it. Is this popular?.. Do people like this? It's very unpopular. Like 90% of the population is against that... And with... population, our society doesn't understand... why he. Why he's doing that. So his agenda. he's. So Armenia is a traditional country, traditional families predominately. I noticed that the prime minister's wife... was interviewed and said something to the effect that... women in traditional families are all unhappy. Yeah, yeah, yeah. He's, you know, he wants to change the society, but with power, not with soft power, but the the way he wants to change the society is very familiar to Americans. He is... focusing on... "transgenderism is a good thing." LGBTQ agenda, whatever that is. Anti traditional. So not to... the traditional families... Like, you mustn't care about your son. He must decide, like, what to do. But if you want what to do, what? Whether to become a woman or have sex with men or whatever. No, he hadn't said something like this, but mostly he's against the traditional values... So everyone knows that he has idea of changing our society, but we. To make it less Christian. To make it less Christian. Yeah. Yeah, I guess. Yes. Who's supporting him in this? This has happened in every country in the west, almost every country in the. Every country in the west, with varying degrees of success. But who is. Who's behind that? Who's pushing this? Who is behind that in every country in the West? Yeah, that's a good question. Is the... Is the same people who is doing it in Armenia, They are doing it here too, I guess. oh And they've been extremely successful. I mean, they've destroyed. you know, our social fabric with this. But who are those people? Who is. Let's just stick with Armenia. Who's. Who's supporting this prime minister? The population doesn't support him. Who is. You know. I think... the main issue when we... thought... why he's doing it against the Church. we think that he gets some information... from Turkey and Azerbaijan, that you must change the narrative of the church... to forget the genocide and to have a new head of church for being for going to a peace deal between Armenia and Azerbaijan and... Azerbaijan... And we... feel... that he wants to change the head of church to change... Then he will change the narrative of the church and... to make our people to forget all... our... like ancestors have done for our Christian religion. Yes. For... being an Armenian. And this is the thing that we must, you know, show our our societies... that... this is the way they work... They want to destroy all the... historical truth... for some reasons... The reason is to be in peace, but we can't. We are very welcome to be in peace, but these people, one and half million people were killed already. They were killed for their religion... We must, Ottoman Empire must accept it. The Ottoman Turks or Turks must accept it because after that we will live in a more peaceful region. Anyone who's forcing you to lie about history... is your enemy. And of course, the purpose is always to maintain power. Right? Yeah, right... Whoever controls the story, the past controls the future. Of course. That's why Wikipedia exists, to lie to us about the past. So... last question. This is, I mean... by any definition, a grotesque human rights violation. You're arresting Christian clergy because... you don't like their theological views and you don't like their views of history, so you throw them in prison. How many Christian churches in the west have weighed in on this, have supported the clergy under arrest, have put pressure on the... Armenian prime minister to stop arresting Christian clergy? Like, how much support are you getting from the West? We are getting support from the west, from the churches. You are? good Yeah, yeah, yeah... There is a... huge support and... we are appreciated... for this. And I want to tell you one more thing. why these people are brave when they are going against the government's ideas. My uncle, Samuel Karapetyan and the clergy, they could be realized... like... tomorrow if they say that they will not defend the church. It's always the same story, isn't it? Yeah. So my uncle, we had like, they want to confiscate his businesses in Armenia. He knows it, but he he wants to defend the church after... that too. So he's continuing to defend the church. And this is the idea... These are the persons... with whom we must. I think we must learn something... because it's like in first. it's like in 20th century when this Armenian, our ancestors were sacrificed in Ottoman Empire for their religion. I am proud that Samuel Karapetyan is can be free. He can be with his business, but he doesn't do this... for his religion because religion and faith matters. You know. it's important. Like the first Christian in first century, they were oppressed... but they fought for their... religion. And this is the case Samuel Karapetyan faces now. It's inspiring to watch... It's upsetting to watch at the same time... So Godspeed. Thank you for telling us that story. thank you Too few people know. And it's not just about Armenia, of course. It's a global push against this one specific religion, against Jesus. yeah So that's what they hate. Thank you very much. Thank you for doing this. I appreciate it. How often do you give a present to a loved one that deep down you know that person... despises or will never use anyway? It's happened, of course. So it feels good to check the box and cross them off the list. But wouldn't you feel better if you given them something they actually... loved? Yeah... Cozy Earth could be the solution for you. Anyone who gets Cozy Earth's bamboo pajamas. bamboo pajamas which are not stiff and wooden, they're actually soft and awesome... Anyone who gets those is going to be psyched... Soft, lightweight, cool to the touch, bamboo pajamas. Cozy Earth offers that rare mix of cozy and breathable so you're always comfortable, you don't overheat. They make blankets the same way, plush, textured, ridiculously soft, next level blankets. If you don't believe it, Cozy Earth backs its bedding and bath products with a hundred night sleep trial and ten year warranty for pajamas. Who puts a ten year warranty on pajamas?.. Not a lot of companies. Cozy Earth does. Black Friday is here early at cozyearth.com use the code tucker on top of their site wide sale for up to 40% off for big savings before the holidays... Visit cozyearth.com use the code Tucker... and give gifts that people actually... love... And if you get a post purchase survey, don't forget to mention you heard about them. But from this show. Bob Amsterdam, as always, one of the people that I... talk to most off camera about what is happening to the Christian population of the world. It's kind of amazing. Thank you for doing this. So the situation in Armenia, the government of Armenia persecuting the church. How is this happening without more international comment? Look Tucker, as you and I have discussed, I do not understand the evangelical movement, the Christian movement in the United States. One thing I want to say, and I won't make many friends by saying it. in the United States, Christianity has been subsumed by the State Department. The U.S. Government... decides... what Christians we support... and what Christians we don't so, in... Armenia, there is going to be a prayer breakfast. and I want you to understand, there's going to be a prayer breakfast while my client, Samuel Karapetyan, is in jail. Archbishops have been jailed. clerics have been jailed... The leader of the country is trying to split the church by going to services of a defrocked priest, a man who has said he is going to remove the leader of the church. This man is being fetted by American... Christians in Yerevan, Armenia. A man who calls clerics prostitutes. a man who uses language that at my advanced age, I've never heard a leader use... against leaders of the church. And yet. shockingly, this prayer breakfast is going to go on. And I call it a reputation laundering breakfast. The U.S. Government... allows this to go on. and What connection is there between the U.S. state Department and the prayer breakfast? Look, I can't... exactly tell you. I'm not privy to the arrangements, but as I've seen in representing the Ukrainian Church, the prayer breakfast and religious freedom all seem to follow a script outlined by the State Department. And. you know, there's a lot of pressure from the administration on peace in terms of Armenia and Azerbaijan, which, of course, all of us welcome. But... it's happened at a tremendous cost to the people of Armenia... There's tremendous cultural and church relics that are being lost and defiled. There's 120,000... who have been cleansed from Azerbaijan, and no thought has been given to this. We have 23 Christian hostages in Baku, and the prime minister of Armenia... did not even speak of them when he was with President Trump. President Trump raised them. I mean, it is shocking how Armenia has a prime minister... who seems to resent his own history as an Armenian. They've. They've taken... Mount Ararat off stamps. They've. They don't talk about the genocide. They attack the church. The leader of the country wants to remove and appoint the catholicos. Well, of course, he doesn't understand what an Apostolic Church is... To be an apostolic Church. Listen to this Jew tell you about apostolic churches. You have to have a connection to the first apostles, which means your election must be sanctified by... bishops, by leaders of the church, not a political figure. He. He is shockingly ignorant of his own religion. It sounds like it's not his religion. I mean, it sounds like he's not a believer. Well, I. You know, I. I never will say that about someone. I agree. I don't know him. But what I will tell you is our State Department has. Has lost the meaning of faith. They have instrumentalized... religion... as A tool of foreign policy. Exactly what we accuse the Russians of doing, we have done it. Thank God our people don't bless tanks the way Bishop Kirill did in Russia... But this support of governments, and we're seeing it in this prayer breakfast, traveling to a country like Armenia with top leaders... of the... Christian religion in particular. and doing all of this while we have clerics and I have a client in jail. And I feel very personal about this... because I was able to defend this client in an Armenian court. I want to thank the Armenian bar for allowing me... to actually speak in defense of the client directly with an interpreter. I was able to deal with the court myself and I thought effectively portray the absolute farce that... this trial was and that these charges were with respect to... Samuel Karapetyan, who is... an absolutely, unbelievably principled Christian who is now sitting in his fifth month in jail, innocent of everything other than praising God. And that's why he's in jail. I just I know I've asked you this before, maybe not as pointedly as I will now, but how did this fall to you?.. How did you, I think, grew up pretty liberal or left wing Jewish guy, wind up being like the world's, one of the world's foremost defenders of persecuted Christians. Like, how did that happen? Well, well, firstly, as a Jew. I am an inclusive person. I, I, if somebody has faith in God, almost any God, I respect that. I feel the same way. and I was raised by a family that was deeply impacted by the Holocaust. I have traveled all my life. I have sought refuge during riots or whatnot, whether it be in churches or mosques. I, I just never feel... proprietary and, and feel that all men of faith have a commonality to it. I've been involved with the Orthodox Church since I was a young man. We did a case against the Soviet Union, which a colleague of mine, Reg Maclean, did... most of the work on. But Dean Peroff and I were young lawyers together, and he was a member of the Macedono Bulgarian Orthodox Church... And I took on that case 45 years ago trying to fight a Soviet attempt at taking control of a church. And since that time, I've always had an interest in... these issues. And when, as you know, I was approached by the Ukrainian church and now by... Karapetyan in the Armenian... church context, it just seems very natural as a Jew, to defend children of Christ. So it's just an amazing story... Thank you, by the way, for doing it. So what is the latest? You have been the defender of the church in Ukraine, the Orthodox Church in Ukraine which is under almost unbelievable persecution by the government with the help of the United States. Where are we now? You know, I want to be very clear, Tucker, when you say persecution, that doesn't. That doesn't sum it up... I'm talking about torture... I'm talking about the theft of churches. I'm talking about. This is not just We're cutting off funding . No, no, it's not they are going to torture you. I have pictures. I have videos. There's a trial going on in England... where the Ukrainians are trying to ship back a former Member of Parliament of Ukraine whose crime... was to speak out for the church they on the day they passed this horrendous bill to ban the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, a bill that I would say has no comparison in Europe since the Nuremberg Laws. when they passed this bill to ban this church, this man had the courage to stand up... in the Rada in their parliament to denounce it. For that, Zelensky and Yermak pulled his security. knowing that his statements would be highly controversial and perhaps deadly. He realized that there was basically a death warrant. He fled the country on foot through a forest, made it to the UK within 14 days of arrival in the UK they were trying to extradite him back to Ukraine... for some hooliganism charge. And, you know, fortunate for him, I knew him. I knew when I had met him in Ukraine, when I had been there, that he had evidence of torture... We're now taking that evidence of torture to the courts. Ukraine is a one party, one person, autocratic state that has no comparison to any democratic values. Rather, today... is a mirror of the old Soviet Union. The man in charge of religious affairs... is an apparatchik who wrote an anti Jewish screed... 20 years ago. He's the head of Religious Affairs. And by the way, sorry to laugh, This is so crazy, by the way. Hold on, let me go a step crazy. Frazier. He was a keynote speaker at the Religious... Freedom Conference held in Washington. What? Yes, his name is Yelensky. He was a keynote speaker. This is a man who spends his life... trying to destroy the Orthodox Church and... transfer it into what is essentially the ocu, a state church. He's a keynote speaker at a Religious Freedom Conference in... Washington where there is a happy hour sponsored by the Ukrainian government, where there are men in Ukrainian army uniforms... walking around. This happened in Washington, D.C.? yes, a number of times. And this is all going on while I, on behalf of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church. We can't get an interview in any press in the United States. Censorship exists. In this country, yes. And when we got any coverage, it wasn't to cover the outrage in Ukraine, it was to taint me as some form of Russian agent, a guy who was arrested by Putin, whose friends were murdered by Putin. I am tainted as some Russian agent... for speaking out... against... this criminalization of Christianity that's going on in Ukraine. And by the way, supported by pastors who are very close to the White House and I don't fault them. Wait, it's supported by American pastors? Yes. How? They don't know. I mean essentially the Ukrainians are masters of disinformation, absolute masters... They have their own sort of captive cells of religious leaders who are told essentially, look, we have, you know, black PR against you. If you don't follow... what's going on and you don't support us. will take you down. I mean, the former president of Ukraine is under indictment for treason. Navinsky, who you've interviewed, under indictment for treason, they've done nothing treasonous... They just represent alternative areas of independent thinking. In Navinsky's case, a religious man who supported the church, but they have sanctioned him, they have tried to destroy him. And of course... they are within a hair's breadth... of taking down the church, a thousand year old church, destroying it, taking the priests out of it, removing all the churches, transferring it to the state church of the OCU, which essentially is... a cutout of the presidential administration. This is, it's hard to. So we first spoke maybe two years ago. Yes. And I was shocked by what you said at the time, which is the government of Zelensky is trying to eliminate traditional Christianity, the traditional church of Ukraine. And I thought, boy, you know, when people find out about this, because whatever you think of Zelensky or Putin, certainly Putin, you can hate Putin and still be appalled by this. Of course I thought, wow, it's going to stop like that once people know. But it, it... just kept accelerating and I still haven't heard a single. I'm sure there have been, but I haven't heard any American Christian leaders say anything about this. Look, what is that? I will tell you that J.D. vance. when he was a senator... and no one frankly knew him from Oshkosh, gave a statement in the Senate for which I thank him every day in my prayers that has kept. I think it's one of the key things, I think you. J.D. vance and there are two... young members of the Young Republicans. Catherine Whitford, who is a co chair of the National Young Republicans and is orthodox, is actually leading a day of action... and she has a colleague as well who is leading this. Those young people have been along with, with our Vice President now the only sources of, of support we've had. What about Franklin Graham? He is speaking in Yerevan. What does that mean? He is the keynote at the prayer breakfast in Yerevan, Armenia. With the Prime Minister who's putting clergy in jail. Yes. How does that work? I. Listen, I am. It may surprise you to know I am not working in... evangelical circles. I have no idea. I'm not either. But I'm very sympathetic to the, you know, to evangelical people, great people. And I'm not against Franklin Graham, but I'm just shocked that Franklin Graham would. I don't know, you know, having, having certainly being aware of him. I... have no idea if he knows... I think because our government has decided, as has the EU frankly that they are going to go with the SOB. They know. I think the silence of the government is something that everybody takes as permission... And I'm sure Franklin Graham is not aware that. Well, cause Franklin. I mean you would think. And I don't mean to focus on Franklin Graham. I'm sure he's a nice person or I really don't know what he's like, but I'm not against him. But has he said anything about what Zelenskyy's doing to the church in Ukraine that you're aware of? No, no, no. I, I honestly... am in shock at the silence of the media... in the United States... and the silence of, of the Christian community to what's happened. I mean, thanks to Candy Stroud, who you and I both know, great person. I'm, I'm, I've been on radio everywhere I can. But you know, the Ukrainian effort in Washington and with media is masterful. They have their own people and key media... who continued to write puffy articles about them. Never a criticism. The first time it ever came up that I saw was... the protests over corruption a few weeks ago, which led people here to scratch their head and say, well, if Zelenskyy is so clean, how could he be trying to wipe out the anti corruption independence? And that was an eye opener to some. But you know, in the UK we wrote to the government to say why aren't you... doing something about the church? And they wrote back and said everything's great. everything's great? everything's great. I mean the UK government is, is more hardline about Ukraine than Ukraine. They, the reaction of Europeans understand Germany is imploding because of, of this war. I know it was obvious that it would four years Ago, it was obvious. The second it started saying, this is going to destroy Germany, which is really The economy of Europe, and let's say something else. It's going to radicalize Germany. Well, that is, that is deep. And, and that is scary. That is, it's coming. Of course. and, and as a Jew, that is a very scary thing to witness, but it's, it's inevitable. It's going to radicalize all of Europe. I mean, how could it not? Like yeah. and, and, and, and I will say to you that the. the behavior of the press has been the most disappointing to me... because I've worked with the press. When I was fighting Putin in the early 2000s... on behalf of one of his key opponents, I had the press with me, and we would do interviews. It would. It was constant. But now that SaintZelenskyy is starting to show a few cracks in the visage, there's still... nothing about this ongoing torture and use of secret police to destroy a church. Nothing. What is that... exactly? Why most Americans, including certainly most reporters, most people in the media, had never heard of Zelenskyy until this war started. They couldn't identify him, and immediately after it started, the loyalty to him blinded them to his faults, induced them to lie to the public in America about what was happening. I mean, they just became shills for Zelenskyy in, like, one day. how? Why? What is that? What's interesting, because we did a study, we looked at media in the United States... because one of the things that's frightening about the churches that are being taken in Ukraine is that very often the people who take them and beat up parishioners and... break the heads of priests. those people have swastikas on their arms. Yeah, I noticed. So we found out that the New York Times... and other... papers had been profiling... the rise of the right in Ukraine right up until the war. Now, the Azov Battalion, which is basically a neo Nazi battalion, has almost taken over command and control in the Ukraine. And this is an ultranationalist government right now that is... pushing a very... radical... line, but no one is covering it. But do you have any guesses as to. And I should say you've been in and out of that region for over 50 years, you know. Well, you know a lot. I mean, I just, for. I could go on about your background, but I would just... ask viewers to look you up, or to take my word for it, you know, what you're talking about and what you're saying... is true. But why would the media, again, do that? Why are they defending actual Nazis like what? That's how deep their commitment is to Zelensky. So what is that? What is that commitment? Where does it come from? Well, you know, it's funny because Zelensky made all his money in Russia. Yeah, I know. And yet he's in charge of a government that's... debasing any guarantees of language rights for Russian speakers inside Ukraine. And the sanctification... of him relates in my mind to two things. One, we have a total breakdown in elite politics in Europe and to some extent, in the United States. Yes. And secondly. I, you know, I stopped playing the market when I was 21, but I certainly remember. you know, making a bet and watching it crash and then think... I've got to double down to. To lower my cost in. Exactly. And I think that's what's kind of happened here. I understand. The first one, I mean the second one.. I think you're exactly right. Like, I was all in from the beginning. I can't get out now. Yes... Double down. And I sort of understand what you mean about the degradation of elite politics, but can you put a finer point on that? Well, you know. look at the uk. I mean, I love the uk. Yes. We have a government that is wildly incompetent. They even know they're incompetent. We're going to have a budget that's going to destroy what's left of the middle class. Look at France. Complete... chaos right now... Complete loss of direction. Italy, struggling, struggling. But with Meloni, there's. There's some sort of strength there. But... many of the other countries, of course, Spain... Spain is. Now, you may not be aware, I'm. I'm fighting Spain in a big way... against their tax administration. We just outed in a press conference last week the fact that... Spain is using Huawei computers to store tax information. for Americans. Not really. Yes. And not only are they doing that, but... they have this discriminatory policy towards Americans. They have 50,000 Americans. They have hundreds of thousands foreigners. They're doing discriminatory tax audits and... basically stealing. Stealing the money from foreigners... to try to subsidize a government that is the most corrupt government I've seen since Papa Doc Duvalier... I think something like 21 indictments... The prime Minister's wife, his brother, the... general prosecutor. I mean, what's going on in Spain is unexplored territory in the United States, and people don't seem to have any interest in. Zero, Zero interest. It's a vacation spot. And the king is flying to China because... Sanchez is... all in with China, of course, and Venezuela. So it's astounding. And the rule of law is under such attack there that the EU is quietly sending a commission to investigate in January, because everybody in Europe knows rule of law is dead in Spain... So it's frightening... what's going on there. And this is what I mean about the sort of calcification of the ruling elite. But what is that? Is that just a. Now I'm asking you, I'm luring you into... philosophy, but... I'm very interested and I agree with everything you've said. It's observable, it's provable, but where does it come from? Is it a natural cycle or is it something else? You know. the cost... of being a politician are so high, the reputational costs are so high, and the materialistic nature of, of all of us now, the loss of ideology, the loss of principles, the loss of faith. this leads to a, a loss in terms of the quality of people entering politics. That's right. And, and you have... a chaotic world situation which, you know, there's a lot of fear. and it, it leads to a completely transactional foreign policy. And more and more states are engaging in this transactional policies... as opposed to following... any form of ideological... policy. So... it sounds like a part of a cycle. Then, just as... politics becomes less productive, therefore more reviled by the population. These are supposedly democratic countries, or not really, but they... still have the skin suit... and people are mad at the political class... So that means that only the worst people join the political class. Right. And yet... fascinating. What I'm seeing in watching the Orthodox community, the Christian Orthodox community... and the Jewish community, the Jewish community, as a result of this... horrible growth of antisemitism, the Orthodox community, as a result... of the woke nature of many Christian churches, is that those who are fundamental in their faith... are growing. Orthodox Christianity is growing at a massive rate. Oh yeah, massive. I'm sure Orthodox Judaism is too. Yeah. Because people... are clinging to real values. That's right. And, and in Europe, you know, quite frankly, it's very, very hard to find inspiration in the United States. We have a president. by the way, I think probably the most effective president... in foreign affairs that we may have had since Nixon. I think he's incredibly consequential... in foreign affairs. on domestic policy, on legal issues, I think the rule of law is in trouble, but I won't go into that. I've noticed, No, I agree, but... foreign policy wise. he's moved incredible mountains. And... I'm not just talking about... the recent activities with the hostages I'm talking about as a lawyer engaged in Africa, the man has done... more to open up our eyes to the opportunities in parts of Africa. He's made it much less risky to go into Africa. As an American in Africa over the last decades, you don't know how frustrating it is when the Department of Justice... opens up investigations the minute American companies want to venture into Africa or into Latin America. And now that's not happening. yes And now... American companies are going into some of the Wild west countries... in Africa and Latin America, and I say... more power to them. Why. Why would we just hand this to China? so Congo, most obviously, but others, yes. Speaking of African countries. all of a sudden, I'm not defending Nigeria. I don't have strong views in Nigeria, but Nigeria has become famous in the last week as a country in which there's Christian... persecution going on... I think that's been. There's been a lot of conflict between Muslims and Christians in Nigeria for, you know, my whole life. But all of a sudden, it's a kind of centerpiece of the conversation. How did, What? What is the truth? You've been in and out of Nigeria for how long? 50 years. 50 years. 1975. Is that correct? Yes. It's a long time. So you know Nigeria pretty well. I do. What is the truth about what's going on? And I ask because you've got credibility, you know the country, and you're spending the rest of your life defending Christians around the world... Tell me what the actual truth of Christian persecution in Nigeria is. Well, let's be very clear... that the Nigerian government is populated by Christians and Muslims. I have represented in his earlier... life, the national security adviser of Nigeria when he was a young man. And he's. He's a lovely individual and. And caring and. And. And universally respected in terms of religious issues... Devout Muslim, but... universally respected. In my adopted family in Lagos, the Odessanya family sort of adopted me when I was a very, very young man... and... living there. I sort of have a... half brother there, Dapo Desanya. That family is a totally integrated family. Muslim. Christian I was always teased that I was a Jeruba, which is a Jewish Yoruba... But, I mean. there have always been tribal conflict. I spoke to the foreign minister before I came here because I wanted to get clarity on the government's position. Absolutely. Let's be clear. President Tinubu's wife is a Christian pastor. This is not targeted at Christians. There are probably an equal or more number of Muslim deaths. I am grateful to President Trump for Identifying these attacks on Christians. Believe it or not, you can blame some of this on the French who had this. oh I know nothing about it, but I believe you anyway. they had a massive force in the Sahel. They armed the Tuaregs, which are a notorious, notoriously aggressive tribal group. That arming... has led to mass killings of Christians. The fact that when Libya blew apart, a massive amount of arms went down to Boko Haram can't be denied by anyone. Nigeria... wants to consult with the United States... Nigeria wants assistance in protecting Christians and Muslims, protecting their populations... Nigeria feels... it has not had a fair shake from Washington. And I'm not. You know, I don't work for Nigeria. I'm not going to go on and on. The foreign minister is a... close friend who I respect deeply. But I. I can tell you from my work, I was privileged to represent one of the Nigerian states years ago at Akwa Ibom... We won a case, actually, for them. The Nigerians would welcome American assistance with open arms. So this is unlike Ukraine, which is destroying its church, or Armenia, which is destroying its church. Here you have a government that wants to protect its populace, doesn't have the resources. Nobody's going to deny Nigeria's been wracked by corruption all the years I've known it. But they want a new deal, a new relationship with Washington, and in part to assist them in protecting Christians... So when I read some of what I've been reading. you know I'm never gonna say that Ted Cruz isn't a brilliant man. But I'm going to say I might have a little more time in Nigeria than he does... And I would welcome him to speak to the foreign minister... or others... Because one thing America doesn't need... are more enemies. Africa... is the future. I have said it time and time again. I'm privileged to be counsel to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We. You know, my firm has spent many years. We've just. We're still trying to defend the opposition leader of Tanzania, who. Tundu Lissu, who's been illegally jailed. A thousand are dead protesting completely bogus, fraudulent elections. And to the credit of the United States, at least in the Senate, they've spoken out. Foreign Relations Committee has spoken out. We need our administration, and we certainly need the EU to stop funding this grotesque government in Tanzania. But... we have to stop looking at Africa as a security... concern... alone... And we have to recognize... that between their minerals and between the entrepreneurial spirit, Nigerian lawyers... are as good or better than American lawyers or British lawyers... I mean, there is an incredible infrastructure of intelligence in Nigeria... that we don't know anything about. All we try to do... is sanction and condemn. It is a horrible, horrible part of our policy that we sanction the hell out of everybody. We are responsible for the consolidation of power in Moscow under Putin. If we were not sanctioning the hell out of all these people who had moved to Europe. who knows whether Putin would still be in power? Exactly. No, that's the truth. I know... it's, it's so counterproductive that it's got to be part of some sort of larger strategy that I'm too dumb to understand because it's, it's achieving... the opposite of the intended result. And, and let me tell you, I'm. I'm working in Iraq. In Iraq, against Iranian interests... We have a woman, Sarah Saleem, who is an American citizen, bravely, incredibly bravely defending her interests and those of the Kurdish in the north. And, you know, the Kurds are going to have an election soon. She's defending their interests against a wildly corrupt chief justice named Zeidan, who is actually an instrument of Iran. And there have been a complete reversal of her fortunes before the courts... because of corruption against a group called the Hannah Brothers. And when we've gone to the U.S. Embassy... for help, this is an American citizen who, by the way, was kidnapped and tortured 10 years ago... and has been fighting for her redemption and for compensation against Al Maliki and Zeidan and others. Our embassy pledges neutrality... Does not help this brave American citizen. How can they not help an American? listen, we cannot understand it. especially in a moment where the future of Iraq, which is massively important to the United States, is at risk. I mean, there's an election coming up in Iraq as well, and the oil wealth of that country is almost unimaginable. And the issue is whether the Iraqi militia will disarm, whether in fact the government that we, we not only have spent billions to support, but we lost almost 5,000 lives... Whether that government will be a government somewhat free of the corruption and control of Iran. and, and, and our government's been impotent. There's, there's a few people in Congress who have spoken out and blessed them for doing that, but very few people have paid Iraq any thought at all. And yet we over concentrate on Ukraine to the exclusion of almost everything else. So... Ted Cruz is upset about what's happening in Nigeria to Christians. I'm not against him being upset about that. You say it's much more complicated than he's presenting. Probably more tribal Than religious. I, you know, I don't know much about it. but how much has Ted Cruz said about the. The U.S. Funded destruction of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church? Nothing. Nothing at all? Nothing? Nothing. I mean, how can that be? Listen, Tucker. nobody. I mean, I. The Washington Post did a hit piece on me. A woman I knew quite well did a terrible hit piece, tried to present me... as a Russian agent. That was their focus. There was no issue about what's happening to the church. None at all. And the funny thing, by the way, is... we are not trying to change American policy. Where you and I disagree is I've always been... totally supportive of Ukraine from a military standpoint because my clients are in the front line. Members of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church are fighting and dying for Ukraine. And, you know, I don't know if you remember last time I met you, I showed you a video that we had done of some young men in the army... speaking out for the church. Well, one of those young men has just died fighting Russia. And right his comment in that video was to the President, how do you... How do you want me to fight when... my own church. I can't defend my own church in my town? so Sad. And, and Arseny here is a bishop. One of my lawyers went to the jail in the war zone to meet Bishop Arseny. He has been in jail 17 months. He has no stomach. He is horribly ill. Horribly ill. He is a monk... He is a bishop. He has spent his years devoted... to a cathedral. What happens is, we think after 17 months they're going to release this poor man in his 60s, possibly to die. They get him out for a moment and the secret police arrest him again on the trumped up charge that he resisted the Russian invasion. He didn't resist the Russian invasion. Some completely bogus charge... and he is incarcerated again. It's a level of cruelty and torture I cannot... express... to you. And Cruz has said nothing about it? No. Really, no one said anything about it, but Cruz specifically. But he's all of a sudden kind of out of nowhere, deeply concerned about the plight of Christians in Nigeria, which I want to restate. maybe a totally valid concern. I don't know. But that's weird. What is? That all of a sudden everybody's concerned about people who clearly have... no track record of being interested in Christians at all, including Ted Cruz. What. What is going on? Where. Where is this coming from? Well, in fact, what's interesting is they're calling it a genocide. And a genocide under international legal terms requires... an intent. And certainly it's a very strange Scenario where you have a government richly populated by Christians and accusing them of some form of genocide. The president, whose wife is a Christian pastor. So, but I mean, one thing I do understand... is... coordinated propaganda. And this is coordinated propaganda. What... I mean is it? Look, you know, I, I can tell you that the Nigerians... have no idea where this is coming from. They've wanted... Washington's attention since the beginning of the Trump administration. There are 230 million... Nigerians... who long for a strong relationship with the United States, who are being cultivated by Russia, cultivated by China, cultivated by India but want... to work with America. And we ignore them until we condemn them for a genocide that is absolutely not a genocide. Yes, I support President Trump's interest... in helping out Christians everywhere... But lets let's be fair to a government who is working to try to protect Christians and doesn't have the resources. Right. This is clearly, I'll just say it out loud. It's an effort to draw the attention of faithful Christians in the United States away from long standing persecution that we have studiously ignored in... Ukraine and in other parts of the world. That is, I mean, it's obvious to me what's going on. Does that sound crazy? No. No, because I don't have another, another way to explain it. And one other thing I want to mention on your show is that, that we have this new white paper on... Armenia... called Pashinian and the Persecution of Samuel Karapetyan. And it's, it's available online and... it's at freeKarapetyan.com and please download it and you will see a, you know, it's 60 or so pages, but it provides... the entire history of the persecution... But, you know, as, as you discovered the Armenian genocide, from there till now, Armenia has been a brave Christian... country in a terrible, terrible neighborhood. And you know, I, having been in their court, having been in the jail, having met with Karapetyan I am at a complete loss about the fact that... I know they think that they're going to have this prayer breakfast. I believe one of the Trump children is going to Armenia... I'm sure... Donald Trump Jr. Again has no idea of what's actually going on there. It's, it's a terrible situation where because you can't get into the media to tell them the truth, so many senior people in the United States operate on ignorance and, and reputation launder. Exactly. People like Pashinyan. Well, I, I've been... an unwitting participant in that phenomenon myself. So I know, like you don't really know what's going on. You get used. I've been used... I... deeply regret it. I'm... not going to happen to me again if I can help it. But I'm sympathetic in general to that... because, again, I've experienced it. But the Ukraine thing is, anyone who wants to know about what's happening to the church in Ukraine can find out. Like, that's not a secret. Now. are there prayer breakfasts for in. For Ukraine? Yes, actually? Yes. Does anyone ever bring this up? They're not. Our church is not invited to the prayer breakfast? Yes. we're not invited. The biggest church in Ukraine is not invited to the prayer breakfast for Ukraine. In Ukraine? No, no, they're not invited... As you're aware, when I fought to get into the... Religious Freedom Conference... last time, we had to fight to get a table to put information... on. Then when I wanted to speak, they loaded a panel with five or six other people... and I got about two minutes to speak... while the man who is in charge of the destruction of the church was a keynote before a large audience. Who organized this? This is the International... Religious Freedom Caucus, I think. And. And I got a call from Sam Brownback to say, if you do speak, could you be civil? And I said, well, you don't know me, Mr. Brownback, but I don't have any record of incivility. You know, that's not in my nature. I just want an opportunity to speak out for the people of this church. Sam Branback, former senator from Kansas. Yes. He was running this. I think he was involved. I have no idea. But I mean, did he speak out against the destruction of the largest church in Ukraine at a religious freedom... event? Nobody did. And let me go further. That is so bonkers to me, like, I can hardly even believe what you're saying. Well, wait a second. What's worse is they brought army folks. People were in Ukrainian army uniforms... walking with OCU priests, that state church priests... through the halls of this Religious Freedom Breakfast or. I'm sorry, religious Freedom... Convention or conference. And they had a happy hour. a happy hour sponsored by Ukraine that is like, absolutely crazy. Are they gonna do this for. Do this for China, too? A Uyghur happy hour. Yeah, exactly. Celebrating religious freedom in China. It's all. Okay, so last question, which I do think kind of sums it up. You've been in and out of Ukraine a lot. You've got, of course, a huge Ukrainian client. Can you go to Ukraine? No. Why? I'm under criminal investigation in Ukraine. For what? I don't know. I just know it. They've announced that I'm under investigation. But again, it's no idea. It's like... with Karapetyan, you know, they, they try to find something to get you on and they invent stuff as you know. So it's, it's really, I'm very tempted to go and I may go again, but I have no idea if I go, if I'll get out... And to some extent it's a bit like that with, with Armenia, because in Armenia they've just arrested not only bishops, but now they've arrested three mayors who spoke out and who weren't helpful, as well as... the family of the patriarch, the catholicos, the... brother and some other... relative on, on again, completely trumped up charges. It feels like we're moving very quickly to just kind of global repression. It seems like liberal democracy has been so discredited, no one's defending it and it's dying before our eyes. That, that's kind of the overview from everything you've said. Look, the EU has lost its way. There's no question... I think the EU is a tremendous danger... if it doesn't get its act together on fundamental values. You know, there's this dialectic going on. Everybody is afraid of Russia. Completely afraid. Paralyzed. Yeah. I mean, a Russian drone crosses the border and we're at DEFCON one. yet after, I don't know, four plus years. Kiev... isn't taken. None. You know, I think there's been a 1% change in territory. So how can Europe be so completely in fear of Russia and yet at the same time instrumentalize that fear to destroy their economies, to maintain sanctions, to engage in wildly self destructive behavior and fail to maintain democratic... values?.. You saw them... throw out a candidate in Romania... You saw what they're trying to do in Germany... You see what's happened in France. It is a continuous obliteration of rule of law. And we have got to start getting back... to first principles with respect to rule of law everywhere or we will lose it... completely... everywhere. Bob Amsterdam. I swear I check the news regularly waiting for an account of your arrest. I hope it never comes. But you are taking actual physical risks on behalf of people who don't have power. So I'm grateful to you for that. Well, thank you for having me. Stay free... Thank you. We've got a new website we hope you will Visit. It's called Newcommissionnow.com and it refers to a new 9/11 Commission. So we spent months putting together our 9/11 documentary series. And if there's one thing we learned, it's that in fact. there was foreknowledge of the attacks. People... knew. The American public deserves to know. We're shocked actually to learn that, to have that confirmed. But it's true. The evidence is overwhelming. The CIA, for example, knew the hijackers were here in the United States. They knew they were planning an act of terror. In his passport... is a visa to go to United States of America. A foreign national... was caught celebrating as the World Trade center fell and later said he was in New York, quote, to document the event. How do you know there would be an event to document in the first place? Because he had foreknowledge. And maybe most amazingly, somebody, an unknown investor, shorted American Airlines and United Airlines, the companies whose planes the attackers used on 9/11, as well as the banks that were inside the Twin Towers just before the attacks... They made money on the 9/11 attacks because they knew they were coming. Who did that? You have to look at the evidence. The U.S. Government learned the name of that investor... but never released it. Maybe there's an instant explanation for all this, but there isn't, actually. And by the way, it doesn't matter whether there is or not. The public deserves to know what the hell that was. How did people know ahead of time? And why was no one ever punished for it? The 9/11 Commission, the original one, was a fraud. It was fake. Its conclusions were written before the investigation... That's true, and it's outrageous. This country needs a new 9/11 Commission, one that actually tells the truth, that tries to get to the bottom of the story. We can't just move on like nothing happened... 9/11 Commission is a cover up. Something did happen. We need to force a new investigation into 9/11... Almost 25 years later. Sorry. Justice demands it. And if you want that, go to NewcommissionNow.com to add your name to our petition. We're not getting paid for this. We're doing this because we really mean it. Newcommissionnow.Com