The general gonna experience you know that's what Bob Lazar thinks that spaceship that he worked on was made But he thinks it somehow 3d printed cuz there's no seams You pay attention to your bullshit. No good for you. No, but I know you do some I'm asked cuz I'm It's like this shit just it's so much shit. They're just coming out now. I don't I don't understand the What's the motive behind they just randomly coming out now? Yeah, I'm super suspicious So what's the place area on area 51 yeah, like I'm I'm assuming that she's been real that's real Yeah, but area 51 was used for all sorts of training purposes. They had all sorts of Programs that were running out there. I think that's where they developed the B52s that were they developed it near 51 They developed a bunch of different Military technologies out there. So that was true about the we don't know We don't know I'll just guessing about whether or not they're working on UFOs, but they were definitely working on other stuff too It's a legitimate military base. So you think these videos real that's coming out. Are you thinking? I think the videos are real What they're filming? I don't know what that is it could be that it's some super sophisticated U.S. Control drone that was built in some sort of a program that's top secret and it has some new super sophisticated Propulsion system that they don't want us to know about and so they Pretend it's coming from another world and they say oh these are off-world crafts exhibiting behavior that's impossible to replicate in America I wonder I wonder because if they're talking about it like that They're literally saying off-world like sure boy it's so suspicious I get suspicious because they're not super honest about anything No, I would be honest about spaceships. They'll it then it just randomly happens now Yeah, it's well, it's another nice distraction gets people excited. Yeah, the fucking fake little Mexican UFO baby They're doubling down. No, they're not I took it. This is from the MRI yesterday It's like they said it's one skeleton What would they like they're trying to others like American scientists are saying well Then let people test samples out there something well What do they have images from the MRI? I mean, I don't know that they showed those actually images But the doctor that took it a server here they belong to a single skeleton that has not been joined to other pieces Interesting footage from the team carrying out the tests Shows one of the bodies bearing in elongated head a small upturn nose and two slanted eyes subjects look tiny when held up by the doctor is examining the watching for the watching journalists This also is like this person says that I think it's the doctor That's claimed that he talks to the version of Guadalupe and the extra dressers will not talk to her like they talked to him because she doesn't believe in them Maybe just drugs Maybe it's telling the truth. Maybe he did talk to the version of Guadalupe So that's what it's supposed to be I want to see what those images look like. They don't have them You have a notice on none of the images be clear Like they really want to see yeah, it's a real problem. I talked to this one guy Christopher Mellon He used to be an intelligence agent and he said that they do have clear footage It just hasn't been leaked but that he's aware of it and some of it is pretty mind-blowing. You said Show me Told you to see it. I don't know man. I feel like a dummy because I want to believe in it so bad That's the problem Because it's so fun, you know the idea of spaceships coming here from another galaxy. I don't know how fun It's basically a name friendly Well, if they weren't friendly, we'd already be fucked right? I mean if they've been coming here forever supposedly and they haven't heard us yet We're probably okay You know, I think they're probably observing us. They're probably if they are coming from another world They're probably making sure we don't blow ourselves up They're probably realizing that we're at this convergence of the evolution of the biology and then science and technology and its abilities that far surpass Like the speed that the biology evolves like the biology evolves very slowly relatively compared to these computers The things that they're able to do these spaceships and the flying cars and something we have so much ability now and We're still the same kind of creature We're still humans, you know, but now we have this insane ability to blow up a whole country Like we have nuclear bombs. We're all pointing at each other and there's enough to wipe out the whole world Like if I was an alien I'd be like let's keep an eye on these crazy fox, you know, people are wild Let's keep an eye on them. Yeah, yeah Definitely Keep my distance from that. Yeah. Yeah. I don't want to fly them all. I don't want to deny shit I just man They're my life Yeah, it's gonna be a long time before people get comfortable moving to Mars I don't know how long that's gonna be but but that's a fucking commitment Didn't they have somebody recently go I think then people go now no they haven't let people go yet. They've sent drones So they have the Mars rover that goes around on Mars, but that's just to robot But the idea is to have people on Mars. I think Didn't Elon say by like 2035 or something like that. He wants man trip to Mars It's crazy keeps saying this name. He's the only to say Don't whatever the fuck he wanted Yeah, he's a wild fella