Go to the show, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night! All day! I don't want to, every one of my senses to sound like Barry White. Is that what it sounds like? In your dreams? In your dreams? In your dreams? I just can't. Whereas without the headphones, I'm just regular. All right, ready? All right, ready. Good to see you. Hey, what's happening? Joe. I'm excited to talk to you. I'm excited to talk to you about a bunch of things, but I've been paying attention to all the web telescope. Oh my gosh. Fast and anything. It's all that. Could you please explain the difference in the ability of the capabilities of this telescope versus what we've had previously? Yeah, so first of all, it's all that. And the excitement was in part because so much could have gone wrong with this thing. And the fact that nothing went wrong, we were ecstatic. Could you explain how complicated it is to get something like that? Yeah, here's one of the great challenges that we face is how do you put a telescope in orbit that's bigger than the rocket that's going to launch it? Is that even possible? And the Hubble telescope, you know what, set the size of that 94 inch diameter mirror? That's the biggest mirror you could fit in the payload of the space shuttle. That's what set the size of that telescope. Big as it was, we would have made it bigger if the space shuttle were bigger. Now, I don't know if you've seen the Hubble telescope. There's a replica of it at the Air and Space Museum. Let's take a photo of it. And it's there hanging from the ceiling, but if you want to know how, it's about the size of a Greyhound bus. So the space shuttle deployed a Greyhound bus into orbit, which is the Hubble Space Telescope. And the value of the Hubble was that you could update it by with servicing missions and it was serviced many times. And as a result, it lived within our culture for three decades. There are people who came of age only ever knowing the majesty of the universe as delivered to you by the Hubble telescope. Thirty years worth of this. Think about it. Most other telescopes, they put into orbit and they have a five-year mission and then they come down. So they don't have a chance to get to get inside you to become something that you that you... Oh, you got a nice visual there. That's the Hubble telescope on the left, which every year, every year, I post a tweet at the end of the Stanley Cup. And I say the Stanley Cup and the Hubble telescope had the same designer. Just kidding. No, I'm just kidding. No, just look at the thing. It looks like the Stanley Cup. A little bit. A lot. I wouldn't confuse it to if they were in a room together. So, here's the thing. So notice the Hubble telescope. Its diameter is the spherical shape that fits in the spherical payload of the space shuttle. So now we want to put a bigger telescope into orbit. How do you do that? And so this is where you need engineers, clever engineers. We say, here's a rocket. One of the most powerful rockets we can use. But the faring, that's the place where you hold the payload, can only be so big. And they say, all right, why don't we fold the telescope? Now how are you going to fold the mirror? Oh, you turn the mirror into segments, hexagons. Hexagons, one of only three shapes that can tile a surface, a square, a triangle, and a hexagon. No other shape can do this. So, well, you can have other irregular shapes that can match up. You can tesulate what it's called. But if you have a regular polygon, so here in the image there, what you can see, it's all of the mirror segments. Those fold into a narrow structure, along with the unfurling solar panels, as well as the heat shield. Notice how it's made at Northrop Grumman. By the way, Grumman has a long history in helping NASA put stuff in space. The LAMM, Lunar Exclusion Module, remember that? The thing that landed on the moon? That was designed and built in Beth Page Long Island at Grumman Aerospace. And so, this is, and you go to Beth Page today, people still stand tall. Because they had ants and uncles who worked on that project space. Is a force of nature unto itself in our sense of pride, in our sense of achievement, and our sense of what operates on civilization to take us into the future, lest we continue to regress and move back into the cave, which we came. There it is all folded up in the image that we now see for those who are watching this. And you slip that into a fairing. And then you launch it a million miles from Earth, opposite the sun from Earth. And it unfurls like petals of a flower. Is there an animation of how they're on? Oh, yeah, yeah, slow mo animation. Sure, he can find it. And it's the deployment, how it deployed as it was on its way to its location, which is one of the Lagrange points in orbit. For every two objects that orbit each other, there are five Lagrange points. So here we are unfolding. So there we have solar panels coming out the side. And there's the communication antenna. And it has a unique set of baffles that shield it from sunlight, so that the mirror and the detector can be very, very cold. Because it's specially tuned to observe infrared that comes to us from space. And infrared, as you may know, we normally associate it with heat. Well, how am I going to detect something that's very, very cold in space? If my detector is hotter than what I'm trying to detect, you can't, there's no way to see something that is warmer than the temperature of your detector. So your detector has to be very cold, extremely cold. So these are the baffles and there are many, many layers. So that when sunlight hits one layer, that layer absorbs it and re-radiates it in both directions, forward and back. So there's less that goes to the next layer. So then the next layer re-radiates it. And by the time it gets to the fourth layer, hardly anything goes towards the telescope. And so it is insulated and it drops to deep space cold temperatures. And it's literally where the sun don't shine right now. So the solar panels are getting the solar energy from the bottom. Yeah, because that's the direction the sun is, correct? Right. It radiates off the bottom and those are the things that protect it. And you see how all those layers, yeah, the things. Yeah. And it's specifically tuned for the infrared part of the spectrum. You remember the spectrum. So you have like visible light, right? We, Roy G. Biv, right? If you want to remember, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo violet. Those are the parts of the spectrum we can see. But there's light outside of this. There's like beyond the violet, there's ultraviolet. That's where you get that. And below the red is infrared. Not visible to the human eye. By the way, insects can see ultraviolet. We can't. That's why bug zappers work. You put a UV light in a bug zapper. The bug say, oh my gosh, I love ultraviolet and then they get zapped. And we're old enough to remember before there were bug zappers, you'd had a picnic bulb for a twilight picnics. And it's like a yellow bulb, kind of yellow amber bulb. It was a bug bulb. It was sold as bug bulbs. It's not that they repelled bugs, is that the bugs couldn't even see it. Because their whole vision is shifted towards the ultraviolet. And it leaves out the deep red. Yeah. So it's, that's evidence we're smarter than bugs. There's one piece of luck. One piece of evidence that we're smarter than bugs. So just to bring that to a closure, the earliest forming galaxies in the universe radiated a lot of ultraviolet. So you might say, well, let's get an ultraviolet telescope. No. Because 14 billion years later, the expansion of the universe has red shifted the ultraviolet into the infrared. So if you want to see the birth of galaxies, you've got to know what they look like in the here and the now. And in the here and the now, it's in the infrared. So this is a telescope specifically tuned to see galaxies born at the edge of the universe. And infrared also allows you to see deep into gas clouds. Now when they're showing you an image like that. So right here, this is the pillars of creation, which were so named at the time Hubble first attempted this. We were gaga over the Hubble image of this. And now like the JWST, oh my gosh, for those who are more prone to religion, some have called this the hand of God. Because if you look at the pillars, you can kind of picture like a thumb and fingers. Yeah. So but regardless, this is nearby. This is the telescope peering deep into gas clouds that otherwise would enshroud what's going on. And you get to see stars being born, planets being born. And so what's remarkable about changing the JWST is that to be tuned for the edge of the universe. And the birth of galaxies is the same properties you would want to see the birth of stars. A star is born right in front of your nose that would otherwise be cloaked by gas. And infrared penetrates those clouds and enables you to see it as though the cloud isn't even there. And you already know this because when if you're driving through fog, okay, you put on your fog lights. The fog lights are not blue. They're like reddish amber. Okay. That improves your ability to see through the fog. If we could see infrared, that's the kind of light you'd use. Then you wouldn't even know the fog was there. That's why self-driving cars will be amazing. It won't matter if it's foggy. They'll be able to see everything. Just give them infrared sensors. The fog is irrelevant. They could drive 100 miles an hour in dense fog. And all the cars will see each other. And they want to change lanes. They tell all the cars, I'm going to change lanes. They'll part for them, open up. And we won't get 40,000 deaths a year as we currently do from automobile accidents. Now how much bigger is this telescope? So, you want to think about collecting area. And I forgot the exact number. Something like eight times around there. More powerful in the sense of you can see things eight times dimmer. Yeah, there you go. So that's two and a half squared. This is about eight times the area. And the technology obviously is improved as well. So like the ability that... Well, our detectors are better. And let me remind you that when the Hubble was designed, it was designed like the 1980s. And it was scheduled to go up. And then we had the Challenger accident. And that delayed the shuttle program. So there's Hubble sitting there in mothballs with an old Microsoft chip. And by the time it launched, it was already not as fast as it could have been. And so the very first servicing mission swapped all that out and put in better methods and tools for measuring what it is we always needed it to do. So one sad part about this is that it's not serviceable. We have no access to that point in space a million miles from the moon. We haven't left lower orbit since 1972. We're not going out a million miles from Earth to fix a telescope. So that's unfortunate. Maybe a robotic fix? No? Do we feel some of the fuel that needs fuel to station keep? Didn't it get hit by a micrometion? Yeah, well that's the brakes. When you're in space. Yeah. But it's not... It doesn't affect the overall performance. That's amazing. Yeah, yeah. Well, it's huge. And micrometion will do small damage. But you don't want it in the middle of a meteor storm. That would be totally bad. Do they obviously know where some of the asteroid belts are and where some of the near the Earth objects are? Yeah, so in this context, so first most asteroids are in the asteroid belt. So that's between Mars and Jupiter. So I have an asteroid named after me. I don't mean to brag or anything. Can you get a star named after you online? Not legally. Not physically. You just get robbed. He's in 10. The sensual map with your name drawn in the map. See paper. Yeah, they claim that it gets registered with the astrophysicist, but it doesn't. Oh. There's only one way we name stars and that's by committee and by traditions and this sort of thing. They're fascinating traditions. So planet are named after Roman gods and planet moons are named after Greek characters in the life of the Greek god who's the counterpart to that Roman god. So Jupiter, for example, one of its moons is Ganymede. Ganymede was the man's servant of Zeus and Zeus and Jupiter, corresponding gods in Greek and Roman. And not only that, what's the number? Is it about half somewhere around there of all the stars in the night sky that have names have Arabic names. So in my field, we have deep respect for people who made great inroads into understanding the natural universe and the golden age of Islam from a thousand years ago made material contributions in this regard. And of course, Greek and Roman legends and this sort of thing. So there they are in its influence on Western culture. So yeah, no, universe is a fun place. It's a pretty fun place. Yeah, yeah. So this James Webb telescope in terms of its ability to recognize things, like what magnitude of improvement are we talking about from the top. Yeah, factor 10. Yeah, factor 10. Yeah, easily. That's right. Well, a factor 10 for the things Hubble could see, but it's incalculable when it sees things that Hubble could have never seen because Hubble was not tuned for the infrared. So then you can't even compare it. It's a complete other window opened up to the universe for you. So what has changed in terms of our understanding? The web has been in the million mile orbit or how far away it is for how long now? Well, it got there and then we did some engineering. So I guess a year, year and a half. And what has changed in our understanding? So that's been people's first question. And what I want to do is temper that to say something a little different. So yes, we expect James Webb to make great discoveries. We expect that. But the first order of business is hardly ever, let's discover something new today. It's here's something that we have limited understanding of. Let's improve on that. And in so doing, we deepen our understanding of how things work in the universe. That doesn't always involve overturning a previous idea or discovering something that nobody ordered. All right. What will happen? We fully expect that to happen. But we targeted parts of the sky initially because we know other telescopes have gone there before. And we're going to say how can we further advance and deepen our understanding? One thing it's going to be able to do and it has already done. We have, you know, many exoplanets there are. I don't know how many of your audience was born after 1995. How many 27 year olds and younger? Probably quite a few. Okay. So I will take this opportunity to night them generation exoplanet. 1995 was the first exoplanet discovered planet orbiting another star. And I'll never forget that because it was my first time on national television. I was freshly minted as director of the Hayden Planetarium in New York City and NBC sent the new city, this is the media news headquarters right of all the networks. So NBC sent an action cam. They interviewed me because of my title, not because they knew that we gave a crap who I was. My title was director of the planetarium. And so I gave my best professorial reply. I still have the Doppler shift. This is how it's discovered and what we do and how we measure it. And I was describing the fact that when you discover these planets, you don't actually see the planet. You see the effect of the planet's gravity on the host star. And so if you'd watch the host star, the host star like jiggles. Okay. Just a little bit in response to the planet going back and forth around it. So you're measuring the star. So I motion that with my hips and that evening on the evening news, that's all they showed was me jiggling my hips. Oh my God. Okay. That's how you're going to do this. Okay. You don't want me to be professor Neil. You want me to be soundbite, Neil. All right. So from then on, I practice my soundbite. And it's somebody's like three sentences. I'll see recognize that this is the format now. Correct. And I said, I can't just give them my stump speech as Professor of astrophysics. It has to work in their medium. And I went home and stood in front of the mirror and had people just shout out things to me. And the universe, any idea, object, person, place or thing. And I would come up with like three sentences that are interesting, make a smile and be tasty enough to want to tell someone off the anatomy of a soundbite. So try it. Say anything in the whole universe. How do we know how it was? Just one word. Just say anything. The big bang. Big bang. Ooh. The birth of space time, energy and everything we know and love about this universe. We occurred 14 billion years ago. And we have no idea what happened before it. And we're still expanding as we will forever. I read an article. That's my soundbite. That's a big bang. It's a good soundbite. I read an article about the web telescope and what they were taking into consideration is the possibility that the big bang may be incorrect and that the universe might be larger and older than we think. So I hesitate to ask what pages on the internet you hang out on. It wasn't saying the universe is older and saying as more data and new information comes in, there is a distinct possibility that the big bang might just be the, it just might explain the reach of the technology and not the actual scale the universe itself. OK. So the way to think about this is. And this is the way science has worked since basically the year 1600 where Galileo sort of starts codifying what people knew probably should be happening but no one really did it in large scale. If you have an idea about something then you test it multiple ways and get other people to test it. And if the tests give you consistent results, you have a new understanding of the universe. And that happens that knowledge of the universe doesn't go away. It doesn't get undone. What happens typically is you have a deeper understanding of the universe in which that understanding gets embedded and you realize that you only understood a small part of a larger hole. But the small parts you did understand where you had multiple experiments that confirmed it, that doesn't change. So the cleanest example of this and I'll get back to your question is Newton's laws of motion and gravity. He, you know, did anyone see anything move faster than a galloping horse in his day? Probably not. And so the news laws of motion and gravity worked. They work not only for galloping horses, it worked for the moon in orbit around the earth and the earth in orbit around the sun and Jupiter's moons in orbit around Jupiter. All right. And for the planets. So okay, but wait a minute. It doesn't work for Mercury. Mercury's orbit is not following Newton's laws. Is it something wrong with the data? Let's check it. Data is correct. Oh my gosh, what's happening? Einstein comes along and says I have a new understanding of gravity and a new understanding of motion. And it accounts for this weirdness in Mercury's orbit. What was the weirdness? It does. It shape was not exactly what Newton's laws of gravity would give you. It shape could only be accounted for when you throw in Einstein's theory of general relativity. Why? Because the sun's gravity is so monstrous and Mercury's orbiting close enough to it that it's being influenced by extra phenomenon going on in the universe. That's the product of very high in significant gravity. And so then do we throw Newton out the window? No actually. You know what Newton's laws are. They're what Einstein's laws look like when you put in low speeds and low gravity. If you put in low speeds, they become Newton's laws. In that limit, Newton's laws don't stop working where they used to work. We, Apollo to the moon, use only Newton's laws. Because Einstein didn't matter at those scales. The moon and earth and rockets. When I go fast enough for any of that to matter. But when you start going fast enough, you cannot use Newton's laws. You have to use a deeper understanding. Now, Einstein take us. You go into the center of a black hole. You get black holes from Einstein. Center black hole is a singularity. All the theories say the matter occupies zero volume. And thereby having infinite density. And that's kind of weird. What? No, you can't have infinite. No. That's a limit of Einstein's theory. That's where it breaks down. If some of joke that's where God divides by zero, remember in math class, you can't divide by zero. It's not defined or not allowed. So in Einstein's equations, we're dividing by zero at the singularity. So we all know that as brilliant as Einstein was. And as successful as his general theory of relativity has been. has limits. And one limit is the center of a black hole. And another limit is the very birth of the universe itself. But getting back to your question, the big bang. So we have top people working on trying to resolve this singularity problem. And in so doing, you get to some ideas that will maybe our big bang. Because the big man is not going to go away. All the data support this. So now I've got this big bang thing. Well, is this embedded in something bigger? Mm. Ooh. So when you put quantum physics and general relativity and you try to come up with some bigger understanding, deeper understanding, strength theorists have been all into this, you get a multiverse. We didn't pull that out of our ass that came out of the equations. So how old is the multiverse? I don't know. It's definitely older than our universe. Because it birthed our universe and it birthed other universes. And it bursts the way the equations drive it and infinity of universes. This is the idea that maybe there's a version of us in another where I'm bald and you got the afro and who is, but everything else is the same. And also a version where everything's the same. Where everything would be the same. Yes. Everything you've ever said has been said before exactly in the same order. Correct. There's no reason to presume that everything in this universe isn't or hasn't already played out in the exact way in another one of these infinite universe. And an infinite number of different ways. Correct. And so that that is what comes out of the equations. So that makes the big bang a kind of a small part of a much larger hole. And so yeah, we're ready for that. But the fact that the universe had a beginning 14 billion years ago and there's the cosmic microwave background. All of these features are intact. They're not going to all of a sudden not apply. That's my point. That's my long answer to your. So this thing that happened 14 billion years ago. What is the predominant theory of why? So this multiverse concept gives us a reason why. OK, so it's like imagine you're rolling around in a basin. OK? And you're stable there. You're just fine. But then something kicks you out of the basin. And you didn't know that there's a huge hill to roll down after you come out of that basin. But you didn't know that you thought you, everything was just fine. You rolled down that hill, you're gaining energy. at the bottom of the hill, something stops you. And then we, there's all that energy go. One of the hypotheses, and I'm highly simplifying here, is that the energy gained by rolling down a hill. And these are energy hills that would exist in this sort of higher dimensional space that we're talking about. That energy has to manifest in that object somehow. And it becomes an explosion and gives birth with enough energy, it gives birth to matter, everything that we know and love. And it expands. Because when you concentrate that much energy in a small spot, that's the only thing you can do. I understand you're simplifying it. But I don't understand it. In the sense that by using this basin analogy and rolling down a hill, that there are equations of the energetics of a system. And this is called a false vacuum. So you can be in a place that's not the true bottom energy state of the system. But you think everything is fine. But it's not. And so if you move around among these hills and valleys, you end up birthing universes out the other side. And this multiverse concept actually delivers this for you basically for free. That thought would be that the Big Bang is just one of many events that happen in the multiverse. Correct. And not only that, it could be that other Big Bang events might have a different, slightly different laws of physics in it. So you want to watch out for that if you cross over from one universe to the other. And the charge on the electron is slightly different. You could like all your atoms could just scatter or compress into a pile of goo. Yeah, so take something to test first. Yeah, send a chicken out there. Chicken get no respect. What happened to guinea pigs? Well guinea pigs are cute and furry. Oh my gosh. Chicken's are way easier to sense. I spent a whole section in this book talking about people who love animals and want to care for them and don't want to eat them. But the only loved ones that are cuddly. Oh yeah, sure. They give you a plush toy out of it. My agent said that. She knows I hunt. She's like, you should hunt pigs because they're ugly. Oh. Oh my. How dare you? Oh, first of all, domesticated pigs are adorable. They are. Yeah. They're ugly too because they're desperate. In fact, I have a I have a voice cameo of a pig in a Disney XD cartoon called Gravity Falls. It's a farmhouse and there's a pig that lives with everybody. And the pig eats some slop that the kids are told makes you smarter. And so they bought it out of fare or something. So they went to sleep putting the slop on their forehead, thinking it would get into their head and make them smart. But the pig sees it on their forehead and licks it off for their forehead. And then overnight the pig becomes a supreme genius build and Adam Smasher builds a voice translator. And while the pig is smart, I'm it's voice. It's cute. It's a cute. build an Adam Smasher builds a voice translator and while the pig is smart I'm it's voice It's cute. It's cute And so but what was I talking about before big bang Multiverses different laws of physics. It's slightly different laws of physics are fascinating prospect How that they might vary and how you might want to avoid it. Oh, but I was talking about you want to save animals? I never seen I've never seen anyone say Save the leeches No, no one cares about bugs save the ticks in particular parasites save the mosquitoes mosquitoes, you know the biggest enemy of humans as Big in enemy as we are to each other through warfare in the history of civilization the greatest enemy To human life has been the mosquito responsible for more than a billion human deaths in the history of civilization and so here we have mosquitoes ticks tape worms You know go down the list and you can ask if You really Into animals and don't want to kill them if you heard that ticks were endangered Would you start a movement to protect ticks? Would you do that and If you would a more power to you, but I'm thinking you're not Why would you if you know about Lyme disease? This is my point. Yeah, or this is my point. I mean by the way the Lyme virus wants to live too, right? These are all creatures and gods green earth, right? And so so you end up being a species bigot That in the chapter meat terians and vegetarians There's the the philosophies that are that each of those camps Will embrace and the question is how Thoroughly thought through are those philosophies like in one example. Let's say you don't want to kill animals and but you So you you have a humane mouse trap in your basement Okay, why not you don't want to snap the neck of the mouse. That's that's cruel You and you can you like animals, right? So you save the mouse you got to check on it every few days because they dry out quickly if you trap it so And so what do you do when you catch it? What do they do release release it back? Into the wild Guaranteeing the mouse gets eaten whole by an owl or peck the part by all manner of woodland predators Between nine and 18 months of its life So the safest thing to do with your mouse is to leave it in your basement If that's if you really care about animal life and the mouse managed to get into your basement Leave it there. It'll live up to six years in your basement. I live in Colorado for a while next to an ashram and I was visiting the ashram a talk to the woman who runs it and she sprayed raid all over these ants And I go what are you doing? And she's like well, it's unfortunate, but you know we have to address the fact that we have an infestation of insects I'm like you just mass killed all these living beings Poison from the sky And you did it in front of me aerial assaults why you espousing the benefits of Buddhism and meditation and Yeah, so people kind of cherry pick yeah, and and I understand it But and I don't know I don't mind if some in cherry picks as long as they're completely self-aware Most of it and by the way the home that where you're saving the mouse I Did a rough calculation. It's it's probably made from the wood of about 50 trees Each tree could have lived a hundred years, but didn't because it was cut down to make your home the two by the studs two by fours the the floorboards the the wall panels the you know the siding and Each of those trees was home to birds and insects and fungus and squirrels and uh And every day of that tree's life via photosynthesis it created 15 times the mass of the mouse in breathable oxygen So I ask you Who do you think nature cares more about? The tree or your one ounce mouse Prodigy I'm thinking and some trees live a thousand years Well, have you paid attention to some of the new research that's being done about how trees communicate I get to that yeah, get to that. That's in that's in that chapter the terrains and vegetarian chapter So so trees are fascinating. I've heard people say well the mouse has a beating heart and the tree does not what plants do not and Animals do and I said to my well, let me think this through if you Cloak a tree does it not suffocate if you cut a tree Does it not bleed? If you cut off its nutrients at the base does it not wither and die Well when they're aware they're being eaten they release plant defense. Yeah, I'm there. I'm getting there all I'm saying is The tree gets nutrients from the soil to the top most leaf It does it not for want of a beating heart It does it in spite of not having one It has a circulation. It just has a different way in life. It's where I get my Maple syrup from tree blood So let us so to fault a tree or plant life for not having a beating heart When it's not that they need one and don't have one. It's that They don't need one and never wanted one Now you talk about the you're talking about the mycelium so this is a Interconnected network. It's a fun go fungal network Underfoot in a forest where it connects multiple kingdoms of life They're four kingdoms you might have learned that there were two we've upped it since then those two kings are still intact but like I said There's more it's embedded in a large issue. There's the plant kingdom animal kingdom fungal kingdom And then we have a kingdom that includes all of the bacteria and archaea and other other microscopic life forms and so Here's an interesting fact. I Lost sleep for a week over this already If you look at the common ancestor between fungus and animals Because the tree of life has ultimately has one tap root Okay, and as it splits It's specie a it's and you get all these things have the diversity of life on earth is Is enabled by the fact that Life can specie eight. Okay, you look at the common ancestor between animals and fungus the common ancestor between humans and mushrooms Split later Then the common ancestor that its common ancestor split with green plants What that means is we and mushrooms are more alike Than either we or mushrooms are To green plants mmm Well mushrooms breathe oxygen All I'm saying is You grill a port about a mushroom. What's the first word people use to describe it? Vegetarian No, either we talk about mushrooms tasting meaty. Yeah, yeah meaty Mushroom no one has last I checked no one has ever accused kale of tasting meaty So in a way we're kind of biting into ourselves uh plus mushrooms, you know Shrooms, you know They have people have whole relationships with mushrooms. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah And mushrooms of fungus fungus thrives on our body. Have you ever done psychedelic mushrooms? I've never done anything psychedelic Why I tell you why yeah, please do so I don't know if it's a good reason I don't know if it's the the best reason that can exist but for me it's a really good reason the human mind Barely works as it is Barely You ever see a book of of optical illusions No one doesn't love a good book of optical illusions And you turn the pale what is that? Was it in the page out of the pages the line longer is it's shorter and you'd scratch in your head these are simple line drawings that Confound the human minds ability to interpret our brain Barely works as an accurate decoder of the natural world around you You now want to stir in chemicals I recognize it'll take you on a ride But I have always valued Objective reality I don't want anything Interfearing with my understanding of what is actually happening in front of me And there are people who would claim that under the influence They're accessing some actual of their reality All I can say is if in that other reality you can You know Invent the James Webb Space Telescope? Tell me about it. If you can figure out how to fly you know and If you can do that tell us about it and there are people say oh, I visited Venus When I was on a head trip did you bring back evidence evidence matters? Okay, do you bring up? No But it was in their head. Well the material world We're talking about actual physical objects, right? It's that like if you could bring the physical back to the physical universe The physical what they're experiencing is something akin to what you could call the hallucination you could call it A portal where physical reality doesn't exist And you only exist as consciousness. Here's my skepticism I don't mind people saying that they visited another planet Or whatever they're visiting or somewhat astral plane. Okay, I don't Okay, then I'm you know Write a travel log and share it with people as some have done. I Guess I would ask Whether what you experienced is part of an objective reality that we can all recognize Because if it's not then it's completely in your head And if it's completely in your head, but wait a bit less useful. What do you mean by that part of an objective reality? So here's an example um The when people have these near-death experiences, okay, or one where they're dying on a table and they A commonly described they leave their body and they look back on themselves. Okay, that's a thing going that's something okay Let's investigate this. Okay, so The test for whether you really left your body or whether you were hallucinating it is Get some writing that faces the ceiling up above your body. Okay, and they've done this experiment And if you're floating above your body above that piece of paper When you come back to life, you should be able to say what's written on that piece of paper And that is yet to happen if you get above it. Yeah, if you get above it correct that is yet to happen That's a really good piece of paper be suspended. Yeah, no, you have to put it up on a shelf or something Yeah, you'd be able to put it in a way that it would be clearly Then the person would have to die knowing that piece of paper was there and then be brought back Possibly if if yeah, I mean the the you'd have to tell them hey I know you're gonna die you're gonna die. We're gonna if you come back. Yeah, I have a piece of paper up here That's a pretty ridiculous experiment. No, try to if you care wait wait wait wait pause pause from dip Ridiculous experiment Okay, I know this guy's about to die but instead of concentrating and bringing him back to life Let's write down to both The fuck is gonna do that? No, you know what they did what in the 1895 after real ham rumpkin Discoverers x-rays and they find out it penetrates your body and you can see bones inside your body You know what they did let's set up x-ray machines at the bedside of dying people To see if they can see a soul leave the body Hmm and everybody just got cancer from radiation They died from cancer I Thought that was an ad and we're bullet-am. Yes to make a measurement. Yeah, that's interesting Yes, but they never saw possibly know that someone is going to die and or have a near death experiment What you do every death experience rather and then put a piece of paper if you want to show you what you want to do You have to be really organized about that. Yeah, and if you want to do this on mass You'd have to just like have shelves and every every every and every every yard Correct or or yeah, how often does that happen where people have Above their body experiences very frequently They're butted very frequently. Oh, yeah. I'm just saying that The brain is capable of so much extraordinary thought within itself of course that What I care about for that world is what is objectively true and what's objectively true can be verified by multiple people and If it's only true within your head It's not Useful is what I'm saying. How could it not be useful to you if useful to you hold on if it's useful to you and then that usefulness to you actually manifests itself in Something that gets created because of this experience like Kerry mollus created the PCR method Because he had an acid trip and during the acid trip came up with this idea. So I What we'd have to ask is how frequent is that so you get everybody who takes trips of any kind be mushrooms or acid or And look at the body of their new thoughts that have come from them For them having when they credited okay and Carl Sagan was a big pothead Okay, and highly productive scientist so So the question is does it give you some insight which which when you were not under the influence? Get you closer to an objective reality. That's an interesting question. Carl Sagan actually believed that there was The way he described it, but he said he believed that there are thoughts that were only available That were you when you were under the influence of marijuana that is certainly the case for any drug Yeah, but he felt like those thoughts were beneficial. Well, I can ask are those thoughts More connected to reality than if you were not So influenced, but it's I didn't experiment with myself. Okay. Okay. When I first started writing in graduate school at a monthly column I I you know, there's that stereotype of Hemingway with a drink, you know, and you do their writing and that's their creative moment I said I don't really like hard liquor, but I like wine so let me get a bottle of wine And drink my while I write and I say yeah, this is good. This is good and I'm doing and Then I did it without wine This is an experiment. I conducted it on myself and it was not as fun Opposing by the influence of just some you know a smooth sort of low level sort of wine buzz But I looked at the two there was no contest My completely sober writing was vastly better than what I was writing under the influence of several glasses What kind even though I believed it was really good, but hold on a second What kind of writing are you talking about if you're talking about fiction? No, no pros. Okay, pros I like the greatest examples of fiction and hand-sing Being enhanced rather by under the influence of drugs and chemicals is Stephen King If you go and let read Stephen King's early work versus the stuff after he got sober And I'm a gigantic Stephen King fan What's it just alcohol in his case? Or a cocaine or other drugs to cocaine a alcohol cigarettes a lot of cigarettes it was way better It's vastly superior darker deeper stranger more bizarre more shocking in the day You're saying in the day read it today read carry no no no man you're saying what he created in the day under that In the way the stuff under the influence the stuff he created is deeply dark. It's so dark. Oh, yeah, yeah It's so dark. So it's so extraordinary all they're almost almost all of the Short-jang Redemption because I think all of them were when he was fucked up He wrote some good stuff after he was fucked up, but like koojo. He doesn't even remember writing it Okay, so the fantastic so is this something you would recommend For creating I recommend it Stephen King get back on coke. So stay off Twitter get back on coke I'm kidding so what my one-way experiment with glasses of wine. Yeah, that's not enough that experiment's not enough Like I personally feel that under the influence of marijuana I come up with some of my best ideas for comedy for stand-up comedy writing. I liked it I do the George Carter we should already to drop up. Yeah, I love your work. Thank you very much Yeah, I do the George Carlin method I write sober and then I punch it up high Okay, and sometimes it's right. Yeah, yeah George Carlin had a great point He's like you should write about things that you're thinking about and things that are like important or things that are on your mind And then he would like let it sit and then he would smoke pot and go back to it and then he would come up all the funny Ridiculous aspects of it and he would interject them into there. Yeah. Yeah, so so I'm just saying to the extent I'd like to know How reliable that is. Well, here's the other point that I should say there's many people that don't do any drugs that write fantastic stuff and there's many comedians that are completely clean and sober that have done their best work Once they got clean and sober that's true too both those things are true, right? But there I think they're tools I watched some comedians for I mean, you know, Mitch Heberd for example one like a bitch Yeah, genius, but he yeah, I really love his stuff really bad drug his injectable heroin This thing which is one of the worst but the point is it's like Their tools and I used to have a joke about it like the marijuana is like any other tool It's like a hammer you could build a house with a hammer or you could hit yourself in the dick if you're fucking crazy And that's that's the problem with all sorts of things they need to be managed responsibly and people need to understand What the effects are what the dosage is and that's where science comes here. Here's what I'll do. Here's what I'll do I still have some writing projects, then I'm gonna finish my shows no When I'm done with what I know I wanted to write before I died. Okay, then I will consider this then come to daddy I'll come to Papa Well, and then I'll see if some new creative thing comes out of me at that time Well, I don't know if new creative things will come out of you, but I think why I got stuff I guess we'll come out that probably wouldn't exist without them and when you're talking about like Really break through psychedelic moments like DMT or mushroom psilocybin one of the really fascinating things is they mimic Neurochemistry like DMT is in the brain and it's in all the organs and it's it's a part of Natural human neurochemistry. Well except of course. So is fentanyl so fentanyl is a part of the no No, no, you have receptors for it. So right, but DMT is produced by the human body It's actually a thing that the body makes. We don't know why and The really heavy duty psychedelic people think that in large doses when you take it and have these breakthrough experiences What you're doing is you're you're going through some sort of chemical portal and this chemical portal is only available to people In these near-death experiences under extreme moments of stress where they have like these moments where they go through the tunnel and the bright light They meet God. I mean how many of these Would I have to see to be convinced that it's a reliable concept? I think it's what we're with this conversation is like talking to a person Who's lived in an underground tunnel their whole life who's dismissing sunlight? They're like, what's the big deal with sunlight? I'm fine down here with light bulbs You and your sunlight. Oh, yeah photosynthesis. I've got hydroponder So you're being a very effective drug pusher But the drugs that I'm interested in are not dangerous. They're not ones that kill you like I've never done cocaine I've never done heroin. I've never done amphetamines. I'm not interested in cocaine. Oh, yeah It can can if you rich enough Well, it certainly can kill you today because so much of it is laced with fentanyl Oh, yeah, she's one of the number one killers of young people unfortunately is fentanyl contamination of drugs, but I'm interested in pharmacology. I'm interested in what what happens to the mind when it's under the influence of different substance. Yeah, I guess I'm less interested because I don't I have to think more about what you said, but Look at how people misinterpret reality when they're not on anything. It's a good point And it's another good point is there's many people that Just to say what actually happened Sure, and that's a scary duress people end up in jail because of that for the rest of their lives Yes, well, Wilson I've had many many conversations with people on this podcast about that because I've worked with my friend Josh Dubin who was originally an ambassador for the Innocence Project and it's done a bunch of stuff on his own where he's gotten many many Many people out of jail innocent project even has to exist in this world is itself a travesty Well, I'm hoping that with science There's gonna come a time where we can actually read the contents of people's minds and they that this will no longer be I remember the black mirror. Yes. Yes, okay, but the I think maybe Yes, that would be interesting the problem is that false memories are a real thing So there are people who believe something and if you read their mind you'll just see what it is that they believe But I wonder if you could sort of back-end jinnier that belief. I wonder if it could get to the point where you could say oh You believe this because this is a memory of the way you've just know just do it memory black mirror style and you have a chip Yeah, that's the cords everything that you see that's probably the future chapter here called crime Law and order where I get into the role of science in deciding whether someone is guilty or innocent and It's the idea that in a courtroom So it says I need a witness this is like in the court of science That's the last thing you are ever asking for yeah, because we know I mean psychologists knew this first the rest of us You know figured it out after the fact that I would just test one is one of the least reliable forms I the third time I was rejected from jury duty. I show up dutifully, okay, and The third time they said there was a woman who was robbed on the street of her groceries and her and her purse and they had the person who she accuses positively identifies and her and It's a literal he said she said okay We read the particulars of the case She said he robbed her the groceries took it and then ran off when they the cops found the guy He was not in possession of anything she said he took they looked in the area of anything stashed and dumpsters I think you can find anything, okay, so that's that's the state of the case and The judge reads the particulars and goes to the I'm down that like down to the last 15 Almost on a jury for the first time I'm almost there and said do you have any What does anyone have any think they would not be able to convict based on the kind of information then evidence that's been presented and? And there's a juror 14 whatever you're numbered right until you're selected Said would you have any price said yes, I'd have a problem if The only evidence available is eyewitness testimony Everything I know about it tells me I should not trust it on the level where you end up putting someone in jail It's like so I could not convict if that's the only evidence you have what the judge said next was Are there any other jurors like juror 14? Who said who needs more than one witness before they would be able to convict and I said Should I jump in now and say that's not what I said? What should I do? I think in my the person in front of me said Your honor that's not what he said. Ah, okay, and I said oh, thank you Thank you Jesus, right He said that's not what he said and I resisted with all my might to say you're honor You were I witness to what I said 20 seconds ago and got it wrong But I resisted but I was nonetheless on the street 20 minutes later I think you should have said that just for his own advocate. No, it's a she by the way, but sorry I'm sexy you're totally sexy. We've all knew known that forever So I'm just saying it's clear that the legal system Precision of deeply flawed It's deeply flawed and this it was the best we have well then fix it Yeah, I mean if that's how you were talking with these to dunk people and if you died face up you were Innocent and died face down you were guilty That was the best they had then but we improved on it right if they drowned you you weren't a witch Congratulations, you weren't guilty. Well, it depends. Yeah, if you that's right how you died. Yeah, and you'd otherwise go to heaven where you wouldn't write no so Plus there's In Columbus's voyage there's a lot we talked about Columbus last time on Yeah, yeah, yeah, so in one of the voyages they went on some stretch of time and they didn't have food and and they had Indians from the That they'd brought on board as well as some of their own crew and people were dying and so at sea What do you do with the dead body you throw it overboard? Of course, okay? So a person who's keeping notes said all the Indians they threw overboard Floted face down and all the Christians Okay, I guess that could happen Statistically perhaps I don't know But now we have his handwritten notes I win this testimony of something that is completely fulfilling his own world views expectations of how things should be So that's so in the whole sort of law and order chapter I just take pick all that apart and just try to say You know why not have jurors that are really good at data analysis? How about that? That would be nice But that's really hard to find and then on top of that if you are dealing with eyewitness testimony What do you do do you just throw everything out completely or do you try to assess whether or not that person is capable of Objective thought and reason? No, you just know because even people who are better at it are still flawed at it, right? Especially under experiences Under extreme stress experts correct as they've done many times in psychology class Yeah, they have you know the classes unfolding and they stage some Violent thing with an explosion and then say right what you just saw right right and nothing agrees right right So yeah, it's a it's a it's a challenge Which is the problem of conspiracy theories after big events like 9-11 like all the people that say they saw this and they saw that And I remember this and I remember that and these little sound bites of all these people and you piece them together like oh my god They planted bombs and they're also there are people who say before An earthquake they knew They say they see all the animals running right and it's like okay You reported that after the earthquake happened not like before but doesn't that happen during tsunamis? Don't don't animals actually do go to higher ground. I think that has actually been documented. I Okay, so that happened highly suspicious of whether that's true Because tsunami there's no I, okay, so I'm highly suspicious of whether that's true. Because tsunami, there's no way to know that tsunami typically occurs from an earthquake way off shore. Right. Okay. And it's a very low amplitude wave in deep water that continues to gain amplitude as the water gets shallower and shallower. So that's why waves get bigger when we crash on the shores. So as it comes to the shore. So if it's just, you're just an animal in the woods. If you're not on the shoreline, there's no way to know that. I think they were talking about animals on islands and animals that do live closer to the shore. And maybe there's an indication because the water pulls back before us and not. Sure, I can, I can recognize that. But if you're just an animal somewhere, you know, on shore, away from the coast, I don't really see that. I need to see very good evidence for that and not just someone's account. Yeah, I don't know if they're talking about this. This is my whole point. Yeah. The people have accounts of all kinds of things. Do you know in the, there's a whole other chapter called Risk and Reward. All right, here's something surely in your life you have taken an average of numbers before. Okay. Tell me yes. Sure. Lighten me even if it's not sure. Yeah. Okay. Do you realize that the first time anyone ever did that, to realize that maybe this, an interesting result here, was after the invention of algebra, trigonometry, geometry, and calculus. Really. Statistics is just something that the human brain, it's just not natural. It is completely foreign to us. We don't know how to interpret simple random events because we want to give meaning to them. You know the thing where you're in a some other country in some other city and you meet someone like a childhood friend. Yeah. He's a small world. Yeah. That's your first thought. Right. Small world. Okay. Here's, here's how to cure that. Okay. Next time you're in a foreign city, go up to every single person you walk by and say, do I know you? And they'll probably say no. I mean, no, you personally. They'll know you because you're dude, but they know you personally. No, just keep doing this. And if they say no, I don't know. You then say big world. Just do that. You'll do that millions of times. Okay. Before you meet someone who you once knew and the proper statistics will then get recorded for that. So no, it's not a small world. It's a fucking big world. And there are a lot of people in it who you don't know. It's just very unusual when you meet someone in another country. No, no, there's a point where well, if you do the math, there are a lot of things that people say are unusual. It would be unusual if you didn't. Well, if you fly to England and you don't tell anybody you're flying to England and you run into a friend from back home, that's pretty unusual. Look how often people say that say that it happens. That's my train. It's my point. Okay. Everybody you know has that story. If you run the statistics on it, it would be odd if you went your life. Assuming you have a normal life and you know people and your school was big and all of this. Okay. You didn't grow up in a farm with, you know, with nobody, you didn't know anybody. It requires some basic number of people. So there's a lot of errors of statistics that we make of probability and statistics. The sad part of it is there's an entire industry that has risen to exploit that fact and they're called casinos. The fact that you could go to a roulette table and somebody's got a lot of money on seven. I said, why do you have money on seven? It's due. What do you mean is due? Well, look at the previous roles because they'll show you the previous roles and seven hasn't appeared in 20 roles or whatever the numbers they put. So it's due. No, it's not due. This is a failure of the human brain to understand and interpret probability and statistics. There are people who are going to roll dice. Okay. If they need a low number, they'll take the dice and like gently roll them. They need a high number from hard. This is, this is crazy. And people are suckers. There's other people that do understand statistics and they kick the amount of casinos because they count cars. Only for those that are not purely random like a roulette table. Okay. We're dice. Right. You think it's like blackjack. Correct. You can tilt the odds in your favorite a little bit and be systematic about it. But I'm talking about pure probabilities. The fact that someone thinks that a number is due is itself. Do you realize the American physical society? These are my physics peeps. That's our physics society. 1986, they were going to have their annual meeting in San Diego and there was a hotel sniff-u. So they had to reschedule. And so Vegas said, we'll take you the MGM Marina, which became the MGM Grant. We'll take you 4000 physicists. Okay. 4000 physicists had their annual meeting in Las Vegas. And let me tell you, okay, K through 12. Is there even a course offered in probability and statistics? You learn reading, writing and arithmetic, not reading, writing and probability and statistics. Right. It's kind of not there. And if it's there, it's an elective. Okay. So as a scientist, especially as a physical scientist, I take some form of probability and statistics every single year I am in school. Different nuances and how data can be looked at and analyzed and put together an average. The average that I told you about, you add numbers divided by that. That's one of a dozen kind of ways you can average numbers. There are other ways you can have statistically weighted average. It depends on the needs. It depends on the situation. Point is, the physicists came to Vegas. One week later, there was a news headline, physicists in town, lowest casino take ever. This is where we're told to never return to Vegas. Really? Yes. They were told never. They were told. Well, that might be a pocketful, but it was in the headline. Really? Yeah. So that's funny. So these are people. These are my pieces. What we do. We do smart. We think about, it's not because we took advantage of the craft estate of the of the the blackjack table. It's because they just simply didn't gamble. Well, I'm the same way. I don't gamble either. I just see, I look how big the place is. I'm like, how was this made by selling tickets to the buffet? I don't think so. I don't think so. No, this is made from suckers. Not me and my wife went. What are you going to do to go? Let's say you're you're winning in something that you're in the one on bandit and you had a jackpot jackpot. What do they do with you at that point? They see this is happening. What does the house do? They check the machine. No, no, they give you free drinks. They got a company server to come over to you and say, would you like a free cocktail to stir chemicals into your brain to disrupt the little bit of objective reality that you experience. You feel unlucky. I feel unlucky. I'm not a lucky at all. I don't feel lucky at all because you know, I feel stupid. Oh, and another thing with the state lotteries. If this is all in the in the risk and reward chapter state lotteries, you know what most of the revenue, you know, it's a state money. It goes into the coffers tax coffers. You know where most of that money is allocated for in most states. No, it goes to education. Oh, that's good. You didn't know that. No, that's great. So that can make you feel a little better like you're helping out your own state when you buy your state lottery. Here's the thing. Part of me wonders. Okay. Let me join you in a conspiracy thing here. Okay. My conspiracy. Okay. Am I allowed? Yes, please. My loud one. Please do one per year. I'll give you all the ones you want. I love the conspiracy. The conspiracy is they have to make sure that the school curriculum does not teach probability statistics. What? What's because if they did wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute. They did, then no one would play the lottery. So they allocate money to education with a specific man. No, don't say in that. What are you saying? Yes, I'm saying that. No, he was not like a law. No, no, no, no, no, but I'm just saying it's a little suspicious that the fair story knowledge of math that would undermine the ability of the state lottery to make money is not a required part of the math curriculum in kindergarten through 12. So you think, but you don't think that's why. I'm just playing with the, no, I don't really think that's why. Right. No, okay. So I see what you were doing there. You were assuming that I was totally in on this conspiracy theory and I have charts on my wall and websites devoted to no, it just crossed my mind how odd it is that when you know enough about probability statistics, you bet less. And when you bet less, the revenue to the state would drop. And that's the revenue that would go to education. So it has the power to plants the seeds of its own undoing. And it doesn't do that. So intrigued by that fact. Just removing ourselves from the conspiracy theory aspect of it, do you think that it would be beneficial to teach probability and statistics to people? Oh, my gosh, along with bad decisions we make. Yeah, because we think we have an understanding of what is random and what is not. Right. What is a, um, there's the one they did this, but actually their analysis was flawed, but the basis was well, was, was well placed. So the idea, you're playing a basketball game and somebody hits a few shots in a row. They've got a hot hand given to them. Yeah. They don't have a hot hand. It is the natural consequence. If you're shooting 50% in a game or 40% yes, and you take, I don't know how many shots you take 30 shots, you can look at the probability that you'll have multiple shots in a row that are made. And it's very high and it's very real. But do you discount something special happening? It is the randomness of the statistics that's happening. Okay. But this is talking about statistics, but from an individual basis, do you discount the idea that sometimes people feel really good? And they have a very good sense of where the ball's going, where they're more loose or relaxed or more, more practiced, whatever it may be, and they're more accurate because of that. If that's the case, no, so people, so people have good days, right? Right. Clearly. So this is why that original analysis was slightly flawed because a person can have more than what is typical shots in a row. Right. Okay. And for that game, you could look at their data and they would make 60% of the shots instead of 40% of the shots. And if you make 60% of the shots, you then expect three in a row here, six in a row there, five in a row here in the in the random expression of having a 60% success rate in a basket, you expect intervals where you make multiple shots in a row. That's my only point. And that could be a good day for you because you're shooting 60%. Right. And I want to, I want to recognize that. I'm going to hand you the ball if you're having a good day. You can totally have a good day. But at the end of the day, you're not, you're not sinking 20 here and none before it. No, in the statistics, maintain themselves in the game unless you get injured or something. Of course. So, but my point is, we have such, and I don't want to blame people for this. If it was natural to think statistically about the world, it would have been the first branches of math we would have ever discovered. But it wasn't. It was like 1753. Sounds like a long time ago, but it's 50 years after calculus was invented after calculus, which is not even taught in so long ago. Okay. Correct. There's a simple paper on the benefits of taking the mean mean is average of observations in astronomical data. Is it astronomer? Did it first to take a mean? And this is just so that tells me we are victims of our own brain wiring. And so, and it takes many years to undo that wiring, we'll just see through it so that you are not it prevents you from seeing other things. Okay. How so do you realize last year, we lost as many people in the United States to traffic accidents. As we did in all the years, we fought in Vietnam. Look at the effort we put up as a country beginning maybe 1967, certainly 68, to stop the carnage. And that's just the American deaths, not to mention the millions of deaths of the Vietnamese themselves north and south. The point is, our reactions to statistics are very different depending on what caused it. Yes. And that's I'm intrigued by that. I don't have a good understanding of it. Any laws that treat it are going to have to fold in people's emotions. Here's an example. You shoot deer with your bone arrow. There's a certain number of deer deaths and human deaths by cars hitting deer in the roads, especially in suburban rural places. Okay. What do you do about this? What are you going to do? Get a truck with a big ass bumper. That's what they do out here. The Joe Rogan solution. That's what they do. You ever see those guys that work on ranchers? Make sure your ranchers have significantly more mass than the deer. They have specific bumpers that they build to save people's lives. Right. And of course, this is what the old locomotives had if they were cattle and you ever see that pointy front on locomotive. Yes. That was the pride catalog. So it wouldn't roll over the cow and do you rail the thing. So what do you do? Do you accept the 100 deaths a year in your county, whatever, human deaths, no one's counting deer deaths here. Or do you find something in yourself a big ass bumper? Do you hear killer bumpers? Look at those suckers. That's what I'm saying. Look at that one. The Ford F250, that red one. That's what I'm talking about. The problem is if the center of mass of the deer is above the level of that bumper, well, for alkyt would be, for moose, it would be. No. Not a 250. F250. Center of massive and alkyt. Moose. Moose is a different thing. I saw moose in my wife. When you see it for the first time, you're like, how the hell is that? The first time I saw how did this happen? In British Columbia, and I saw it was like the scene in Jurassic Park where Jet Bulboom gets out of the Jeep. It's like, yeah, it's like, who invented that? Right. Right. Right. Right. So if you're under the center of mass, then it will just roll up and crush your windshield. So you have to watch out for that. Well, through your windshield. Yeah. Yeah. It's horrific. So here's my point. There's a group. I forgot where somewhere in New England who did a study. And the study was, if you have 100 deaths a year, we can drop that to maybe 30 deaths a year. How? By introducing the natural cat predator to the deer. So it would be like the puma or a bobcat, one of these sort of mid-sized cats that hold the deer as their quarry. Okay. And they ran some models of how this would go. And you could drop the number of human deaths by a factor of three. Okay. Because still some deer would wander onto the road. But you'll lose about 10 children a year. They'll just snatch your kid out of the backyard. And eat your child. So look at these numbers. You killed 100 people in their cars or the deer kill 30 people plus 10 children. No, no, the deer kill 30 people, the bobcat kills 10 and bobcat might not kill an adult, not bobcat, but whatever is the next mountain lion. That's the word. Whatever was native in the region long ago. Okay. And so they did a study. And the point is, you could not bring that suggestion forward. Right. Because the government would be introducing an animal that killed your children. But no one's looking at the 100 people that were whatever the numbers were. It was a factor of three or so. I know there's another solution. The correct numbers are in the book. No, I'm just giving this as an example. I understand of we don't we're not equipped to fold our emotions with the data to arrive at a solution that would save the most lives. I see what you're saying. There's a technological solution that they've come up with. There's a device that they put at the front of the car that makes a very certain sound that I've learned about that on the edges of the I've heard about that. But I haven't read about it 20 years ago. So I haven't heard much about it. I don't know how effective it is. It runs the air going through it makes a kind of a siren effect. Is that what it is that when I last remembered it? Yeah. Well, whatever it is, it develops some sort of a sound that the deer can hear and they avoid it. But they have a problem. I was in Alaska and there was a deer and a grizzly bear must have been 300 yards away, must weigh down in the valley and the deer noticed it and it was eating, but it's eating very cautiously, always looking to the bear. And I'm saying if it could notice a bear 300 yards and be cautious of it, why can't it know a four to 50 barrel in down a road? Because it's not natural. But figure it out. It's got a brain that takes forever. Let me get angry with the deer for a second. How come we haven't killed all the stupid deer by now? So the ones that are left are the ones that recognize that cars kill them because they're all stupid. They just have really good senses. And I heard some of the senses that are designed to avoid predation. But do you ever wist us now? You know, they don't know that. But how long have I had rats figured out how to coexist with humans. Rats that very tells they're very they figure this out. Okay, deer don't know what to do with headlights and cars. It's a completely unnatural thing. So everyone that doesn't, they die and the ones that have a little bit of genetic variation that figures it out, they'll survive. Sort of because then they get horny. The problem with deer, if you look at the number, anything about the sex life of deer. I do. Okay. One of the things that happens. Tell me how you know what you're going to take. Well, for the rot, when deer rot is when you hunt them and one of the things that happens during the rot is they get ridiculous. And they just run out of the canny they control the cells. They control the cells into the street. That's oftentimes the male deer. The male deer. Yeah, because they're just chasing them. The females are just trying to get away. Okay. And they just run out of the traffic. That happens or the male is trying to chase the female. And all he's got on his mind is got tunnel vision and they just boom. Get hit by that F 250. Speaking of deer, by the way, my sister drives an F 250. Where's it? A 450? Is there 450? No, it's 350. Excuse me. Oh, she has a doly. Yeah, she's got one where the tires can do separate things. Oh, okay. Up with his side. Yeah. She's serious. She's serious. She's, she's, she's, don't, don't mess with my sister. Okay. Is she sister out there off-road? What is she doing with that crazy truck? She just, she'd like being badass when the tie comes. I like the way she thinks. So, but she doesn't hunt. So, but it's missing half the equation there. So, on the subject of deer, in the chapter on gender and identity. So, I go there, gender and identity because it's very hot topic. Yeah. And I just apply some rational thinking to it. Do you know about Santa's reindeer? Do you know about them? Sure. I know very much about them. Oh, you do. Yeah. Okay. So, do you know that? Terrible. Yes. Yeah. Caribou, correct? Yeah. And well, you can domesticate the caribou. And when you do, then both the, the boys and the girls have antlers. Mm-hmm. Okay. Well, that's just the fact of all caribou. All caribou. Yeah. But sorry, the domesticated ones are called reindeer, but they're, they're derived from the caribou. Correct. So, now watch what happens. So, as you may know, the male deer lose their antlers in late October, early November. Depending upon what, where they're at. What you castrated, they don't, they don't, they don't, they don't, they'll orchestrate them, they'll keep their, yeah. But otherwise they drop their antlers. Right. Before winter begins. Generally not. No. It depends on the animal, but a lot of them keep it until almost spring. And they drop and they grow back very quickly. That's nothing of what I've read or learned of this animal. Or it goes to just caribou. No caribou just specifically. Okay. The ones that became Santa's reindeer. We're not talking about the deer on the, you know, in central Texas. No, they dropped them in the winter. They dropped them before, they dropped them November. Okay. The female don't. The female don't. So all that means is all eight of Santa's reindeer are female, which means Rudolph has been misgendered. Interesting. Well, do you know where the myth of Santa's reindeer flying comes from? I think it's from mushrooms, isn't it? Yeah. You have an eating mascara, a mushroom, which looks like Santa Claus. Yeah. That's it. With the red and red and white. They love those things. They love the amineed and mascara mushroom to the fact that to the point where when people are doing mushroom ceremonies and they go outside the urinate, they drink the caribou will knock you over to get to your urine. Yeah. If you have domesticated caribou, they will knock you over to get to the urine because they smell the amineed and mascara. And whatever the, it's not still a side. It has to be such a major. I'm trying to imagine how high I want to get to drink someone else's pee. Well, that's caribou. That's not that wise. Nor are they educated or they even understand the concept of urine. Whatever the, whatever the compound, yeah, it's there. Well, there's sense of smells proportionately intense. I mean, we can't even imagine what a deer can smell. They can smell you hundreds of yards away. I mean, I've seen deer go like this, 100 yards away and then they bolt because they smell you. They catch a wind. Yeah, they're amazing. Here's a mystery that I've always had to this day because dogs have very acute sense of smell as well. Yeah. That's how you say that. If you just say dog smell good, you don't know what that means. Right. Do they smell better than we do? Right. It's an ambiguous sentence. Right. So they have acute sense of smell. So if they smell so acutely, why do they get within like a half inch of each other's butt? Because they want to smell each other. But you could, you could smell that. 100 yards away. Yeah, but they want to smell every one of the smells more moist. They want to, yeah, well, they're they're intensely attracted. So good. Yeah. Let me get up on it. Yeah. They want to know if you're feeling aggressive. Okay. In heat, they want to know all those things. Yeah. I just, I never fast had that urge to do that with other humans. You know, bear could smell somewhere in the neighborhood of nine times greater than a bloodhound. Mm. So we should domesticate bears and track down good luck with that. By the way, have you seen a bear? You got to be able to find this. It's on, I saw in social media. There's a bear walking down a highway and there's a tipped over traffic cone and it looks at it and then writes it back up and keeps walking by it. Wow. And I say to myself, because I have a chapter here called body and mind. There it is. What? Check this out. This watch. All right. It's a black bear. Clearly. Yeah, it looks wrong. Okay. By the way, you found this video really fast. Thank you for this. I think that's a grizzly bear. I always got the lump on the neck. Yeah, the little one looks. That's pretty crazy. That's, yeah, that's grizzly. That's total grizzly bear and keeps going. Didn't even look back. Right. So that, so I don't want to say this evidence of intelligence so much as it's evidence of more going on inside the animal's head than any of us would have previously ever credited it. Yeah. In another example, and I get this example in body and mind again, there's a magpie bird who there's a bottle of water in some playground area, park area. And it goes up to the bottle of water and it dips its beacon to drink from it. Okay. Here it is. See it is? Yeah. Okay. It goes in and drinks from it to watch. It's going to drink. But the problem is there's a limit to how far its beak can reach inside of it. So, and so it gets a stone that fits inside the bottle, which raises the water level so that its beak can continue to drink from it. Yeah. This is some archimedian crazy stuff going on. It really is. The magpie bike, those in the know, is ranked among the smartest of birds. And this is doing something I think humans wouldn't even think to do. Probably many humans. Right. Right. And so, so do you remember how do they teach you where humans were in the tree of life when you were in school? Like we were the smartest or the biggest brain. How do they describe it to you? Yeah. With the top of the food chain. And okay. And what do they say about our brains? Just tell me in your- Well, it's the size of our brains and makes us so superior. Okay. But look at a magpie. Yeah. But dolphins brains are bigger. Yeah. 40% larger. Okay. So then, so then therefore what is, you know, whale brains are bigger. Yeah. So, so then how do they, if there are other animals with bigger brains and we want to state the top, what do they say about those other animals? I don't know what do they say? No, I'm saying. Okay. So you know what they did? They say they're inferior. So what they do is say they say, no, we don't have the biggest brain. Oh, but brain to body weight ratio. Then we're the highest. Okay. Is that accurate with dolphins? Yes. So our, because they're, they're bigger, much bigger creatures than we are. And when you divide the way to the brain by the way to the body, we win. Right. We beat out whales. We beat out dolphins. We beat out elephants. Then they're, those who are fans of those say, well, you want to do it lean weight because those, the dolphins in the whale have a lot of blubber. And that's not, the brain is not having to control the blubber. So cut away the blubber that boosts them, but they still not as high as us. So we walk away saying we're at the top. However, but they did not say, which I had to 40 years later, I learned this that we do not have the highest brain to body weight ratio among animals, only among mammals. The magpie has a higher brain to body weight ratio than humans do as do all other mid-sized birds, like crows, owls, eagles, these, these folks, okay, all have a higher brain to body weight ratio than humans do. So that rule that put us at the top, was specifically for mammals. And I'm angry that I didn't think to hear how specific that was when I was taught that in eighth grade. Okay. Is our understanding of like crows using tools very recent, like within the last hundred years? All I can tell you is any animal that we have ever got to study in more detail than we previously did has shown to be more intelligent than we ever gave it credit for being. And you know, has the biggest brain to body weight ratio of any creature on earth? Who? Some species of ants. 15% of the body weight is their brain. And it's kind of obvious. Some of them like the whole front section is their head. It's kind of in retrospect. It's kind of obvious. And ants are very busy doing some complicated things and we don't know what they're doing, especially leafcutter ants. They're busy, carpenter ants, leafcutting and crossover into termite land. I don't know how big their brains are, but they're busy. Leave cut-or-ants. They're busy, carpenter ants, leave cutting ants, and cross over into termite land. I don't know how big their brains are, but they're busy doing building stuff. And they work in communication with each other. And they communicate. Yeah. One of my favorite cartoons was two dolphins swimming together. And there's a human up, you know, it's like one of these water parks, right? And one dolphin says to the other, they're speaking of the humans that are up on dry land. They face each other and make noises, but it's not clear they're actually communicating. So I'm just saying, we have a close-up of an ant. Yeah, that's that recently released this image, I think. Yeah. So with a river and demon that would be in the garden. With so much detail on their bodies. And to say, well, we're at the top, really? I got one for you. How much of the top are you? Do you realize one slice? Of your lower intestine, your colon? Once one centimeter slice lives and works more microbes than the total number of humans who ever lived. So what, ask yourself, what are you to those microbes? Are you, Joe Rogan? No, you are an anaerobic vessel of fecal matter in which they thrive. And without them, you don't exist. Well, you don't digest your food. First of all, second, you want to keep them happy because if they're not happy, then they're in charge. They send you to the nearest toilet as fast as can be. So part of a cosmic perspective on this world is looking at things in a way that decentralizes who and what you are relative to everything else. And you get a much more honest account of how things work, how they put together. That's very hard for people to really grasp. It's an ego. You're actually an ecosystem. Yes. Yes. And what is the number? There's some, some percent of your total body weight is the weight of other living things, especially what's alive and thriving in your gut. You're just carrying them along. Well, that's the case with all organisms that we like to think of organisms as being individuals, but they're actually hard for us. I don't think a meeb is not when you're on the single side. When it's not single sides, but others, yeah. A lot of symbiotic relationships going on. Oh, yeah. And so you can have a cosmic perspective that's not just the cosmos. Yes. It's a cosmic perspective just here life on earth. And, you know, they talked about the overview effect where the astronauts, you probably had a few astronauts here, if you guessed. Looking down. Yeah, you look, you look down. I prefer the view from the moon. I'll take it from orbit. Are you going to do any of those? Like would you, if they let you up on the Jeff Bezos spaceship, they send people up there all the time. Yeah. Yeah. So it's fairly regular. I'm an astral physicist. You're not interested. No, let me, let me, let me hear me out. Hear me out. So take earth and shrink it down to like a schoolroom globe. So now we can think of distances relative to that and ask how high up did Bezos and Branson go? Okay. So here's a schoolroom about how far away would you say? Quarter inch. You say quarter inch. Okay. They went the thickness of two dimes. Oh. And a boy who jumped out of a balloon some years ago. Yeah. What's his name? Felix Bumgardner. Thickness of one dime. So this idea that they go, I see the curvature of the earth and then they say, no, you don't. You know, I'm sorry. Did Jeff Bezos doesn't see the curvature of the earth? You will see the edge of the earth. But ask how far away is your horizon when you're only that high up. You can just look at that. Go to the schoolroom globe. Go to dime thicknesses up and then draw a line to ask how much of earth do you see? You will see a circle that's a circle cookie cut out of the larger sphere. It's really a perspective issue. It's a perspective issue. And by the way, the images when they showed Felix Bumgardner where he's prepared to jump, you see this curved earth. That's a fish eye lens, dude. Okay. Fish eye lenses take horizontal lines and bend them convex when you're above the midplane of the photo. In order to gather in more of the image. Correct. That's the only way you can distort it to fit it onto a flat plane. Because it's looking at a full sort of 360, well 180, and it's trying to get it in. But what happens if you take that horizontal line, the horizon, and put it below the midplane of the camera? It then bends the other way. Bends the other way. In fact, I have a tweet that did this. Look for Felix and throw some keywords in there with my Twitter handle. And I have an example of the photos. So no, he didn't see the curvature of the earth. But you think he did and he's high up. And what do we need NASA for? Right? He's one dime thickness. Elon Musk authentically goes into work because they didn't go into orbit. They went up and fell back to earth. Authentically goes into orbit. So he is a centimeter. Not even. Let me say. Yeah, a little less than a centimeter above earth surface. The folks who really saw earth were that the folks that went to the moon, we went to the moon nine times, three astronauts, a pop, 27 astronauts have seen earth from the moon. And that'll change you. That, you know, Apollo 14 astronaut, Edgar Mitchell. I have a quote from him that opens this book. And that's all you have to read because the whole book issues forth from that quote. You know, here it is. Edgar Mitchell, Apollo 14. You develop an instant global consciousness, a people orientation, an intense dissatisfaction with the state of the world and a compulsion to do something about it. From out there on the moon, international politics looks so petty. You want to grab a politician by the scruff of the neck and drag him a quarter million miles out and say, look at that, you son of a bitch. Edgar Mitchell also believed some wacky stuff. Did you know that? Yeah, I spoken with him about it. And he he was one of the, like, was he co-founder of the Noetic Institute? He was he was a big fan of the possibility that there was a deeper level of consciousness. And I don't think it involved drugs, but just that there was a deeper level of consciousness that the brain might be capable of if subjected to the proper influences. And he told me how he came across this. Okay, I'll tell you. They're on their way back from the moon and they're in the capsule and the capsule rotates. It helps to stabilize it among other reasons for that happening. And he happened to be positioned in the capsule for three days where the windows to the capsule were aligned with the plane of the solar system, which means every time the capsule rotated, what came in and out of view was the sun, the moon, earth, and all the planets. And so he's there for three days watching this drift by. And he felt like he had descended or ascended into a trance state that was beyond what he had ever experienced here on earth by normal things you encounter just being a human on earth. And that led him to wonder whether this was an achievable state by some other means by some other forces that you could emulate here on earth. And because he experienced that and I didn't, what am I, who am I to say? I'm not going to judge that. He believed in psychokinetics. He believed people can do things with their mind. He had a lot of like very strange things. I think he's I think the cleanest way to say that is he believed there was much more capacity of our mind than we had previously tapped. And that opens up the gates to all these other things. But I was just sharing with you the the cycle, the the the experiential origins of why he thought that way. Yeah. But the point is that that can change you. And in the chapter, earth and moon, I talk about cosmic perspectives. As you ascend that the earth does not look like the schoolroom globe, right, color coded countries. You know, only as an adult that I look back in that and I say, you train to me from elementary school to know who my enemies are and who my friends are by color coding, contiguous land masses on a globe to teach me about the planet earth. But they weren't trying to do that. They were trying to explain consequence of it. Geography. I knew who was evil, evil, godless, Russian and Soviet Union was. Right. Okay. Their country was painted red. All right. Not ours. I knew this even if it was not on purpose. It had a subliminal effect. And when you go into space, the country borders go away except for two places. There are two places. You can still see two borders from space. One of them in the daytime, you can see the border of Israel with surrounding deserts because Israel irrigates. And so it's green in the surrounding areas are brown. You can see that from space. Another border, which you can see from space at night is of course north and south Korea right there. Yeah. That's crazy. And that's punched up. I mean, if you're in the dead of night, you don't know the difference between the ocean and the land as the as your sight line crosses north and south Korea. And so what you and if you look at the GDP per capita differences between Israel and surrounding nations and South Korea and North Korea, it's factors of eight, nine, 10, 12. So space can reveal economic inequities in at least those two places, which is itself kind of a stunning fact. Hmm. So I want to tell Elon, you know, neighbors with him, right? Get him back here and say, Elon, build a bus, a space bus. We have an air bus, why not a space bus? A space bus, we put all the warring leaders and have them send them to the moon, have them look back on Earth. So you know, we're fighting over that border. We are. Was they came back down? I think they'd just go right back to work. No, you think so? I just went to the Keck Observatory on Wednesday. Nice. It was Hawaii. Big Island. Very nice. Can you go to the base camp or already at the top? To base camp? Yeah. I went specifically there because I had an experience there about I was six, 17 years ago. I went there and I caught it on a perfect night where the moon wasn't out and it was phenomenal. And the view is so astounding. There's so many stars. You see the Milky Way in such clear detail that you have a totally different perspective of the cosmos. And you feel like you're flying through space with a windshield over your head. Like you're in a spaceship. You know, there's some other my entire PhD thesis involved mountain going. It's a lost ritual because now we would have what's called service observing. You just write in what things you want to observe them, what nights for how many hours. And then they send you back the data. They used to be a pilgrimage to the top of a mountain and you live not turnily. And you go to them and be up all night with the telescope and the universe. There's a certain almost spiritual connectivity that that brings upon you when it's just you alone. And there are moments that mountains are high up enough so that if clouds roll in, you're above the clouds. We were above the clouds. You're above the clouds. This is what makes it especially spooky, magical, mystical, mountain-limp us like because you're on the top. There's no other land. It's just clouds. So it's you, the tops of clouds and the universe. Yeah. Commuting with the cosmos. And the views that is so astounding. And many people who go to Australia and say, oh, you got to see the southern skies. What they're what they don't know when they say that is any clear sky anywhere in the world will get you that. Yeah. In the southern hemisphere, only 15% of humans live there. So there's essentially no light pollution anywhere there. 85% of all humans in the north, you're hard pressed to find a completely dark sky in the north, leaving you to think that there's something magically beautiful and different about the southern sky. You're observing the northern sky. Hawaii is like 15 degrees north, but so it's a lot of the southern sky as well. Point is you have the best observing site in the world, which is why they want to put a 30 meter telescope there and there's some conflict with the Indigenous groups regarding that and whether mountain is sacred and in what ways it's sacred and the like. And so that's still going on last I checked, but I'm not surprised and I'm delighted that you have that experience. And now you know how I feel when I look up. Yeah, I was baptized in emotionally psychologically baptized with a night sky in New York City's Hayden Planetarium because as a city kid, I grew up in the Bronx, we don't have a relationship with the night sky. You know, we might see the moon in an occasional planet, the setting sun. That's it. You look up dots. That's it. You see the tall buildings back then there was air pollution, light pollution. So my first night sky was the Hayden Planetarium. Mm-hmm. To this day, to this, that was nine years old, to this day when I go to Mountain Tops just as you experience and I look up, I said, oh, this is so beautiful. It reminds me of the Hayden Planetarium. That's fine. It's, I know it's messed up. But, but that's how I feel. And you're sky, you got a sky here with media news and we love it. Man stars. I'm loving it. Yeah. The view that I saw on Wednesday was not as good as the view that I saw, whatever, was 16, 17. Wait, who laid out these stars? Oh, it's just, there's really deep panels. Call me. You didn't know they're not accurate. They're just those dots. Dude. All right. At least you have stars. In my old, this is in California, I had the star system of where, like, you know, I was born in August. So is the constellation where you go? Yeah. When I was born, embedded into the ground of the pool. All right. There you go. There you go. Allegedly. You know, they're asking me to verify, like, wow, it looks like stars. But that view of the keck observatory, just even from the base station, it's so stunning that it does reset your understanding of where we are. And it makes you angry that we have so much light pollution that people are denied that because I think it changes the way people view our relationship with the cosmos. It goes even deeper than that. But let me quickly comment that there is an entire indigenous community in the world that is very concerned about the loss of very dark night skies. Because so much of the culture relates to that night sky as part of what it values and what it passes down from one generation to the next. It goes beyond just the light pollution because now, folks like your boy, Elon, is launching and I don't like the fact that these are the word constellation to refer to satellites. Because that's my word. That's not my people's word, constellations, they're actual stars, not moving hardware. We've got people talking to people. I've got people. No, no, we're just hate trails. We're using the wrong words. I feel completely at home speaking to he's on the spectrum a bit. I'd say one out of six of my colleagues is probably on the autism spectrum. In retrospect, now that I look at and once you learn what the spectrum is, these to be aspergers and then they folded that in. You know, they're colleagues who just would not relate to another person or a camera, but they were graded in their lab and in their things. And so you say you're just not socialized. No, there's a, some else go. ask you a question about that. Oh, sure. Do you think that that is an evolutionary advantage that in some way people are developing in this manner so that they can concentrate on things like technology like astrophysics, like these like very specific things that require immense amounts of concentration and extreme focus? Do you think there's possibly that human beings are developing in that way? specifically to accentuate our ability to innovate? So it would be very hard to draw that conclusion as some kind of modern force of evolution because for that to be the case, what would have to happen is those who had this sort of autistic level of focus. So high functioning autism. They would have to be making more babies than other people. Well, Elon is. Ah, that's right. He's out there doing his part. He's got it. Yeah. So they'd have to be making more babies relative to everyone else to affect the evolutionary path of modern civilization. Yes. And it's not clear that that's what's actually happening. So we have to ask, did that have any value historically? I mean, in the history of the evolution of our species. So in the in the chapter body and mind, I go over the variations that we, that exist within our species. Huge variations in every in height and weight and in speed and in all kinds of things. And you can ask, well, then what is normal? The day that we control the genome, is there going to be someplace somewhere where there's a normal human and you're going to take your genome and that you're about to control in your unborn child and say, let me adjust it so that it matches this so that all your senses are working as they're supposed to and all the proportion is that is that the future we should ask that because if that's what you're going to do, you're going to homogenize the species. Yes. Okay. You realize I have a run here of content. I have a run of descriptions of what people have accomplished. Okay. So for example, there's a guy, there's a guy growing up, he wanted to play basketball. Okay. And he wanted to be like be a professional basketball player. All right. So he worked really hard at it. And he was just wasn't tall enough. So he says you should give it up, take on, put he's stayed with it, stayed with it. He said, no, this is best. What was for tall people, you're not tall. Okay. He now plays for their Harlem Globetrotters. His name is Hotshot. What's his last name? Well, Mugsie Bogs is a great example. No, this guy is four feet five. Whoa. Yes, he's a genetic, he's a genetic dwarf. People told him he can't play basketball and now he's one of the most popular basketball players. There he goes. Wow. Okay. Swanson. Hotshot Swanson. Okay. That's like being an advanced thing. All I'm saying is, you can move around that. I'm making a different point. Oh, yeah. That's part of the point. The point is, when you look at someone and they're not quote normal, and then you start listing what you think they should not do in life, constraining the options that maybe they have ambitions that are greater than anything you imagined. And so there's a letter. There's a letter beautifully written of someone took a voyage on a on a on a steamship in 1915 and I reproduced the letter in here beautifully written and this passenger was given a tour of their steamship. Okay. By the captain and this letter I can't find it in here, but it's beautifully. I mean, so time for me to read something short. Can I do plenty of it? I got to read it. We have all the time of the world. Give me a second here and talk them on yourselves. What? I see H and G G. Okay. There it goes. Okay. Here's a letter. Okay. Again, this is in the body and mind chapter where we explore. Here it is. Oh, so I had the wrong year. How about a letter written on April 10th, 1930 to Captain von Beck of the U.S. lines SS President Roosevelt. That's Teddy Roosevelt, of course. The captain had given a tour of the bridge to a passenger who later that day waxed poetic about the experience. Again, I stood with the captain on the bridge and he was quiet and composed in the presence of a million universes. A man with the power of a God. In imagination, I saw the captain standing on the bridge gazing into the wide canopied heavens and seeing the darkness sprinkled with stars, systems and galaxies. That passenger was Helen Keller, a 1904 graduate of Radcliffe College. Okay. So what my point is, and I have other, there's a whole run of pages. And there's a whole description of hotshot here. Okay. From the Harlem Gertrass, my point is, the moment you homogenize, it quote, normalize who and what humans should be, you have cut off so much of what has enriched civilization simply because people were different. Yes. Simply because. And so if everybody's the same, what kind of world do I don't want to live in that world? Give me a different world. Do you worry that I got another one here? What is, okay? Okay. Um, you probably know this, but those who don't know the name hold off on the hold off on it. Okay. Okay. Here it is. Jim Abbott, you know, Jim Abbott is sure. Okay. Some people won't, but here it goes. Jim Abbott wanted his whole life to be a professional baseball player, a dream shared by many American boys. Jim wanted to be a pitcher in the major leagues. He succeeded and played for many teams, trucking up a mixed record of wins and losses, but on September 4th, 1993 while playing for the store read. Oh, remember New York Yankees, dude, I thought it was the math. No, I'm out of that. He pitched a no hitter. That's when no batter gets a hit in the entire game. There have been about 320 no hitters in major league history out of 220,000 games played. Due to a congenital birth defect, Jim Abbott was born without a right hand. Hmm. Is Jim Abbott disabled? Is he? He pitched a fucking no hitter for the New York Yankees. What I'm saying is obviously not everyone who has a disability will achieve this way. Yes. I don't get me wrong here, but what I want to say is look at what people would have told and I have six other examples here, one right after another. What people would have told them coming up and temple grand and among them, but probably the most famous autistic person there ever was. She's professor of farming at the University of Colorado somewhere in the West where because she sees the world the way animals do, she could advise farmers in ways they can handle in herd cows that does not create stress in them. She figured stuff out. She has research papers. Yes. But you're going to say, oh, she's not the life of the party. Get her out of here. What are we doing? Can I give you an example? Can I give you an example? I give you an example. What the hell? And so I was angry writing that chapter. I was angry. One more. I got a good one. Okay. Another person was an example. My jiujitsu instructor, John, John Machado was born on his left hand. He only has a thumb. He is a genetic defect where he has no fingers on his left hand. Call it a genetic feature. A genetic feature. Well, in your value, judge, it is a feature because he's a multiple time world champion. Because of the fact that he was born with this one hand that didn't have fingers, he developed a style of jiujitsu that enabled him. You see his hand there? He is one of the absolute best that's ever done it. And he developed a style of jiujitsu where he utilizes that left hand to get under chins because it's not encumbered by the fingers on his left fingers. And he slides it in there and sinks rear naked chokes on people. And he also developed a style that didn't rely on grips on over, he developed a style that's over hooks and under hooks which became modern, no-geed jiujitsu which is incorporated in mixed martial arts because in mixed martial arts they don't wear the kimono. And people who have fingers probably would have never even thought to think that way. And people who saw Jean-Jacques Machado as a child said, oh, this poor child, he will never reach his full potential and turned out to be one of the greatest ever. Got one here. So Oliver Sacks was a noted neurologist. Pioneering entire subfields within his profession. He was also a best selling author describing the human brain as the most incredible thing in the universe. He led a remarkably varied life while suffering from a neurological affliction called Praspo Pagnosia, more commonly known as face blindness. This condition contributed to his severe shyness since he couldn't recognize faces, even if he recognized everything else about you. At times he would not even recognize his own face in the mirror. Whoa. And he's shy because if he's interested in a- How does that- If he has a love interest, if he has a love interest, he doesn't know the next time he sees that person whether that was who we had the conversation with. Okay? In 2012, after a lecture on hallucination at Cooper Union College in New York City, I asked him. If you could go back in time, would you take a magic pill in your youth to cure your neurological disorder? Without hesitation, he replied no. His entire professional interest in the human mind was inspired by the very disorders in his own brain. He wouldn't have it any other way. How does that work where they can't see faces, but they can read- No, you can see faces. They just don't recognize them. It doesn't land in any place that you recognize. Every face, even if you've seen it before, is like a brand new face. Wow. So he'd have to recognize your voice, your vocabulary, your accents. Yeah. Is like a brand new face Wow, so he'd have to recognize your voice your you know your vocabulary or your Your accents. Yeah, your body gestures this sort of thing Wow, so Doesn't Brad Pitt supposedly have that that I don't know I don't know Prudge's bug Yeah, no is yeah Yeah, I see that's true. I felt like he said he has some form of that Is that what he told one girlfriend when he saw the next one? Yeah, he does he has some some variant on that Yeah, he's explained that he's an official big diagnosis with it he's extremely Extreme difficulty recognize people's faces Wow, so maybe there's a varying spectrum Yeah, there it is. Yeah, yeah, face blindness nobody with a very recent article over this patch How crazy is it got one of the best faces ever Faces yeah, so so it's the idea so all of this you'd expect to happen on some kind of spectrum severity let's call it or featurety and And depending where you are on that spectrum you will have certain access to Ways people have never thought before ways people have never done things before Have you seen the video of the woman somewhere in East Asia who? has no arms and She gets out of bed folds up her yeah, it takes care of her child puts on her makeup with her feet with her feet. Yeah, yeah and so Yeah, she puts on her makeup and puts on her coat puts on it's a whole video about this and so I don't know what else to tell you oh you must know this is my other guy here You must you must know them if not get them on okay Get the dude on your show. Hang on Studies show 150 people may have developed that face blindness. It could be genetic, but they just doesn't develop mental Yeah, there's it's Interesting, but how is it the always fought winds up with hot women? Come on You ready yes Matt Stuxman I recognize the name what is a championship archer. Oh, yes, that's how to shoot most people who have ever wielded a bow and arrow He's actually coached by my friend John Dudley in competition. Yeah But by bow and arrow in competition. He's also a car enthusiast. Oh He was born without arms. Yes, he shoots his arrows and fixes his cars using his uncommonly nimble legs feet and toes his Matt Stuxman disabled all I'm here to say is because you started this conversation asking me on the spectrum of of Autism where at some point in that spectrum you focus like no one can focus before possibly to the exclusion of personal hygiene and other concerns related to your health and The civilization has definitely benefited from those who have been able to focus in such a way. Yeah so maybe our species and civil I'm just Spitballing here that our species and the advance of civilization itself has pivoted on the fact that in the variation of who what and what we are Some of us Can focus and solve a problem Like it was the most important thing we would ever do in our lives and and end up doing so thereby pivoting Civilization into some future that would have not otherwise been Realizable so Yeah, I'm I'm all there. Yeah, I mean the diversity of human beings and their interests and what they look like and their sizes and the way they interact with the world is one of the reasons why we can create such an amazing world I mean but consider also And it goes it goes beyond just this what we call these disabled features right people with disabilities it goes to other things for example That you must know that it was not until 1987 Where the American Psychiatric Association with with some names such as that but the psychiatrist Removed homosexuality as a mental disorder From their records from their encyclopedia 1987 yeah a disorder and so What does that even mean if Whatever the number is 10 20% of people were higher or on a gender spectrum As measured in the multiple dimensions that have have revealed have been revealed in recent years uh If you had control over the genome of your children 50 years ago and If homosexuality has a genetic component Would you say I don't want that that's abnormal because you're gonna go through that list of what is normally And you can say I don't want any abnormalities in my children Not at all So there's an entire ethical frontier that is yet to be touched Yet to be resolved I should say certainly there are people thinking about it. Yes. Where What what kind of child are you gonna create? Well, this is the question When you have and this is what I wanted to get to when you you have things like crisper and you have what could be whole legitimate legitimate genetic engineering of fetuses and of embryos legitimate you mean authentic Yeah, you'll you'll you'll you'll minimize its yeah, I mean like they can say it's not sanctioned but the fact that that is an emerging technology and that like all technologies it will increase in its ability With innovation with new versions Where do you think this goes? Do you think it's inevitable that human beings engineer ourselves into these super creatures that are homogenous? Do you think I? I think we as Has almost always been the case the science is advanced advancing faster than our morality yes or our Sensibility our appreciations of humanity You know and often the scientific advance has very important Plus sides to it. Here's what I want to see happened if we can control the genome Let's just start with what already exists in nature. All right. We put ourselves at the top of the tree of life But if nutes Could draw the tree of life? They put themselves at the top. Why? They can regenerate their limbs and We can't They would value that very highly. So would we? Let's get whatever that is in the nutes splice it into us Line up all the the veterans who have you know, yeah missing limbs put them first Regenerate though. Have if the monsters can do it and and and crabs can do it and nutes can do it They are doing research on that correct. I have to it. I don't I haven't checked it. I believe I hope so Yeah, but we're doing research on we on growing organs. Yes, there's a huge need for that. Yes, you don't have to wait for someone to die right particularly The day we have self-driving cars on the road dominating the Population of cars. I see that happening within decades by the way And I've good reason for thinking that but the day that happens we lose so so no longer do 35,000 people a year die Right in peak physical health Which has been a source of so many organs organ donors Right. Yes, you sign your card when you get your driver's license so that when you die in a car accident We can harvest your organs. You're young and you're all your organs work. We don't hurt harness harness organs Harvest organs of 80 year olds because they're 80 or 90 right. Right. So The day we lose the 35,000 deaths per year I hope that happens at a time when we can start growing artificial organs. Have you done any Playing around with auto driving features on things like Teslas. I know it's there But I'm not read I'm not mentally ready. It's pretty amazing I mean I have Jamie and I have the latest beta Okay, Tesla self-driving have you mess with it at all Jamie? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, I've what's your take? I had someone drive me around with it in the beta. It's Not comfortable yet. It was my best. I would say like I'm not Hands on the wheel. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, and I haven't had to take over But there's like one time I was like, well, I'm not doing this right now. I'll test it another time Here's what I did do in a test. Look you put it on the on the Sub-drive and it's not not so driving auto. No, just the simple what's it called? All the old cars on it. Yeah cruise control cruise but it's it's it's managed cruise control. Yes So I put it at 50 miles an hour the traffic's close to 30. It's close to 30. Yes with a Prescribed car distance in front of me car comes to us the traffic goes for standstill the car stops All right, the traffic picks up it the old cars wouldn't do that right So it's doing this so I experiment with that and I noticed that when it starts from a stop Or when it slows down, it's way Harder on its brakes than I am yes. I'm way smoother driver than my cruise control. Yeah So and I've seen cars come in from the side and it abruptly stops when I saw it Before it did and and so so I don't know but we're at the beginning judgment It's dawn. It's dawn of this So you're recognizing patterns and judgment and whether or not someone's paying attention Whether or not it's gonna happen is that it goes into an AI learning mode and it gets the sum of all of these experiences of all drivers in In these situations. Yeah, AI is gonna kill some people in self-driving mode But I guarantee you can tell a lot less it will kill fewer people. Yeah, then in Then without it have you seen Lex Friedman playing guitar while he's driving around self-driving car Yeah, Lex drove around in a Tesla while playing guitar. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. It's pretty fast-standing. It's right So there's a headline here and That I'm gonna read to the very simple headline But uh, where is it here? T-E-E Oh my gosh, where is there it is. There's Lex. Oh That's pretty good Lex didn't shred. Give me some of that You got to listen to this listen to this Oh, yeah, he was playing along here. It's good. It's good. Listen to here. Okay. Have you done Lex's podcast? No, you'd love him. He's an AI researcher From MIT originally now he's mostly doing independent work and doing his own podcast and Brilliant brilliant guy You would love him. Mm-hmm. And he's got an amazing podcast too Okay, so here it's gonna be in this section. I don't get your interest in Lex's podcast Simply snuffing attention. What do you mean? I think I got this Lex thank you for the tip. I'm trying to get him on buddy. I'm trying to get him in Lex actually here is one of the most brilliant people. I know I think you would love talking to him We're interesting quote here from Walter Batchock One of the greatest pains to human nature Is the pain of a new idea for healing? That guy's an idiot. Ah, that's not the greatest pain Someone needs to kick him in the next That's the lot human pain. They're lost the pain of failure. There's a lot more pains. I should know this one The most important thing I have here just an all fairness to the fellow is It is as common people say so upsetting It makes you think that after all your favorite notions may be wrong your firmest beliefs ill-founded Naturally therefore common men hate a new idea and art Dispose more or less to ill treat the original man who brings it oh boy now. We're in the common man This 19th century. I like that even last. All right. Here's a headline ready? And it's why our brain is not statistically prepared a headline. Okay Tesla says autopilot's Autopilot makes its car safer crash victims say it kills Both of those are true Yeah, but less it's all like introducing mountain lions into areas to kill correct. Yeah Both of those are true And if you keep at it yes autopilot will kill or AI Self-driving will kill people but that number will drop every single year and you know why because every way that someone dies No other person will die that way again Yeah, because they'll upload all the software and that does not happen Yeah, and that this is what the airline on industry did the f FAA investigates every single crash You know why you can't take lithium ions onto a plane because it was a UPS Plane that had lithium ion batteries in the cargo and it caught fire and The there's the audio of the pilots Talking to each other and to the thing while the plane is on fire Just before the thing crashes You remember when they used to make you take the batteries out of Samsung phones when you got on planes I never used a Samsung phone Samsung phones had an issue. Okay. They're galaxy. No. Yeah, I remember I remember first in the flames I remember they they juiced up the battery capacity. I remember it. Yeah, and they well do Well crazy So all I was always saying is that they fixed that part of the diversity of who and what we are is who Who you love yeah, who what you want to look like, you know that this resistance to the gender spectrum Concerns me because it's a it's a force of restriction on people's freedom and somewhere I read That America is like pursuit of happiness. I read that somewhere some document right and so If someone wants to dress in whatever way they want And if it doesn't conform with your With your Bynarity You're gonna create a law to prevent them from doing it. What what does that? Does that are we any longer in a free country? If you have that power over me to express my happiness and Another thing we're not good at Nothing and I gotta go like soon Come on. We've been talking here dude couple hours damn Dude come on. This is fun. I love you man. I love you. I love you. I love you. You may love you. I love you People don't know we were outside wrestling a few moves. I used to wrestle you know Captain of my high school chair have a little flashback No Who's the third period of down four points? Oh head. I yeah, the buzzer So What was I saying? We're talking about diversity. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah So here's something we're another thing. We're bad at We're bad at recognizing a spectrum of things when we confront it Our urge is to categorize it That urge is so great. We categorize things that are fundamentally not categorizable for example hurricane strength Hmm hurricane strength is a continuum of Miles per hour of wind speed But we cut it into five categories Hmm, and you know what happens that affects us right so a hurricane hurricane Irma goes some low category three to high category three They're just oh, it's just category three Irma It goes up one mile an hour. It's breaking news hurricane Irma strength into category four just this past hour and everybody crowds around the TV set So our brain doesn't allow our continuum We can't and so so what happens? Are your boy or you a girl you have to be one of maybe there's a continuum Okay, oh you want to talk X chromosome. Why could we can do that? Fine All right, so Biogenetically I can say that there's a boy in a girl or some variant on that which is in the rare case Will you have the double up on the chromosomes? Yeah intersects Sure, we can have that conversation, but that's not Visible to me in what you do when you wake up in the morning I don't see your chromosomes. You know what I do. I see what you do to make yourself look like a boy You go to the gym. You'd have wimp muscles if you didn't work out Okay, that's what you do because you're a boy. You went boy clothes so that everyone knows you're a boy If it was that obvious you were boy, you wouldn't have to do all of that So so much of what we do to split us into this binary Is artificially added On top of the chromosomes So like I said if you're a wimpy guy and I you know you go where man clothes and you go to the gym Because you want to look like a boy If you're a girl you're a woman and you have hair on your lip can't have a mustache You're a girl got hair between your eyebrows can't have that got to remove that Okay, you breasts are not large enough get them enlarged as what happens to what is number? 300,000 Rest augmentations a year in the United States Okay, these are huge numbers to make us look more to fit into this binary and suppose I don't buy into that binary. I say I Like the spectrum someday. I feel a little feminine sometimes if you are not going to wear clothes that way You're going to come after me and say I don't like that. I'm going to pass a law Oh my gosh, that's no longer a free country. Is anybody saying that you should pass a law that men can't wear whatever they want or women can't wear whatever they want Their their own really good forces of resistance in society that are strongly preventing it. Yes Well, I think that's unfortunate but come over my social issues like which bathroom do you use? Solutions there. Yeah, just make unisex bathrooms. Yeah, every new restaurant in New York City is that So that takes an entire category of people's worries and concerns off the table when we're talking about genetic engineering by the way that's in the chapter Agenda and identity and I didn't even get to color and race. Oh my gosh Just before I go. I want to read a quick thing from that section. I go on. Go ahead. No No, finish what you're calling my my my wonder is like where if you try to look at what human beings are capable of doing now in terms of Genetic engineering and what the hopes are where do you think this leads us if this is allowed? It's not good whether or not it's gonna be allowed. It's going to happen. Where do you think this leads us to? Do you think this lead when you look at this is when you look at the archetypal Alien what is it? It's got a large head and this no sex organs and they never have hair I want to hear you in one day with with a hair dude, right? Yeah, right there always ball big on 70 afro. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What do you think that leads us to? Do you think that leads us to like one uniform shape? Or do you think it leads us to everyone looking like Thor? Like where does that lead us to? Yeah, but of course Thor still had to go to the gym But but what if there comes a point in time? Sorry, it's not an extra place for right to let it go to the gym Right. Well with things like biostatin inhibitors. You wear those. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah So if they incorporate that into the human genome then you're gonna have people that have incredible amounts of muscle mass And they don't even have to do anything to achieve it, but what you would have done was As a parent or as someone in control predetermined What they can or should be in life right? Whereas in a free world in a free society a person's own ambitions should be what guides them in my opinion I think that's a controversial opinion certainly. I agree with you. So my concern is Yeah, it's a real concern. And if the technology gets to the point where it's a uniform strategy And that people just start doing that to their children. We're talking 100 years now thousand years now. Wait. Wait. Sure. That 50 years easily Where does this go? Easily 50 years. Yes. So you want to have the muscle bound family But suppose one of them wanted to be a ballet dancer and had to be a little more Lanky-lanky and we get to a point where genetic engineering could be utilized on fully formed adults And you could change the shape of like you know, there's there's people that are transgender What if you could literally become a double X chromosome human being and you will Literally have a vagina literally have breasts ovulate How that would have to think about how that would happen. That would be like an extreme An evolution of biology your genomes. Yeah, so that's a really interesting different world Maybe you can be whoever you want right. That's what we are on Halloween. Right. You're whatever you want to be Thoughts on human neural interfaces like things like neural link in these technologies that are being proposed That would allow human beings to integrate with technology in a physical way symbiotic link. Yeah, so I have a chapter in here called Exploration and discovery where we talk about the rapid pace Technology and its impact on civilization which is extraordinary but I Most predictions are wrong You get it right in the first few years and after a few decades. Oh with new technology new possibilities emerged that couldn't even The could be that they cut it comes in from the side rather than like the internet more of what correct correct it reminds me of There was an ad in 1992-1933 early 90s from AT&T they had a relatively successful ad campaign where they said Have you ever wanted to bought it out? Not even say some futuristic thing and they say you well AT&T will bring it to you. Yeah, I've seen one of the things one of the commercials was something I've never wanted to do never dreamed of doing never did and never will do They show a guy on a beach Okay, and he's working on a tablet which was a good predictive thing tablets to come We're gonna tell him said Have you and there's a surf coming in. It was beautiful beach things it have you ever wanted to? Send a fax from the beach You will It's like no thank you No one has ever in the history of the universe wanted to do that So I but why wouldn't they if that was all that existed? I'm just saying but now it's email the same thing email attachment correct sure But no you don't see that coming if you're Installing the virtues of faxes right that's like in and back to the future part two a Filmed in 1989. We're riding high in faxes 89 to the early 90s You know what year that took place? What's supposed to take place back the future to it's like modern. Yeah, 2015 Yeah, okay, so Marty pisses off his boss and he gets fired. Yeah, all right, so the boss communicates this Viacce to his residence, okay, except this is the residence of the future He has three fax machines in itself in his home So you see them they come out on three different fax machines and no matter what room he was in he would see it Because that's the home of the future. Yeah, because a modern home in 1989 with one fax machine Many homes had no fax machines. So this is how we're linear thinking people And Fire three different fax for fax machines. That's the future. There it is. That's what they thought in that funny. Oh, no the future Wow, and so I talked about here how we also have linear brains Which prevents us from seeing exponential change. Yes, and the best example of this is the is Algiana pond Okay, so algae, you know as it grows and it floats on the pond you see like one square foot of it and you learn someone tells you The algae is doubling every day Any other huge pond and you're told this okay You go away for a month and come back The pond is half covered With algae It's it. Oh my gosh I was away for a month and this happened When will it be completely covered? So what's the answer? It took a month to get halfway How much more time a week no a day? What did I say doubles it doubles every day? Yes, that's how I started this conversation. Yes, see the linear brain Override even the stated facts. You know how they deal with that? They introduced carp Good, I didn't know that carp eat all the algae. I didn't know that Then the problem is they eat all the out all the vegetation and you get like Lake Austin Oh, there's almost no vegetation and all the bass have no place to hide yeah interesting Yeah, Lake Austin looks like the bottom of a swimming pool now Interesting. Yeah, it's a mistake There too. Whoops. Yeah, it's you think you know all the causes and effects of things and then you don't well I want I was on the big island what I found out about mom big island Hawaii Yeah, they when I was there for the chemical some monkeys is that allowed so adorable We saw one at the resort among us. Kill it fella. Well, but Hawaii has no snakes So what is what did the monkey see? Unfortunately, they brought them in for rats and they went after ground nesting birds So they've devastated local wildlife. There it is. Yeah, so you're an island in the middle of Pacific That stuff is pretty tightly Configures little fellas are so cute. Yeah, okay. The mongus is found a wire native to India We're introduced to Hawaiian Islands in 1883 by the sugar industry to control rats and sugar cane fields Any species in Hawaii is going to be invasive. Yeah, but then it gets to a point where people are making the argument that Wild pigs are no longer invasive because they've been there as long as the humans have. Yeah, so there's so It's only a problem when it's a problem. Yeah, it's really what that comes down. Right. Right. Right I'm told that LA palm trees are not native right. They're not yeah, but they've been really well there and then it Overrun the city or anything. Also. They're like symbolic Los Angeles. Yeah, the palm tree. Yeah, you got it everywhere Okay, so I make a prediction by the year 250. I have a bunch of predictions here. Okay. Let's hear it I'm and this is so that into 2050 you can say Tyson you had your head up your ass No hesitation because I go through a whole set of predictions that all didn't come out right people predicting 30 years ahead and so I just want to join The susceptibility Neuroscience and our understanding of the human mind will become so advanced that mental illness will be cured leaving Psychologists and psychiatrists without jobs Hmm in a shift that echoes the rapid conversion from horses to automobiles in the early 20th century Self-driving electric vehicles will fully replace all cars and trucks on the road If you want to be nostalgic with your fancy combustion engine sports car you can drive on specially designed tracks akin to horse riding stables of today Very nostalgic the human space program will fully transition to a space industry supported not by tax dollars But by tourism and anything else people dream of doing in space We develop a perfect antiviral serum and cure cancer Medicines will tear leart to tell it to your own DNA leaving no adverse side effects we and this is in response to your earlier question We will resist the urge to merge the circuitry of computers with the circuitry of our brains Response to your earlier question. We will resist the urge to merge the circuitry of computers with the circuitry of our brains Have you ever seen I'm happy enough to just dig it up here No, I don't need to surgically implant this I'm seconds away from all the knowledge of the world that I could possibly want. I don't have to surgically implant I'm not I don't have that urge. I'm sorry right, but if they do increase the capacity for human knowledge and your access to information Substantially to the point where someone with the neural interface has an enormous advantage faster perhaps, but I know that not just faster but change that remains to interface with information that remains to be seen Of course our guy says that Singularity no, no, oh Raylors. Why right? Percival right. He's a big fan of that is a new book where it's the the Singularity is near-er First book of the Singularity was near-er prediction We will learn how to regrow lost limbs and failing organs bringing us up to the level of other regenerating animals on earth Like salamanders starfish and lobsters Hmm Instead of becoming our overlord and enslaving us all Artificial intelligence will be just another helpful feature of the tech infrastructures that serve our daily lives These are my predictions to be found wrong. Do you have any fears of artificial general intelligence? No, not at all. I don't think that's where it's gonna head. You don't either this curts while by the way Do you do you put intelligence in things that need to do things get the perfect couple coffee put it in your car So it drives and doesn't get it when accident put it in things to have the one thing that does it all I don't I would love to hear you talk to Elon about this because he has a deep fear of it. Yeah, it's I'm Anomalous there, so don't listen to me listen to others. You're anomalous in the fact that you're not concerned I'm yes if you go to AI experts most of them are concerned that it poses an existential threat I think it'll just be more stuff that'll help us out. But what about when it's used in military applications Well, that is an ethical I mean all military operations involve some ethical Decision tree right so it would be added to the ethical decisions But when you have unethical foreign countries that will use these sort of well They're artificial anti-tank warfare, so you need ways to combat that You do Yeah, once once by the way, because we have ministers of AI. We don't yeah, we're behind on that curve. I'm worried We're yeah, that's the concern right the concern is that someone else is gonna implement it Yeah, and they're not gonna have ethics or morals behind it They're just gonna have this idea of control and dominance correct And so there's always the bad actor that you've got to And the military they're paid to consider in the real concern conduct of a bad actor is that we become them to beat them That's the fear. Yeah It's like we're not autocratic or we don't think we are so We we would have to get an entire Congress an entire electorate To vote that way. Yeah, and that's if we do I don't know what the future of the world will be at that point. It's okay It's booky because again that we don't have the ability to sort of extrapolate and look at the future in terms of like how all these things are implemented and what the overall Results gonna be So you're not worried about these human neural interfaces at all. You don't you know, I don't see that as happening You don't see it happening at all. No, I think we'll resist it. I don't I think it'll but didn't we there's a lot of people that resisted email Like we don't even know the email moon those people all got on board Yeah, people just a print email remember that and they print it and then read the printed email Yeah, but a lot of people resisted this idea of cell phones, but now they're everywhere no of course No, I'm the only resistance I'm referring about is the machine biology interface right that's what we're gonna Resistant I'm gonna resist the continued advance But it creates a superior human being it already has it beats us a chess and go at any intellectual task We give it but it's a symbiotic thing if it becomes integrated with the human biology I think we'll resist that. That's all it's a prediction that you know, I'm a hop on board right away I'm gonna be one of the first people My head I don't want to be left behind Okay, well the real concern is that it's really gonna separate the halves from the have knots because if it does give you an advantage economically and advantage in terms of your intellectual capacity You're going to have this advantage because it's gonna be prohibitively expensive. I would assume initial often things that are Prehibitively expensive initially don't forever stay that right like cell phones, of course But eventually it becomes more flat panel TVs sure like impulse items that came out I was just had a Walmart I was just had a Walmart Yes, it's nuts. Yeah. It's crazy. They were so expensive. I remember in heavy like 20 grand Yes, yeah tens of thousands of dollars and they come in like wood crates. Yep. Yep And you need a power tools to do it yourself and mount them yourself on the wall I gotta let me leave you with some thoughts here. Okay There's a section here on race and color Which is another thing with the variation of what we have in the world just a point of what I make when European Anthropologists started running through Africa and started describing what they saw The urge was to say everyone in Africa is this thing and they've dark skin woolly hair and That is a thing and they call it a race and they called it the Negroes, okay? And this is our attempt to classify into few categories something that might actually in real life be on a spectrum We know that the human species began in Africa and Everybody who populates everywhere else in the world came out of Africa to do that What that tells you is that the genetic diversity within Africa as The origin of our species is Greater than it is between any other two people anywhere else in the world But because the anthropologists were not thinking genetic diversity They're thinking skin color They put them all in one bin But if you have the most genetic diversity Then in practically every way humans vary you would find the extreme of that in the African continent Where would you find the tallest people in the world? What to see tribe of Africa? How about the shortest people in the world pigbies the pigbies not even that far away? Right geographically They have the same skin color so the European said these are one group of people one race Where might you find the slowest people in the world? Well, no one looks for them Where would you find there's no racist to find the slowest people? How about the fastest people? Africa Okay, people of African descent have dominated the long distance as well as the sprint to completely different physical abilities Oh, but they're all dark skin people. They're all Negroes. Okay Where would you likely find the dumbest person in the world? Africa How about the smartest person in the world? Africa how about the Egyptians? The Europeans did not look for people smarter than they were Okay, and to this day where they find evidence where that might have been the case You have people saying aliens did it Egypt is of course in Africa. Yeah a brilliant civilization. Oh my gosh While Europeans were still either disemboweling heretics or whatever the hell they were doing I was even before that thousands of years ago So my point is If you don't look for it and you don't find it and you're gonna create a map of Humans of the world you're gonna put yourself at the top That's what you're gonna do and you're gonna write things like this What do you want to hear from Thomas Jefferson or Francis Galton Jefferson Jefferson 1785 speaking of the Negroes Comparing them by their faculties of memory reason and imagination It appears to me that in memory They're equal to the whites in reason much inferior as I think one could scarcely be found capable of tracing and comprehending the investigations of Euclid and Imagination they are dull tasteless and An animal what is Euclid I honestly don't know how many Euclid fluent white people Jefferson knew in the original American colonies Euclid invented a geometry Okay Euclidean geometry is ancient Greece and his books still exist to this day So he's saying the black slaves don't know Euclid can't figure out you could Well, they haven't been educated. Well regardless how many how many white farmers in 1785 USA also weren't new Euclid. Yeah. Oh, yeah Okay, I But whatever were his observations and objections to black people he had no hesitation Continually mating with at least one of them producing six children So you know what I did here Then there's a guy who wrote a whole book Comparing black people and white people a book that was used into the 1960s. It was called the origin of races by Carlton Kuhn He wrote if Africa was the cradle of mankind which he recognizes It was only an indifferent kindergarten Europe and Asia where our principal schools So this is these are people putting themselves at the top. He's white so he had to put white people at the top Then I thought suppose anthropologists Were black racists instead of white racists? What were they right? What would they come up with? Well also what he's saying is ridiculous because if it's kindergarten how did they do the pyramids? It's the most complex structures ever known the man. Hold on. So we can't reproduce today. No All of us my only point is When you have that mindset and you have to put yourself at the top and all people with dark skin or one entity You're not looking for people smarter than you you're not there's other evidence here They do realize that the people who get the highest scores on standardized tests in England are our people immigrants from the Igbotribe in Nigeria and These are their kids outscorer all the the the the quote native white people in the town if you're not looking for them You're not finding them. It just doesn't it's It's a it's a thing. It's all here in this chapter and all doing is bringing science to it. That's all I'm doing here and Where's it where is it here? Okay? so a black Yeah, here it goes Then I gotta go. I can't keep staying here dude. It's okay. You can come back There's a lot of little stickies on that book. I'm sure you have many other things to talk about What is the book by the way? Oh? Starry messenger is this now cosmic perspectives? Is it out currently civilization? Came out eight weeks ago. Please tell me you did the audio version of it. I did thank you. I did I hate when people have other people do the over Yeah, I did the audio version. Oh, yeah Of course you you have I could not do the idea of Actor I talk about the pyramids here Even Elon Musk by the way tweeted Pyramids Aliens built the pyramids obviously that's even Possibly but he said it and it's in a You know Elon likes to joke around about shit. Here's one on May 1st 2021 a talented chess player Reach the title of National Master for having achieved a US chess Federation rating above 2200 landing among the top four percent of 350,000 rated players in the world a Rating achieved that was five hundred points higher than that of his chess coach Just a few years after learning how to play the game That prodigy is a ten-year-old boy named Tani to lua Ad Ade woo me the son of Nigerian refugees to the USA in 2017 his family spent a brief time living in homeless shelters in New York City Before his parents established stable employment and permanent residence. I played a brief chess game against the little fellow in March 2021 on Grand Master Maurice Ashley's twitch platform a live streaming social media interface The game was indeed brief Yeah, he wiped the floor with me speaking of Nigerians immigrants to the US Speaking of Nigerians immigrants to the US Enjoying eight percent higher household income than the national average Nigerian immigrants of the United States Yeah, and ethnic Nigerian children in the United Kingdom especially those from the Igbot tribe Consider a consistently attained higher test scores on average than their white UK counterparts What is it about Nigeria because so much in Japan? I wonder what depths of intellect? These are occasions to pause what depths of intellectual capital in math science and engineering or any field Lay hidden deep within the African continent or anywhere else on earth Lost for now or lost forever For want of an opportunity flourish I'm gonna leave you with a fast list. I want to tell you what my racist black anthropologist found Let's go back to the 19th century and little anthropologists be black racists instead of white racists Okay, okay, what would they say? so all right Jimpanzies are Humans closest genetic relative. We just need to find similarities between chimps and white people And that would be sure fire evidence of their less evolved state Because that's what people were saying the blacks were still evolving and they show a chimp a black person in a white person and so that's you can enslave black people and Laws against them it would wait to justify it because of course you're gonna put yourself at the top so now hypothetical black racist anthropologist chimps and other apes so this is a list This is in there a book that there was never written chimps and other apes grow hair all over their bodies The hairiest people you've ever seen have been white people With mats of hair across their chests and ascending their backs their body hair can even reach upward and out of their shirt color Black people do not remotely approximate this level of hairiness There was no mention of this in any of those books Distinct from their face hands and feet part the hair of most chimp and z's the way they do do each other when checking for Lice and their skin color is white Not any shade of black or brown chimps tend to have big ears relative to their head size After decades of ear watching I can attest that the biggest ears I've ever seen on humans have been on white people Have a look yourself next time you're in a crowded public place Doubtless the strong overlap, but the size of black people's ears can be as little as half the size of white people's ears You might now ask about the famously large ears of President Barack Obama But he is precisely half white Just as much white as black so maybe his big ears come from the white half of his family For most of the 20th century Neanderthals were portrayed as stupid and brutish Turns out beginning in the 1990s genetic research revealed that Europeans are between one and three percent Neanderthal Africans zero percent They can't be good for Europeans time to clean up that backward primitive image since then published references to Neanderthals Instead comment on what must have been their creative artistic inventive and articulate ways crafting sophisticated tools and technologies to shape their world Look how easy it is to be racist Let's continue Chimpanzees invest quality family time pruning each other's hair. We've all watched them do this Apparently the lights they find must be tasty because whoever plucks them from the other chimps head also eats them Ever hear of a lice outbreak among black children? Probably not white children are 30 times more susceptible to lice infestation than our black children The parasites simply likes to lay eggs in the hair of chimpanzees and white people more than on the hair of black people This goes on hmm. This all This is over this could have been included and they would have said well wait a minute Maybe all humans are together and chimps are something completely different But they didn't go there their bias prevented their analysis of information that stares flat into their face, okay Here's one I'm gonna skip some here cuz I got to go. We got a plane waiting for me I'm skipping some here ready. Yeah This is one more from the chimp vault. I have others that are not chimp related. Here's one chimpanzees love to swing in trees apparently So do suburban white children They typically can't wait to build and live in a backyard treehouse You have not likely seen black children Even contemplate the idea White people clearly want to return to their fully primitive state This would be a racist black person Okay from the 19th century Publishing trying to find ways to enslave white people That's a cosmic perspective. That's a it look dude This is what we were doing as humans to each other not recognizing authentic diversity in who and what we are Trying to separate to say I'm better. I make the rules and whatever rule I'm making I'm gonna put myself at the top and you're not gonna be at the top because you're different Do anticipate that as people get more education more information and as we Evolve That will believe that stop doing that and we'll start recognizing the importance of diversity I want to believe that and that it's our strength. I want to believe that I want to believe that too. I so Want to believe that okay? Here it is Then I really got to go okay last one There's a quote a short quote from I want this on my tombstone I beseece you nobody uses beseece anymore. I love it I beseece you to treasure up in your hearts these my parting words Be ashamed to die Until you have won some victory for humanity Mmm our primal urge to keep looking up is surely greater Than our primal urge to keep killing one another If so then human curiosity and wonder the twin chariots of cosmic discovery will ensure that Starry messengers these are messages from science from the sky from the universe continue to arrive These insights compel us For our short time on earth to become better shepherds of our own civilization Yes life is better than death Life is also better than having never been born But each of us is alive against stupidness odds We won the lottery only once we get to invoke our faculties of reason to figure out how the world works But we also get to smell the flowers We get to bask and divine sunsets and sunrises Nagaze deeply into the night sky they cradle We get to live and ultimately die in this glorious universe. That's a hell of a tombstone Dude, I gotta run. Thank you. So I want to and one day I'll come back and just chill We'll lift weights together. Okay. Wrestle a few rounds. Let's do it. You know Thank you very much. Thank you. Thanks for having me. Thank you. All right. Bye, buddy