And just press the music. Let's just go right with music. Ha ha ha. We have no commercials today. I like it. Dolan Spring. We're commercial free ladies and gentlemen. We're brought to you by the universe. So good. Experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night all day. Ladies and gentlemen, a very special episode. Podcast sponsorship free, Dennis McKenna, and Josh Wickerham. Josh is from the ethnobotanical stewardship council, one of the fauc, you were on the founders of this. That's right. And what exactly does that mean? For folks who have no idea what ethnobotanical or stewardship means. A lot of people struggle with council. Or council. Right. Like you're counseling people on ethnobotanical stewardship. Imagine bringing that up at a party. Yeah. Well, the ESC is dedicated to transforming lives through assuring the safety and sustainability of traditional plants. So that means transforming people's lives through experiences with plants. But it also means the sustainability of plants and the safety in their use. So we're starting with ayahuasca and Iboga. Yeah. You shouldn't start with like ferns. People don't get excited about it. It's hard to get you co-lipped this. People are going to get fired up about that. But ayahuasca, anything involving trip to means. For folks who have experienced it, it's something worth saving. Exactly. You guys find it odd that in this day and age, in 2014, the average person who you would go up to to try to discuss these issues with would have no idea what you were talking about. Actually, I think over the last few years, that's kind of changed. ayahuasca is emerging into mass consciousness. And I think that's a good thing. I would say 10 years ago, 15 years ago, if you approached the average person on the street and you said ayahuasca, they'd look at you like you had a speech impediment. I know what. Yeah. But chances are people would recognize it now. And not necessarily know what it's about. Not necessarily have a negative or positive view of it, but the meme is out there. And I think that's a good thing, ultimately. It's most certainly a good thing. I agree with you. It's certainly out there with young folks. Right. But with folks, I'm 46 of folks my age and older. It gets a little sketch. It's like, wait a minute. What? What are you doing? Folks who already have mortgages and families, those are the ones that's very difficult to get them to even consider what you're talking about. You'd be surprised. The ESC is sent out a call for experts. And we've been infiltrated by the mainstream people that do evaluation work for the World Bank and USAID. They're interested in ayahuasca. People are going down to South America to have these transformative experiences to sit in ceremony. There's a lot of underground activity in the US, as well, and Europe where it's not legal. But in South America and Peru, ayahuasca is protected as national patrimony. That's awesome. Yeah. That's beautiful. Do you ever worry that you're being infiltrated by government agents who aren't that? I mean, exactly, right? I'm not doing anything illegal. We're working in countries where ayahuasca has been used for hundreds of years traditionally. And we're looking at increasing the safety of it so that we're creating a kind of self-regulatory model so that we can take that model to places where it's illegal and say this is a totally safe medicine. If you do it right, people with certain medical conditions shouldn't take ayahuasca. But done with a skilled kurandero or shaman in the right setting, it can be helpful for all sorts of psychological issues or PTSD or depression and just give people a new perspective on their lives. Most certainly. I mean, I'm completely joking around. But what I was saying when I was, it's like that hasn't happened with marijuana. Marijuana is they're still fighting it tooth and nail despite all the evidence that it's not just beneficial. But probably prevents a lot of cancers and does a lot of fantastic work with PTSD and with anxiety and all sorts of issues, medical issues, interocular pressure for people with glaucoma and on and on and on, people with AIDS that are having a hard time keeping their appetite up cancer patients. I mean, it's still. They fight it tooth and claw. And ayahuasca is a completely different barrel of monkeys. Ayahuasca is coming at this through the back door. I mean, it's interesting that it has gained recognition over time to the extent that it does. And to a certain extent, I would say it's, you know, Josh, people like Josh and me, we say, we work for the plants. And ayahuasca has got its own agenda, interestingly. And people go down to South America. And they have these experiences that are revelatory and self-transforming. But often they come back with an enhanced ecological consciousness and enhanced awareness of the connection between humanity and nature, the idea that nature is threatened. And I think ayahuasca is sort of a messenger from a community of species that's trying to tell these monkeys to wake up you clowns. You know, we're coming down to the wire. We're in a crisis here. You've got to re-understand where you fit into nature and do what can be done in the ever shrinking time that's left. So people come back with this renewed sort of awareness of the interconnectedness of life. And that we have a role in this, you know, we primates. And we have to re-understand what our role is as stewards of nature, rather than exploiters of nature. And ayahuasca, you know, that's the message it delivers to many people. And unexpectedly, they may not be going there to, you know, to experience that. But that's what they come away with. From your work and from your brother's work, Terrence McKenna, what I got that I never considered before was that psychedelics in various forms may very well be responsible for why we are human beings in the first place. And our separation from them might be the whole reason why we're so haywire. Why we're missing a crucial ingredient involved in the creation of cognitive thought in the first place, the creation of this ability to look at ourselves and communicate our ideas and really become a human being. And then we're separated from them, other and left to our own devices. And all of our wild animal instincts sort of take over. And our animal instincts sort of don't coexist peacefully in this weird world that we have created as human beings. And then we create chaos because of it because we can't see what we're doing. Right. Right. ayahuasca allows you to see what you're doing. ayahuasca, yes, ayahuasca refocus the whole understanding. I think of the relationship that we have to that we have to nature. And I think that's what, you know, if you believe in plant intelligence, I mean, there are different ways of looking at plant intelligence. But it's interesting how often people, you know, they come out with this renewed understanding. And I think that's, that's, you know, a desperate call on the part of the community of species. And ayahuasca has been delegated to be to kind of lead that conversation. It's fascinating that ayahuasca is the one that's been, you know, in the forefront. When mushrooms are so damn easy to grow, you could, you mean anyone can essentially get ahold of some spores and start cooking them in your basement. Like really quickly, whereas ayahuasca is probably the most complex, communitory beverage that we know of as far as like psychedelic brews. It's the one that requires the most knowledge. It's the one that requires the most care and creating. And it's easier to extract DMT than it is to create ayahuasca and get all the plants and brew it together and know someone who really knows what they're doing, how to cook up a good batch. It's weird that that's the one. Yeah, it has, it's, I think it's because it is so, you know, it's escaped from its home in the Amazon. And that's the area on the planet with the greatest biodiversity and all that. But it's got all those associations, you know, people regard it. I mean mushrooms are also important, but they just don't seem to carry that same, I don't know what it is, emotional kick ayahuasca is the one right now that's getting all the attention, you know, and it's quintessentially a plant, right? Mushrooms aren't plants, so maybe that's part of the disconnect, I'm not sure. But, you know, all of these things in indigenous cultures are regarded as plant teachers. And, and as you mentioned, a lot of it comes down to triptamine chemistry and, you know, our brains for some reason are evolutionarily primed to really act to triptamines. I mean, we have these triptamine detectors for some reason. And I think it's partly that we can, so that we can receive and interpret what they're trying to tell us. And what they're trying to tell us is there's not much time left. We have to really re-understand our relationship to nature. We have to realize that we're not separate from nature. Well, you're trying to overcome at least 2,000 years of Judeo-Christian history and, and, you know, those traditions, their 10, their whole agenda in a certain sense is to devalue nature. You know, nature is something that we own, it's there for us to exploit, it's there for us to rape, and, and we're busy doing that because, you know, my, my problem with those religions is the focus is always on the afterlife, so it tends to make you devalue this life. It makes you, you know, it, it teaches people to devalue nature, to devalue their bodies, to devalue personal experience, all of these things and it leads to the very out of balance situation that we have going. And, you know, what's disturbing to me is that we're all part of this circle of, of the converted. I mean, we, we got the memo, you know, and, and the meme is spreading, the memo is spreading, I'm not sure it's fast enough, you know. Do you think that it's possible that the human race is essentially cramming, you know, how when you're about to do a test and you put it off to the last minute and then, you know, the day before you like, holy shit, I got a deal with this. Right. And then you go bananas, you take an anaeronol, you file through books until you head once you explode. That is a characteristic that's very, very common for people that want to attack a project, especially an important project. Right. It's, it's almost like we have this thing where it has to be completely overwhelming where it can't be ignored and then we go into it full throttle. Right. Is it possible that the human race is cramming and that maybe part of our self-destructive tendencies are actually us recognizing that we're fucking up and going into it more chaotically, more materialistically, more shallow, more nonsense, more Kim Kardashian, more American Idol, more horseshit just to get you to the point where you get so sick of it, you puke it up and then move on. Yes. Yeah. And we're in the middle of an ecological crisis and time is running out. We certainly are cramming. We're destroying the Amazon, we're destroying the climate. We're destroying the ocean, we're destroying the air, we're destroying everything we get our greasy little hands on. And this is the first time in the 500 years of European colonization of the Americas that there's a kind of reverse sort of message coming from the Amazon. People are going there not to convert but to be converted to learn to learn the traditions and the indigenous people 95% of their population was wiped out by viruses or wars or plagues. And now we have this opportunity to come back from the brink and work with ayahuasca that grows in the canopy of the rainforest. You can't have ayahuasca without the trees and it's an alternative to mining and oil exploitation and there's money to be made in it. And I think coming back to cannabis, the reason the dialogue is starting to change is because governments are realizing there's a lot of money to be made taxation. It's a solution to budget crises. And the same with ayahuasca tourism, I don't like to say tourism because people are legitimately seeking a spiritual experience. Some people just want to go have an experience. I think it's anything wrong with the word tourism but I know what you're saying like the frivolous idea. Yeah. I don't think it does. I think you know I think ayahuasca tourism is a beautiful way or pilgrimage. Yeah. I think the tourism is a phase in our relationship to ayahuasca. I think that potentially if we can you know what I view is going on now is kind of a rough period but what is really being played out here is the coevolutionary relationship with these plants that have gone on as you say ever since we became cognitive beings. In fact it was the plants that triggered that. And now and that conversation is going on but now the conversation has gone to a new level where ayahuasca before was kind of you know the it was under the stewardship of indigenous people confined to the Amazon. Now it's encircling the and I think this is partly this is what plants do. They like to spread and they're spreading out into different cultures and the plant itself is now you know even if the Amazon is destroyed which it may well be ayahuasca is not going to be destroyed. It's too late. It's already escaped but I think you know hopefully we can arrest this process but what you're seeing is has always been a coevolutionary relationship where you know at some time some points it's more quieter it's underground but at some point says as the crisis deepens it's becoming more and more public in a sense and I think that's what you see going on you know and and potentially I think that ayahuasca you know we're now discovering that it's good for so many things you know therapeutically for addictions for depression for PTSD and that sort of thing and that's all to the good but we shouldn't make the mistake of thinking ayahuasca is only for sick people you know it's it's we're all wounded and we all need to understand something about our relationship to nature potentially the paradigms that are emerging in ayahuasca tourism or these more you know these ayahuasca-centered spiritual communities in the states potentially this has the this may transform mental health care in this country it may transform psychiatry and from that it might transform medicine and it might actually transform all these other institutions that we have to deal with whose values have become twisted over 2,000 years of bullshit and indoctrination you know these institutions are not going away and they're fine they just need to rediscover a moral dimension to the consequences of their action if that makes any sense you know our cleverness far exceeds our wisdom and that's a problem that's the problem we've got to become wise and when we couple that with our ingenuity and our cleverness then we'll be on the way toward saving the planet saving ourselves I think there's also this growing understanding of all the factors that encompass a healthy person and how many of them have to do with your conception of reality how many of them have to do with the way you think how many of them have to do with how you view your environment if you view your environment as a hostile stressful and antagonizing angry negative place you'll get sicker and your body fight it doesn't know what to do it's fighting it constantly and you're you're in a battle and you're all stressed out and you're susceptible to all sorts of things and there in in that sense there's a direct physical connection between psychedelic experiences and improved health right and that's something that people really need to understand and I think once that catches root once people grasp that concept and understand the incredible pressure leaving leaving any properties like I can remember one of the first times I ever did DMT the the day afterwards like I had this completely different view of the world that I had to sort of apply now all these other and like figure out like do all these factors that I've considered as being important how many of them am I going to throw out like the way I described it is like my computer rebooted and now only has one folder in the desktop and that folder is labeled my old bullshit and so now I have to open this folder and go okay how much this is valid like Jesus this is my whole thought process this is my whole mind this is how I interface with reality unfortunately some of it made its way back in you know and then you know I had to do another trip you know a few months later and then I threw out more of it and it was a sort of a deliberate process of reevaluation you can't reject it all there's some good stuff in that folder right but I think what the DMT experience the psychedelic experience does you know that's partly what it does I like your analogy of the folder because now you're looking at the folder from the desktop you're outside the folder yeah you know so it's liberated you you were imprisoned in the folder before now you can look at it from the outside and you can go through and say oh you know delete delete delete oh this is good let's keep this yeah you know let's integrate it so you know ultimately this is a process of you know personal cleansing both physically and emotionally and you're and you know psychologically and you're encounters with these things but also cultural cleansing you know I mean there are there are good memes out there and there are good things going on but there's you know there's so much noise there's so much bullshit it's hard to sort out what's worth preserving and what needs to be dispensed with I think we're also kind of trapped in this weird world of our creations as far as technology as well I think that technology just like corporations just like anything that sort of becomes a force that's constantly growing it becomes it has a certain self preservation aspect to it and I think that we're completely connected to the idea of constant innovation and constantly improving technology and that also is completely connected us to materialism because materialism is the real driving force behind constant innovation if we all just looked at our laptops and said I'm good are you good there's no need to we call Apple right now hey um these are fucking great stop right there right like you know you literally don't need to improve internet speed you don't need to improve the laptop everything's wonderful let's stop all this and let's move onto something else well that's not what everybody wants everybody wants the newest latest greatest fastest dual video processor I want to screen that rolls and folds and but that's part of the trap yes this idea that we have to keep upgrading to the iPhone 10 or whatever I mean these tools work and they're and used in the proper way they can be tremendously important for consciousness evolution and transformation that's what the psychedelics are they're just tools they're a kind of technology and like I say often to my classes and elsewhere technology in itself is neither good nor bad drugs are neither good nor bad these technologies it's all about how you apply them that's where the moral dimension comes in that's why you know you can use you can misuse technology internet technology to you know propagate whatever the Kardashians are doing lately over the internet but you can also change hearts and minds with with those tools like for example you know this live streaming symposium that we're that we're involved with that we're are mandated to plug this thing but it's important you know this conference coming up in Amherst is just one example of Massachusetts and her oh I know it well it's the socialist capital of Massachusetts right perfect place to do this symposium that's coming that's going to be live stream people should go to it's a cute name symposium ps y m p o s i u m and it's going to be live streamed and if you go to the website you can you know sign up for tickets for live streaming give that out one more time for people that were struggling symposium ps y m p o s i u m cute right yeah hard to symposium dot com and if you go to their website what you're going to see right now which I had nothing to do with you're going to see a little trailer for live screaming and it's actually it looks like a stealth advertisement for my new product coming out which is the Dennis McKenna bobblehead I mean this trailer and I look like I have a movement disorder or something and you know but why do you why does it look like you have a movement disorder huh let's let's play it you want me to play it no we're playing it right now okay go to folks well you'll see what I mean okay I was I just looked at it this morning and I thought actually this bobblehead I just thought what is going on here well you see I'm just bouncing out in Mars you're janny how high was the person who made this pretty high pretty high yeah he just made it last night I looked at it I this morning and I said seriously you really want this to be on your whole page there it is you know the important thing is get past the the trailer and you can you can sign up for this symposium which is these guys these young fellows of the amperester really enthusiastic and good good people they want this conference to have an impact and I think it will amers is one of the few places in Massachusetts I'd consider living yeah I I thought familiar with it that's great it's yeah I've heard it I had an ex-girlfriend who moved out there when I was in high school and I used to go out there and visit her and I remember thinking whoa this is like a totally different world out here it's all like Birkenstock wearing strange hippie open-minded right right it's a weird sort of strange place in the middle of western Massachusetts western Massachusetts is a strange place in and of itself because you have Boston and you know which is a very it's a big city a very educated more colleges per capita than anywhere else but then as you get out of Massachusetts you might as well be in Kentucky for about an hour and 20 minutes and then you get to this weird oasis where like the the woods part and then you know you have this strange place and amers was really highly educated and open-minded liberal community well I'm not sure I've ever been there but I'm looking forward to this conference you enjoy a lot of fun yeah it really is the perfect place it's very much like a very small Austin in the middle of Massachusetts but with no music right not as much music the guys organizing the conference really are working with the plants and for the plants and you don't have to go there to participate the the beauty beauty is this this live sign up for ten bucks you get a screening of neurons to Nirvana a great film and access to all the the presenters yeah have you have you interviewed or shown neurons to Nirvana no on your side no I I mean it you know from a technical point of view I'm not a filmmaker you can criticize it from that point of view but it's an educational tool for psychedelics I think this is really an interesting movie and it's the kind of thing you can sit down with your parents and watch and they will come away maybe some of their assumptions will be shaken you know I mean it's a very good educational tool for under it the subtitle is understanding psychedelic medicines and it's entertainingly done and it's a kind of a review of the cutting edge research on about four or five psychedelics MDMA LSD mushrooms ayahuasca and where the state of the art research is on that and these these chemicals you know what we need to do as we were talking about before we need to change hearts and minds I know it's a cliche but these chemicals under the right circumstances are actually a way to do that and coupled with that is education education is so important and that's kind of the vision of these gentlemen Brett Green and his colleagues that you know symposia like this are an important component of this because it's a way of getting the information out and the more people it can be gotten out to the faster the change can be can be implemented yeah the change hearts and minds is an interesting cliche because we've heard it so many times that it's almost like we've heard wolf wolf wolf there's wolves there's wolves right holy shit there's a wolf right like the first time I did any psychedelics the first major one of the besides MDMA was mushrooms and then that was the my first experience like oh my god there's a wolf like this is this is a totally different thing this isn't something that you have to believe in this is something that's unavoidable right no matter if you believe in it exactly he doesn't care if we're paired for it too well you can't be I really don't think you can be I think you can be the best you can be prepared for is to give up just let it go don't fight it be prepared for that take a few yoga classes know what it's like to be uncomfortable and keep breathing right and then right then then do it and then listen listen to it surrender to the messages there yeah well you said earlier which is a very controversial but oddly fascinating thing that plants are the reason why we are human beings today why in these plant medicines and these these psychedelic compounds why is that so controversial I find that to be incredibly amazing when I talk to really intelligent people and I bring that idea up and they dismiss it like almost instantaneously and I don't understand why because I get it that they're connecting the idea of a drug to a bad thing I get that but when you want to talk about powerful influences on cognitive thought is there any more powerful influences on cognitive thought than a psychedelic drug I don't think there is I think I don't understand why that wouldn't be immediately considered at the top of the top of the short list but it's not it's heresy that's the thing it's an unconventional idea I mean if you look at you know we as a species we evolve in the rainforest initially and you know we evolve in an environment of incredible chemical diversity you know and it's absurd to assume you know and the reason they're such chemical diversity in the plant kingdom is that they're great chemists you know and they make all these chemicals for whatever purposes that's how plants mediate their relationship with their environment right they they substitute biosynthesis for behavior this is what I say this is a cliche That's how plants mediate their relationship with their environment. They substitute biosynthesis for behavior. This is what I say. This is a cliche. They can't react to their environment through behavior. They can't run away. They can't fight through chemistry. On the other side of that coin is we are chemical systems. I hate to break it to you folks, but we're made of drugs. That's why drugs work. We're biochemical engines. Our brains are biochemical engines that run on neural transmitters. These plant compounds are neural transmitters, essentially. I mean, they were in plants a long time before they were in our brains, before they was even complex brains enough to utilize these things. And of course, in evolution, we internalize these things that adapted them to our own internal signaling processes. So now we have the neurological tools, if you will, to talk to the plants. They've always been talking to us. Now we can actually have a conversation. And you get into the conversation and the conversation is, you monkeys need to move to the next level. You need to get more conscious of your place in nature, our place in nature is a species. Realize that we're not separate from it. We're part of it. And if nature goes down, we go down. I mean, there is no escape. There's no ticket out of here, not yet, anyway. And the plants are the tools to understand this. I mean, there's good scientific studies now that show that's still a sign, which is the one that's been studied, can reliably induce a state that you might call a mystical experience. I prefer to call it a transcendent experience. But the nugget of the experience that it can elicit under the right experiences is an understanding of we are all one. We're not separate. That's the core of the mystical insight that psychedelics bring about. Why should our brains even have evolved to have that kind of experience? If it's not a way of kind of, I don't know, being able to initiate that conversation with the rest of species. I mean, they're counted on us because never before, you know, civilization and humanity has impacted nature in adverse ways. As long as we've been around, as long as we've had fire, you know, I mean, fire back in the Paleolithic and even earlier was a tremendously, not necessarily destructive force, but it was a transformative force on ecosystems. We didn't particularly use it in a conscious way. We used it in a way that that served our purposes. But now with seven billion people on the Earth and counting and technologies that no one ever imagined that we'd have in our fingertips, what we do now really matters, you know, because we, because before that nature, the homostatic mechanisms that tended to take nature, keep nature in balance, you know, we could cause tremendous ecological destruction and nature would eventually, you know, that would fade away and nature would come back into balance. Now we're actually in danger of permanently screwing up those mechanisms. So we actually have to kind of consciously intervene or be conscious of what we're doing because the consequences of what we do are just so much greater. Does that make any sense? Oh, no, it absolutely does. It absolutely does. I think there's another thing that we need to put into perspective, the relatively short amount of time that human beings have had access to the information that we have today and the terrible effects of propaganda and how long propaganda can stick. You know, when we're talking about just the just say no era of the 80s, the Nancy Reagan nonsense, I had Dr. Carl Hart on recently, who's a brilliant guy of you wherever's worth. Amazing work on addiction and sort of educating people about the actual real reactions that a human body has to drugs. But what he's talking about that was really interesting is like, there has never been a drug free society nor would you want one. It doesn't exist. So this idea is so stupid that it's been hammered into us, this impossible ideal. And it's because of the ability to communicate. It's ironic that the ability to communicate through it to mass amounts of people is so recent within the last few hundred years, a thousand years, whatever it's been, that we, the impact of these things, although in our incredibly small finite lives, seems like forever is a comparatively just a little tiny blip on the radar where we've had this sort of cultural hiccup where we lost the script. And the internet seems to be what's resetting the information. I think that's one of the reasons why marijuana besides the financial reason, why marijuana has gained so much steam. Just the sheer overwhelming avalanche of facts, the lack of deaths, the LD50 rate of 1500 pounds and 15 minutes, like just the sheer absurdity of what it takes to kill you. And then the stats that come in, I mean, how many times can you see someone posted with the numbers people died by cigarettes, the numbers people died by prescription drugs, the numbers people died by alcohol, the numbers people, you just start looking at that and then marijuana gets the bottom zero. Well, what the fuck? Right. You know, it's over and over and over again. It's resetting this strange propaganda, but to people that have been alive through it, it's indoctrination. It's how we've come to understand the world. But with a message as penetrating now, it is now. With all that cultural baggage that marijuana is loaded down with finally, the real message is coming through and people are exactly like you say, beginning to wake up to it and compare to all the other recreational drugs that we accept. This one is benign and beneficial. I've said that I think that in the future when people look back on this age where people are being arrested and imprisoned for marijuana, they're going to look back at the same way they used to look at killing witches. Exactly. It's really that ridiculous. It's such a black mark on our silly society. Yeah. And just an indication of how disconnected we are. This concept of a drug-free society, as you say, is totally absurd because we're made of drugs. In fact, we are drugs. And our brains run on neurotransmitters and whether they're endogenously produced. And we know, for example, that DMT is an endogenous neurotransmitter. And that's a whole fascinating area of neuroscience now. Potential functions for DMT. You know, are being found. We know it's been there for a long time. We've known it's endogenous, but it's not been so clear what the hell it's doing in there. Now we're beginning to get some indications that it really does have a function. For example, in places that you wouldn't expect, modulated in the immune system, for example, all this stuff is emerging. So, you know, I mean, by any measure, these internal chemicals are drugs. They just happen to be drugs that we make ourselves. We don't buy them from the local pot dealer or whatever. So the perceptions are changing, I think. Yeah, I agree. I think, again, I attribute the internet. And some of the work that Rick Strassman has done has been pretty fascinating as well. And the most recent work showing that DMT is actually produced in the pineal gland of live rats. Which was always, for whatever reason, even though everyone knew DMT was an endogenous neurotransmitter, and that human beings absolutely produced it in the liver and the lungs and different parts of the body. The pineal gland has always been ultimately incredibly fast any, because it literally is that third eye, the seat of the soul. Right. And there was so much resistance to that idea that this mystical chemical is actually produced by the third eye. And I saw online, like, all this battling back and forth of, you know, well, it's only anecdotal evidence that it's produced by now there's actual physical evidence. Now there's actual evidence. We know it's there. We know it had to be there. All the enzymes to make it, all the precursors to make it were there, but nobody had actually nailed it down. Now they've nailed it down. So that's progress. That's a step. But that's the resistance to the idea was very fascinating to me. Why would anybody care whether or not it was produced? The body makes it, for sure. Why is it such an issue that the pineal gland makes it? It is. It is. Because that sort of opens up the door to Eastern mysticism, to all that traditional religious art that showed the glowing third eye. And, you know, all these peaceful and lighten beings with lit third eyes. Like all of that is like, oh, well, they probably knew something. Like, oh, there's something to it. They did though a second to it. Yeah. Well, they knew quite a bit, right? The other thing is the Egyptian artwork that so clearly resembles the pineal gland and the actual cross section of the human brain. And there's so much of that in ancient civilizations in ancient cultures. It just makes you really try to piece together. Like when did we lose all this? Like what have we figured that out? When did all that sort of slip away? I think it's lost. I mean, obviously it's not lost. Right. But it's not just discovering it. It was just, it was esoteric. You know, it was esoteric knowledge for a long time. Now it's becoming less esoteric. More people are becoming aware of what the ancients knew, what the visionaries of the mystics always knew. This is no longer hidden knowledge. You know, it's becoming more accessible. And that's partly the effect of the internet. And partly the effect of a lot of very smart people obsessing over this. And sharing what they're finding out. So again, this is I think part of the general raising of consciousness in this area that's going on now. Amber Lyon, who's a, she was a reporter for CNN and sort of lost her faith in mainstream news when she did a piece on Bahrain. And it got redacted and edited and turned into like a tourist piece. And she, you know, she left CNN. It was this huge thing. She was really like trying to figure out what to do with her life. And I suggested psychedelic drugs. So she goes down to Peru, takes like just jumps on a plane, like literally grabs what, what close she had in her car. Jump on a plane, goes to Peru, takes seven long ayahuasca trips. Completely changes her life. Goes on a year round journey, year long journey to discover various psychedelic medicines and different indigenous cultures. Goes to Thailand and does mushrooms, goes to Mexico. Just does all that now she's writing or making this website called reset.me. She's dedicated her life to psychedelics within one year. One crazy transformative trip. And it's people like her and people like you and people like you that are, they're putting this information out. That's starting this sort of like undeniable tide. This shifting. Yes. Undeniable shifting. Right. Right. psychedelics and neurotransmitters aside because people expect something big when they take these things and people are rightly a little apprehensive. I mean, it will change your life if you take these plans. But if you want to have a transformative experience with plants and your leery of psychedelics, try going on an all plant-based diet for a little while. Change your intestinal bacteria in a way. You'll have this sense of levity, lightness. It will change the way you think about yourself. Not as quickly as a psychedelic plant experience. And it takes discipline or try a fast. There are ways to have these transformative experiences without drugs, without plants. Just doing transformative experience that I've ever experienced from dealing with people that have gone on a completely transforming their life in a completely plant-based diet is they can never shut the fuck up about the fact they're on a plant-based diet. Well, you have to go out to you with a hand with a right. You can't go out to the rest of the restaurant. It's a hard lifestyle to maintain. Yeah. And in light of the new information that's been discovered over the past decade or so. About the intelligence of plants, about plant's ability to calculate their ability to recognize, perhaps even a memory, their ability to recognize dangers, their ability to adapt. There's a consciousness in plants that is undeniable and I think very misunderstood or non-understood. That's not working. But we're ignorant to it. And that's one of the problems that I have with people that push the plant-based diet. I don't think life eats life and I think it always has. And I think you can get to the very bottom of the karma chain where you're fungi and you're living off of poop and basically things that things have thrown away. Or you can be a tiger. And they're all beautiful. The whole system is crazy and beautiful. And the only reason why we exist at all is that a fucking star had a die. I mean, the whole thing is death. But we're so obsessed with this idea of eating only plants or eating, being on a plant-based diet connects you more to nature. I've become a hunter over the last year and a half and I couldn't disagree more. And one of the reasons being is that hunting is a very psychedelic experience. In a weird way that I never would have believed. The first time I ever went deer hunting and shot a deer and then wound up eating it, there's a weird connection that you have with nature and with that animal when you do that. Especially if you do it in what's termed a fair chase environment. You go out into the actual woods. You deal with an animal, most likely that animal right there. Never even seen a human being before I shot it. And then we're eating it that deer head right there. Not the alien, but not the alien. Not the alien. He's hunting you. But I think that there's life in everything. And there's most likely some form of a consciousness in all life. And I think brains are overrated. You know, nervous systems are overrated in a certain sense. You can say, well, how can a plant be intelligent? It doesn't have a nervous system. It doesn't have a brain. But it clearly displays intelligence. And in fact, speaking of that and speaking of your hunting experience, you know the author, Michael Pollan, right? He had a great essay in I think the New Yorker recently about plant intelligence. That if you haven't read it, it's worth reading. But I also love his chapter in Omnivores dilemma, which is which is subtitle, The Natural History of Four Meals. And one of the meals is a meat meal where he wants to create a meal, but he wants to do it. He wants to put himself in the shoes of a hunter gatherer. So he wants to gather all wild foods, plant foods, obviously mushrooms, pine nuts, and this sort of thing. But he also wants to hunt down a bore, I think it was, and kill it and strip it, skin it, cut it up and eat it, and have that experience. And I think that what you say is totally legitimate. If you're going to eat meat, it's important that people realize where that an animal died so that you could have that meal. And Native Americans and Indigenous people have always recognized this because they are up against it. So they'll always thank the animal for what they're kidding. And that's really important. And that's something that we should try to integrate into everything. Why not thank the plants to this thing? You know, thank everything. We wouldn't be here if we weren't sustained by this web of life. So why are we being so disrespectful to it? I mean, I guess that's the crux of the question. Well, we can't really feel what we're doing to this earth. And we have this diffusion of responsibility thing going on. You're meat in the grocery store wrapped in plastic. You know, if no notion where it actually came from. Yeah, I've made a commitment this year to live entirely off of game meat, of wild game, all wild too. Nothing that, you know, no penned in animals that you just wind up shooting. The ham that I was telling you guys about before the show of smoking ham, that's a pig I killed on this ranch to hone ranch. I mean, they actually have to have hunters come in because these are invasive species. These wild pigs and they will destroy everything. They deer fawns, they grounding, ground nesting birds, they eat their eggs. I mean, they're unbelievably devastating to the environments that they aren't naturally a part of. Right. So there's a role for us as stewards of the environment. These wild boars are, as you say, they're devastating ecosystems. I don't know in California, but Hawaii, this is their biggest problem. And it's destroying ecosystems in Hawaii. So there is a role for us to step in and say, well, you know, we're going to kind of exert some control here and control that population. Because they didn't originate in Hawaii. They're invasive species, as you say. Yeah, from Eurasia. They're going to feed for some regulation. Well, there's an issue right now in San Jose. San Jose, they've started to make their way into suburbs and they're destroying people's lawns. And, you know, they'll have a little package. Children do. They're doomed. They're gone. They're the, our thoughts when we talk about Native Americans, like almost immediately we think of the spiritual connection that Native Americans had to the land, the deep respect that they had for the animals that they killed in the fact that they would use every single piece of that animal. They'd use the hide to make a roof or clothes. They would use sinew for strings, for their bows and arrows. They literally used every part, tooth, bone, nail, flesh. They ate them. And they worship these animals. Yeah. And it was a deep respect. It was an inexorable part of the relationship to nature itself. Yeah. I really hear you on this. I grew up in the woods of Michigan. I was at a mile outside of a town of 150 people. And my uncle is a hunter and a taxidermist. But hunting for him is a spiritual quest and experience. And you feel the pain of the animal you kill and utilizing all aspects of it. I'm not, I'm not opposed to eating meat by any means. I'm just saying that an all plant diet when, when you do it properly can transform consciousness. It's a, it's a strange thing. But going on an all meat diet and eating that conscious, conscious eating can change consciousness. Conscious eating is a funny thing, right? Conscious everything. Everything is a design of institutions, of, of the internet, of our experiences. Yeah. And other people. What you were talking about earlier about brains being overrated, one of the things that I've really, it's been inescapable for me over the last few years or so is this idea that we've been in an a way that we are the caterpillars that are giving birth to the moth. And that our whole screwy system and our whole, you know, our issues with ego problems and materialism might be because we're just sort of a transitionary stage to this symbiotic relationship that we have with technology. And then we're going to give birth to some artificial thing that doesn't carry the burdens of natural selection. And carry the burdens of primitive instincts that the need to survive all these animal reward systems that are built into us from the time that we were monkeys. Perhaps it doesn't sound like a very nice existence. Doesn't sound like a nice existence. I'll take the human animal. But I'm not sure about that. This is why I bounce it around because I don't know if it's better. I mean, the idea is that, well, if I'm not a person, well, I'm fucked. Is that the ego hanging onto that? I mean, is it? It is some sort of hyper intelligent artificial life that's capable of living completely, a completely self-sustaining existence where you're totally solar powered, all garbage or any waste product whatsoever. It's factored immediately into the equation instead of put off like nuclear waste where they just dig a fucking hole. And, oh, we'll figure that out later. I mean, that's madness to me. The nuclear waste issue is one of the most maddening and insane issues ever where they take these things, they build holes and then they put it in there and then they seal it up. Like, what are you little, little kid? Like, are you fucking crazy? That's like what a little kid would do. When they have to clean the room, they lift up the carpet, they sweep it under, they put the carpet down. It's a childish way of approaching an issue. Instead of having a completely holistic approach to this thing, like, okay, are we going to build this stuff? If we are going to build this stuff, what are we going to do about the toxic waste? Okay, let's factor that in before we move forward and then spend an extra few decades trying to figure out what to do with that shit and then maybe come up with a solution before you ever move forward. But we don't do that. We have this weird thing that we just sort of put it off and it's true. Child companies have quarterly reporting requirements. If we just change the financial reporting structure. I wonder if that's one year or a five year instead of this short term thinking, well, solar panels are different. This is what has to be. This is what has to be factored into corporate planning, as you say, because the corporations have gotten a free ride for too long because they never pay the environmental consequences of what they do. And we have to change that where they have to be held accountable and responsible for the environmental impact. It's not just that you pay $200 for an iPhone. You pay $200 for an iPhone, but it costs $2,000 to deal with the environmental impact of people that are getting cancer from the toxic waste. That economic equation has got to change. And that's one of the biggest challenges because it's a huge challenge to capitalism. It's laying down the government and say, look, guys, okay, you can make money. But let's look at the bottom line in the realistic way. You're making all this profit. But what are you costing the taxpayers and the rest of society for your profit making activities? And what about a little payback here? How about some way to compensate for the damage that corporations do? And that's the biggest threat that I can see right now. The corporations want to own everything they want to corporatize everything. And nature is just another commodity as they see it to be owned and exploited. That's the perception that's got to change. And maybe one way to do it is to, you know, I think speaking of hearts and minds, I think if you can get, you know, there are ethical capitalists out there. Yes. And chances are they're partly ethical because they took psychedelics at some point. I'm sure Steve Jobs and people like that, you know, and we can name others. So, you know, psychedelics are teaching tools to help people kind of understand their place, their responsibilities. And, you know, we have to, again, that's part of this, it's not that we can't innovate. We just have to be realistic about the impact that our actions are having. We also have this issue with corporations having survival instincts and corporations, this unlimited growth paradigm, this is impossible. And you're like, what we're talking about with laptops. Can we just stop right here? No, we can't. It's impossible. And we also can't stop as far as profit. Well, we made this much this quarter and this quarter we showed a 25% growth. Excellent. Let's keep moving on. By 2075, we should have all the money in the world. I mean, that's really what every corporation and isn't this what's happening? Yes, it is. It's madness, right? You've got what is it? 95% of the wealth concentrated in the 1%? Right. And the rest of us are, you know, the rest of us is quickly devolving into a third world situation. And that is economic slavery in a sense. I mean, people do what they have to do because they don't have a choice. They're, you know, their economic activity, their priorities are dictated by corporations. So this idea that profit is the only thing that a corporation should be concerned with. We've got to evolve beyond that. Sustainability is more important. Helping people's lives be better is more important than profits. I mean, sure, profits. But that should be down several notches, I think, on the totem pole in terms of what they identify as important. I think it should be like food. I think profit should be like food in that you can't eat poison and that if you're eating something and look, we have all these calories. Yeah, yeah, yeah, but it's fucking killing you. Do you understand that you can't eat this? This is bad for you. Like don't eat this, but it's got a thousand calories. And I need calories to it. No, no, no, you don't need those calories. That's poison. And essentially the idea of profit is profit overall. And profit over humanity, you know, the idea of financial, financial gain over human suffering, like that somehow or another it balances out is just like eating poison. I mean, it really is. There should be no profit at all when there's human suffering. It should be one of those things with it's factored in, oh, we can't eat this. It's poison for humanity. Right. So the corporation in the US if it does not maximize profit can be sued by its shareholders. That's the law. They have a legal responsibility to maximize profit. That's so crazy. And so we have to change the laws that shareholders will. And tell the shareholders start demanding that they actually act responsibly. So that's I don't know how that works. But you know, if the shareholders achieve a higher level of consciousness, maybe they can influence the way the corporation. There was a NASA funded study looking at collapse of civilizations. And one of the major factors is the discrepancy in wealth that the wealthy people are using up the resources and they're insulated from the effects. And then it gets to a point where the people making decisions haven't been thinking about the consequences and the alternatives. And, you know, it's something's got to change. Yeah, that was a fascinating and very terrifying report. Because this is not someone with any financial interest in relaying this message. This is not something that's selling a solution. They're just looking at all the data and going, look, if you just follow these trends, this is where it goes. And there's no indication whatsoever that it's going to slow down. This is where we're going. We have to figure this out before we hit this wall. When I was in undergrad, I was in business school until I took five grams of suicide and mushrooms that I grew in my dormitory closet at the urging of Terrence McKenna's books. The old, the most generic method, how to undermine civilization, one jar at a time. Or have they been a group, I think they should. I think they're a radical. Right. But I realized that I was fighting a losing battle if I wasn't speaking the same language of making some problems. Or I could aim a group, I would say, I'm a jratical, but I realized that I was fighting a losing battle if I wasn't speaking the same language of making some profit of appealing to people's business interests. It was a long process I wanted to get out of this culture and ended up in China teaching English and I've spent most of the last 10 years in China. I'm like a third Chinese now. Really? And I became comfortable, you know, analyzing the situation I was in, meeting people on their level, because I can't, one thing being in China teaches you is to be constructive with people, to come at an issue from how they're thinking about it. So I begin- Why is that? Why is that? Why is that? People don't want to lose face. So it's a top-down culture. So you understand the priorities of a leader and they have some enlightened interests. They have their self-interest as well and you appeal to their better image of themselves. What's possible, a win-win situation where- So I think of myself now as a kind of economic therapist. I talked to corporations, I talked to NGOs, the campaigning organizations, and I try to help people find a balance. What is- What are the win-win situations? So the last six years I've been working with the global sustainability standards like the Forest Stewardship Council and the Marine Stewardship Council and the ESC is modeled on these organizations that you talk with enough stakeholders and you build consensus through dialogue and you have a transparent process that appeals to companies, appeals to regulators. So take McDonald's for example. They realized that they were catching too much fish from the ocean and it wasn't sustainable. So they now all McDonald's fish sandwiches are Marine Stewardship Council certified which means they can sell Mcfish sandwiches into eternity as long as the oceans are viable for life or Kimberly Clark was cutting down the rainforests and cutting down the arboreal forest in Canada. Now all of their paper products are going to be FSC certified. FSC certifies 15% of the standing forest of the world which means that people have a fair share. This notion is there is- This stewardship I think is really important. It's an important word. It's got to be reintroduced into corporate thinking and corporate planning as opposed to profits. I mean we all have a stake in survival. Not everybody has a stake in profits. The shareholders have a stake in profits but there's no profits if you know we don't survive if this whole shooting match collapses. So the concept of stewardship and I think that is really important to get that message out and that's what people like Josh are trying to do. And I think psychedelics have a role to play absolutely in educating. I mean it's interesting you know we can't- It's going to be a while I think before ayahuasca gets integrated in this country in a way for example in therapy and in biomedicine it's not going to happen but what you do see happening are these centers that are growing up and right now it's in South America Josh and the botanical stewardship counselor trying to develop standards for these organizations so that you know they're committed to a certain ethical set of standards safety and quality of their of their brew and so on but I can envision a time not too far in the future where if a person you know you can go to South America and if you have issues if you have sickness addiction or whatever you can get treatment but even more importantly you can just get an education you can just get you can go there for purposes of spiritual discovery and self discovery and all that. Once you have that infrastructure which is growing then it partly becomes you know we need to get people in positions of power corporate CEOs other government leaders and so on to go and have these experiences. That's the big one right? Yeah I mean you can't hold them in a headlock and force them to drink ayahuasca although I'd like to a lot of times. They're catalysts for creativity. They're take your marketing team to South America and have a ceremony together and rebrand your company exact and crease your profits in the process and the benefits to people. That's where the economic that's where the business model comes in. People have a negative reaction to that and I know this personally firsthand because I have a business on it on it.com is a company we sell exercise equipment and supplements and healthy foods and one of the ways that on it was created my partner Aubrey and I talking about it and Aubrey going to South America doing ayahuasca and then having these visions about his business. And when he talked about that he was met with so much criticism. So many people were like oh you're down there doing ayahuasca thinking about your business. Oh that's so gross. Oh that's so base. That's so egocentric. That's so anti you know the message of the plant but it's it's creativity and creativity it manifests itself in a million different ways. And the idea of business equals evil really has to get we have to get past that. We all exchange you know it's not evil if some guy could fix your car it's not evil if someone can fix your your your refrigerators so you can store food. All those things are businesses that people will be by fair trade coffees. Yes. Promotes biodiversity and farmers can send their kids to school. Exactly. So it is it's win-win. It's possible to develop these economic models and I totally disagree with your your partner's critics. Your partner is exactly right on. And it's okay with his background. I assume it's a he goes to South America and he already has the mindset right. And then ayahuasca is a way to sort of flesh out the vision if you were. I mean he went there to learn something and boy to de-learn something. Well he clearly he went through a bunch of other things about his life. Well you've got to get the personal shit cleared the way. First. You've got to open up that my old bullshit. Hit over the head. That anyone of us here has dumb back completely. I mean it's a morning process. No no doubt about it. You know I got a tank session scheduled for tonight. He's going to work out. The the word ethical company or the expression ethical company I think is is a big one. And I think that this this idea of the psychedelic experience for those who have an experience in or for those who oh I dropped acid in college but I'm past that now I've got a 401k in a mortgage and college you know bills for my kids and I have a lot of things to come. You never asked it. Yeah but that's an excuse for not wanting to confront it. That's just that's just self-delusion really. Nobody has ever passed. No no one ever's ever. If you're a human being and you have I mean you're a constant sort of soup of chemicals, neurotransmitters, adrenaline, hormones all these different things are going on. You're trying to maintain balances and keep everything aligned and then keep the pattern of thought in a good place that maintains everything as well. I think that to these people that are perpetrating a lot of the issues that we have whether it's the head of BP or you know it takes some guy who wants to frack you know and say before you do that do this first you know and then let's talk you know like confronted with your own mortality. It should almost be mandatory. I mean you should show that you but when before you start fracking you should show that you have a degree that you understand the actual physical process of removing these chemicals you should understand you know whatever energy extraction degrees you have to have and whatever sciences that pertain to that but you should also have psychedelic trips on your belt. Like you'd say well you know here I see your documentation you've gone through your five grams and what did you get out of that you know you know what I mean like it should be one of those things where it's reviewed like okay you haven't mm-hmm and okay what you've got to take that off yeah before you proceed yeah we mean it should be like a presidential council for psychological fitness and they sit you down they go you don't have any psychedelic experiences on your resume. What are you doing opening up a fucking company that digs holes in the ground you don't have any psychedelic experiences that's a recipe for disaster so you're missing a key component you're you're missing this connection to the mother earth via some unfathomable experience that literally is impossible to describe. So you're missing that part so go get that and then come back and then we'll talk about your business. Yes or people in the department of defense or the veterans. Yes that are dealing with all these soldiers with PTSD. Another important aspect of the symposia conference is a new organization called VET. It's veterans for nthiogenic therapy. Oh that's great. The founders participated in the maps PTSD study with MDMA and they came away failing so much better and they want to open this up to other veterans and others suffering from PTSD so a portion of the proceeds from the Amherst conference in the live that the online live participation will go to this organization and to the ESC. That spectacular. I'm a huge huge fan of maps. I've been Rick Doblin on the podcast before who's a just a fantastic guy and he they just tweeted me something and I retweeted it about they did a new study on autism adult autism MDMA assisted therapy for social anxiety and autistic adults and some amazing dinner with Charlie Grob working with he working on that. He's Charlie Grob who's at UCLA he's one of our hefter superstars if you will. Yeah he's name so we can get him on the podcast. He's an OB Charles Grob he's at Harbor UCLA he's done a he's done a psilocybin end of life study he's a member of the hefter board I may as well plug hefter here where the sort small organization that nobody knows about hefter.org for a cow no no F E H E F F T E R not the hefter but hefter and it's a non-profit and basically we're committed to clinical developing clinical protocols with with psychedelics and have kind of staked out psilocybin in some ways in the same way that MDMA is maps his thing psilocybin is our thing and we've got several really interesting protocols FDA approved clinical studies right now for end of life existential anxiety at the end of life for exploring actually what you might call experimental mysticism because psilocybin can reliably reduce mystical states roll a griffous work at Johns Hopkins has shown this so it's an actual tool for the first time we're actually able to approach transcendent states of mind in a controlled clinical setting we can reliably induce these states and then study what what's the brain doing when when you're in a state of psilocybin induced mysticism well it's doing a lot of things similar to the state of a mystical experience when you it's on the natch or whatever I'm not sure that even but anyway hefter dot org most of the leading researchers in psychedelic science right now are either on our board or being funded by hefter and so we have funding and we're focusing on psilocybin we work closely with maps but maps gets all the attention which is fine they're doing beautiful work but we're also doing effective important well we'll certainly get some people to you um hefter hfft er dot org dot org yeah named after Arthur hefter actually who's the he was a 19th century scientist the first person to isolate masculine in a pure form from peyote and demonstrate that it was the main ingredient of peyote based on self-experiment son he was kind of exemplifies what we like to identify with you know good science driven by curiosity and ethics and uh yeah it's a good organization this psilocybin connection to dimethyl trip demean dimethyl trip demean being in a dodginess chemical and neurotransmitter and psilocybin being very close very close what what is the exact like what's the chemical what's the okay very simple dimethyl trip demean is simply dimethyl trip demean uh psilicin which is an active principle of psilocybin psilocybin is converted to psilicin in the body so it's what pharmacologist call a pro drug it's converted by a very simple chemical reaction to psilicin that's the one that actually interacts with the receptors so psilicin is chemically four hydroxy dimethyl trip demean so it differs with one trivial substitution on the endol ring that oxygen that alcohol group at the top of the endol ring is what makes it psilicin and not DMT but it makes all the difference pharmacologically because psilicin is orally active and it doesn't require an MAL inhibitor and and DMT does if you need that's the ayahuasca secret you know DMT plus MAL inhibitor makes the orally active preparation by itself DMT is not orally active so you have to take it potentially by smoking it or indigenous people make snuff out of it and so on they get get around that whole detoxification mechanism your gut is full of is full of MAL monitoring an oxidase and the reason it's full of monomeran oxidase it's a consequence of our evolution is omnivores because plants are full of amines most of them are toxic and you don't want those you got the so you have the detoxification mechanism but that also works for DMT and for that matter we can't be dining on DMT containing plants all the time and wandering around I mean you do need to be able to function in the world yeah um you your brother had a fascinating idea about the idea of panspermia in relationship to psilocybin that psilocybin being the how did it what is the exact nomenclature again for a high four hydroxy thor hydroxyptide methyltroptamine that psilocybin I don't want to get bogged down in chemistry but psilocybin for the chemists among you it's got a phosphoro group and that phosphoro group is cleaved off and that yield psilocybin psilocybin is for hydroxy dimethyltroptamine and psilocybin is for phosphoro dimethyltroptamine so it's got that phosphoro group that makes it stable right so that's the form it's stored in in the mushroom and it can be quite stable for a long time as soon as you convert it to psilocybin it's very unstable and it's a femoral which is one reason why it's so easily metabolized by human metabolism it's very compatible with human metabolism which is a reason why it's so you know it's appropriate you can give it to people who are quite ill you know in terminal states and so on they can tolerate it's it's not a it goes through human organism like ice water it's very easily handled you know but we don't want to get too down the road no it's absolutely fascinating but yeah the idea that your brother was promoting was that this may have come from another planet and that what you might be eating when you're eating mushrooms is you're eating some sort of an intelligence which is the weirdest thing about mushrooms is that it feels like they're talking you certainly do have that impression yeah this I thou dynamic that set up and the content which I guess not everybody has this you know this this feeling of this science fictionish cast to the experience but many people do and they they're not all Terrence McKenna fans I mean if you if you follow the Terrence McKenna recipe and eat five grams in the absolute darkness you'll be utterly convinced that they've landed you know I mean they're here yeah and whether that's just an impression or whether it's you know some again I think this is possibly something you know built into the the structure of our nervous system you know and it may be I mean we've always had this this fascination with with space with you know with with the external you know with the ex that this sort of longing to maybe return to space maybe that's where we came from I don't know you know but certainly in this in this evolutionary process of cognition you know which we credit the plants for if we want to buy into that idea we credit the plants for bringing about cognition the ability to wonder the ability to speculate well we you can't wonder very much if you're looking down at the ground all the time you got to look up and when you look up you oh you know there's this whole universe out here and what's our connection to that you know we we've always had this intuition that there is a connection I mean I don't go so far as to say you know people ridicule the idea that mushrooms might have come from outer space and so on and on a surface it seems like a ridiculous idea but you look a little deeper and maybe not so much you know that's certainly possible that spores are one of the hardest substances in nature and they can survive for they can survive in the heart vacuum and radiation dense environments and they're not affected by it the other thing that your brother had mentioned was that it was so different than other life forms on earth because of its chemical makeup that he thought that the four hydroxy or four phosphory? Yeah the four hydroxy four phosphoryl biosynthetic pathway is really only found in this group of mushrooms you know actually and related species he wasn't he wasn't about chemists I don't know if I agree with that I mean mushrooms are so completely a part of you know earthly evolution that you can't really say that they stand outside of it I mean we know that's true I think if you want to make that hypothesis you have to go further back and you have to say well you know maybe a super civilization seeded our ecology at some point not with the genes to make uh silicine but the genes to make tryptophan and now tryptophan all these silicine and serotonin and all these tryptamines come from tryptophan and tryptophan is one of those 20 amino acids that uh make up proteins so tryptophan is universally found in all organisms it's you know it's an essential uh molecule of life right it's found in everything but two trivial steps away from tryptophan two trivial enzymatic modifications away from tryptophan you've got DMT you know you remove the carboxyl group you stick a couple methyl groups on tryptophan and there you are you've got DMT and I've often thought wow maybe this is a sort of sub-text sub-message of nature saying just around the corner right just around the corner uh from tryptophan is uh this this compound that opens the door to other dimensions pay attention monkeys. This is also fascinating the tryptophan converts to it eventually converts to serotonin that is serotonin is just another tryptamine in fact chemically serotonin is five hydroxy tryptamine. Silicine is four hydroxy dimethyl tryptamine blue-fotenine another one of these hallucinogens is five hydroxy dimethyl tryptamine so they're all you know very close to each other you see the diagrams I'm oh hell there you are and there you go right so you can see how how it works and uh the idea that mushrooms come from outer space seems ridiculous to some folks but the reality is we we're made out of stars we are made out of stars. Everything comes from outer space and I think that as we get further along in our understanding of the universe I think we're going to realize that everything is kind of fractal and there really is no separation between this planet and other planets and the whole thing is just one big soup right right exactly and you know any prebiotic environment I mean we don't know that much about exactly how life evolved but we we know that in certain situations you've got a buildup of organic compounds and under the right circumstances it just seems to be a property of matter you know atoms molecules fall together in such a way that before you know it you've got living systems you've brought this up twice and I can't ignore it because you brought up in the last podcast as well you you are fascinated by the idea of life being seeded here by some intelligent forest. Amber Lyon who I just discussed earlier she had a vision of that actually happening on ayahuasca and many other people have as well. Do you think that that's something that is a real possibility? Yes I do. Wow that's a heavy one when you bring that one up you get thrown into that certain category right away oh Dennis McKenna's fucking crazy. You got to read my book we actually in my book I mean which one? My book oh the latest one the only latest one I wrote the brotherhood of the screaming abyss. Oh that's the one you promoted last time you're on here which is excellent. Which thank you for that. That was really good. If you haven't bought it please folks go buy it. You really gave it a boost but I actually talk about that I talk about this in some length about this idea could this really be and I'm trying to you know discuss it from the standpoint of a critic of the idea say well that's totally ridiculous you know how could that be and they just dismiss it. I try to go a little deeper into it and say well wait a minute let's step back from this a little bit and if you think about our existential situation how unlikely it is that we are even here that consciousness exists that this civilization exists. I mean you know in the in the from the standpoint of the improbables we're living in a very improbable situation you know if we you know I don't think this is going on I think that life is probably widespread in the universe but I think intelligence is rare and the fact that we find ourselves in that existential situation you know maybe we need to take another look at this and say well maybe this is not such a crazy idea you know that I mean I do think that intelligence you know is we're not the only ones and I think you know and I don't know if I've degenerated into incoherence here but I think that intelligence can have an influence on the evolution of even the universe you know it's a force in the universe and I think that mind is probably you know as primary a feature of reality is as the quantum foam I mean it may not it may not even be separate from it you know so it's okay to say we don't know and you know one of the problems with science is it tends to be arrogant it tends to assume that it knows a lot more than it knows and we actually have we have a very detailed understanding scientifically of very small pieces of reality you know and so there's a tendency to say well we've got it all figured out no you haven't got it figured out you haven't got even a tenth of it figured out which is another useful message that ayahuasca and other in the agenda other psychedelics remind us of you know I mean ayahuasca never fails to remind me and a lot of people remember you don't owe shit you know you don't know shit you know so get off your high horse and be a little more humble and be open to to learning and it's all right in front of us if we go back and look at what we know about human history and what they knew and how we laugh at what they knew then right you know we would go back to the time when they thought the world was flat back to the time where you know they were killing Bruno because he thought that the universe was infinite back to that I mean there's all these different things that people like had a consensus on there were absolutely incorrect that we go all back then we were foolish that was a blink of an eye right and so the message is beware of what everybody knows beware of cultural consensus because chances are in a hundred years what we thought we knew will just be seen in that light I mean we were so stupid back there yeah it's also one of those things too when you're discussing aliens and you're discussing the possibility of an alien life form we want to think it's preposterous but we're preposterous if we if we didn't exist actually oh my god we have to be most ridiculous thing ever right behind me are preposterous behind me dead people that were locked in a cage and I honor them right we're ridiculous look at the photos behind me of Jimmy and drinks and the Elvis actually apparently wasn't really a mug shot he was just a law enforcement nut wanted to get his picture which is even more ridiculous he loved the fact that people got locked into cages so he wanted to get a fake picture of him locked in cages most likely was highest fuck on pills next to you to be a drug and yes exactly and then this woman rose apart she got arrested because she had too much melanin her skin to sit in a certain spot on a moving piece of transportation and then she was celebrated as a hero I mean we're fucking crazy yeah yeah totally what just the fact that we exist at all why would we deny the idea that something else far more advanced than us exists somewhere else no no different than us looking at you know when we find primates using tools you know evidence of using tools without any human intervention like they just figured out how to do it on their own like to get ants out of anhills and things like that we're fascinated by amazing look what we've discovered Jesus Christ it's easy shit you know like compare us to something else they would probably look at us the same way look at these dummies they're they're worshipping people that were locked in cages you know they're right right you're a hero because you're sitting in different spots that's the thing we're yeah we're observing experiment of some sort and whether you know we're you know some civilizations some super civilization has genetically engineered this whole ecosystem and created trip to fan and then seeded it into the ecosystem knowing that over the course of evolutionary time it was going to develop things like psilocybin and serotonin it's almost as though the civilization this hypothetical civilization wanted somebody to talk to and in order to do that it had to invent us primates you know and it had to get us talking first to our plants and maybe eventually we'll get a chance to talk up to and in order to do that, it had to invent us primates. You know, and it had to get us talking first to our plants and maybe eventually we'll get a chance to talk to them, whoever they are. You know, or maybe they're already here. I mean, there are a lot of people who say, they're already here, you know, and I, yeah, I don't know who knows. The other problem is there's so many people that are full of shit. Well, that's, this is the area where flakiness is flourishes. Yeah, it's a huge league. I had this sci-fi show and we stopped doing it for, and they wanted to keep doing it. I didn't want to do it anymore because I got tired of talking to liars. I couldn't handle it anymore. We interviewed Bigfoot people and UFO people and some of them were well-intentioned folks, but there was a lot of liars. There was a lot of people that were just, there was a psychological issue and I could clearly see it because when you have a podcast with someone and you sit down with someone for three hours, you can bullshit someone for a seven minute interview on a news show, but you can't bullshit someone for three hours. After three hours, weird things start to show up. Like weird patterns or what you just, you can't keep the, can't keep the rhythm up. So to speak, especially if you could do multiple podcasts like, oh, crack you after two or three. I'll find you. You might be very clever, but after two or three, little things get exposed. like, hmm, screw in my weed voice, reveal the basis of your, your, your, your passion. The, the, keep the rhythm going, you know, it's just, after a while, if you're full of shit, your full of shit also to yourself. And that's something that I found is that people that are constantly deceptive, they're also internally deceptive. And that, that manifests itself in, in weird things that they say that they don't even realize or bizarre because they, they're also easier to trick themselves, I think. And because I think they lose their ability to, really, to see things objectively. I like, false, falseifiable facts. Yeah. Things that you can prove that that's true or not. The scientific method is important. And all this theoretical conversation is nice about whether we had, we have the imprints of other civilizations in our, our ecosystem. But the fact is we have an ecosystem and we have, maybe we delude ourselves that we have some control over its, its evolution or stewardship of it. But we certainly have this opportunity to, to either destroy the planet or, or preserve it. Well, we certainly have an effect and we're certainly conscious in some way, shape or form of that effect. And when you extrapolate that to a hundred thousand a million years from now, if this civilization or something similar survives, but you got to think that it's going to be something like an alien invasion. We, we, we really will be like that thing that wants to see the universe. If we recognize that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Especially if we, I mean, if you're an intelligent being and you recognize that a star is a finite, we, a star is only good to support life for another billion years. Right. That's not a lot of time. If you really stop and think about how long time has existed on earth. And if you were an intelligent species that lived a hundred million years from now and you're like, Hey, you know, we only have nine more of these to go. have nine more of these 100 million cycles. And then we're fucked. Then the sun burns out and there's no life here. We got to get moving. You know, that's an interesting stuff here. Yeah, that's, that's very interesting. I've often thought that, you know, these cosmological models, I think we got more than a billion years. The cosmological models say 10 to a hundred billion years, maybe a trillion years. I don't think of life on with the sun. I think that that there's. Well, the sun. Yeah, the sun doesn't have so much. Our planet, it's got port lines. It's got maybe four billion years. But if we haven't figured out how to get out by that time, where we're not paying attention, you know, we're getting these cosmological. Yeah, we're getting in exactly or get in. That's a very important point that, you know, I mean, as I've been told on psychedelics many times, the only way out is to go in. Yeah. Yeah. But, but this, you know, these cosmological models, if you look at them, which are kind of of very depressing when you think about it, you know, it's just now the current model is just endless expansion and not only expansion, but accelerating expansion. You're talking about the heat death of the universe and, you know, not very much interesting is going to happen. But the key factor that these models do not, do not integrate into their planet is mind and consciousness, you know, and that makes all the difference. And so, you know, if you look far enough ahead, that's going to affect the way the cosmo see falls. And, you know, and they don't take that into account and it's impossible to really know what the effect somebody is. But I don't buy the fact that it's all going to just kind of peter out and finally, the last flicker is going to go out and it's just darkness and cold. I don't buy that. I mean, surely there's got to be more to it than that. So the inward trip might be what we're missing. And the inward trip may be exactly. I mean, if you look at quantum models and we know there's, you know, three dimensions of space and one of time, but then there's the, what is it, the six or eight other dimensions that are all folded in and you don't see that, but what's in there? Right. What's in there? That's the feeling that you get on dimethylchiptimine is that you've entered into a new area, a new space and that the space is somehow another inhabited with something that's communicating in some nonverbal form that reaches you as intent. It reaches you like intent. And that that might be where consciousness is headed once we free ourselves from this sort of carbon based shell that we're, we're, we're clinging to that we might figure that out. And like, oh, we were at a rest stop. We didn't realize that we could drive just a couple miles down the road and there's the fucking Yellowstone National Park. Like we got to the rest stop. We thought that was where we were going. Yeah, we're just eating shitty food and breathing trucker farts and we thought that's all there was. Oh my God. We just had to just figure it out. Yeah. I don't, I don't dismiss that possibility. I mean, this, this eye thou relationship and that we say that again, eye thou, this thing that mushrooms, other psychedelics, but especially mushrooms seem to set up this dialogue situation, you know, when you're getting this information, but it's very hard to evaluate whether it's whether it's bullshit or whether there's something to it. My brother used to play games with the mushrooms, you know, when he would take them them at these high doses alone and say, well, how do I know that what you're telling me is real? Tell me something I cannot possibly know, you know, and they would never, they would never cough it up because it was like, you know, but it was like, all right, I want the blue prince to the starship now, you know, download the blue prince now and I believe that you're, you know, they are what you say you are. And they're very invasive. You know, they never give you that kind of thing, you know, but they, so, you know, I don't know. I have this thought on, and for people who have heard this podcast, unfortunately, I have to repeat myself. I have this idea that, you know, we have this dismissal of psychedelics experience as hallucination and hallucination being frivolous. And my thought is that if you absorb some sort of a psychedelic compound and have this intense moment where you do pass into another dimension and you meet with pure love and the very wiring of the universe is exposed to you and you get to see the fractal nature of reality and some incredibly profound form. And that is what you're actually experiencing. or if it's just your imagination and you go there and it's all in your mind, but you have the exact same experience, it's still the same. Like this idea that everything that's real has to be, you have to be able to take a tape measure and touch it that you have to be able to put it on a scale that you have to be able to quantify the ingredients. Oh, what's made out of aluminum and this is glass and, you know, the keyboard is plastic that now I know a laptop's real. So I'm here to tell you it's all hallucination. Right. I mean, we dwell in a hallucination. That's what the brain does. It creates a model of reality that we live in. We never experience reality. You know, I mean, we take it on faith really that there's an external reality out there, but everything comes to us through the filter and is processed and extruded, if you will, into a more or less comprehensible most of the time model of reality. And that's where we live. Reality is out there somewhere. It's unknowable, you know, but we're getting signals through this sensory neural interface and then the brain is basically a processing device that takes that information, combines it with internal associations and everything and generates the hallucination that you and I and everybody else are living in at this very moment. You know, we're all part of this constructed reality. So people dismiss it as, you know, psychedelic experiences hallucination, I would say no. It is, but it's just another hallucination and it's all hallucination. It's all or at least interpretation of something, personal interpretation. Yeah. I mean, the world physics, we know enough through physics about this supposedly external reality to know that it doesn't look anything like what we're experiencing. You know, it's all buzzing electrons, most of its empty space. This table is not solid. It's mostly empty space. It's all energy and energy fluxes. We don't experience it the world that way most of the time. Sometimes on psychedelics we do. Maybe we're getting an actual peak into the way it's really constructed. That, you know, we get to look at the circuit board and turn it over temporarily and look at it. Oh, this is how it's wired. You know, this is the reality generating machine that you get to look at when you strip away, you know, the when you take the cover off and look at the way it's the diagram as wired, then you get some insights into it. So then that's a useful thing because then you can go back and you can say, well, none of this is real. Let's not get carried away that, you know, this is any more real than anything else. Yeah, that seems to be like the information that's coming from folks that study subatomic particles. That information is one of the most undeniable pieces of information that the universe is not what you think it is. It's not what you think it is. It's just it's impossible for it to be what you think it is when you study subatomic particles. When you study things that can exist in two places at the same time, like what are you talking about? Like how they blanking it out of existence? What does that mean? Well, they go away. What do you mean they go away? They go when they come back. What the fuck are you saying? They go away and they come back. Are they here? Are they not here? Well, they are and they're not. Well, they move? Yes, but they also stand still at the same time. Right. What? Like superposition. Like when someone I had doctor at Mikkel Swami's theoretical physicist, he tried to explain superposition to me and I was like, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute. It's moving and it's still at the same time. Right. Right. What are you talking about? Yeah. Like what does that mean? So here you have physics, you know, the absolute sort of cutting-edge science, the one that we've charged with explaining the fundamental nature of reality. And you talk to these people and it sounds like the raving some schizophrenia. That sounds like someone who's on drugs. Yeah, it does indeed. It sounds like someone who may have the mathematics and the measurements and all that to back it up and say, look, I'm sorry, this is how it is. Like our math and our instruments tell us if you want to trust that. It's like we sent a scout and the scout went over the top of the hill and saw the impossible and came back and looked like, okay. Yeah. I'm laughing. Yeah, don't go over there. It becomes a rainbow that talks to you. Right. Yeah. Yeah. That is fascinating because the explanations of reality by these physicists are in fact more bizarre than the experiences that are relayed by people who take ayahuasca. Absolutely. Those are way more believable than particles in superposition or the fact that it's all empty space moving in a vibration and what? What are you talking about? No, it's wood, man. What are you talking about? This is wood. Hear it? That's not, I hate you over the head. That shit's going to hurt. This is real. There's no empty space there, dude. You're crazy. But no, that is what it is. Yeah. Well, it's all real. Yes. You know, our experience, anything you experience, you can't dismiss it. You can't say it's not real. Right. It's just not necessarily the absolute reality and I don't know if there is an absolute reality. I agree with you and I think that's also one of the transformative parts of the psychedelic experience that the experience itself is transformative because you're experiencing it. Doesn't matter if it's not real. What does that mean? It means nothing. Nothing. Not real. These are dualistic delusions. It's not of its real. It's all real. So established, established fact that when you get to the lowest measurable portion of reality, when you get to subatomic particles, it's fucking magic. Okay. So we, let's go from there and then let's look at, well, it's all in your imagination. Well, let's look at what that means because everything you see on this planet that a human being has made has somehow rather popped out of the imagination. The imagination is a factory for televisions and the internet and airplanes and condoms and eyeglasses and laptops. I mean, the imagination is a motherfucker and we have this idea that the imagination is this frivolous thing. Oh, Billy just sits in the field and imagines what the world could be. How about you dig a ditch, Billy? How about your good work, Billy? Hammer some nails and be a man. Pull yourself up by your bootstraps and stop crying because you're freaking out about the fact that everything's air. Everything's particles and it's all, no, the whole thing. Or you sit in a field and you take LSD and your Steve Jobs and you have all these fantasies except then you actually make it happen and you create the Apple computer or whatever. And that was a psychedelic vision and was at the time and remained so. And this thing here, I mean, this is the little psychedelic toy of the future. It's in my hand that it exists. And you ask a question and it goes online and it gives you the answer to the entire volume of human understanding and that subject, the consensus. This is like we were just explaining what the chemical definition of a citizen is or the description of it. You can find that out like that. I had to go to you. You're an expert. You came to me with your education. You explained it to me. But anyone can do that with their phone. Yeah. Just tapped into the database. Right. Yeah. So that's some, that's a threshold we've crossed in the last decade or so where basically the sum total of human knowledge is right here. And that's incredible for transformation, for creative thinking, all of these things. That's something we've never had before. And the connectivity, the other thing is now there's seven billion people or something like that on the planet. Well, you know, I don't know what the statistics are, but four billion of them have cell phones. You know, so we've created, I mean, they don't all have smartphones, but they got some kind of a cell phone. And so they are tapped into this database and that's making a big difference in the way that, you know, formally disenfranchised populations interact. I mean, you know, you're a fish farmer and you have some fish to sell. You can go on your cell phone and say, oh, well, you know, if I go to this village here, I'll get a better price for that. A trivial thing, but in fact, that decision affects commerce on a global scale. If enough people are tapped into that anyway. Your brother was obsessed with December 21st, 2012 being some sort of a transformative moment in our history. And a lot of people were, me included. I guess we can put that one to rest. I guess we can, but can we? That's one of the things that I've been thinking about. Yes, as a specific day. But if you really look at like the tipping point of technology and our connectivity, and that's kind of where it's 2008 or 2012 when you're looking at it a thousand years from now when they talk about the Renaissance, you know, when they talk about, you know, whatever great periods of human history, you know, whatever very gigantic periods of change, this is going to be one of the biggest ever. And it really, really will boil down to these decades or these at least these few years. So his error, I thought, is I was kind of a critic of the time wave for exactly this. But for folks who don't know, explain what that means. Well, his idea that he created a mathematical model based on the eaching that he claimed described the structure of time. I mean, he'd postulated that time had the structure and time had an end or at least history had an end. And that that end was December 21, 2012. And there's, you know, linking just to the Mayan calendar, which supposedly said similar things. It was a mistake to link it to a particular day. I think that's not the way that novelty, the idea was that this wave described the way that novelty ingressed into the continuum. Well, I think that novelty ingresses in the continuum. I mean, every day there's something new under the sun. There's something that never happened before in the history of the universe. It happens. But it doesn't explode into the continuum. It more like it seeps into the continuum. But change does happen. And we are going through a period of tremendous change, but it's not linked to a particular day. So what I say is he was wrong as far as the particulars were concerned. It wasn't December 21, 2012. But he was totally right in terms of the idea that novelty does increase. And it has increased. And it's increasing. And it's accelerating. And all you have to do is look around, you know, and he was clearly right. I mean, if you look at where we are now, even from where we were 10 years ago and even 20 years, can any of us even remember what it was like 20 years ago? You know, I mean, the world is completely transformed. Yeah. So it was correct in that sense, you know, that things are changing. Well, maybe in just putting a date to it and giving people something to focus on, he made the idea more tangible for some. It made it more tangible. But I think it wasn't, I think it was not necessarily a good strategy because it, people were giving into the temptation of focusing on that date. And it was either on that date, either everything's going to collapse or will cross the threshold and everything will be great. And it was kind of a, you know, consciousness will be transformed and will be in this golden state. And I thought it was kind of a, for many people, it was an excuse for not taking responsibility. I mean, and just all we have to do is wait and it'll all work out. No, you know, that's not taking responsibility. We've got to get cracking now. We can't wait. We can't wait. So now that it didn't happen, so we, the message is the same. We've got to get cracking. Yeah. And we can relax. Yeah. Okay. The aliens didn't land. No wormholes appeared before our eyes. Yeah. None of that happened. But it doesn't mean that things aren't happening. And, you know, to make hate things that make change, I think, happened quietly. You know, they're not noticed. They're not tremendous. We know with with obvious exceptions, like, you know, global asteroid impact. I mean, hey, that's abrupt and it's transforming no doubt, but that only happens once every few million years. It's normally don't explode into history that way. I mean, Terrence used to talk about the, you know, the first explosion of the atomic bomb. You know, well, that was an abrupt event, but not really. I mean, when did the actual novelty take place? Was it when Einstein developed the equations that described nuclear fusion or was it the fission rather or was it the point where, you know, we achieved the first sustained nuclear reaction? I mean, these were not things that anybody noticed at the time, but those were the transformative events that made it possible to a couple decades later drop the atom bomb on Hiroshima. You know, that's the one that got the headlines, but that wasn't really the roots of the novelty, if you know what I'm saying. No, I totally know what you're saying. It seems that they're all pile on to each other as well. They pile on to each other and their cumulative. Exactly. And we haven't even started. No, no, we haven't started, which is why the concept of an alien invasion seems so ridiculous to us based on our current capabilities. But so inevitable when you think about the fact that we got robots wandering around on Mars right now as we speak, I mean, what would we think we're going to do? I mean, what we do, the most spectacular thing we do, we have two things we do. We blow shit up and we explore space. Those are the two things that gather the most attention. Right. We can blow up a city or we can send a robot to wander around on Mars and send back videos. And you're like, holy shit, those are the two, you know, like, very distinctly different, but this almost exemplifies the limits of our power. We have the power to completely, you know, disrupt the whole shooting match. And it just it all turns into radioactive slag or we escape some way. And I think, you know, I think it's wonderful that we can send robots to Mars and all this. But space is so vast. It's never really going to become accessible to us unless we can figure out this hyper light thing. And I don't know if it's traveling hyper, you know, traveling faster than light or figuring out how to open up a portal. I mean, this idea that, you know, there's Newtonian space separated by this vast distances. I don't buy it. I think there's a way to get from one place to another without going through new to you know, hyperspace is a real thing. Well, it might get down to learn how to navigate it. It might get down to we just have to be stopped being carbon based life forms. And that may be real space travel. Yeah, right. It may end up that way too. When you when you look at the possibility that dimethyl trip to mean and similar psychedelics are a gateway to to some other thing, whether it's another dimension or the state of being another, the access to a part of the mind that doesn't, doesn't exist. Do you think that that is that is that something that I'm trying to figure out how to say this, but is that that's something that is like it's going to take a long time before that's something that you could pass off to other folks that haven't experienced that and have them accept it. And is there a bridge to sort of getting them to consider these ideas? Well, I really I don't know. I mean, the bridge that the most convincing thing is, you know, here's the pipe. Smoke the pipe, you know, they meet it, tell you. As you mentioned before, and it's quite true. One of the beautiful things about psychedelics is you don't have to have faith. All you have to have is courage. You know, you have to have enough courage to sit down and put that pipe to your lips. And you know, we can get beyond this conversation very quickly. Yes. Then we can have the real conversation about what is all that mean. What happened and what is the real what happened? Are we, you know, are you tapping into some external, again, these ridiculous words that are dualistic, but are you tapping into some dimension that is not part of you or are you looking at, you know, a certain neurochemical brain state that has, that doesn't go beyond that. And then it's like we can fall back on what we were saying. Everything you experience is a neurochemical brain state, right? Right. Right. That's what we are. That's what our brain does. Um, so do you define it? Do you define it yourself? Like when you, when you do it, what do you think is happening? DMT. Yes. Which is the most profound one. I think, well, you know, the problem with psychedelics, one of the, one of the problems that we experience with psychedelics is they are essentially un, un-languageable. They're beyond language. And you take DMT or something like it that has such a profound impact. I mean, you probably noticed it in yourself. You're not even down from the experience before you're trying to box it into some kind of a linguistic box that's, you know, and you're reaching out and you're babbling and you're saying, that's it, that's it. Turn my God, my God. Or, you know, but you're trying to put it into some kind of a linguistic box because, because it's incomprehensible by nature. It's incomprehensible. It's like trying to describe what God looks like. It is by definition, undescribable. And so, but our brain wants to conceptualize things. So, so whatever model you create of what it is, that's not it. That's not the thing. It's not what you experienced. It's a memory of what, of what you experienced. And I don't know how you get around that, you know, I think that, well, I don't know. It seems to say even exploring the concept itself is almost impossible without that experience. It's almost impossible. I mean, I mean, so you're asking me to supply a linguistic description. So I, with the caveat that any linguistic description is going to be inadequate, I would say, a lot of what my impressions of DMT are, the most profound experiences are, it strips away, you get to see the raw data, the raw data of experience in the unprocessed form. You know how we were talking about how the brain takes experience and, you know, puts it all together into some kind of a more or less comprehensible model and extrudes it out as, you know, your reality, your movie, the movie that you're producer, director, and star of. And it does that. DMT gives you a chance to kind of arrest that process. And again, as I said, step back from it and look at the raw data, look at the circuitry underneath. Free of interpretation and say, oh, okay, this is the machinery, this is the machinery that generating reality. But again, by even saying that, I don't do a justice. I mean, it's slippery, obviously, it's a slippery concept. Intensively. Intensively. And I've always wondered, like, what is the best, if there is a way to describe it to someone who hasn't experienced it? Obviously, it's a slippery concept. Intensly. Intensly. And I've always wondered, like, what is the best, if there is a way to describe it to someone who hasn't experienced it? I don't think there is. I think there is. And even to those of us who have experienced it, you can't describe it. After my experience, I've never seen it. Oh, you have a memory. I've been tricked. Like, that's not anything like Terrence McKenna or Dennis McKenna described it. What was your experience like? No self-transforming machine elves. Well, I'm thinking of my first mushroom experience. Wow. No, my first DMT experience was, I mean, it sounds trivial, but it was sort of like some sort of ginger bread or Play-Doh that was alive and talking to me. And I was just sort of one aspect of the Godhead, sort of ginger bread or Play-Doh. It was sort of like a live or a self-transforming ginger bread, people. I guess, yeah. You know, it didn't look like an elf, but it kind of had that aspect. It certainly felt alive. Like, it had been waiting for me. Yeah, that's the weird one. That's the weird one. Yeah, the weird one is the friendliness of it. But I felt dead. That was my overwhelming feeling was, oh, no, I've really done it. But in the back of my mind, I knew that I was coming back. I was still sitting in my chair. And before I knew it, it was over. And I was. Doug Stanhope, who's a good friend of mine is the Stan of Comedian, did DMT with me. The first time you ever did it, had him over my house. And he went into convulsions, which I've never seen before. And his five MEO. And he started moaning and foaming at the mouth. Like he was like, drool was coming out of his mouth, and he was going, oh, and I was thinking, can you die from this shit? I never heard of anybody. I just killed my friend. Damn. How am I going to explain this? And I've never seen anybody have that experience before or since. And it was weird. It was very, it was moaning. It was a big dose. He took a big dose. And when he came back, just filled with descriptions that were inadequate, which we all are. But fibothoxies, even trickier than DMT. I don't know. I mean, I've had very limited experience with fibothoxie because it's too much. Yeah, I didn't think I was coming back. That's my problem. Maybe that's exactly the one we should be looking into. I mean, but it has more issues with toxicity and all that. But it's definitely put you in this place. You know, James Orak's book, the Chiptamine Palace. No. Oh, you should, you might want to get him on this show. Chiptamine Palace, James Orak. How you spell it? O-R-O-C, I believe. Fibothoxie, DMT. This is all about fibothoxie, DMT. That's his whole book. Yeah. And he says, you think DMT is something fibothoxie is where it's really at. And I can't dispute that because frankly, it scares the shit out of me. Yeah. It was different for me because it didn't give me the sort of comfort that DMT did, that it was sort of talking to me and communicating with me. It was completely absent of any context. It was impossible to do. Exactly. That's what it was. There were no friendly, elfen, no gingerbread people, no elf machines, no nothing like that. It was like you were my apprehension was it was that I was part of this oort cloud of souls. I was a part of this somewhere, somewhere. There's a place where all conscious entities arose from and go back to and I was in the center of this galactic cloud of being. And I mean, I sort of had a dim awareness of my existence as a separate entity but mostly I was part of this soul cloud and is the best I can describe it. And by the time I came back, that was all completely faded as it tended to. That was 20 years ago that I had that experience and it's still resonating with me. I haven't done it, Sam. Yeah, I've only had it a few times. And I didn't want to go back again. I was like, I got it. I got that. Whereas the end and dimethyl trip to mean was different every time and it seemed like it was a communication. Like something was talking to me. Like there was a lot going on. The visual aspect of it was way more compelling. Yeah. I just very little visual aspect with five methoxies. It was just white. Yeah. It felt like I wasn't I didn't have a consciousness anymore. The only thing that I've ever done that seemed to eliminate consciousness. Right. It wasn't didn't matter. Like the vaguely aware, the deli aware of the fact that you existed all was more and more terrifying aspects of it. It's like, oh, this is probably what happens when you die. Well, you die. You die. You probably go into this thing and become whatever. Part of this cloud. Or this community of over souls, which is every conscious being that ever existed anywhere in the universe. It also gave me the most tangible feeling of there not being an up and there not being a down. There's no left. There's no right. There's the whole thing. And then you're part of the whole thing. And it just goes everywhere. It doesn't you're not in the middle. You're not in the center. You're not in the left. You're not to the right. It's just the whole thing. You know, and yeah, it's an illusion. And that that was the weird aspect of the planets were an illusion that everything's a little wind, all of it, nonsense. You're just a part of the hole. When you get down to the lowest thing, you're a part of the whole soup. Yep. Yep. He he he he he refers to this zero energy point field. Oh, yeah. Which yeah, I mean, that's definitely worth putting on your map. And if you're brave enough or foolish enough, it's probably worth exploring. But I'm I'm too old for that shit. I can't not that this you know, my friend Duncan took it and he took a huge dose because he didn't believe it was that he had never done any DMT before and he had done acid. And I had never done acid before. And I was telling him about DMTs like you've never even done acid. So he takes he takes DMT in a big dose and he calls me out. He's like, dude, what the fuck man? I'm like, I told you like, no, he didn't tell me you kind of told me, but I didn't listen. Holy shit. Like he was convinced that he died. He was a believer. Oh boy. Yeah. Was he ever? Yeah. Yeah. It was, you know, it's very disturbing. But again, impossible to ignore transcendent experience. Yeah. It is. I think Sylvia de Vanorum can take a person to a similar space. Sort of you feel that you're you're no longer a point of consciousness. Except it doesn't feel like a cloud. It feels like a Mexican dance party. It's like a magic thing. It's not the same one. Isn't it because it slipped through that Sylvia slipped through and it took a while before people realize it slipped through. You mean legally. Yeah. It's slipped through because it's its own best insurance against abuse. Most people are like, once is enough. Never again, dudes. One of these ones like Fibonafoxie. I mean, most some people do seem to be fascinated by it. And they keep going back to it. And but most people find it very disturbing and not particularly enjoyable and actually just bizarre. You know, but again, these are areas of consciousness. These pharmacological tools are, you know, they're exploratory probes into these realms of consciousness. And just because you're familiar with the psychedelic experience, which is mainly the trip to being mediated serotonin, you know, dimension there are all those other dimensions out there. And their aspects of consciousness too. Sylvia de Vanorum happens to be that the Kappa opiate, you know, it's a Kappa opiate like and it's very selective. You know, we don't think of opiates as going to those places. You know, heroin, morphine, those sorts of things there. euphoric, gentle, you know, almost sedated states of mind. Kappa opiate, which is, you know, one of the three opiate receptors that happens to be the one that's Sylvia de Vanorum exists. It's a whole other ballgame, you know, I mean, it's not certainly not anything that anyone would seek out, you know, certainly not addictive. But so that realm of consciousness is mediated by that whole network. If you look at the tourist, the night shades, the anti-colonergics, that's working on acetylcholine, there is acetylcholine blockers. So that's a whole other neurotransmitter system. And if you look into, you know, the, and they have a long history of use, obviously, and they seem to be, if you look into the use of toei in South America toei, Brick Bandsia, or you look at Datura and other night shades in Europe. This is the realm of wraiths and ghosts and that sort of thing. Mm-hmm. Datura is a very interesting one too, because of the reality dissolving properties of it, where people think that they're somewhere that they're not and they have huge issues with memory. Do you think that's the disruption of acetylcholine? Well, yeah, it does disrupt memory. I mean, we know that acetylcholine has a lot to do with the entrainment of memory. And then Datura, Datura disrupts that. So it's hard to remember the state, which is probably a good thing, because the states are really bizarre. I tell people Datura, you know, night shade Datura is not a psychedelic, but it's a true hallucinogen. In a sense that it's not a psychedelic state, but you have hallucinations. The problem is you can't tell if they're real or not. Usually a psychedelic hallucination. You know, it's not real. You may be seeing something that's not there, but there's a part of your mind that's saying, this is a hallucination here. It's not there. You see things on Datura. You don't know if they're there or not. If I could have a hallucination, I'm sitting across from you talking, and you seem as real and solid as you do now. But you're not there. I'm having a conversation with you. And then you sort of just fade away like kind of a race. You know, you're sort of like, what the fuck? Where did you go? What has happened to you? Yeah. That's what happens to you when you did it. That's what happened. You were talking to someone they literally didn't exist. Yeah. Well, I took Datura. I described this in my book, actually. I have a whole chapter of it. A friend of mine and I took Datura when we were 16, not even knowing what it was. I mean, this is how clueless we were at the time. I actually thought it was a kind of morning glory. I had had LSD once in my life and we took these Datura and I thought it was a different species of morning glory. So all this stuff began to happen and I thought, oh, this is what a bad acid trip is like. Wow. And no, it's not what a bad acid trip is like. It's what a totally typical Datura trip is like. And it's characteristic that you see entities, you see things that aren't there. And I was quite anxiety per folk came. And my friend, I was in my bedroom. I managed to, you know, you have to read the chapter. But I finally got to my bedroom. I barricaded myself and my bedroom and my mother was completely freaked out. You know, what was going on? I just said, mom, I'll be out in 12 hours. It's okay. No more. I don't know. How old are you? 16. Oh, that's awesome. And so I'm in the bedroom and one of the weird things, I guess people who take Datura should be forward. One of the things that does is dilate your eyes, right? And it's used medically to dilate your eyes, atropine is what they put in your eyes to do an eye exam. What that means is your eyes are dilated so you can't see very well. So any modeled surface, anything with texture, like tablecloth or wallpaper, anything you look at starts to swarm. And the next thing, you know, they're bugs everywhere. For me, so it was like the bug experience. There were insect-all surfaces were like covered with these swarming, you know, things, which were the visual distortions of not being able to focus on anything. But I was totally freaked out by this. And so my friends or images of my friends kept appearing at the edge of my bed, at the end of my bed. And they would appear and I would say, help me, help me, get me out of here. I mean, you know, and they would sort of just look at me and like, you know, you pour sap and shake their head and then just fade away. Oh, that's awesome. It's fascinating that it has something to do with acetylcholine. Yeah. If you ever experiment with taking acetylcholine before you go to bed, I haven't. It gives you the most amazing lucid dream. Amazing dreams. I'm not surprised. Yeah. Fascinating what I call durable lucid dreams. Right. Because I'm not a lucid dream. Like, I'm not disciplined. And I've never studied it. I don't practice it. Apparently there's techniques that you can learn how to like successfully lucid dream on the natch as it were. Right. But if you take acetylcholine before you go to bed, like a couple hours before you go to bed, you have lucid dreams whether you like it or not. Yeah. They just more, it seemed like your dreams are more durable when you're aware, it leads me personally. When I'm aware of my dreams normally, they fade away. Like, I'm dreaming and then it's gone. I wake up. Right. But with me, you're just boosting what's a natural process. When you go to sleep, your brain becomes flooded with acetylcholine. Yes. And these deterris, these, these tro pain alkaloids, what they do is block acetylcholine. They block the receptors. So they're acetylcholine. They're called the technical term as anti-colonergic. They block acetylcholine from binding to its receptor. So that's the basis of the altered state of consciousness. And interestingly enough, the detourous state of mind resembles, it resembles profound sleep deprivation. If you keep yourself awake for five days, you will have experiences and hallucinations that are almost indistinguishable from a state of deter and intoxication. That's bizarre. I don't recommend it, by the way. I mean, don't do deter. Or if you do deter, have somebody there is looking after you because you really can't distinguish reality and you do silly things. You know, I had a friend who took deter one time and he spent the whole time dismantling his motorcycle engine on the floor, on his kitchen floor, taking it apart and cleaning it and putting it back together. He didn't own a motorcycle. So what was that? Oh my God. What if he learned how to do it though? What if he gave a motorcycle engine like, oh, I've done this and then he starts doing it all together correctly. He told me he was able to do it. Wow. That uber bizarre. What is that, there's that drug that they use for air sickness? Same one. Scopolomy. Yes. That's the one. That's the same thing. That's the same. That's the one being double-sided. That's the one being double-sided. Alcolyde and detoura and belladotidal. And this is the one that does it. There are other alkaloids, but it's primarily scopolomy. Wow. And they used to use medically, they used to use scopolomy because it's for childbirth back in the days of barbarism when they thought women in order to give childbirth, birth had to be put in it. It had to be drug. They used scopolomy to put them in a twilight state, like a hypnotic state of semi-consciousness and then they could have the, of course they didn't remember any of that experience, which was sort of the point, I guess. How does nicotine fit in? Because one of my most intense lucid dreaming experiences was with a nicotine patch. Nicotine has the opposite effect to the tropanes. Nicotine is what's, the tropanes are what's called acetylcholine and tagueness. Nicotine is an agonist, so it has acetylcholine like effect, which is why when you smoke, you get this sort of cognitive activation. It's great to settle down and focus your attention on a task. It activates cognition. Wow. A lot of the research now on Alzheimer's and other dementias are finding things that either have this colon, colonergic agonist effect like nicotine or they block acetylcholine from being broken down. acetylcholine, acetyrase inhibitors, acetylcholine, acetyrase is the enzyme that breaks down acetylcholine. I don't smoke cigarettes, but I found it absolutely fascinating in reading Stephen King's book on writing, where he talked about when he stopped smoking cigarettes, it really affected his writing process. Absolutely. I'm not surprised. He couldn't really fire up the way he used to. That's right. Now we've again got off the track and we're off in the jungles of pharmacology. Well, it's fascinating. No, I mean, it's off track at all. I mean, it's all interesting because it's all in relationship to what we understand currently about compounds that affect the human body. What you're doing with the Ethnopotanical Stewardship Council is to try to educate people on these things, try to expand consciousness and awareness of these things, and really just promote it and put energy behind it. Part of it is education. It's developing a model of self-regulation that can improve the safety of people that want to use these traditional plants. But one thing I want to be clear about is that we're ourselves not setting a standard per se. We're engaging people in dialogue. We're kind of setting the table for indigenous groups and people that run retreat centers, people that are selling ayahuasca online, et cetera. All the people that are involved in the kind of value chain of ayahuasca to come together and determine, well, what does sustainability at the site level look like? Like, ecotourism. How are you giving back to the community, to the biodiversity of the place where you're of your site? How are you making sure that people in the ceremony are safe, that they're screened psychologically or for heart conditions, they're not taking antidepressants, they have people babysitting or watching, so people don't wander off into the jungle. The antidepressants one is an interesting one. What's the issue with that? Well, the issue with antidepressants and ayahuasca is because ayahuasca involves MAL inhibitors, right? So it prevents the breakdown of DMT, right? And so there's a lot of DMT in here. It's a serotonergic agonist, right? And so are the antidepressants. So you are essentially piling on one serotonergic agonist on another because you're inhibiting the breakdown process. MALs involved in breaking down both DMT and serotonin. So the safety wise, the issue is that it could lead to what's called a serotonin syndrome. And the serotonin syndrome is something that happens when you've got too much serotonin, too much pushing the serotonin button a little bit too hard. And it could lead to hyperthermia and cardiac irregularities and ultimately death if it's really bad. You want to avoid the serotonin syndrome if possible. That's fascinating because that's also an issue that people have if they take SSRIs and they want to consume trip to fan or 5HEP. Exactly. Exactly. That's also one way to do it. In some ways, the psychedelic experience itself is kind of skirting this. I mean, you're pushing the serotonin button, right? But in most cases with psychedelic, you haven't inactivated the enzymatic breaks that are metabolizing this stuff. So it's not an issue with ayahuasca. It's really only an issue if you're taking the SSRIs or if you're taking MAL inhibitors, most people, they're not used clinically anymore. There's a whole older generation of antidepressants that are MAL inhibitors. You shouldn't combine those with ayahuasca and you shouldn't combine SSRIs with ayahuasca. The, I mean, maybe a theoretical hazard. I haven't seen a lot of reports of serotonin syndrome happening with ayahuasca. So it's a theoretical hazard. I'm sure there are people taking serotonin, I've taken inhibitors that are taking ayahuasca and there's no problem, but they're probably taking lower doses. It's just a good idea to get off those things before you take ayahuasca. Is it a good idea to get off those things, period? Yeah. I mean, it is if you can. If you, not for everybody, they really help some people. But a lot of times, you know, antidepressants are over prescribed and overused for too many things. They don't, they don't really help people get to the root of their problems. They just kind of bandated over and you feel sort of normal, you know, and you can be a productive citizen and you don't really think about things too much. They're prescribed for PTSD, you know, but they don't cure PTSD. They just kind of dampen it down and bury it. They don't give you an opportunity to really, you know, look at issues and work them through. This is why, you know, psychedelics are not a good model for big pharma. Big pharma wants things like SSRI's which you take every day for the rest of your life. That's the business model. Yes, there are things that you might take a few times and work through your issues and you don't need antidepressants after that. I've talked to many, many people who said, you know, who have been on antidepressants, they go to South America, they take a few eye wasca sessions, they never have to go back to antidepressants. Again, I mean, they can get off it for good, many people have that experience. That's a huge problem financially for pharmaceutical companies. Well, you don't see them piling on that. Yeah, exactly. Well, then you start selling eye wasca. Yeah. It's not going to work that way because big pharma, they want drugs that people consume. I think the way that I think we're at the business model, you can't use these drugs in therapy, in a therapeutic session without intense psychotherapy, whether that's actual psychotherapy or shamanism or some combination of those things, these are drugs that have to be used in context. The take two and call me in the morning model doesn't work for these. These have to be used in a very highly controlled set in setting. So I think where the business model comes in is you have places where people can go and get this kind of therapy. So it shifts from the drug itself, the emphasis is on our whole biomedical industrial complexes set up to encourage band-aid solutions. You have a problem. You go see your psychiatrist. He has seven minutes if he's lucky to talk to you. Here's a prescription. Get out of here. That's the way it works with psychedelics. You actually have to have a therapist who will sit down and talk with you. This is a whole novel concept. So I think where the business potential comes in is to have centers of therapy where you can go and get psychedelic therapy. The emphasis is more on the setting than the services provided than the actual chemicals. The setting in the... This is possible in other countries where it's legal in America. So it's happening. Yes. In America right now it's a huge issue. But Josh was talking about selling ayahuasca online. I mean, how many people do that in what's the legality when it comes to? The plants themselves are not necessarily illegal. Right. Right. DMT is illegal. DMT is illegal. But DMT is found in so many plants that they can't really make all those plants illegal. Because I mean, they can, but they're not going to be able to enforce it. It's just... You're not going to be able to have salad. You're not going to be able to have salad. I mean, I'm, you know, heartening back to what we're saying about how close DMT is to a trip to a fan, two steps away. I'll bet you... I mean, I wish somebody would do this. There's no funding for this, but I'll bet you if you had sufficiently sensitive instruments, you could find DMT in all plants. You know, you could just start randomly selecting them out of your backyard and run them through the mass spec or whatever. You could pick up DMT. Not in usable amounts, but it's universally just, you know, nature is drenched in DMT. How do you think that is? Because it's so close to trip to fan, you know, and it's just the compound... The trip to fan is universally distributed. The enzymes that transform into DMT have other cellular functions. So they're found in all cells. They're just part of metabolism. And so it's just an accident of nature, you know. It's just the way it is. What a fascinating one. It's actually maybe nature's trying to send us on a little message if you want to interpret it that way. But it's just the way it is. Or it's just a part of the building blocks of the University of South America. Yeah, just a part of the building blocks of exactly. Exactly. And that chemical doorway to another dimension exists in virtually everything that's alive. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. What a mind-fucked that is. I don't know if people are selling ayahuasca prepared ayahuasca brews online. They are. They are. Seems to be the case. In a legal gray area. Yeah. I think that's irresponsible. Because... Well, because it's a drug that needs to be taken and then appropriate setting setting. It needs guidance. So to sell it online is to be guilty of that whole thing. Take two and call me in the morning. Go off and do this with your friends. Well, that's what happened in the celebration and the any real knowledge. That's... That's not it. go off and do this with your friends. Well, that's what's that's what's happening in the operation and and the any real knowledge that's that's not ethical in my opinion. That's how five MEO is acquired until fairly recently. When I bought five MEO, I just bought it online. Yeah. It delivered me enough to get the world high. Yeah. I mean, it was a little, I mean, it used to, you realize how potent it is and what a small dose you need. And if they're sending you some giant supply of it, well, that's an issue with all of these things and the whole, you know, the whole designer drug thing. There are, you know, hundreds and hundreds of these things. Yeah. So I sort of say, well, you know, we should stick with the plants. At least we know what the identity of, but, but, you know, I mean, I think that I mean, synthetic drugs are out there. People are going to use them. It's, it comes back to education. You know, teach people how to, how to use drugs. Basically, you have to teach people how to use drugs. This is what so-called drug education hasn't, won't quite, hasn't quite, grock to, hasn't quite admitted, but that is in fact, that's real drug education. Not, you know, all drugs are bad, never take it. I mean, that's absurd. That's ridiculous. Now, you've lived through several errors of psychedelic awareness. You lived through the 60s. You lived through all that craziness. You lived through the 70s. You lived through the clamp down. And now you're here, which is, I think it's safe to call this the psychedelic Renaissance. I think this is, this is a new time. Well, we'd like to think so. I'm pretty positive. Yeah. It's just, at least it isn't my reality. There were, there were reality that I experienced. Right. I mean, I've never in my time seen psychedelics more reference than I see them today. And part of it is because the company I keep, part of it is because the message that I put out and the people that I interact with because of that. But I think also it's just, it's just a matter of the cat got out of that. Yeah, the stigma is fading away. The whole 60s baggage that psychedelics have been, have been, you know, marginalized with for so long. That's going away and a new more positive perception is appearing as some of these therapeutic uses are becoming, you know, more aware in general consciousness. So PTSD can be treated with MDS MDMA. We've got veterans out there who need that. That's a hugely powerful message. And if the Department of Defense is behind it, it can't be bad. Right. Yeah, I mean, it's kind of ironic that the need for psychedelics has arisen from the, the war culture that we've seen. Yeah, it's totally ironic, but so strange. There it is. And so these positive messages are being heard more and more in their less and less, sort of, you know, partly because a lot of people from the 60s are dying off or whatever they don't remember. But the, the knee jerk negative message about psychedelics is not happening this much. Yeah, there's, there's much harder to distinguish now. Yeah. The folks who use them than the hippies with the beads and the, you know, the, the, the look, which was so stereotypical of what, you know, the gold water Republicans found reprehensible about that generation. Right. But they were lazy, shift list, do for nothing people that just wanted to get high in escape reality and that, that paradigm, that perception is passing. Yeah. It's all to the good. What has it been like for you to experience these different waves? Well, I don't know. I haven't really been personally impacted by this, this thing. You know, I mean, I've, I've been where I've been all the way through and not particularly public. I'm much more public now about it than I have been. So I may, maybe that's a difference. But I don't feel that I have to be careful about talking about it in public. I mean, I'm, I consider myself an advocate for responsible use, you know, and good science. And I'm not even saying people should even take these things. Take it. What I'm saying is if, if you decide to take it, go into it with open eyes, do some preparation, pay attention to set and setting, do it in a way that, you know, if there are benefits to be had, maximize the benefits. So approach it as a conscious, conscious exercise. And, you know, and, and, and approach them with respect and intention, these are serious things. What do you say to someone who has zero experience any things? I'm, I guarantee you right now this podcast is reaching people that have no psychedelic experience whatsoever. They don't know anyone who has had any psychedelic experience. They don't know where to turn or where to start, but they're very intrigued and the door's been opened to them. Okay. Well, the first thing to do is get yourself educated about it, you know, like sign up for this symposium, right? I mean, watch the online thing, but there are many other tools, another group that I love to plug, and I think they're doing a marvelous work as Arrowwood, uh, Arrowwood.org is online. It's the best online source of information about psychoactive drugs of all kinds, not just psychedelics. It's the go-to place on the web if you want real solid information, not bullshit, not put out by the propagandists, put out by people who, whose commitment is to accurate information. Start there. It's fantastic. Read about it. There are trip reports, there are safety reports, the chemistry, the, you know, the, uh, the, and the old botany, the part of it, the, the shamanic traditions. It's all represented there. That's the place to start. And it's, it's spelled it out too. For PROWID, Arrowwood.org. Go there and read up about it, educate yourself before you take the substance so that you can make an informed decision. Uh, what's an appropriate, uh, method of use? Uh, what are the right circumstances? What are the hazards? Do you not want to do? I think that's the first thing. And I think again, I think this symposium, uh, conference is going to be great, but it's also exemplary of what needs to happen. And I'm really impressed that, you know, young people, like the folks that are organizing this conference are, are stepping up to the plate and saying, we want to make this a part of education, you know, an educational, uh, dialogue. We want to have this happen on lots of university campuses, lots of places. That's the thing. We have better tools now than we've ever had for sharing information. Take advantage of those tools, uh, you know, before back in the 60s, 70s, you might not have had no experience with psychedelics and no real, uh, you know, no way to know how am I going to find out about these things, you know, now it's a click of a mouse and you're there. Another way is no excuse for not educating yourself. Another very good site is icears.org. I see EERS, the International Center for Ethnobotanical Education Research and Service based in in Europe. They have a ton of information about ayahuasca and Iboga, the plant based psychedelics. They're also a sort of incubation partner for the ESC helping ESC gets done. Ibogaine is another fantastic drug, uh, for dealing with addiction. I have a good friend who had a back injury and got hooked on pain pills and had a real problem and really couldn't kick it. Uh, went to Mexico, uh, did Ibogaine became completely fascinated, cured and absolutely fascinated by Ibogaine. And how is this possible that this is escape Western medicine started his own, um, Ibogaine uh, center down there. And now, you know, regular, I mean, he's just a different human being when I talked to him. He's just like so at peace and just, it's a different guy. He knows himself in a different way. Mm-hmm. It breaks that, that physical addiction to opiates instantly. Yeah. Um, the ESC is of signing a memorandum of understanding with the global Ibogaine therapist Alliance to work on the safety and the sustainability of, of that traditional plant. It's under extreme pressure from the growing global demand. It's traditionally from Africa and it takes seven years for a mature plant to be grown and then you have to take the route out and kill the plant. So, um, there's a lot of work to be done. Um, there's a global Ibogaine therapist Alliance conference in Durban, uh, this may, as well. I hope we're going to have some big announcements come out of that on the sustainability front. So many things came out of that. Ibogaine never, I mean, it was, it never went away. It was always there, but it, uh, you know, it was suppressed essentially in Western medicine. I mean, they had a perception that it had no place. There were almost clinical studies approved by the FDA and then they stepped back from it because of some supposed neurotoxicity, which I don't think they ever sounds factually demonstrated. But that's a good example. You know, the therapeutic community was saying, well, Ibogaine is so useful for this addiction therapy that we're just not going to put up with this. And so Ibogaine has not illegal. It's illegal in the States, but it's not illegal in most of the world. So these addiction treatment centers have blossomed all over the world. There's Mexico, South America, even Canada. There are treatment centers that use Ibogaine to treat addiction. And they've just said, well, you know, fuck the FDA. We're going to step outside that framework and do it because it's important to get this therapy to people. And that's, that's all to the good. I think that's a model maybe for what's going to happen with ayahuasca. Yeah, I would hope so. And I would, I would like to see what's going on right now with marijuana in this country slowly start happening with ayahuasca, Ibogaine, silasab, and all these various things. Yeah. Do you have hope for that? Totally. I do. History is on our side. The first thing I'd tell people that are considering psychedelics is put your preconceptions aside and just look at the facts. What would you say to someone say, look, we're talking about young people. What if a guy is 50 and you know, maybe he's going through a rough divorce. And you know, it's like, man, this fucking, I need to reset my brain. I need to figure this out. But I don't know anybody. Nobody at the office knows anything about this stuff. Right. Well, smoke to joint in college. That's about it. Right. I would say take it in a traditional context that you feel comfortable with. Take it in a, if you're looking for psychological help, maybe take it at a center that focuses on that. If you want to, if you've always been attracted to shamanic experiences, then suss out which centers might be best for you and read reviews of them. And in two to three years, the ESC will have a rating system or a kind of star rating system for sites based on how sustainable they are. Like a good deal of safe side psychedelics. Not so much a Yelp, I mean, a deeper level than a Yelp. Yelp because you can't fake it though. Right. But it's hard for somebody going in to see what kind of an impact a center has on the local community or where they're sourcing the Iowa'ska come from, comes from. And that's where the ESC is bringing that professional expertise to supplement what the community is doing. And certainly we'll rely on feedback from visitors. That'll be part of the credibility and the transparency that we're building into the way of assuring the sites are sustainable and safe. There'll be grievance mechanisms if you have a bad experience. Hopefully in five years, five, that's probably optimistic timeframe, but hopefully in 10 years there'll be places you can go and have these experience where you don't have to leave the country. I mean, you can already find them outside the country, but it would be nice if there were places in the states where you could get this. And it would transform psychiatric medicine if there was, which is again threatening to many people with a stake hole, a stake in how it's done now. But I talked to so many psychiatrists and other professionals that are involved in the mental health world. They're very frustrated. They're like, say, these people are hurting. And the way that we're handling them is not solving the problem. It's only making it worse. So there needs to be a wholesale, I wouldn't say overturning, but transformation of the model. I think that we're on the right track. I really do. There's a lot of people that are cynical today and they look at today's culture and they look at the toxification of our environment and the materialism and the nonsense on television. They see it as a bad sign. But I really feel like civilization's cramming. I really do. I really think we're just scrambling to try. And maybe we need something like all this nonsense that we experience on a daily basis to sort of really motivate this global awakening. We have to consume it to the extent that we're sick of it, that it makes us sick. And then we purge. Yeah. And that's the eye-o-o-ask model. You know, you consume so much of it that eventually you just regurgitate it all and you feel much better afterwards. Yeah. That's, I think that's partly what we're doing to ourselves. I think the most exciting thing too is that we have a way out. We have a way up. Whereas like, it's not like we're in this pit and there's no ladder. Like, there's a fucking like, hey guys, we have the tools. We have the tools. I mean, and they're incredibly profound and real. These aren't theoretical things. Like, you know, we have all these theoretical concepts about like fixing the plastic and the ocean. Well, you know, some 19 year old kid figured out a way that there's a machine. It scoops it up and then it converts it into something usable and then we could use that for energy and the same thing is true with like nuclear waste or some theories about how to, but those are all, those are theoretical. They may or may not be effective. They may or may not ever get built. The ladder might be in your life. Yeah. The ladder's right there. But you know, I mean, in respect to that, we look at this dire existential situation, the environmental crisis and all that. I take heart in the notion of never underestimate human ingenuity. You know, there are a lot of really smart people working on all these problems. And that's my hope, you know, for our survival. I think that the ingenuity will prevail. I hope so because otherwise we're, I mean, we're already in deep shit. The question is how do we dig out of it? And it, you know, that's why we have these smart brains, you know, we're not going to get there by being stupid. You know, we've had enough of that. And there's still plenty of it to go around. But we need to move beyond that, you know, and stop listening to a lot of people like our politicians, for example. It seems to make a profession of stupidity. They're actually proud of their stupidity. And that's distressing. In my way, what way do you feel like they're probably like Sarah Palin as though to me? Well, yeah, people like that, you know, the science deniers, the people that, you know, I don't, you know, don't bother me with your fucking facts. You know, my mind is made up and, you know, and God told me this and, you know, this is horseshit. I mean, come on, you know, clear thinking, at least should be a criterion if you want to be a politician, not somebody who's, you know, buying into some, you know, myth from the 14th century. I don't necessarily even think most of them are buying into it. I think what they've done is realize that there is a market for that. That there's just a gigantic chunk of the population that's terrified of change, terrified of the possibilities, the unknown, the intangibles, and they would like something Norman Rockwell. They would like you to paint some really clear and easy to recognize pattern that they could say, Jesus, thank you Jesus, you know, and they just, the Lord has blessed me in so many ways and they just fucking lock themselves in this box of perception. And then politicians come along and they go, oh, that guy, I don't have to fucking play his heartstrings. Right, exactly. Well, then you're part of the problem. They're not really helping solve the problem. You're taking advantage of what these people, what I think even Carl Rove called useful idiots. Yeah. People that want simple answers, I call them simple answers for simple people. Hey, get over it. There are no simple answers, you know, and what we need to be doing is looking for the real answers, asking the hard questions, realizing that it's all very complicated. There are answers, but we're not going to get there through delusions and fairy tales. You know, we've got to actually acknowledge and start thinking about this and start talking about it to other people in a real way. So Sarah Palin, these people, I mean, these mushrooms, they're idiots. He's ayahuasca. She needs a DMT trip. She needs a head of experience. Right, she needs a head of experience. Yeah, fuck yeah, she would. She would realize that she's right and wrong at the same time. Right. Right. Mind blown. Oh, okay. So the website for the ethnopatanical stewardship council. It's ethnobatanicalcouncil.org. And the symposium is spelled Sim like as in psychedelic, PSY. The symposium 2014 is April 12th and 13th in Amherst, Massachusetts. Right. Listen folks, if you can make it there. I'm sorry, this symposium.org or symposia symposia simpler. symposia dot org. Yeah. And if you can make it there beautiful, can you pay to go there? $30 at the door. $20 in advance tickets. $30 at the door. If you actually want to go, but you can also watch it live for $10 online. It's a great deal. And you're a great deal. And you are contributing to something that is hugely important. You are part of this whole movement. There's something going on folks. Dennis, you're a huge part of it. Josh, you're a huge part of it. People listening to this podcast are a huge part of it. It's all out there and it's moving. It's moving in. I think a good direction. I really do. One last plug if I may. There's a Congress that I'm going to next weekend in Mexico to Luca bringing together indigenous leaders with Ivoja, Peyote, Mushroom, Iowaska experience. And they need funding to attend to bring more of the traditional healers to that conference. It's called the Second International Congress on Traditional Medicine and Public Health, Sacred Plants, Culture and Human Rights. And is this information all available on F-N-O BotanicalCouncil.org? Can they find it there? No, but I'll change that. Yeah. Put that in the news section. Put it up. What the hell? Put the fuck. Come on man. We're all working together on this. Can't just say it. Well, I'd like to say, Joe also. Thank you for having us on. And you, you, my friend, are one of the change makers. Yeah, sure. Don't underestimate that. I mean, you're a hero of mine. Oh, that's a huge honor. I'm a useful idiot. What I am is a useful. You ain't no idiot. I'm a repeater of things that are fascinating. But I appreciate that very much. And I feel as compelled as all of you to try to broadcast as much of what I've stumbled upon and talk about it as much as possible. And it's impossible without guys like you. So thank you all. Thank you very much. Thank you for having us. Thank you to the listeners. We're all in this shit together, people. So please go to F-N-O BotanicalCouncil.org. Go to Symposia with psy. Symposia.org. And that's it. We'll be back next week with much more love. Big kiss till then. Muah. First again, three hours. What time is that?