Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Well, what's happening? Hi, Joe. How you doing? Good to see you again. Ben, nice to meet you. It's a pleasure to meet you as well, Joe. I've enjoyed your videos and I've enjoyed your videos. Of course, Jimmy, I watched your whole series on Atlanta all day today, I've been watching for hours. I'm watching Impact videos, videos about the Atlanta structure. And so let's just get into it. Let's do it. So the Richard structure I was on your show a little over a year ago and shared some details about it. To people who aren't aware, there's a location in the Western Sahara desert of Mauritania called the Richard structure. It's also commonly referred to as the eye of the Sahara. It is a site that most people have never seen or heard of before, which is truly peculiar because it's so spectacular. It's a site that astronauts typically use to reference from space. It is a geological feature that is said to be volcanic in nature. And what's so spectacular about this is that it just so happens to match more than a dozen striking similarities to what Playdoh had described as the lost ancient capital city of Atlantis. I almost feel like we're not going to do your video justice by just talking about it. Because the video's so good and you go into so many details. By the end of it, my job was dropped. I was like, holy shit. Like from what you had the last time you're on the podcast to what you put out now, it's even more compelling. Like way more compelling. I appreciate you saying that. And I guess to anyone that wants to check it out, I have a YouTube channel called Bright Insight. It's right at the top of the page. And it says lost ancient Roman map has Atlantis in Sahara, Africa. And that's kind of where it goes from there is that there is a, actually, let me just mention real quick. Like you're a very inquisitive individual. You have many interesting people that come in chat with you. And when I had asked you last time, you said that until you had saw my video, you'd never seen a herd of the shots. Never heard of it. Yeah. Anytime I meet somebody new or from at some party, I'm like, oh, what do you do? We start trying to about YouTube. The first thing I do now is I show them a picture of the wrist shot. And I've never not once ever come across one single person that has seen a herd of it before. Other than people who are familiar with what I've shared. But there's so many things like the, where the water flows to the south, where there's clear evidence of water erosion that took place after the volcano. There's so much that points to that possibly being Atlantis. It's spectacular. So just to run down real quick, play to had described Atlantis as being the capital. Let me just mention that because it was an empire said to be made up of 10 kingdoms. And what I'm focusing on is the lost capital city, which was said to be made up of concentric circles, three of water to have land, which matches the wrist shot structure. It also was said to have an opening to the sea at the south. And if you look at it from satellite imagery, you can clearly see that water had ran through it. Let's take a look at that. Put tell Jimmy what image to pull up sort of. And furthermore, it was said to have mountains to the north. And you just so happened to have mountains called the Atlas Mountain Chain, which Atlas was said to be the very first king of Atlantis. And what's interesting is that the very first known king of Mauritania, which is where the wrist shot structure is located, is also their very first known king was also named Atlas. And though I'm not saying that that's the same individual, but what we do today is we pass down names, right? Like people like, oh, my dad's name is John. And so is my son. And so it's another striking similarity, but it goes further than that. Like there's geological similarities, such as the fact that Atlantis was said to be made up of red, black, and white color stone, which is another similarity you see at the wrist shot structure. It was said to have an abundance of gold and that the outer walls were lined with it. And it turns out that Mauritania is loaded with gold. And not only that, the richest person ever known to exist in all of mankind is Mansa Musa of the Mali Empire, which consisted partly of modern day Mauritania. And he was so rich from gold that he would be richer than Elon Musk and Bezos combined almost. Like many unfathomable amount of billions of dollars. So that's another similarity. What year was this? Oh, this is 1300s or 1400s? There we are. There we are. 1312, 1337. A great name too, man. It's a moose. But the similarities don't end there. There was said to be an abundance of elephants, which is one reason why to suggest that Atlantis would have been in Africa is because besides the fact that elephants are known to be throughout Africa, the used to be in Mauritania, they're unfortunately pretty much extinct there today. But another little detail that most people aren't aware of because they think of Atlantis like, oh, it must be at the bottom of the ocean. Well, that's not exactly how played awarded it. He did describe that the aftermath of Atlantis followed a catastrophic event involving water is that what was left of Atlantis was reads of grass and a shole of mud that prevented ships from navigating to and from. And what people don't realize is that Sahara Africa, up until about 4500 to 5,000 years ago, was totally green. It was tropical. It had the largest network or one of the largest networks of rivers ever known to exist. It had the largest freshwater lake ever known to exist, which is mega lake Chad, which just to put this into perspective. It is if you take all the North American Great Lakes combined, that's 94,000 square miles of surface area, whereas mega lake Chad was 139,000 massive. The additionally Atlantis, the capital was said to have a river that went just north of it or next to it. And the Tom and Rossa River went right through the rishot structure or just north of it, went all the way to the Atlas Mountains that I described, which is in modern day Morocco. And the evidence is that it existed at that same period of time when Atlantis was said to be around 11,600 years ago, prior to its destruction up until about 5,000 years ago. So going back to my point, like a lot of people see the Sahara desert and they don't realize that this place was unbelievably different than it is today. And one of the things that's so important is that I know some people listening will, you know, the here Atlantis, they think, oh, it didn't exist. Right. Whether it existed or not, the evidence that we're going to chat about today to show you that there is conclusive evidence, I would say that catastrophic water erosion that the ocean had blasted through the Sahara, tens of millions of years more recently than previously known. According to the science, 56 to 66 million years ago was the time of the Trans-Saharan Seaway, which was the last time the ocean blasted through it. However, there are a few lines of evidence that say otherwise, besides the fact that anyone that looks at the Sahara desert on through, you know, the Google Earth app, you can see fluvial striations, which is signature traits of water erosion. This is confirmed by other experts that look into these things. As far as I like to mention, Reindel Carlson, he's someone that's analyzed the area and said, yes, this is catastrophic water erosion. But so one of the signature lines of evidence that suggests that the ocean blasted through it far more recently was the largest volcano in Sahara Africa is in Chad. It's Mount Cusi. And there is a lava flow that goes through it that is dated at 12,000 or so years ago. The volcano itself is supposed to be somewhere between 1.2 and 2.3 million years ago. But if you look at Mount Cusi to the south, you can see in I don't know, Jamie, if you're able to bring up one of the photos of that mountain chain, but you can see that the water erosion cuts off that lava flow directly to the south. Yeah, keep going over a little bit right there. Okay. So go over a couple, that is the mountain. And you can see those striations, which are signature traits of water erosion. All those white blemishes are salt. And I should point out real quick that it is the confirmed fact that much of the Sahara has surface level. salt. And you see those white blemishes on that mountain. That is not cloud. That does not snow. Those are salt deposits. And surface level salt that would have been from the ocean. That is what I that is what I suggest because in the middle of that called Dara, you have huge patches of salt. And is it reasonable to suggest that that salt existed before that the creation of that volcano? Because it seems to me that all that molten that salt would burn up. And not only that, there is scientific studies that show that there are gastropodities. Which are sea life that existed inside that called Dara that used to be a thousand feet deep and dried up just a few thousand years ago. So the fact that this is an 11,000 foot volcano that has salt on top of it. I would say is corresponding evidence that the ocean had once went through it. And if you go over a couple more images, Jamie, you will see far better images that show you that. Okay. So notice how it cuts off. You see to the black right here. That that is a lava flow that's dated around 12,000 or so years ago. And regardless of whether the volcano or that water erosion happened 12,000 years ago or 2 million years ago, that in itself is evidence that the ocean blasted through the Sahara Desert. Literally 50 to 60 million years more recently than previously known. And the implications of this as far as climate science, as far as the topic of geology and cataclysms, cannot be overstated. I mean, does it not look like that water or excuse me, that lava flow was cut off by whatever type of erosion that is? Does it I mean, that's yeah, completely. Yeah, it's such a clean line. And it aligns with all the water erosion marks that are to the left of it. Can you make that smaller, Jamie? Can you make it stretch it out? Yeah. And I'll start go ahead. Nothing. It's just like you could really clearly see that it looks like a line, like a water line passed through what was marked by the volcanic eruption. And this is one thing I say. I'm like, it's visible to anyone that has eyes to see, but it turns out that the Sahara Desert is one of the least studied places on earth. And mostly because it's so inhospitable, it's an average of 125 degrees Fahrenheit much of the year. It is so unbelievably big that just to get out there, I mean, you need reliable aircraft or vehicles. There is most of the countries out there are, I regret to say third world and that you just don't have supplies. It's not feasible to just travel out there with a whole team at on a whim. So most of it is essentially undocumented and it's not a site. The Sahara is a whole isn't a site that gets much attention, unfortunately. Ben, we got to bring you in otherwise we can talk forever. No, I was going to say something that you mentioned about the origin of, I guess, the playday description. You said it was mud and grasses was like an aftermath. It's interesting, the topic I've been exploring recently is that does match some of the translations of origin stories from the ancient Egyptians. So it's like that the temple of Horus at Edfoods is amazing structure, but it's literally covered head to toe in horror glisten descriptions. And all these types of things. But one of the stories in the translations they do talk about is this, what they would call the original point or the primordial mound, the primordial island. They describe it as being an island that was surrounded by water. That was sinking and essentially these reads that were growing on it that created a Falcon's Purch. And then the God, it was either Horus or Horun, or one of the Falcon Gods, are lights on this Purch and then Gaines Divinity. But as part of that story, I mean, they, they, and then he goes and forms, came at the, essentially the motherland Egypt. And it's this tale of them, I guess their civilization moving and migrating to this new land. But they, they do talk about a whole stack of unknown gods and a whole culture that existed before that. It's, it's an interesting correlation. It's something that Graham Hancock speculated about in his work with the temple of Horus at Edfood. You know, they, they also have, you know, catastrophic flood myths and things like this. But it, it may be that whatever prior civilization and that, that's might have been where the dynastic Egyptians actually got their origins from, because it seems clear that they've inherited some things from the past. That's a story they themselves tell. Yeah, I wasn't aware that the story of Atlantis had come from Egypt. That's one of the most bizarre parts about it. I didn't know this until just a few years ago either. It's like, oh, it's like, Plato didn't just, Plato, his, his, his distant relative soul on had traveled there in search of knowledge because Egypt was the place to go for it. And, yeah, it was, it was the priests of the Delta that told Solon. And he said, he said that, yeah, so 6,000 years, or 9,000 years, sorry prior to the time of Solon was when the sinking of this city happened. And that, that works out to be 9,600 BC, so 11,600 years ago, which is bang on exactly where now the geological evidence points to basically the end of the younger dryer. So, we know something happened at the start at like 12,800, 900 years and then 11,600 years ago was that end of the younger dryer. So, brought us up out of the cold spell and into the, the Holocene. Isn't it crazy that that's 4,000 years and we think about it in like the same time period? Like, yeah, I mean, around that time. I know, we had just played literally 11,600 to 12,800. We're literally talking about 1,000 fucking years. Yeah, it's so much time. It's so much time that actually if you go from 12,800, you know, so basically let's say 1200 years. The English language, Old English is only like 1400 years and modern English is only like 400, 500 years. So, this is such a wide, a long period of time that we weren't even speaking the same language in that same, you know, 1,000 years ago. It's a, you think of it like that. It's a different world. It's nuts. And if you think about the people that lived 1,000 years ago and how they lived, you know, all of this that I've learned from Graham, Hancock and from Randall Carlson and from you guys, all of it is so astonishing and it all fits into place. It all makes sense. Like, why are we so fucked up? Like, why is civilization so wacky? Why do we have these these these weird structures that no one can really explain? And when you think about the fact that there's so much evidence that we were hit by comments that we were hit by comments, that we were hit by large objects. Like, I didn't know about that enormous crater that's in Antarctica. Oh, yes. I don't know all the details on how old that one's supposed to be, but it's one of the largest, isn't it? Yeah, there's a big one in Antarctica. I don't know that much about it, but another one that you have you heard of Birkel crater? That's another one. Yes. Yeah, Birkel crater like the 20 20 mile hole in the bottom of the Indian Ocean. Yeah, it's crazy. And when is that supposed to be? And so five, that was 5,000 years ago. They've dated that. It's something plopped down in the Indian Ocean. And it washed up these mega tsunamis on the coast of Madagascar and Western Australia that we can see in satellite images today. These got these like 500 foot-high chevrons from where the water went miles inland. And they found organic material from the seabed in these chevrons. And then they date that with carbon-14 dating and they put it right at 5,000 years ago. So so 2500 around that time BC, which is actually a really interesting date when you consider some of the, I guess, the publications that we rely on in our modern civilization today. The Bible, the Old Testament wasn't written long after that. And if you think about where the Indian Ocean is, that could have been the source of the biblical flood. Like that would have washed up north into the Persian Gulf flood of the hell out of that whole region. It's just crazy that it's happened so many times. We like to think of history as being this linear thing. We started out as cave people. We branched out from Africa all across the world. And kept learning. And here we are today with cell phones. No, no, we've been rocked multiple times many, many times. And there's real solid evidence. The Antarctica one, how old they think that is? I don't recall on that. I have to double check that. I have to do a Google J. And so research is a discovery to create your 1.5 colon. 1.5 kilometers beneath the Antarctica ice crust. 482 kilometers in diameter. 482 kilometers in diameter. Holy shit. What does that mean? It's back to a meteorite impact 250 million years ago. Wow. Okay. So that's an old one. It's like an order of magnitude bigger than anything related, even with the younger draw. I mean, that's bigger than the dinosaur one. Yeah. That's like a 99 point whatever percent extinction event. So it just keeps happening. The earth just over millions and millions of years and thousands of years of humans have been around. The earth just keeps getting whacked. The evidence is so overwhelming. And in say going back to the younger driest period of time, there's evidence. When you say get whacked, more than 30 percent of all land mass at that time was charred burned. They claim that it's more fires than existed in the time of the dinosaurs. Now, I don't know if that's an article I wrote on Science Alert. I don't know if they can truly prove that. But if nothing else, 30 percent of all land mass existing today was burned and scorched to death at that period of time. That helps people to wrap their heads around like this, the world was on fire. Yeah. That's the younger dryest mat. They estimate as part of the burning. And because there was floods and fire and this car lights to a lot of origin, this from cultures all around the world. But yeah, 10 percent of the biomass are things that are 9 to 10 percent of the, which is an inconceivable number of that's how much of the world was burnt. and that's now embedded in blackness. 10 percent of the biomass. It's so crazy that there's a literally dark line in the ground. In the ground. It shows where everything was on fire for a long fucking time. Yeah. Well, we barely survived it. There's actually, we now have a correlation of not only population reduction, but a significant drop in genetic diversity. As a result, like it's tied to the younger dryest, there's been a few good studies recently done at that. So we were one of the megafauna that the 50 percent of megafauna at the time that actually survived and got through that event. How do they think people survived? Is there any speculation? Where did we survive? Where was the good spot? I think caves. I think a lot of it would have been underground. And I think that's, you might actually, they may have even known. I think there's some evidence to suggest that some of these, like Darren Kuyu in Turkey, in the capodoshia region, could host tens of thousands of people. There's massive labyrinths all over Egypt at beneath Sakara. There's miles and miles of tunnels and catechums. I've been down into a bunch of them. And even when you look at sites like Gobeccli Tepe, there's been some interpretations of the artwork on that site that seems to indicate a cosmic calendar. Like they're almost marking that date. We know that the ancients were watching the sky. Like they were concerned about it. And comet mythology is a fantastic topic for Randall. I talked with him about this quite a bit. The comet, it wasn't seen as a pretty thing in the sky. Like it was the harbinger of doom, like comets and all those types of things were just seen as really bad things that they were preparing for. But I think we survived partly because of diversity and being spread out all around the world. There were parts of the world that weren't as badly touched, like Australia, for example, that whole continent wasn't as badly affected as, say, the northern hemisphere was from the younger giants. But also caves, 100% caves and sheltered caves. There's big cities that they could take tens of thousands of people on the ground. Yeah. Something wild that it's popped back up in my head, speaking of flooding and this 11,000 year timeframe. Going back to the British hot structure, there's a study that I came across that ties into the video that we're just mentioning that off the west coast of Sahara Africa, right in front of the British hot structure, there's an underwater seafloor slide dated at approximately 11,000 years ago and keyword approximately. The very symbol is in there. So they're not entirely sure the date, but in that timeframe. And this sediment looks like in the shape that was blasted from a flood of water coming out of the Sahara, just based on the nature of the shape of it, that's more than 200 miles wide and maybe 130, 140, 150 miles from north to south. And it's layered sentiment that is 2,000 meters, excuse me, more than a mile deep and it's layered. This right here. So one, it's corresponding evidence that massive force of water may have blown out of the same. and the one reason why this is so significant is besides the fact that it indicates a possible flood of 11,000 years ago. But if there was any remnants of Atlantis, if there was, if the rich hot structure was the location, this is where you would want to go looking. I mean, it's again layered sentiment more sediment. Yeah, sentiment. More than a mile deep. Wow. Yeah. That's just to put this in a perspective from going from east to west, based on this 200 mile, the widest point of the Florida peninsula is 150 miles. Like this is more than 50 miles wider than the entire state of Florida panhandle. I don't know. I mean, it's the same distance from New York City to where I have that in DC, excuse me. So like this is literally evidence of a catastrophic flood. That's more than just a seafloor slide, something bulldozed in when you look at these fluvial erosion, say anyone that's looking at this right now, signature traits of catastrophic water erosion. And it looks exactly like the teaching school when it comes to water striations, whether it's from glaciers or from water, these are signature traits of water. This is not wind. And the fact that all these areas of white blemishes say in the wrist shot are confirmed salt. There's numerous studies. I mean, for example, there is a treaties from 1851 from England and Mauritania that list a few things that talks about one that abundance of gold. It lists that, but actually we back up salt. These export gold out of Mauritania to Europe. And that's one of the locations. And also gold, it said that prior to the land or the gold rush of North America back in 1800s, Europe got most of their gold supply for Mauritania as well. Which is an interesting point because if that was a side of Atlantis, which was said to be so rich in gold, what an interesting similarity. Go back to the image again, please, Jimmy. If you, what's really fascinating too is the description of Atlantis of having that opening to the south. And you see this clear pathway to the south. Everything lines up the shape of Atlantis, like the concentric circles, the amount of them, earth to water, the way the representation of it as described, the mountains to the north. Like everything lines up. And not only that, all that salt is all. If people play around with this on Google Earth, you can check the elevation by using your mouse. All the areas with all the most significant amounts of salt happen to be at the lowest elevations, which I think is corresponding evidence that seawater had settled and later evaporated there. And as you see here, you can see it and it rips through the entire Sahara. And if you look at their study that's showing the trans-Saharan sea way of 56 to 66 million years ago, it shows that the water blasted to the south, but it does not show it going west over the rish-hot. So I feel like there was some other event, something separate that happened. And I mean, yeah, these photos are spectacular. The photos are spectacular, but could you zoom out again, please, Jimmy? The thing that's crazy is how clearly it looks like water came over that and wash back. Look at the left side of that image. It looks so clearly like massive amounts of water came over there and then pulled back. Look at the way it's eroded. Do you want something that's going to blow your mind? So this area right here, scroll in, Jimmy, and you'll see we discussed this last time as being water ripples. So remember when Graham Hancock and Randall Carlson were on your show a few years ago and they were showing you the area of the Missoula of one plains in Montana and Washington, Westbaw. Yeah. God, look, it's so clear. And so what's interesting is that so I measured these and they might be some of the slides in there. I'm not totally sure, but yeah, those are that's white salt, but these. This is a wild picture. It's got a great idea. That's like a crazy thing. It's a recent sunlight. God, it's amazing. You can keep digging in like that. So these ripples when you pan out. And the ones that Randall had showed you, those were something like closer to 300 feet apart and 50 feet high. I've measured these more than 3000 feet to 6600 feet in between each ripple and more than 200 feet high. Wow. So if these are indeed caused from like ripples that you see on the beach from catastrophic flooding. This is a force of water that is truly, it goes beyond the mind's comprehension. It's something that I don't think we could even understand. But if you pan out, you have people have to understand that this is a couple hundred miles from one side to the other. Yeah. And so this is this is this is this would have been a force of floodwater that I think goes beyond anything we could have thought possible. I think this is why scientists have somehow missed it because I don't know how to say this, but no one else seems to be talking about this. Now the structure that you think is Atlantis, how tall are those concentric rings? So it is the entire structure from one side to the other is nearly 30 miles, but the interior structure of the concentric circles is 16 miles. And this is one argument that's made against it is that the size dimensions that Plato had gave are significantly smaller. And so, but I would make two arguments on this. One, this is a 12,000 year old story and I would argue that it is impossible for over 12,000 years to carry down precise translations because of how often from the translations. Oh, significantly, the entire site would be a small circle inside the middle of the circle. But here's the reason why I think those mentioned dimensions are wrong is because Atlantis was said to be busy all day and all night. And I would compare that to any modern city today, which you could argue would be a population within the millions. So if it was as small as Plato described, it wouldn't be feasible to suggest that millions of people would have lived there. And I'll make one another little point, which is that because many people posit that it could be in the Atlantic Ocean, like that, the Azerors. And I think that's a phenomenal argument for that. But if I was to defend the wrist shot, or I would say that if this was a place that was spoken from languages of all over and was said to be a trading hub, I don't think that it would be as feasible to suggest that Atlantis would be in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean as opposed to West Africa, which was green at the time. This whole area was connected by a network of rivers, which I should have some slides in there. To the coast, right? You're the boats and you wouldn't have to venture out in the middle of the ocean as you described in your video. You make a very, very compelling argument. My question, how tall those circles, like how high do those things go? I want to say 60 feet from, or 60 to actually no, excuse me, I want to say 100 feet at some of the highest points down to the salt. I'd have to re measure, but if Jamie, if you go over it, could you go there personally? No. So I have, in fact, to give them a shout out, Josh the Gertzen and David Stighanson went there individually. These are some intrepid fellows. It is a gutsy trip. Josh almost died because you have to drive through a minefield to go there. So actual skeletons. Like an AKA pointed it his head. Yeah. It's a wall to ask place. Yeah. Yeah. He's you have to drive through a fucking minefield. Yeah. Yeah. And bowls of steel. He's an intrepid fellow, same with David. And to be honest, like, I don't, I'm to look, I don't, I really fly over it. If someone wants to fly me over it, I'd love to get some great pictures. Shoot the hell. And that's nothing. I don't want to trash more. Because I've heard for people have gone there. They met the nicest people they've ever met in their lives. They're not shooting you. They're nice. But it's worth mentioning that that I know. Well, there's all the gold there too. I would imagine they would want to protect that gold. Which is why they won't let you do ground rate are here. So Josh brought up ground rate equipment and they threatened imprisonment. And apparently this is one of those countries where they will cut off your fingers. If you get caught stealing potentially. And this is a country that it wasn't until the 80s. And as well as additional law, a legislature in like 2007, where to abolish slavery, but apparently it's not being enforced. There are still slaves in more attanience. So I'm like, when I hear details like this, it makes me just not feel like driving out there. Do they know that people think that's Atlantis or they're aware of this? It's growing. It's fairly. Yeah, people are now talking about it. People are venturing out there. They have this on their currency, the picture of the wrist shot. We're gonna see that. It's the most famous. Yeah, well, just the whole term of Atlantis too. We do tend to focus on it being like a single city, a single thing. It was. And I was chatting with Randall about this just last night. And he was saying, you know, it's, they were colonies. They were outposts. They would have had a global kind of outpost all around the world. So it's possible even likely that Atlantis existed in various different places. And it's almost a term now that, you know, you say Atlantis, it gets this connotation to it. It's almost pseudo-archaeological term. But we thought that was the case. But we did. Troy's another one. And Troy's one until what year was Troy actually physically discovered? Oh, the 1890? 18 something like that? Yeah. 18. I'm gonna say. So up until that moment, they thought that Troy was just a myth. Yeah, it's just fantasy. Yeah. I mean, and that people used to take Atlantis a lot more seriously. It was something happened. In the 1960s, there was a lot of legitimate scientific work being done on like the In the Azerals region, looking at the possibility of subversion and can there be large parts of land that sink? And then something happened where it's like the establishment just turned on it. And it became this pseudo term. And anyone who mentioned it was kind of dismissed and shaken off. In the same way that, you know, they're treating guys like Hancock and with this ancient apocalypse series are now. But I don't know, I don't know specifically what happened, but it used to be taken a lot more seriously. A lot of evidence coming. and uh... with this ancient uh... apocalypse series are now that i don't know i don't know specifically what happened but it used to be taken a lot more seriously and there's certainly a lot of uh... evidence coming from prior cultures that something did exist and i think now we we got a massive body of evidence that just our history is a species and as a civilization goes way back much further than what we thought about as being our own history since you know fits i mean right up until two thousand six we pretty much thought no the last six thousand years that's when we stop being cavemen and became you know started building cities and so nice societies and things like that that's i think they keepers of academia you know just the stuff that you two gentlemen put on your youtube pages should open up fields of inquiry people should be reaching out to you they should be having you speak at universities they should be watching your videos they should be like oh my god like look at all this actual evidence not speculation not like look you're looking at physical geological evidence physical erosion evidence and then all the stuff with the structure that lines up exactly with the stories of it lannus it's fucking wild it's it's one of these things like i'm a very open-minded person i'm not i can't say like with one hundred percent certainty i mean anything's possible of course but even but i'm like there's so many similarities that if nothing else it shouldn't be ignored the the off the west coast should be drilled and run with some light art to see what's going on underneath that sediment and not only that like that's just pretend okay lantis never existed the rish-hot's not it well then that's like focus in then on why is this catastrophic water erosion going through the Sahara 60 million years more recently than it was supposed to there's another image in there Jamie that shows where the trans-Saharan seaway went and it does not reflect it going west over the western Sahara so i'm like in the context of climate science i'm like this should be discussed what why is nobody talking about the Sahara was green potentially 4500 years ago which is by the way the same alleged date as the Great Pyramid's construction in giza 4500 years ago so check this out as you can see it does not annotate the water erosion going west over the rish-hot but as we just showed it clearly did and this was based on a 20 year study wonderful people did this i don't know i have no explanation for why they don't annotate it going west but it clearly did and not only that it went east of nijir along chad which you know i showed you the water erosion along the volcano so what i'm suggesting is that either something else separate happened or they just missed something because again the Sahara is a big place and they can only search so many places when they did this did they have the sort of satellite imagery that are available today no i can't say no satellite for certainly around what year was this this is like i i want to say two thousand seven or so i i could be wrong i got double check that i would have had satellite yeah so but i know that they were doing some boots on the ground stuff maybe they just didn't think to look at that particular areas being maybe they had like a preconceived notion that's what i suspect i don't think they are intentionally not looking at it but i feel like you know when it comes to you know you're mentioning that we should be speaking at universities you know joe the first thing they ever say is like oh jimmy he's he was a fraud investigators for the corporate world like ben uh then has an awesome story too by the way coming out of the corporate world you got oh we could get into that yeah you got cans with okay all right tech i um we'll get into that um but like so that's the immediately dismissed and i want to make an interesting point which is that so so crazy that they're gatekeepers yeah they well the ego centric ego minded gatekeepers like they don't want anyone to discover something they haven't noticed 100% it is it is totally what they do it's almost unbelievable coming as like an outsider to this i couldn't be more surprised to see the reactions to anything alternative because it's like wait a second the success of uh the things that we present the success of grand handcoks ancient apocalypse show this any true enthusiast of the ancient of ancient history or geology this is a win-win for everybody because it's gaining interest in these unanswered questions and everybody would stand to gain from it like archaeologists like it if it's up to me they'd be out there digging right now because of the stuff problem is they have already made these assertions they've already published papers they've already written books that's so good books would now be disproven and they would look foolish and they do not want to look foolish it's it's it's they're throwing everything in this at ancient apockel they really are everywhere in the book i mean one of the radirism yes they're white supremacist white supremacy the boys is white supremacy to say that people who lived 12,000 years ago we have zero idea what color they were we have zero idea what they looked like we were we're literally talking about human beings fellow human beings that created some unbelievably magnificent structures that exist today yeah to call that or they somehow or another connect at the racism like wow it's an ad homin in the only reason why you would do this it's one of two things i've listened to their arguments and it's either one of i'm just gonna say it i'll be bold they're either really stupid to associate that with racism or they're doing exactly what i see going for anyone that says something counter to a narrative which is we need to cancel this person shut them up yeah and and i had a friend reach out to me when the show came out and the google i didn't want to say this but it has to be said the google gram hankok and there's articles at the top linking him to white supremacy i'm like this is in my mind that's why they do it because they want to just shout some doubt i mean it's gonna generate outrage without addressing the things that he says right and addressing his so does marry do an indian woman it's not everything about it is fucking done and he's one of the one that was the nicest guy in the world i know granny pretty well too he's yeah he is he's one of the most considerate people you ever meet he's so nice and he's just so inquisitive and he's been so courageous his entire career and the more time goes on the more he's valid it's a more really yes i mean you go back to fingerprints of the gods i read about that in the nineties i read that book in the nineties and that's when i got really into his stuff and back then if you brought it up people go always are cook this is not but as the internet came about and as more and more information became available and then the discovery of go backly tappy yeah just through the whole thing on its head yeah he has i would argue he's done more to sorry Ben he's been working he anything more he's done more for the bringing the topic of the mysteries of lost ancient civilizations cataclysm's and arguably anyone else on earth because of him i saw him on your show i go down the rabbit hole start looking i start talking about these things so it's like everyone should be the same thank you to gram handcock there i've been they're just so scared that he's going to make them look like fools yeah they wrote these books when they had limited access to information and they made these very like like direct assertions they like this is what happened and they're wrong it's it's a it's a position of power it's it's archaeology not being a hard science that does you know hypothesis experiment result like you can do in things like chemistry for example those these guys they rise to their positions of powers and in academia they become their their whole personal i think sense of self is somehow tied up around this position as an expert in this story and it's that's all it is ultimately we're looking at we're trying to interpret the very scant evidence that is history it we're looking through the bones of many civilizations people have destroyed things rebuilt them destroyed them rebuilt them you're trying to put that together and evaluate this evidence and yeah they they write the textbooks and they've they kind of have that position of power and when new evidence comes along that i think threatens that that's why you get in some ways such a strong reaction because you're almost threatening the person i think they take it that way and it's most certainly unfortunate i'm sure you've seen the the original discussion that graham had with uh dr robert chock when they brought the evidence of the water erosion to the things and then that archaeologist's like laughing but like not really laughing oh what happened it's do we have mock line of an ancient civilization 11 000 years ago well now we have a lot of fuck face yeah yeah there's a lot you know there's there's go backly tepies massive and then there's another structure that's close to go backly tap karaan tepay yeah in fact they're discovering many of them now it's it's yeah it's not only that the whole story as we're told it in dynastic Egypt just doesn't make sense from a number of different perspectives it's as if they arose out of nowhere it like perfect and then degraded over time when you think about it things like the pyramids i mean those are the the first pyramids ever made like these massive mega lithic stone pyramids that that have all of these different elements of sacred geometry and precision and all these different aspects of incredible engineering built into them they did that's apparently what they did first like kept building pyramids after that time and they sucked they saw there is a lot of them they made from mud brick what they don't really know that's was what do you got here jerry karaan tepay yeah they're in April are you really yeah look at this that face jesus christ yeah that wasn't a scary i don't want to and i think i like scary video viewers that i watched today was a video that showed the similarities not just between pyramids but between construction methods all over the world in japan i had no idea that they had made the sarcophagus covers in japan they were exactly the same shape right as the one and odd oddly shaped exactly the shame is the same as the ones they made in in Egypt and in a place there is supposed to be zero connection between ancient japan and ancient Egypt that's not supposed to exist and if you compare that sarcophagus work it's like it looks unbelieve uncannily similar impossible it almost impossible that two people would come up with the same design right because it's it's like coming up with you know i don't know i don't have a good like if someone like this lighter if someone buy i mean this is an unusually shaped lighter the way the top pops the right someone just coincidentally without any internet came up with this on the other side of the planet but like how the fuck it's so oddly shaped right the buttons in the same place the lids in the same place there's no way right that's what it looks like to me and the fact that it took an enormous amount of effort to make and move and put it into place because you're talking about incredibly heavy stone and hard stone yeah that's the other people don't appreciate just how hard this igneous stone is that these things are made from granite granodirite cyanite like these are this heart of instill like it's it's you know there's 6.57 on the most scale it's it's incredible work like in the fact that these similar construction methods existed in Peru they existed in Egypt they just in japan and we don't know how old stone is right that's what's really wacky when we talk about like carbon dating they're not carbon dating stone they they really don't know so even when they they go back to ancient Egypt and they say oh we date the pyramids construction of 2500 BC it's a fucking guess that's what i think it's a guess it really is it has to be a guess it really can't be anything other than a guess they can measure organic matter they can measure stuff that's in between the stones but we have no idea when that was put there if if something existed for tens of thousands of years before we're dating it we really wouldn't know what we would have evidence that these of course people would still live there of course people would still live around them and we would have evidence that those people left up behind that was a certain age but we have zero evidence as to how old those things are right and when i found that i was baffled yeah yeah because i always thought they knew 2500 BC rock solid this is it well they they tie it to the the the guy the king they know when kufu right and so they try and tie and literally with the great pyramid very little evidence there's like a this big statue of him that they found down in the valley temple nowhere near it and then there's a glyph on the inside there's a lot of controversy around that but there are some of these artifacts they do for that reason because they date a lot of stuff based on the site that they found it so if there's organic material at the site that they found it what's been i found it's it's a kind of like a smoking gun piece and all of this is all the vases so you're you familiar with the incredible stone bazers yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah so they in in there is a collection of these things they made from igneous stone there and Jamie have got a few pictures of the bazers in that vase directory and they date back that it's what's interesting to me about these is that they they're some of the earliest types of artifacts that we find they stretch back far into what we'd call pre-denastic time basically mezzolithic times right back to even 15,000 years ago there was a site called Toshka that that was dug up it's underwater now but in this and it was a primitive burial there was a guy that was curled up in this in this burial site on the site go back to that Jamie the one the thin cardboard what's going on there so this is an example and these vases display just astonishing aspects of precision and engineering so this is an example of just how thin this material is so it's igneous stone this might be poor for you or something like this a very very hard stone very hard to work but also brittle when it becomes thin you can see the giant crystal occlusions those the white marks in it this stuff becomes brittle yet it's been worked down to this thinness because this one's been damaged you can see how thin that interior wall is. Petri flinders Petri is a great Egyptologist the first guy to really start applying engineering principles from the industrial nature this stuff he found one he talks about one in his work that was one-fourth of an inch thick, 40th of an inch thick and the interesting thing about these vases there's 50,000 plus of them were discovered beneath the steppe pyramid of josa he collected them all up and even in the museum that's at Sakara they talk about yeah this is so I've been down underneath the steppe pyramid this is a fragment of a one of these vases that I found you can handle down there and even in the museum there they talk about well these he didn't have the mate these were inherited objects from earlier times like they get the concept right and so these things stretch back way back into time there's pre-dinesic artifacts from pre-dinesic burials but there's always these sort of arguments where can you do this by hand can you not and so recently there's been some work done I've been working with a couple of guys the son of Christopher Dunn who wrote some real seminal textbooks on ancient Egyptian technology his son Alex and Nick Sierra their call of like professional metrologist they work for Rolls Royce in Indianapolis they they make like you know aerospace parts turbine blades things like that they've got their hands on a pre-dinesic Egyptian vase and for the first time they've actually been able to scan this thing using a structured light scanner and define the specific elements of precision on it and it's just astounding like this is this this puts the whole concept of can these even remotely been made by hand to bed like these things had to have been made on a machine and made with extreme precision because this vase that is is pre-dinesic this is a picture of the vase here that they found in inner private collection because I should say generally archaeologist Egyptologists they're not engineers they're not particularly interested in sort of how things were manufactured so what what they've done is they've taken this and put this in a machine and it's a structured light scanner so it creates like a point cloud of different lights and then you match a geometric shape to it be that like a flat plane a cylinder a sphere a cone and then you can perform sort of geometric calculations on it and define things like precision so if you go back to that the surface a the vase lip right so this is you can see down on the bottom they've created a point cloud of the top of this lip so the flatness and it's they've called this surface a it's comprised of 3,813 points and it's within three thousandths of an inch of being basically perfectly flat but that's three thousandths of an inch and this is over who knows how many thousands of years of erosion and sand and dust and wind exactly it's at least five thousand years all right I suspect this could be far older than that now what's interesting once you start doing this and if you go to the next one Jamie you now he's now now we're looking at the the lip so this you take a cylinder and you match you basically take 10,000 points plus and you match the the the inside the mouth of the vase to a cylinder and what you can now measure that against the other surface so if you think of like the top of it as being like the x axis this is now your y axis so that first symbol here the perpendicular what you what it's showing is that how perpendicular is this cylinder on its axis relative to the top of the vase the surface a that's on the top within one thousandths of an inch so it's perfectly perpendicular to within one thousandths of an inch of the top of the vase and then the second reading here shows you how perfectly what's the circular arrow like what's the circular ity of it's within 13 thousandths of an inch of being perfectly circular how are you going to do that by hand you well you can't this is this is a thing and if you go literally can't no the no one's ever been out you it gets you can if you rub two surfaces together you can make them flat but when you start looking at the real teller in precision and in these discussions about ancient engineering the it's an easy thing to understand when we talk about 90 degree turns and flat surfaces but what gets really interesting is when you start talking about one surface in relation to another and remember these objects like the big boxes in the syropium that weigh like 70 tons you've got surfaces you know 11 feet apart it's the relativity of one surface to another so how flat how straight is this in relationship to this surface and with this vase the the incredible thing about it is is that it's as you go down it there's another slide you can look at the yeah and you should mention how much this equipment cost real quick well yeah these structured light scanners are like two hundred fifty thousand dollars that their professional yeah this is this is absolutely a tool that gets used in aerospace quite a bit so no one's ever really done this type of work so this and it does there's nothing like this approaching you can't do this with handwork this type of thing but if you slip skip to the next one so now it's this is like this is a great example so what you're doing here is measuring the circularity go to the next one because the lug handles are kind of the really important part of this it's an interesting thing so for one thing it's showing you the okay they solve the problem of carving granite it's made from granite it's actually made from the same rose granite that the the box in the kings chamber the great pyramid is not pottery just a no it doesn't really isn't pottery people often call the pottery real quick yeah when you talk about these measurements yeah what kind of measurements can be achieved through ceramic pottery well ceramic pottery if you're spinning on a wheel I'm not even you might be able to get down to tenths of an inch or or or or half like fresh you would never get to thousand not two a thousand no and this is carved so this is carved out stone right but I'm just saying like if you think about a pottery wheel spinning yeah and you think about the precision involved in that and you look at it it's beautiful it seems symmetrical you seem to me but nothing compared to this kind of symmetry it's so to give you an example so a thousandths of an inch if you take a sheet of printed paper like this this is that's about seven and a half thousandths thick holy shit a human hair two to three thousandths of an inch so it's half by human size of a human hair within of being perfect and being perfect yes so holy shit that's how that's how precisely aligned the mouth of the vases now so again we've carved this out of stone and remember they don't even the Egypt ologists don't say that these they're not spun they're not they're not cast and created they say that the Egyptians you know used very primitive tools to make these pounding stones chisels flinch chisels what did they say in the face of this they don't say don't address it that in generally they don't address the evidence for precision this is hold it down this is what I'm literally grab them yeah go tell me what the fuck is going on this work should should do a bit of that because there's a lot of these are there well it's not just one perfect one that you're oh no this is the only one they we've managed to scan so far and I would I would love to say that if because you can't get your hands on these things that in general curators of Egyptology museums aren't interested in their in their manufacturing or engineering and they don't gain it you don't get access to these vases to do it this one came from a how could they not be interested in that I don't know it's it's it blows my mind so here's an example of like another perfect I'd love to scan this one's one of my favorites it's like you can see the symmetry inherent in the vase just in the fact that it's sitting on like almost like the an egg shell like it's so perfect but what what what that study is showing and what those that that precision that's now been measured is showing that okay these were turned on a machine and not only were they turned on a machine but when you think about the shape of the vase it has these lug handles right on each side they're like got little holes yeah those can't be turned those you can't if you think of it spinning and you're car and this is being carved by machine right those lug handles can't be turned you would have to cut out like a round thing around it and then take another tool and and shape the lug handles without turning it now in precision manufacturing when you introduce another tool that introduces error even in our best processes today and we just don't see that on this vase like those lug handles are within one thousandth of an inch of being perfectly aligned with those other surfaces of the vase it's that it's that relativity of one section of the vase to another that means I unquestionably not possible by hand but B this has been designed like somebody made a model of this and they had a very sophisticated bit of machinery that must have carved it out and when we talk about this machinery like what are the what's the speculation I mean what do they think was used to carve these things is there any markings on them that would indicate there is so this is a whole other discussion when you get into the depths of of this work so when you look at ancient Egypt and the way that gets treated they found tools and I should say it's very rare to find metal in the ancient world right as soon as the Bronze Age starts any metal super precious get smelted down turned into tools weapons things like that so it's very rare to find metal in general but across ancient Egypt they found a bunch of tools so they found some you know copper chisels bronze chisels very primitive stuff some wooden you know squares and plumbobs pounding stones flinch chisels so those are the tools that are found and in general it's like the the the orthodoxie here in the academia will do everything they can to just hammer everything you find into this into this box and say these are the tools we found so therefore everything's made by these tools now outside of that there's a whole realm of what I would call machining marks that exist all over these sites in Egypt there's a place called Abucia that's been close to the public from all the hundred years you have to get special permission to go that's one of my favorite sites it's an old kingdom site like fifth dynasty and all over this site you find amazing evidence for massive circular soils you see machining marks there are these two drills I've got like an hour long documentary just on the two drills because there's been an argument going on for 150 years about the two drills there is evidence for very sophisticated and powerful tools that is etched into these artifacts from the very earliest points in Egypt all over the place and a lot of these things they disappear in later periods of time go back to that image Jimmy Jimmy just have a look at that yeah so here's an example I didn't send you any of the machining marks but I can show them to you at some point yeah so you find the two drills are really interesting because it's a very thin tool and what they would do they range inside from like a half inch up to nine inches and there's plugs that were removed from the stone so it's like a hollow hollow tool that gets that gets cut down and then you snap off the core and now flintest petri he was you familiar with petri he was he was around like late 1800s early 1900s I use his work a lot in the stuff that I do because he was the first guy to apply engineering principles to what we saw which is kind of this meta point that messes with my head a bit in that it took our civilization up to the industrial age to even be able to put some of this stuff into context like anyone else that looked at this stuff before we understood what machining was what working in this stone was what it looks like to cut stone with a circular saw we you just you don't have the context to explain it so we had to get to the industrial age and develop sort of mass manufacturer and engineering for us to even recognize what we're seeing here so he he found uh there's a famous courts called Petri's call number seven and it was it's a it's a drill call from one of these holes it's in granite and it's located in the Petri museum and this museum is one that actually allows research appointments and you can analyze it and it's been analyzed several times it's been an argument that's been gone for literally 150 years about this core because what Petri found and what Chris done Chris done later verified yeah that's Petri's call number seven exactly right there that in fact might even be Chris done's photo um those spiral group that groove that goes around it very obvious striations right it's so it's been in controversibly shown that that's a spiral it's a it's a spiral so it's not like just horizontal striations so if you can imagine the way we do it today without we have two drills and core drills spins really fast makes lots of little marks has been studies done looking at those at those sort of marks that's not what we're seeing here what we see here is a continuous spiral groove of at least two points that's it's a twin spiral that runs down the length of the core now from that and analyzing that you can determine a few things things like how fast was this drill or how how quickly was this drill penetrating the granite and Petri and done both analyzed it and looked at it well it's about a one in 60 rates so for each say 60 inches of horizontal travel it's going one inch into the stone so imagine that so if you if you take a spiral and straighten it out and you just imagine right 60 inches this way you're getting one inch of vertical travel that that figure is 500 times greater than we can achieve today in terms of how how how how fast it penetrates the granite 500 times greater now it it doesn't mean it cut quicker it could have been moving slowly like it might have been turning slowly right but it's penetrating the granite at a rate far greater than what we can achieve without technology today this is why it's so important to bring outside eyes into this whether it's an aerospace engineer like this is you know going back to Troy that was discovered by a businessman he was an archaeologist that's something that most people don't know it's like when you bring an outside set of eyes with different sets of experiences they'll pick up on things that others wouldn't look at that image that that all the spiral lines around that that's just amazing yeah so you can go there and I intend to do this I might be in the UK this year and I intend to do that it's called a cotton wrap test you can actually under a little microscope run a piece of cotton through that groove now they took they actually took it at step further and they made a latex molding of it right and so Chris then they sent it to Chris done the petri museum did this and then he he like cut reference holes in it cut it out and then geometrically proved basically that this is a spiral groove like it definitely it starts above the line and ends below the like he showed that that's it and what I would love to see happen is we could get this core and then scan it with that structured light scanner because it will put that stuff to bed no problem like like there's as far as I'm concerned this is a spiral groove the case has been closed but people still argue the point but it's it's a hundred percent indicator of some form of technology that's far away beyond the primitive stuff that we attribute to the dynastic Egyptians so to me that's it's an indicator that and I don't think the dynastic Egyptians they don't describe having this type of capability we've never found any tools from them that can do this type of thing so I think what we're looking at here with dynastic Egypt is is a story it's a longer timeline it's a story of inheritance I think they inherited a lot of artifacts potentially some architecture potentially like parts of the pyramids or well that type of thing and then that's where they their culture grew from that I mean they themselves described their history is going back nearly 40,000 years like it's way they they themselves look at themselves they look at them like a legacy culture they you know that's in the Palermo stone it's in the Turin Papyrus the priest Manetho talks about it there's a lot of different yeah so that that actual the yellow image in the center that's the latex cordon up to the right yeah that one that's the latex core that the latex molding of core number seven but this the crazy thing is too this is the only core that's really been analyzed like these things they're all over the place like lots of museums have them I'd love to see a body of work be built up with true analysis of it because do they all have similar markings on them well yes and so you can see the holes on a lot of the sites that seem to have a very clear striation on them some of the tubes that the actual drill cause if you like seem to have it that way there were other techniques used so the argument that how the the mainstream archaeologists describe them solving this problem is they wore they had a copper tube and they got sand and they put a rock on top of the tube in a bow drill and they just went back and forth with this and they did some experiments and it looked grinding works ultimately because sand has little chunks of like it's a corunda minute but it takes days and days and days to cut this much and and the markings and the and the machining doesn't look anything like what you see in the ancient examples and and what's more and what's kind of interesting here is that the actual the drill cores that they found they're tapered so actually they tapered in the holes are straight the cores are tapered so it means that the tool itself must have been had had like a almost like a cone shape and the thing that because some people say well those lines could have been created when the tool was removed and I might know if you think about a tapered tool like this the second you take any pressure off it that's the whole tool removes itself from the surface of the stone so those marks can't be removed and I might know if you think about a tapered tool like this, the second you take any pressure off it, that's the whole tool removes itself from the surface of the stone. So those marks can't be made by withdrawal of the tool. It's 100% something going on. And Petri back in the, you know, late 1800s, scratching his head looking at this stuff and he goes, there must have been a weight of two or three tons on one, like he just, he sort of said it was all a, a jeweled tube of bronze that did this, but he was looking at it. He knew a mystery when he saw it and he couldn't explain it. What's the speculation? Like what's the wildest speculations to how these things were made? Well, I'm, I'm pretty convinced that there was, uh, it was, there's obviously source and two drills that are powered by something. Now I think it may not just be pure friction, there might be ultrasonics involved. One of the whole interesting things I like about this space is and this has to do with even like the energy stuff that Randall was talking about that he's coming to talk about as well. There are realms of science that sit outside of our understanding. We'll know more tomorrow in 10 years, in a thousand years about science. So I think when we look at some of these, these things in the past, we should be open minded enough to consider the possibility that some of the answers may sit outside of our current perspective because, you know, our tendency is to look at it all and try and how would we do it? Right. How would anybody have wild speculation that you've entertained? Uh, yeah. I think there's, yeah. So one of the topics that often gets mentioned here is, is like ultrasonic drilling. So having, having it resonated a frequency that matches the native frequency of the rock and sort of separating the, uh, the, the rock more easily. And that's a technology that we're developing. Like we do some ultrasonic drilling like this today with jewelry and stuff. And it's, you literally vibrate. You find the correct vibration. You can put like a little star shape bit through a stone. Uh, they do it in like small work. I've seen lots of examples. And if you turn off the machine, it's like discover stuck in the stone. You, you can't get that thing out. Like it's, it takes, you need that vibration to go through it. Uh, plasma, you can even go as far as well. There was softening the stone somehow with, with some molecular technology, um, speculation like that. Uh, I would also say that some of these examples of technology and machining extend way up to these massive objects. Like you have thousand ton single piece objects that also exhibit some of these signs of precision engineering. So you might be talking about truly giant machines that made them, uh, giant columns and statues and things like that. And what do, what do conventional archaeologists say when they're confronted by all this data, the pottery, or excuse me, the, uh, the vises, this, this stuff that you're looking at here. It's, it's, what do they say? Well, you either get, you either just get a, a denial and they won't address it and you get dismissed as, as, as, as just being ridiculous pseudo archaeology fantasy theory type thing or in the case of the two drills, for example, they, they will answer the funny story, because they will argue that none. It's not spiral. The grooves on that thing aren't spiral. And in fact, in the textbook is what Kristin found out in the textbook that they, where they do try to address the engineering with that two drill, they took the photo of the two drill and they just tilted it just a little bit. So when you look at it on the page, the lines look horizontal it's literally in it in the textbook. Oh, they fucked with it in the textbook. Yeah. Why would they do that? Like altered the photo because they, if, if you admit that, that, that, that, the, the, that tube has a spiral, has a spiral groove on it. Now you're admitting that they're cutting into that granite at a ridiculous rate and you can't do any of that stuff with any of the primitive tools, it has this flow on effect that just knocks over this house of cards that says all this stuff was built with primitive technology in a whole concept of the ancient Egyptians is off. Now, I don't think it's, I think that dynastic Egyptians, they use primitive tools. I think they just inherited a lot of stuff that's potentially a lot older. You know, I, and the proofs in the puddings with these vases, for example, that stuff, those things disappear from dynastic Egypt after the like the third, fourth dynasty. They don't make them anymore. They make alabastavasas. Is that a tool that that's a fantastic example of what I would call an out of place artifact. It's a hollow tube of lapis lazuli, which by the way, there's no quarries for lapis in Egypt, the closest one's probably in Afghanistan. Came from Gebel to a found in a pre-denastic site. It's hollowed. It's perfectly made. This is a very difficult thing to achieve, even with a modern machinery. And it's displayed in a cabinet next to what? Bone and beads. Right. And what is that? What is that supposed to be? It's a, it's something decorative, I assume. It has a gold sheath, but it's a hollow tube. I actually have pictures of it from the end on not probably in the ones you have Jamie, but yeah, hollow tube. It's an out of place artifact. Like these things from hard stone, and these are more examples. Rock crystal, obsidian, gourds, and vases that show just perfect, like just very high degrees of sophistication. You should mention the pre-denastic, the statue of faces. Oh, that's a symmetry. How can you possibly do that by hand? This will, this will wow you. Yeah. So there's a whole, there's a category of aspects to the discussion around ancient technology. Right. There's, and I have to be kind of careful about what you say, oh, it is or it isn't because in reality, we really haven't analyzed that many artifacts. This vase that worked that we've done. First one we've actually taken a look at that, that core. That's the first one and the only one that's really been analyzed. So I characterize something that's beyond the capabilities of these primitive ancient civilizations as being okay. Machining marks, tool marks like these giant circular saws, two drills, precision, and there's elements to precision. And one of those is symmetry. And there's been some interesting studies done on the faces of giant statues. One in particular is the face of ramsies. There's a statue at Luxor. They've since put their head back up. It's up now 30 feet in the air on top of the statue, but it used to be on the ground. And again, Chris Dunn was real seminal and this he went and took a photo like bang on like very front on. And then what he did was you take a copy of that photo, you make it 50% transparent, you make the original 50% transparent, you take one and you flip it like on that horizontal axis, then you overlay them. So you would see any like the left to right. It's like overlaying the left side on the right side. And it's perfect. This face here, but I wonder if you can find the picture of Chris Dunn. There's actually my video right there. There's there as well where I get into it. But it does not that picture you're asking for. No, it's similar, but it shows other aspects of well, the same radius of tool being used to cut. But what's interesting about the symmetry, it's perfectly symmetrical left to right now. This isn't this isn't a feature in humans. No, human is perfectly similar to different nostrils, different eyeballs. It's also not something that is done in artwork. So you know, people often say, well, Michael Angelo, you know, he carved David. It's a beautiful statue. I've seen it's incredible, but it's it's human. It's not symmetrical. Symmetrical is you can't again, you can't achieve that degree of symmetry just by eyeballing it and doing it by hand. And it's also something that's not really human. I think some of these statues almost look a bit inhuman because of that symmetry when they're when they're up there and they're staring at you because it's it's mind-blowing to actually go and look at them. But yeah, it's it's it's the other aspect is it the most efficient way to create that would be to say, well, I'm if you were going to design it in computers, like, well, I'm going to create half this face in a program and make map it out. And then I'm just going to reverse it and say, well, that's the other half. It's literally the most efficient way to do it. And that's kind of what we're seeing in some of these statues. Go back to that image, please. It's a virtual perfection. And how did what what what's the explanation for this that modern archaeologists use? They did it by hand, right? That's a big hand. That's literally what they say. You just don't they're not engineers and construction experts at the end of the day. That's the problem is so it's very difficult to engage them on those specific details. And I've taken many engineers, master stone mason, stone carvers, construction guides, and they almost they a lot of them see it immediately. People that understand what it takes to both work in this material and to work at the scale that some of this stuff is worked in. They see it immediately and they just dismissed the idea that this was done with literally pounding stones and you know, copper chisels. It's a funny thing. They insist those things are how they were done, but not once no one ever has has cut a single big slab of granite the size of a refrigerator in half. We've never gone that far. No one's demonstrated that yep, you can take a copper bar and sand and grind your way through a refrigerator sized block. And you're saying copper because we think that they didn't have steel both. They didn't. Well, they yeah, they mean they they didn't and not until late if there's no evidence for it. There's evidence for copper and bronze. There's no evidence for it when we're talking about right. A thousand five hundred BC. Exactly. Now if there was some sort of very sophisticated civilization that was tens of thousands of years before that. And they were wiped out. And then you're leaving behind these artifacts and then people are claiming them as their own and then trying to copy them. That imitation was a huge part of it. And we even see that there's you go to the Egyptian museum and there is there's these beautiful igneous stone vases made of made of granite. And right next to them in the same display because they're found in the same place. There's a rough pottery vase that's not even turned just put together by hand and they've painted it with dots to make it look like granite and it's shaped the same way as the granite vase. That's like this pure invitation like this here. I love this. This is one of my favorite examples. And this is like either first dynasty or pre-denastic. But yeah, you have a hard igneous stone vessel made with perfection. And right next to what's clearly an imitation of it made from pottery and they've even dotted it up to make it look like granite. All the most sophisticated artifacts, pyramids, everything are all the oldest. It gets worse as it goes on. And that's that doesn't that's not supposed to make sense. And like I when I saw my Zamas on with you, Joe, I was trying to articulate a point which was that there was a you know, a middle kingdom. There was the first kingdom. There is the and there was these periods of revolt and revolution and missing history within Egypt. And there's three different kingdoms. And one of which was 126 years of lost history. And other was over 200 years. And the one point to mention about that is that that means that whoever took over and re-establish themselves. There's now no one alive at that period of time that was around prior to whatever it is that reset them that that government or whatever they were. So if there's 126 years of lost history, no one is now alive to say what was what before that year one of 126 years. If that makes sense. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's 3000 years late. The dynastic Egyptian civilization itself is 3000 years old. Now they they do trace that back 30 plus 1000 years. They describe a time that is zep tepy when the gods walked the earth. They literally talk about these magical abilities that you could interpret as technology. And then after that, there was the Shemsu Hall, the followers of Horace, the semi-divine mystical beings. And they have a list of kings and rulers that go back into that time. It's it's only an owl interpretation, an owl archaeologist that really say, well, you know what, that's just myth and legend. And after that, you know, we start, didn't dynasty one king one, that's that's actually history that they what what is their justification? Why do they say that it's just myth and legend? Like, where are they getting this information from? Well, why are they making these well, because civilization can't exist until 6000 years ago. It says right here, Joe, memorize it. But once they see go backly tepy, don't they kind of have to re they should have the they refuse. They're like, they say they're primitive. They say go backly tepy was created by they changed it. And it literally happened. I saw this argument being made when micro-jurmas here with Joe with Graham and Randall, they say it's made by hunter-gatherers. They literally changed the definition of what it means to be a hunter-gatherer rather than move that that precious date of civilization starting from 6000 years ago to, you know, 10,000 years ago with go backly tepy. And I I think it's ridiculous. Go backly tepy. You cannot produce that type of of a of an instructive of an installation without civilization, right? You just so many things. The specialization of allowing someone to be able to carve, you know, 18 foot pillars that weigh several tons of just that. But the fact that these animals on those pillars are 3D. Yeah, you carve out the stone to remove stone so that you have these giant pillars with like a lizard crawling up the side of it. But the lizard extends out from the stone. Yeah, it's not carved into it. I mean, that's just insane. Yeah. That's difficult as possible. And you need, you know, you need a population based to support the sort of the development of specialization like that. It's as if to me, it's as if they just think, well, no, these hunter-gatherers, he's dude, just want to get around the weekends, get away from the women. Go and do some rockin' little little carbon project on the weekend. We'll move some stones over here. And it's not just stone circles, there's buildings and systems and quarries like there's infrastructure at these sites as well. And they're finding more and more of them in Turkey. And they, yeah, the fact that it all goes back to that dates just like, look, we should be shifting the date of civilization back. We've shifted back our date of as a species. Yeah. I mean, fossil record, we were 190,000 years old forever. They found a human jawbone in Morocco. Now we're 300,000 years old. The latest DNA evidence are looking at our divergence from a common ancestor within the anatels and studies on teeth morphology, put us at around sort of 800 to 900,000 years old, potentially. Like that's the range of us as being sitting around here as modern humans on the planet. That's so much time. Dude, it goes back to other, you think about it, like that's into other periods of warm, more hospitable environments. Like it's beyond, you go through a couple of different glaciation cycles in that timeframe. And give us a few warm, sunny days and enough shit to eat. And we're going to solve some freaking problems. Yeah. Especially for thousands of years. Yeah. Something wild about go backly tapping. How many of those pillars are still buried and not excavated yet? Almost 200? It's like 5% of it's been excavated. And they found it by accident in the 90s. It did. That's what's crazy. Like, it wasn't a sheep herder. Yep. Yeah. It's a pot-bellied hilly. I found something sticking out of the ground. Let's this. Let me kick the dirt away on this thing. And then what the fuck? Yeah. You find 12,000 year old massive stone structures that predate what we think of as history by 6,000 years. Yeah. It's it's crazy. And it did just finding more and more of it. And I yeah, you know, it's funny. Jimmy, you mentioned about an interesting point about the sediment, because I know and Graham Hancock likes to talk about this to underwater archaeology, the fact that sea levels of rotary, risen three to 400 feet. One of the challenges with that is exactly that is that this catastrophic flooding that happen as a result of this violent process that got us to our climate of today and our sea level is that yeah, the sediment everywhere. So even if you were, if there were cities, there were remains, the younger driest and the cataclysm was so violent and such a savage event that it would have just smashed up. And even if there were stuff that's now underwater, it's like buried in sediment. Like, it's not like you're going to just take pictures of the ocean floor around these continents and find in lost cities. In a lot of places, this is all going to be buried in sentiment. Smashed in a bit. Yeah, it's very difficult. Just completely smotherings. Yeah. But they should go looking. They should go looking. But I mean, just knowing the geological data, knowing that the younger driest impact theory appears to be correct, knowing that there's people like Randall Carlson who have looked at the surface area of North America and shown this incredible, incredible pieces of evidence that there's massive water flooding that went through the unimpossible to understand. Like you can't comprehend the amount of water and the amount of power that would come from that water and just from being impacted by a mile wide chunk of iron that slams into a nice cab. It's crazy. The channel's cabbling is absolutely spectacular. I go, I've done those trips with Randall a bunch of times. It's such an incredible landscape when you put the it in that context. Yeah. And you're looking at this outflow from these floods. Like we've never like, yeah, it's these massive big coolies that are 800 foot high and you're standing on top of about 300 foot a sediment to the bottom of it. And it's just ripped all this basiled out and then dumped it out into this massive big boulder spree that's also several hundred foot deep. And you've got granite from Canada that's been carried by these floods down here and deposited in these giant icebergs. It's happened over a couple of days. Yeah. I mean, maybe up to a week. But yeah, it was, it was, I really think he's onto something with the, you know, like the major flood, like there's so many problems with the Missoula flood, the main theory of like, well, lots of little floods that this ice dam reformed and it's a good topic for Randall. But yeah, I think it definitely, it had happened in a real short time because that whole Lake Missoula area where they say was the reformation of an ice dam. That's what they say. So I, well, this reformed like 95 times and these floods happened. That's we have no evidence for that. And there's nothing that ever supports that theory, least of all hydrodynamics of trying to form an ice dam that's like 2000 feet deep in six miles wide. It's ridiculous. I always, guys, dams don't get that big and can't happen. And it makes sense if you think about the fact that they believe we got hit by these massive chunks of rock and ice and stone and iron from space. Let me, 43 miles, 1000 miles an hour. Yeah. Boom. Into two mile thick ice. Two mile thick ice. Have you, let me ask you, Wes, have you heard of the Carolina Bayes? No. Okay. This is, this is a great one because this ties into that. And this is like one of those things that nobody knows about, but it's a feature that's everywhere. And so up and down, if you search for Carolina Bayes, Jamie, all up and down the East Coast is not just the Carolina. There are literally millions of these geological features. They're, they're literally base. They're elliptical base. The whole landscapes littered with them. We started to notice them with the advent of aerial photography. And then when we started doing light-up lives, we start to see them under everything, millions of them. We also, that's on the East Coast, then over in Missoula, we have what's called Missoula rainwater basins, again, millions of them all over the, all over the landscape. Look at that. Carolina Bayes. And they're, everywhere. They range in size from pretty small to pretty big like miles in diameter. And they're all elliptical. They're all like a conic section. Now, what are they? Look at that. Lido one is really good. What do they think these are? So there's been some debate. And one of the mainstream opinions is that they're well, they're wind and sand, the Olean, LaCustrian solution created. There's, none of the experiments along the lines of wind can back this up. The interesting thing about these is that they're all oriented in a specific direction. And what turns out is that there was a study done because the guy went and mapped out thousands of them and lined them up. And it wasn't until he took into account the Coriolis effect. So the spin of the earth that all of a sudden all these lines, the orientation of these basins all lined up at around Saginaw Bay. So which would have been buried in ice. So here's the theory that that comes out about the Carolina Bayes is that there was a massive impact into the ice. And it basically threw up splash damage of ice boulders, the size of baseball stadiums on suborbital trajectories that then created this saturation bombardment and liquification of the entire East Coast and over there in Missoula of the entire land. Like it's that image, Jimmy in that lower left. Oh, I have a laser pointer. Yeah. Yeah. Jimmy, I brought one. The gift that would be fun giving. What I have to do to give it to this press that but oh, yeah, rip off. That little plastic thing. It's like a safety. Oh, no, I rip out the battery. The little color here. You can use this one. It's ready to go. Show me how to I got you. Okay. So this one. Wow. Jesus. I know crazy. Right reflected back. Yeah. There's the real deal. So is that what they look like in real life? They're more, they're more elliptical than that in general. So if you look at the light, our imagery, but a lot of them yet. And so they're overlapping as well. I can't see. Bro, I'm going to be shooting this thing at airplanes later. I got one. That's $18. I've ever spent on Amazon ever. I got one little pop balloons. Really? So much. Oh, dude. I bought. Yeah. It's it sounds like it comes a little case with safety goggles. You got to put them on. Two or less in this show. I learned so much. I'll bring you. So these, these are what is that in real life? Is that is it actually look like that? It depends. Some of them are just farmland. Some of them are still lakes. They have bodies of water in them. They mostly show up with lighter. Oh, look at this. There are a few spots. You want to Google. Yeah. You can't see them on, on Google Earth. There's that's, that's more of a natural lake, but they're, they're literally everywhere and they overlap. The whole landscapes made up of them. Didn't they find most of them through later? Those are a lot of the sentiment. They started to see them with aerial photography and then lighter. They just turned up everywhere under farmland. I wish I, if I could, I didn't send you the photos of the base with lighter. But the, it's just the, the crazy story about their creation is that these are splash damage from a cosmic impact into the ice. And they think it may be related to the younger dry. So one of the impacts into the ice kicks up massive ice boulders that are coming in at like, you know, six or seven kilometers per second that takes seven or eight minutes of these, you know, ballistic trajectories to come down from Saginaw Bay and then just all over the East coast and Missoula. And it, it would have exterminated anything that lived that literally liquefied the ground. The ground would have the earthquakes and the impacts would have turned the ground into quicksand. Like we see in, we've seen the aftermath of earthquakes. You have cars that are half buried in mud. Like it literally liquefies the earth. And it was just a saturation bombardment on the East coast. And it's people now just, you know, we play golf on them and it's all this stuff. But there it's a, it's a catastrophic landscape. The entire East coast, which is like you did the coast as well. So here, this image is what? Yeah, this is from South Carolina's government page talking about it. Carolina Bay, as you see there, ellipse, they're elliptical, they all orient in a certain direction. And so the conventional explanation is wind wind and, and basically water. Yeah, but it doesn't, there's none of the experiments make sense as a guy on YouTube, um, Antonio Zamoras. He's also written a paper on it in a couple of books, but he shows that, yeah, it's, there's always been a bit debate about them. It's, it's, but, but the by far, the best, I think explanation for them is the, is the ice, ice boulder hypothesis. It's crazy to think about it. Like, you know, impact happens over here. Eight, nine, 10 minutes later, you just have this rain of just destruction coming from the sky that obliterates the entire coast of the, of the United States. That's, you'd expect if there's something that hit at a high speed and, and of course, there'd be fallout, things would get sprayed about. It would make sense to find that if the younger, dryest climate impact hypothesis is true, there would be something like that. They've done experiments. Yeah. So they've like, you, you shoot like a bullet into ice at an angle, and it shows like the shattering of ice and the, and the, the orientation. So we can step backwards from the bays and look at like, okay, what's the energy required for the impact and what angle was the impact coming in? And they, it's something like it would have been probably a a mall wide impact on, uh, up at Saginaw Bay that might have ejected that much ice to do that. We're so vulnerable. Yeah. So vulnerable. And we like to think this is all permanent. I mean, you think about how ridiculous human beings are. We're spending most of our lives accumulating stuff, trying to get status, trying to, you know, fuck as many people as we can and get the biggest house. And meanwhile, there's rocks headed our way that are going 45,000 miles an hour, that could exterminate 90% of the population instantaneously and completely erase every little bit of information we've ever accumulated all the knowledge, all of our history, all of our understanding of physics, mathematics, the astronomy, everything. God, see a good buy. Welcome to being a fucking ape man again. Welcome to like eating whatever the fuck you can get your mouth and dying when you're 12 and having people try to steal all that from you. Yeah. You imagine. Within a like, like three, four generations, people would be, this is what I love the ancient Egypt analysis. You would be probably hammering a black rock into a shape like this, like a fun and dancing around a cave fire trying to turn it on. Like if we dance around a fire hard enough, then this black rock will turn on and it will give you the right answer to anything I want. Like it's just, we'd be talking about plasma TVs like it's a, the legend in the past. I mean, we would have no evidence of any of this stuff. And one of the weirdest things about us is we insist on putting our stuff on hard drives. Oh, God. And which is the absolute worst thing. And then there was the Georgia guide stones, people are like, well, let's blow that shit up. Somebody blew that up. Something interesting. They still haven't found anyone from that. I find that quite interesting that they called it an act of domestic terrorism. I mean, exploded ordinance on on government land or as is publicance by the state, but they don't have anyone. They had a car drive right by it. They have in no suspects. I find that really peculiar because there was supposed to be that buried time capsule. Yeah. Well, they allegedly dug it up and there was nothing there. I find that interesting. What do you, what's your crazy 10 foil hat conspiracy theory? Okay, here we go. It was great. So this is this is complicated. I made the Georgia guide stones. By the way, do we know that? Some of it's a mystery. Some of it we know. Right. It was, um, it was a gentlemen, I made a video about this. Yeah, RC Christian and there was a small group of donors. And they had had these, um, written, uh, essentially laws for like in the event of a cataclysm and in human history was to be reset. And this would be a guidance for how we should proceed. Yeah. And some people could send it to be very benign. I don't, I wasn't a big fan of them because it basically preaches, um, I would say communism. It talks about having, um, population control as far as not allowing that there should be societal pressure as well as legal pressure on controlling how many kids people have moving forward and to keep a balance at 500 million. They don't say reduce the population of 500 million. That's where some of the conspiracies come in is that this is a depopulation agenda. But the conspiracy to answer your question. Some people suspect that what if, because there's a lot of talk today about people wanting to reduce population and, you know, we're destroying the earth, that what if the powers that be that did create them purposely, if they're, if they're under, if they're under, that way, if they're under their plan, they'd want to destroy them, remove that evidence and pretend those guidance zones and even exist in the first place and remove that, that time capsule. This is complete conspiracy. I don't know what I'm talking about. But do I do find interesting? So is that the car? Yes. Here's the most bizarre thing of this thing. The charge, they destroyed. So as you can see, they, they cause significant but the very next day, less than 24 hours after this bomb went off, they leveled it. They raised it to the ground because they said it was a safety hazard, but I'm like, this is the middle of a field. They can coordinate off with police crime scene tape and just be an Iraq veteran. Like when there was an idea, they'd go off. They got people come out and investigate this and do an investigation. This was a bomb on, on, on the, on United States, uh, you know, ground and they leveled it the next day. And I'm like, where's all the forensic teams coming in to try and like analyze the explosive evidence? It just seemed really, really, they urgently removed all evidence of this. And that's the part that makes my little conspiracy wheels go is because, you know, where's the true investigation? Where's the FBI? Where's the ATF? Again, less than a day after that bomb went off, they raised it to the ground. And nothing since, I mean, how do they not found this person? They, the why would they raise it to the ground? Why wouldn't they just fix it? Or they, I mean, it was a salvageable. I don't know. What I do know is that they quickly remove that thing. And I just, that just, that's just a little bit weird. Why would you do that? Where's the ATF? Where's all the people out there taking swabs of everything? You know, if there was a natural disaster that was imminent and it was headed our way and only a few people knew about it, how much do you think they tell us? They wouldn't. Yeah. Yeah. I think I damn think because we would go crazy. We wind up looting all the targets. That's not the target. Target and Walmart. I'm going to last game. Star books. Real quick. Did you hear what Elon Musk said on the full send podcast a few months ago? What? So there's full send, the note boys, awesome guys, great podcast. Elon Musk was on there. It's like four months ago. It's like 15 million views. So three hour podcasts and at two hours and like 53 minutes, they start talking about cataclysm and ice ages and Elon Musk, this is out of all things that were discussed on the podcast. In my mind, the most interesting part of it all got zero coverage. It's like nobody talked about it. And it's because it's two hours and 50 minutes in. But Elon Musk says a couple things within just a few minutes. He says, if you want to go down a deep, deep rabbit hole, look into ice ages and how often they happen, he goes on to say that it's listen to this. Okay. Listen to it. If you read the about ice ages, yeah, really? Like a deep rabbit hole on ice ages. What's so intriguing about him? The whole earth has just been through like the whole earth is just freezing. Like I said, this deep rabbit hole on ice ages, deep rabbit hole. Where should we know? So many, wait, there's so many competing on it. It's like a little bit of a tidbit of it. Yeah. Why do you love it? I mean, I think it's just interesting. So interesting. That's how much earth's climate has changed. And even where the magnetically, where the poles are has shifted over time. So anyway, there's also been times where the past where our galaxy is like. Anyway, this that's because also been times where the past where our galaxy is like collided with another galaxy That that probably you know through things for a bit of a loop at the time Was there like conspiracy when it comes to ice ages or anything like that or it's not really no When was the last I say tell me what was that? Well, we're technically in Sort of an ice age right now although it doesn't what you call an ice age what happened at global warming wait Yeah, how so what defines an ice age at that global warming is a deep rabbit hole What do you do when you want to download deep rabbit hole though is that YouTube videos books or how do you educate? We go internet and yeah books and clicking around the internet Googling with media, you know YouTube whenever so Twitter can be interesting so But I think there was probably something significant that happened at the In in the last ice age because we don't see any evidence of writing I want to say I'm using ice age in the colloquial time like of like when when was very snowy and And where the glaciers came down far and where where some were short went to was very long and that was about 10,000 years ago so Some of something happened around I think around that ice age that because we see no writing How do you know writing before that ice age and we we start to see writing pop up in multiple places on earth after that after the most recent locally termed ice age so Yeah Like said, they've been times when Earth has been extremely tropical and where it's been a snowball But these these central curve are very long periods of time the global warming thing we're talking right here That's about it. He knows For such a unbelievably smart individual and as rich and powerful as he is I look at these topics that were into cataclysm's younger dryest Lost ancient technology poles. That's the one thing. That's what I would like to dive into that Yeah, I watched a video on that this morning the the Adam and Eve video. Oh, yeah, I tell this thing Jesus Christ. That's an interesting one. Is that how much of that is? Agreed upon that there could be a time where the magnetic poles actually shift so this is science that they say that the last one was like 778,000 years ago and we're more there were like something like 200,000 years overdue But the avenue story the theory of that is that these Happens and cycles of 6500 years and that it's a 90 degree flip But six days later around the seventh day it corrects itself and planet flips No, it's good. That correct. It's a it's a planet flip 90 degree and that because of it The earth essentially does a stand still the sun will be direct will basically stand the same spot causing heating Like we've never experienced and that the wind and the waters continue with their momentum because essentially the wind travels at approximately A thousand miles an hour at the equator. So the theory is that when that event happens It's going to be cataclysmic and here's the wild thing is that in that document. It says a Continental size tsunami being two miles high Well, I showed you the emmy kusi volcano in Africa in the Sahara Which is at 11,300 feet that has salt as well as evidence of gastropods See like two miles high. Yes, and I'm like it's just it would make a lot of sense like if you look at the Bible and involving like Revelations and saying like six days on the seventh day God rested and that document it says six days things start Curing down a bit in the set, you know by day seven things are starting over new So what's the science behind this complete reversal of the magnetic pole? So real quick This is the I the part that sets me off about this is that any article you ever read on this and makes it crystal clear that This will not be apocalyptic Maybe we'll have some no we'll potentially have some satellite communication issues that could affect our power grid and telecommunication Systems and that's going to be unfortunate But don't worry. It's not a doomsday I'm like, okay first of all if the grid goes down that is doomsday But number two they don't know what they're talking about because they claim that the genia geomagnetic Pole shift is because of the interior whether it's iron core or whatever it is the molten core does a shift and because of it That's why the the compass will flip but I'm like if you look at the nature of earthquakes They some originate in the crust others originate in the mantle in the in the parts that are that aren't solid So I'm like if you're saying that the interior that is molten does a shift Why on earth would you suggest that it wouldn't cause earthquakes or volcanic activity on the surface? So I feel like the I every article I ever read on geomagnetic Pulships they go out of their way to say don't worry. It's fine and I'm like But yet the evidence shows that it's accelerating back in just the 1990s It was traveling the pulled the North Pole was transitioning at 10 miles a year now It's at 40 or almost 40 miles It's accelerating and then Adam and Eve story it talks about actually no not the Adam Easter There's a documentary on Nova years ago that the evidence shows that when you've studied all other volcanic rock For prior known pulse shifts because keep in mind there's hundreds that are known This has happened throughout millions and millions of years. This is mainstream science. The poles do flip They they but it's not that the earth flips over it's that the inside core does and so your magnetic compass will flip like what causes it? So the whatever that molten core is it does a shift inside it allegedly happens in cycles and we're long overdue and When it happens the other theory is that the earth shields will be diminished What definitely so the magnet we know two things right now is that the pole is moving So it's off. I think it's it's off the even the South Pole might be off of Antarctica at this point like the magnetic South and then the magnetic field consequently to this movement is weakening So we know our magnetic field and that's where a lot of that danger is going to come from is if the magnetic field keeps weakening Now everything cosmically that happens is going to hit the earth and particularly us with our electron It's all gonna get He's more easily smashed because the magnetic fields what protects us from solar flares and cosmic radiation and all this stuff So as as as the field and the acceleration of that weakening of the field sorry is accelerating So it's it's getting Gets getting weaker faster So we seem to be heading towards a unknown or under term in time where the poles may shift Like the polarity of the the the earth will shift. Yeah in the compass. Are there any estimates on when this could possibly take place? According to every article I ever read look. Oh don't worry. It's probably another thousand years I mean you have no idea what you're talking about. It's accelerating and if you look there's a there you don't have to google this Jamie I don't know what the but there's a mountain chain in eastern Oregon where it's the most evidence of a pole shift That there was a volcano that was active during the shift and if you take a compass along The the volcanic rock the compass will slowly start to change and so wherever like pottery or volcanic rock solidifies That wherever the North Pole is at that time that it's an imprint and the compass will continue to show that It's really fun. Take a compass around volcanic rock and it will it will move the compass to wherever the North Pole was then But here's the interesting part is that what it shows is that the polshif starts slow and then the accelerate to the point where The day that it happens you could potentially see the compass slowly moving and then when you go back to this Adam and Eve story talking about the polshif they say that the event happens and approximately a quarter of a day So six hours So it's like it starts it comes out of nowhere and I'm like what if Like I'm into the cosmic impact that there's unbelievable evidence that definitely happened But there's other things that happen on earth whether it's super volcanoes Where if that's related to polshifs as well and the reason why the evidence wouldn't be Necessarily that we couldn't find it is because if the Adam and Eve story if the if the details Disgusting it are accurate the reason why we're not seeing the evidence of it is because it flips right back and thus Masks the evidence that it ever happened So it's pretty wise you guys are freaking me the fuck out man. Can you actually text Elon real quick? He knows he talks about no writing before 10,000 years and he's saying it afterwards and he's talking about deep deep rabbit hole Listen to what he says he's careful with his words and I mean if since we know there's been five interglacial periods over last 450,000 years This is the topic you want to see something else President Trump said it too. What are these? He was I have the I have the video on my my laptop It's only 30 seconds long if you YouTube Donald Trump on climate climate scientists basically they were talking about global warming and he says he basically interrupts and says it's gonna cool first though isn't it and The scientists like oh, that's not what the evidence shows and he starts he kind of laughs he goes I'm not so sure you know that and I'm like Of course he wouldn't people don't don't Trump's anti-sigh. He's stupid. I'm like he didn't just pull that out of his ass He was saying when he was the president. Yes, this was just a few years ago. This is probably his last year of his term It's I had I have the clip on my laptop. It's a 30 second clip or maybe 20 seconds He said it's going to cool first though before isn't it and I'm like I look at what Muska saying in this evidence of the Poll shift I think that the true data on earth is that the earth is cold most of the time that right now We should be grateful that it's nice and cozy because we can live when it's warm But I think that the data might indicate that earth is cold more often than it's hot Well, that's what Randall Carlson has said and what Randall Carlson said that really freaked me out he goes Global warming is not scary. He goes global cooling. He's gots. What's really scary? But we're so concerned with our own guilt and impact because of industrialized society and what sort of You know impact we're having on the climate and the earth and our air and and then there's this narrative that just gets repeated Over and over and over again this fear mongering and everyone gets freaked out It's not to say that we aren't polluting. We certainly are not to say that we shouldn't improve We certainly should but if the fucking magnetic poles might shift and we might get hit by a giant rock from space We might have bigger problems. Yeah, and we're gonna be concentrating on nonsense Which is really par for the course with the human beings We're gonna be concentrating on these things that we're really knocking to fix over the short term When something might happen that it makes all of it a moot point This is what the doomsday people say where you guys say something to yeah This is gonna say like that's the analogy is the great one that from my friend George Howard says it's like We're sitting in a car arguing about what what what channel the radio is tuned to but the car sitting on a train track Right and the trains come and eventually because the climate the climate change that we're going to get from yeah catastrophic impact or any of these other Events that inject kind of energy in from the exterior system I mean just all of this current discussion pals into nothing is any in there's super volcanoes too That's what all the time which by Yellowstone Yellowstone's overdue Yellowstone is a continent killer. Yeah, I mean we have no Save guards in place. There's no we're lucky that the last Essentially 10,000 years with a couple little blips things like Birkel Crater We've had really calm pleasant weather for most of it I mean that's why our civilization has risen because if you look at the temperature record and the swings from Cold to even colder and back again. I mean it's it's up and down There was all sorts of nasty things happening You know more than 10,000 years ago and and ever since then it's this pretty straight line It's the reason that we're a civilization now and because we think in such short term time frames human lifetimes or you know Yeah, just a couple hundred years We just ignore that stuff But yeah, if you extend the timeline out far enough these things are gonna happen again and we should probably be yeah a bit more Conscious of them and like that. Yeah. That's that's the threat. Someone must know Some if there's enough smart people they should be investigating this. I'm like what does Elon know? What do other people know? Like some people speculate that the reason for such brazen Bat poor behavior involving spending with the government and the economy and the US dollar and all these things like that Some speculate this totally conspiracy that like the powers that be know something's coming and so they're just gonna keep things going until then Because the way things are being run does it makes no sense World economic form is taking place right now at Davos and Klaus Schwab and George Soros just pulled out of it I did would you make of that? They went to the bunker They think it's a pretty big holes in Colorado and there's a lot of bunkers in New Zealand too that are in my billionaires There's big holes in Colorado. Oh, yeah, I mean that's that's also the Cheyenne Mountain and that's where all like the Commanders and stuff and and they've they've been From from sources unknown I can also tell you that at some point they have I've seen I've eyeballed this like an an RFP request for proposal for people to develop Basically drone systems you know that the movie Prometheus where they threw the drones They there was an RFP for people to develop tech like that because the the government was interesting The premise was that they wanted to be able to fight in underground cities Fight yeah like is in for the military want to be able to map terrain and have these drones that can navigate in underground space without GPS and and map the environment because it's the combat situation was fighting in underground cities There's gonna be a small population of marauding people and there's very little resources and the small number of humans left alive and Civilization be thrown into chaos right fun. Yeah Good time, but let's argue about what gender you should use the restroom. Yes. Yes I'm sure there's people that explore that premise man. They have to be I think smart people top man as they call it Probably must be looking into it And so like I brought up on the first time I was on with you and then a Graham Hancock had a whole episode on it The capadocia, you know underground cities. There's there's a cool many of them and a lot of them can support tens of thousands of people That almost to me looks like a doomsday bunker like an arc of some kind like they could hold house farm animals They connect to underground rivers that are 15 stories down that this was sophisticated And unlike that underground rivers are 15 stories down They dug right to them and here's something else They say that there's zero evidence of any type of cave in so whoever carve this out of the the limestone in there This was sophisticated like they did so in a way that it didn't collapse in on itself and yet and they also must have known that it It reached a freshwater Source of water down below so as long as it doesn't get hit directly right which you could never predict Yeah, you'd be screwed. Yeah, which is where I'd want to be if it happens. This is wild Look at there's pictures that show images of it like underground Yeah, we've we've seen those before when Graham and Randall were on last we we talked about these and that they'd probably use these for short periods of time Right post impact before they came back to the surface again So they weathered the storm and then came back above and that they had gotten accustomed to this Which is really wild man, so this is in Colorado? They're in all over the place. You mean you should Google the shy end you want to grip them if everything goes sideways Completely back to caveman life. Do you really want to make it through that? Yes I've seen enough television shows movies to know that it's a lot of fun. I'm gonna I'm a prepper. I have my I have my things in place to be safe And I would if if shit really hit the fan I'd want to look after those who are still around, you know like I don't know Maybe it'd be miserable and be eaten alive by cannibals. How many bullets do you have saved? I won't answer that ask me after the program plenty Okay, plenty of it. I was a soldier. All right, so you need thousands because it's a lot of thousands because people don't realize you hear that Oh thousand rounds. That's scary like if you're just doing target practicing you go through a hundred rounds in minutes So you would need a bunch and you'd want a variety of calibers And you'd want a bunch of each one of those calibers because if you get to a point where you run low You want to be able to go scavenging and you would want a variety of weapons that can house different calibers You want a shotgun you'd want the 556 you'd want probably a 9 millimeter because it's the most abundant And Ruger 10 22 long rifle you'd want it all. Yeah The people coming at you though, too. It's that's the thing like I've got a few acres and you run through the scenarios and stuff like that The people that are gonna come at you from the cities and from those desolate areas like they're the winners of that competition They're gonna be the most savage crazy emm-f's that have been eating everybody else Yeah, I'm taking all their shit. So you just gotta be and then how long before we start figuring out phones again after that How many thousands of years for that's what's really crazy to think of things get knocked into the stone age Like if you go back to the sophistication of ancient Egypt and you think about What the civilization could have been like? I mean you're just speculating you're just trying to just imagine how they could have moved these 500 tons stone blocks 500 miles you're putting all these things into your mind and then say how long does it take to get from that? If you knock back into barberians, how long does it take to get from that? To where we are now well evidence would suggest something like 6,000 is Wild you think about like wait if you think about how Absolutely fucking ruthless people were 2,000 years ago doesn't it kind of make sense that those are the ones that made it through and then It took a long time for they calm the fuck down right? So if you go back to you know, whatever it was the the sophistication level that people were at when they built ancient Egypt Let's just speculate that it was 20,000 years ago. Yeah, and you think about how much they had to endure to get to that point And how much they had to I mean there's there's real evidence that if you especially pay attention to the work of people Steven Pinker that over time there has been less violence less less crime Less everything like Civilization has gotten better we are calming down from now Versus the way we were 2,000 years ago a thousand years ago 500 years ago things are moving in the correct direction but How long does it take before you have? This level of sophistication that allows you to get to the pyramids and then we're nowhere near that now so even on the most Conservative speculation that the great pyramid is only 4,500 years ago We're not even anywhere near that now when I know we're near the level of sophistication that it took them to build and We're just guessing as to what kind of technology they had available to them and as you pointed out with these vases and With just the the alignment to the constellations the sophistication that's involved in the construction to get stones That are tons of stone that you can't even get a razor blade in between like what the fuck was going on Here's the fun thing to entertain is about moving the stone so all that black granite that came from 500 miles away yeah, but the ones that came from the eastern part of Egypt The whaty hamamet quarry that's in the east yeah in the mountains in the mountains of snow in the other Nile right and so they would have Have another ground you'd have to go up and down mountains to move these things that were tens of tons Like how like off cliffs and and because like the narrative is like oh well They would have brought these stones up the Nile right well There's there's stones out there that are on the other side of the Nile in the mountains So how did they bring those there's enormous stones huge or well? thousand tons stones there is so there's this there's evidence is multiple statues that I can show you Pictures of that there were single piece statue you have the unfinished obelisk in the quarry That's 1,200 tons, but then you have at least three or four Unfit like finished statues that were a thousand tons single piece granite and one of them's in a place called Tannus which is way up in the north in the Delta that's more than a thousand miles from where that stone came from and Then moving that thing I mean it's a thousand it was around a thousand tons finished single piece granite So moving it you maybe at 1500 tons or more like moving that there's There's some there's a quarry in Egypt I think it's called the menu quarry which has these blocks They're not they're still attached where they've cut these big blocks out and there's like a image of what looks like a giant Pharaoh that's been carved on top of it. They're made from limestone now Maybe they were never intended to be blocks Although maybe now never intended to be finished, but if you assume their blocks these two blocks way I think it's 3,500 and 5,000 tons of piece based on the Density of limestone in that region like they're not they're not disconnected, but that's That's the scale we know there's objects up to like 1200 tons But the fact that they moved them a thousand miles and we have examples There's a stone called the Russian thunderstone have you heard of this no so like in the 1700s they took a big lump of I think it's granite or something like that from from Finland and they shipped it to St. Petersburg And they carved into a statue. It's still there today. It's the thunderstone. It's in it's a it's an edifice It weighed that's it. That's it now. Yeah, that's the finished one. This image here is the right one Yeah, so this is how they did it in the 1700s the thunderstone and They moved it around a hundred hundred and fifty meters a day took them forever and they only way they did this was by basically sinking giant like Logs into the ground to give them a leverage point for these cap stands and they'd move the system of rails big steel rails was steel ball bearings behind it it weighed about 1,500 tons and just over a period of just very slow Grinding and turning with cap stands and pulleys and these steel tracks. They move it about 150 meters a day took them forever and in order to get that thing across the the water from Finland they had to construct a giant barge Like a huge barge and on each side of the barge. They they'd would tie up three warships just to try and keep it stable It's about the same size same mass as the obelisk that's sitting in this mountainous quarry in Egypt in Aswan It's still in the ground. It's like 1200 tons of granite and you're expected to believe that they somewhere We're gonna lift this thing up out of a quarry over these like basically big hills and mountains of granite and put it on a little ship That's narrowed in this what they would this they call it the harbor there. It's this tiny little space I'm like you you're absolutely delusional If you think this was a simple task that could be achieved by with primitive methods And then ship that thing a thousand miles somewhere When you speculate when you sit around by yourself because you've thought about this a lot How the fuck do you think they did this? Look, I take a while. Wildass guess. I think there's Connections possibly to to gravity manipulation. I think any gravity had to have a play a part in moving some of this stuff I actually think there's some connections to some of the the work that's being done with this plasma would implosion technology The the stuff that Randalls been looking into that's coming back to talk a little bit about the relationship and the the sacred geometry aspects of that are the similar to the things that we see in some of these cultures in the past so That may potentially have something to do with the methods that that we used in the past But I'm convinced it was a form of advanced technology now whether it's our form of technology because Let's face it. We can do things like that today But it takes hydraulics and diesel powers and cranes and all that stuff They may have had an entirely different avenue of tech and that you open up into the realm of resonance and acoustics and anti gravity. I think Resonance in particular might be might have had a played a strong role because that's certainly a feature that you see In some of these oldest structures whether it's an accident or not But some of them are incredibly resonant the great pyramid generates a tone just on its own that comes from the earth in their Generates at home. It does it generates a low tone. It's just it's basically Here is if you quite enough you can but it's certainly been picked up in a whole number of different experiments where they're measuring The tone it does the whole structure does generate a low tone It's an interesting thing a lot of these places that typically have a connection to underground water as well Like we know there's water beneath the gizapleto Places like the cori can sure in Peru, which is also a giant megalithic building. There's an underwater river near there We always see some form of flowing water associated with it whether or not that has something to do with it I don't know but it's it's just in that realm of I think it's the answers lay in realms of science that are outside of our Current understanding that we should be Approaching with an open mind because we might ultimately learn something from it if we do we instead of just dismissing it putting in a box and said You know what we're we're superior to every Civilization that's lived before right their primitive. They did it with primitive methods Right, all things are a frequency all things operate on resonance And by the way a quick little bizarre similarity when you're mentioning anti gravity that Dr. Chan Thomas who wrote that in a neve story He was researching anti gravity from McDonald Douglas back in the 60s Listen so Jamie put that back up, please a recent study published on ancient origins website claims that the ancient Egyptians benefited from The sound in the construction of the Great Pyramid of Giza and relied on the discovery of a dead end In the rock inside the pyramid room as a tube of acoustic resonance that generates Ultrasonic waves at a base frequency within five hertz This raises the questions of the importance of ultrasound for the ancients and can we find the use of sound waves between ancient cultures elsewhere in the world Yeah, all the boxes to the Serapeum is an incredible site that that houses like 25 of the biggest stone boxes you'll ever see it's this one spot and they're the biggest ones They're like some of them are up to like 70 tons with their lids 30 tons And we've I've been there with some people that have been measuring like the frequency resonance range inside there So what range you generating standard Standing waves and they all seem to have a very similar resonance tone to them So it's an interesting experiment like you can you can stand inside a water tank or a concrete room and find a resonance But it's it's it's interesting to go and actually analyze those aspects of these ancient structures and to speculate Maybe this has got anything to do with what they were made for Because he's a giant precision made Boxes made from cyanide and granite that are perfectly flattened square and they're just massively solid They went to tremendous effort to remove imperfections from the stone no cracks Almost like they didn't want the damn things to shake apart or vibrate Well, it's just the sheer scale of them well It flies in the face of logic like the the actual Archaeologists that want to lock this down and try to come up with some sort of a conventional reason and You know some sort of an explanation that we can all get behind all these pulleys and pushed them on logs like shut the fuck up Yeah, shut the fuck up. Well, you're saying doesn't you make any goddamn sense? It's way more likely that there was incredibly sophisticated technology that existed and It's way more likely in face of the evidence of the younger dry-ass impact theory Yeah, that that shit was wiped out and that we're talking about a really advanced civilization that lived a long time ago It's more advanced than we are today But moved in a different direction like we moved in the direction of combustion engines and Electronics and they moved in some other direction but achieved maybe many thousands of years more sophistication in that direction that we have with our internal combustion engines and electricity Yep, all the shit that we use and it's important for people understand that these primitive methods that are suggested and pushed very hard by the Quote mainstream they don't test any of these like show me them moving, you know a thousand tons stone on logs That's that's see that They don't show they've never cut one single box like you said in half or even completed one single average size box or any box I'm I say box and talking about a stone block with the primitive methods Have shown that they've moved that one one thousand ton stone right the thunderstone. Yeah, but but does know again When you do not wait to read Decated it's but also the way it's constructed. It's just a rock. It's not like this amazing Obelish that's carved out of a mountain of thousand miles away. It's nothing like that There's also no evidence for it in dynastic Egypt. That's the other thing They can't the earliest parts of look there's crazy thing about it is in the old kingdom the the mainstream archaeologist There's some disagreement on this but in general they don't give them the They don't grant them the ability to even quarry granite I say that in the old kingdom. They couldn't quarry granite. They made all of their granite artifacts From surface granite. It's just it's the most it's the craziest thing. No no wheel no use of the wheel Never in the Egyptian civilization did they grant them the use of the pulley. It was it was literally human horsepower ropes leavers and wooden sleds. That's it the Romans came along and the Greeks and they started using pulleys and False multiple eyes and stuff like that, but they don't there's no evidence for that in the dynastic You will have a conversation with all the information that you have at your disposal I'd write off the top of your head. Have you ever have a conversation with a conventional archaeologist I want to argue this with you online. I mean on email a couple times, but not in life What do they say an email? It's it's it's a lot of it. I want to keep my job I shouldn't be an expert. I fuck you. I have I bought a BMW I want to keep my job. That's the same. I think that's a bit of that. Have you read my text book? I shouldn't be an expert, but I fuck you. I bought a BMW, you piece of shit. You're taking from me. Tenured. What they did. They say, like, oh, we know how they did it, because they talk about it. So for example, with the giant statues, right? There's a scene on a wall. It's called the duty hotel image. And it shows the Egyptians. It's all the cities, dudes, and profiles. And Egyptian drawing definitely you've made the drawing. And there's 156 dudes when you count them all up, and they're pulling a statue that's tied to a wooden sled. Now, we know this statue. There's parts of it still exist. First, it's alabaster. It's not granite. Second, it weighs about 56 tons. That's fine. And you're dragging it on a wooden sled. You can't use that to explain how you move a thousand tons statue. It's not like a sliding scale of difficulty. There's a curve to it. You can move. I do grant them the ability to use primitive methods to move stuff up to like 150 tons. But once you start getting to 400, 600, 1,000 tons, material failure would not an issue that literally sleds would just be crushed or driven into the ground. It's there's an absolute scale of difficulty that gets applied to these massive objects. And I think it's me. What are they using to cut these things out of the stone? Well, that's a whole other mystery. Is, particularly in the quarry, we can see different technologies and toolmarks. We know. And this is funny because in the New Kingdom, the 19th dynasty, there's Ramsey's the Great, the greatest fairer of all time, right? He was quarrying granite from the middle pyramid for his own projects. He was taking the granite casing blocks. And the way they did it and the way that they still do it to some extent is they would hammer out with a flinch chisel or even with steel. You hammer away. You make a little groove in the granite. You smash wood into it. You make all these grooves. You wet the wood and you split the stone, right? Eventually you hammer out it with chisels. You wet the wood. All this pressure gets on it. And your object is to split a piece of stone, crack it off. And then I take that piece of stone. It fails all the time. And you see this mark all over the place. You see it in the quarry. You can even see later examples of these chisel marks where they've gotten big chisels. And this might have even been hundreds of years ago. Or not Egyptian civilization, but like the Persian civilization that lived there. And then at the quarry, you have these scoop marks. Like you have this whole other technology that exists where it's like they've scooped away at the granite with an ice cream scoop. And it's under as a place where you get it under a piece of stone. Look, they'll tell you that this skull was a pounding stone of dollar right about that big. And they reckon they would do in this with it. Which is it doesn't make sense at about 15 different levels that I do go through in autistic detail in one of these videos. But you know, these scoop marks extend to like the underside of rocks where you're pounding up. And it's just, it doesn't make sense. None of this fits the evidence that gets presented. And it's there's something else at work here. Like there's there's some other technology that's been used to remove this granite at a rapid rate. Like the scoop mark in the obelisk is the whole other mystery. But it's we see it also on other bits of unfinished stone. You see scoop marks on some of the blocks on the third pyramid that are unfinished. You see them at the Assyrian, which is a massive underground granite structure that's at the temple of seady the first with granite blocks that weigh like 90 tons. When we were in Egypt together and we're at Aswan, they actually have a granite block with these dollar right hammers that are, you know, round dollar right black stones that are like eight, 10 pounds a pop. And you're allowed to bang away at it. I have video of one of my videos on YouTube. It's me doing it. And if you ever take an eight to 10 pound weight and start banging across first of all, it feels like you're going to get arthritis within a few minutes. And you see that you're only chipping away particles of dust. It is the least feasible explanation ever. And anyone that simply picks up one of these dollar right hammers and bangs away on a piece of granite themselves will see that it's nonsense. And not only that, those scoop marks that you mentioned, I don't know, Jamie, if you're able to type in Aswan unfinished obelisk and you see these scoops, they're symmetrical. It doesn't make sense that that would be done by handwork. See, that's what we're talking about. And that's in those granite. That's as hard as a rock. So to speak. I thought in the heart, how would a hard time understanding how that's even possible? It looks like it was sandblasted if something that's scooping the granite. You actually have these test pits as well, like these pits that go down like 15, 20 feet. It's size of that obelisk. You have these holes around the side of it where they call them test pits because what you want to do, and this gets back to my comment about the ability to quarry granite, is the quality of granite that it takes to take an object like that, or like, it's actually from a guy that went on my tour. The quality of granite that it takes to make large objects like that, and a lot of the quality of granite that we see on the Giza Plateau, you're talking 30 feet. There's a test pit. Yeah, that's a test pit. There are 30 feet inside a granite mountain. None of that, you don't get this quality of granite at the surface level with just granite pieces lying around. And you can go to Giza today, fourth dynasty, and look at the blocks of granite that were hanging off the valley temple, or the pyramid temple. And there's huge crystal occlusions in them. Like this stuff came from the core of granite mountains. You can't say that the old kingdom guys didn't have the ability to quarry granite. Maybe they didn't, but whoever made those granite blocks sure as hell did, because that's where it comes from. Real quick, this image right down here, that black rock is the dullerite hammer. And when Ben was just mentioning from underneath these scoot marks, so they want to claim that that's how they did it, that they were banging away with this rock basically upwards. Well, yeah, you actually get this consistent lines on the wall behind where we're standing. It's like 20 feet high, and you'll see a horizontal ridge that runs all the way down that line underneath, and then up underneath the other piece of rock. It's like this can get through. This is exactly what I did. He's banging on it with a dullerite pounder. Nothing about this is fun. And is this, are they trying to say that this is how they did it? Is that what this is? They make the watch of video. They indoctrinate you at this site. It's the one site where they sit you down and make you watch a video before you're allowed to go out and look at the site. It's really a good video. Yeah, you've got a minute. Can you watch it? Yeah, there's a video that says, this is how they did it. It was incredible. And they're insistent. And which wild is that if you just do it, when you do something yourself, you realize just like, that's not, I don't know how they did it, but it wasn't this. There we go. I filmed this. These are wonderful gentlemen that traveled with us to Egypt back in November. Couple of engineers there. Yeah. Yep. So it is possible to do that with the stone, but not feasible, and certainly not on the scale of those obelists. So that's right. There's been some tests that have been done. And I get into it. And I think it's something like, I've got to say about 70 cubic centimeters or something like that, that you can remove with that method over a solid hour. And I think it's either 50 or 70, but it's put it this way. It's three quarters of the volume of a golf ball, or two fifths of volume of a chicken egg. Like that's how much material you can remove in an hour by just nonstop pounding of granite dust. That's the best estimate we have. So what you got to imagine is that entire trench around this obelisk, bearing mine, the trench is only two thirds as deep as it needs to be, to remove a square section. But if you filled that whole thing up with golf balls and added another 25%, that's the number of hours it might take to do back to that past image, that method. Is that, is the idea that that obelisk was left there because of the crack? Yeah, it developed supposedly what they tell you is it developed a crack across the center, and they left it there. Now I think the crack could be the result of later quarrying attempts. When they found this, it was utterly buried. Like it was, there was one small section of it poking out, and a bit the rest of it at the bottom here was like under nine meters of rubble and there were other big quarry blocks. I actually think this could have been here long, I think the Egyptians were using the quarry, but I think this object could have been, they just poured stuff onto it. It just was at the oldest part of the quarry. What's the wackiest explanation for these scoop marks? Wackiest? Yeah, like not worried whatsoever about people's interpretation of you and your ability to discern reality. Like what? It's like, is yeah, some sort of molecular softening tool that just comes in and scoops it out. Like somehow gets between the two. Well, that's a lot of the other softening tool. Like can soften the stone, can change them and let molecular bonds beneath the stone? Because it's made up of all these granets like a composite material made up of a bunch of different types of horn blend and crystal quartz and a bunch of stuff like that. And then just being able to somehow scoop it out. I don't know. It's as if it looks that way when you look at it. You've got to think it's either some sonic tool, there's something going on that is enabling them to scoop that material out of there in an effortless fashion. These scoops in places, it's almost as if they articulate. Like we see in places in the recent observation we made, they're not just straight down, but they imagine a backhoe arm. It's digging in. It does this. And you see that in some of these scoops, they literally, there's an articulation to these lines. So maybe there was a tool that was anchored. And it almost looks like it had a very flexible tip, but it was some rotating tool that just chewed out this stone. And that's where Chris Dungo is with it is, there may be a, some sort of rotating tool. The interesting thing about the quarry also is that there is, in an area, there is drawings on the wall of the quarry where there's all these scoop marks of these ostriches. And it matches pre-dynastic drawings. So it's almost as if there were people in that quarry making paintings on earlier done scoop marks before the dynastic Egyptian even start, civilization even started. So I think that scoop mark stuff is absolutely a part of this ancient lost civilization. There was something, and it's one of their working areas. There's a tremendous value in seeing unfinished work, because we get to have a little bit of insight into, how did this tool potentially function? How did it work? Like, Jeff, to have an open mind to kind of look at it that way. We see the same thing on a couple of objects that are unfinished. There's some incontrovertible evidence for machining and things like that in other objects. It hurts my brain. It really does, because you start thinking, like what happened? Like, what are we talking about? Like, what kind of technology was available then? Like, when you think about a completely different branch of technology that was achieved 20,000 years ago, or whatever it was, you really, there's nothing there. Like, you're just spinning your wheels, just guessing. Right. It's speaking of technology. Jamie, you should Google the Kufu ship, because the largest vessel it's ever been found from ancient Egypt is. A canoe. Basically. And now, and there's no other depictions, and I'm not suggesting that no one's suggesting that this boat was used to tug and move around large stones. But it's worth mentioning that, of all the descriptions that you see or in Scripture, excuse me, this 140 foot long boat is the largest boat ever found. That's a bull ship boat too, boy. Yeah, I said it before, and I feel bad, but it's a shipbox in comparison. It is a total shipbox. It's such a bad design. Like, look at how low it has very little depth in the water. So it will have very little stability. And then it's also a top heavy. It's like driving around on a fucking sprinter van on a racetrack. And then you can talk right over. Any weave at all is tip and that bull ship boat. Right. And he found this right next to the pyramid, by the way. Yeah. So it's pretty fun. Hey, you get the same thing here. It's like there is a war scene at Sakara where they show a very small column on a boat. Like, it's a column that barely comes up to a guy's knees. And it's on a boat. And it shows them shipping a small column. And they go, see that one boat in the first ship? That's how you're cursed, Jamie. Now the one above it to the left, right there, above it and to the left. Got to use the ladies pointer. That one. Yeah, I should have imagined taking your kids on that. Your kids, yours, we're going to get, go out into the ocean on that. If I get it, I don't know if that's a notion, but it's getting to be taken forever. Wait, even a river, fuck out of here. Yeah. That's for a hot, hot. That's for a hot. That's for a hot. Yeah. That's a swan boat. Is there any evidence for you to have to life? Life preservers back then? Did they have a vest? Volmatic because the hippos and crocodiles that take care of Jesus. Jesus. It blows and procs. I forgot about those. But that's the point. The point that's significant in this is that that is the largest boat that they've ever found. And my point is is that if they're going to claim that they were moving 100-ton stone blocks on barges, I just want to iterate that they've never found one. And there was no inscription that shows anything large enough that would have done it. Right. Right. And there's also no inscriptions at all of the constructions of the pyramids. That's right. Well, so there is, there is, but not the big ones. There's a tomb of the nobles that's in an over-neer on the west bank of the Nile Luxor. But it shows them literally making mud bricks and building a mud brick pyramid. Mud. Mud. Which is what they made a lot of mud brick pyramids. Yeah. But later. Well, there was one person at one point in time that was speculating that the pyramids were made with concrete. They devised some sort of a way to make concrete out of granite. The geo-polymer theory, George, drives me nuts on a daily basis. But it seems like total horseshit. It is. Yeah. It is. Let's look. It's an interesting thing. No, the quarry is right there. There's literally holes in the ground that match the objects that we have. There's, behind the middle pyramid is the middle pyramid, they cut it out of a hill. Like they cut it into a hill. It's crazy. Like they had to cut down 40 feet at the back and put these massive tiles into the front. They plopped the pyramid on it for some reason. But at the back in that area where they cut the walled down, it's a quarry. You literally see where there's, that's where they cut big blocks of limestone off. The little stubs from the blocks are still there. I mean, we have quarry. And not only that, all the blocks are different sizes. They're not one offs. So if you were literally filling in geo-polymer, you would have a lot of the same size. You would have, you know, we filling it. And so since they're all different sizes, it's like that doesn't, that's not what you would have if they were filling. What is the speculation as to why they're different sizes? Like, why do they do that? Like, one of the cool things that you showed in one of your videos, which shows the similarities between the construction methods of ancient Japan and Peru and Egypt, is that so many of these stones, they're like these odd shapes that like a jigsaw puzzle is they're fitting perfectly. Polygonal. Yeah. They fit in, oh, don't worry. That's just a coincidence. These polygonal walls that are found in multiple continents around the world, the fact that there's pyramids and five continents around the world. There's, it's, they say it's a coincidence. There's a natural progression of civilization. That a pyramid's like, oh, it's come on. Kids with blocks will make a pyramid. Makes sense, which is why we make them today. Right. But if you look at comparisons of the Indonesia pyramids and the ones in Central America and Mexico, like they have similarities of like the strip steps that go up the middle of it. I use the analogy of like skyscrapers that we have skyscrapers in any major city around the world. And they're all the same based on that, yeah, you have steel and concrete and glass, but they're all different. You have a different architect here and they look a little different, but it's still the same thing. But is it really feasible to say, or is it a coincidence that they just happen to start building pyramids on multiple continents around the world or these polygonal walls that are, whether it's from Peru, Egypt, places in Italy, Greece, there's a pyramid in Greece. I don't know if you saw that in the video. Yeah, let's look, pull up your video. Tell Jamie what that video is. Just so we could see some of the images that compare these polygonal walls. It's a pile of e-lon, mosque. You know what I would do? I'd hire someone to make a pyramid. I'm like, let me see if you could do it. Who's the best motherfucker? Hellroom. Yeah. I'm going to throw a billion dollars at this project. I bought Twitter for $44. Yeah, I'm going to put a billion into it. Let's make me a pyramid, bitch. It's got to do it. It's got to tie, make it as accurate as the, or what my fucking money back. Yeah, they're line up. I think it'd be a wonderful, by the way, that Joe tweeted this morning. So it would be the first one they tweeted. It makes it easy to find. Yeah, I was tweeting it when I was watching. I was like, people need to watch this. This is nuts. I appreciate that. And was I going to say I had something. South American polygonal walls. Yeah. I mean, it's literally the most difficult way to do it. That's the crazy thing is like this is not how you solve the building a wall problem. Like if you say they got to try different just independently, like making these complex polygonal walls, that's not how you solve that. It's very speculation to what the advantage of polygonal walls with, please. Well, they say that it's definitely true. Like so, yes, you don't have a single line of vector of force. So it won't tip over. But this is where I get crazy about things like the Giza Plateau. You have both. You have polygonal walls that are made like that at Giza from the fourth dynasty. And then you also have much more regular construction from smaller limestone blocks. Also at the fourth dynasty that at Giza that are still standing. It's like they've all been through earthquakes. Both types are still here. I mean, it's difficult to say that, oh, they just made it that way to make it earthquake proof. I'm like half the chateere is still standing up. Like it went through earthquakes. And so here you see one from Egypt, one from... Go back, one from Mexico. Mexico, and one from Cambodia. And what is the explanation for the ones in Cambodia? Do they know who built those and why? That's a good question. I had to refresh my notes on that. Daika and Moam modern, civil, like Moam modern, ancient cultures, I guess. Nothing. They're like 1500 years old and not supposed to be 4500 years old or something like that. And the reason why this is significant is because if the great pyramid is 4500 years old, my argument is that there are connections across the oceans that are not supposed to exist because according to everything, they're adamant. It wasn't until Christopher Columbus 1492 sailed the ocean blue, but yet there's evidence that goes back more than 1,000 years prior that suggests. It's a prepped plate, Jamie. Just press place. We could see some of these images because they go pretty rapid fire. And it's really, really well done this video. And I'm glad that you gave credit to all the people that helped you out on that too. Yes. Paul, you got no walls. There's this nub phenomena. There's these similarities across numerous continents. Yeah. It's really wild stuff because it's so obvious that somehow or another, these people had to be in communication with each other or sharing information or had carried information from other places. Right. You know what? This is the same video that has the Egypt, Japan, sarcophagus similarity. Yeah. Earlier in the video or later in the video, but just skip around. Yeah, look at that. And what part of Greece is that? It's not Athens. I'd have to double check. I made this video like three years ago. So I'd have to double check. I haven't looked at this in a while to be honest with you. Well, there's also the weirdness of the crop list in the parthonon. Right. And like that the crop list was built on the parthonon, but like what, who built that? They don't even talk about it. Right. We'll get that fucking. That's sexy, Wama. Yeah. That's in the streets of Cusco. Is it really sexy, Wamaan? That sounds like a hot chick. Sexy woman. Sexy, Hwaaman. Yeah, it's Italy. Look, they have been Italy too. Yep. These polygon walls, you can find them in Japan, Eastern Ireland. Yeah. Eastern Ireland. And who do they think built these in Italy? A lot of it's attributed to the Romans in the same way that, you know, bowback is all attributed to the Romans, which doesn't make any sense. Like the foundation of it, the jaw of the thons. The jaw of thons. Yeah, crown of thons. Yeah, 800 tons. Yeah, 300 tons each. And then it's just so strange because it's such a strange way of constructing things and yet it exists all over the world. Right. It's actually the most difficult way to construct something. And we're looking at this after thousands of years. Right. Who knows how many earthquakes, weather erosion. Look how good the Peru one is though. That's amazing. Some of the details in these are astonishing. It's a little tiny notches that, but it's just matched throughout. It's matched on all the sides of the stone. And it's not just surface level either. It goes all the way through the mating surfaces of the stones. This is the valley temple in Egypt. Ah, it's so wild. That's the Assyrian. I can just tell by like, look at the one. Now most people aren't even aware of this one. No, and from Japan. And like what, when do they date these Japanese structures? I'd have to double check. I know they're accredited to be in some castle by some guy. I'd have to double check, but I'm going to go ahead and guess 1,000 to 1,500 years. Go back just a little bit, Jimmy. But I think they're probably older. But Japan one, not this one right there. Bam, stop. Look at the size of that one stone. Yeah, probably 500 tons of that 400 probably. Holy shit. Yeah, right on there. Just eyeballing it. But there's a long enough. I mean, look at that gentleman who's standing there. Depends how deep it is, I guess. But yeah, it's a giant piece of stone. I am pushing that thing. Oh, I'll get it out. I'll lift it up. Fucking put it. It's above the other ones. Yeah. Right? It's not even the one that's on the bottom. Yeah. It's how? Let's see that sarcophagus compared to the one in Egypt. I'm not sure what part of the video. Look at the one above it into the right. Oh, yeah. God, oh, I should use this. Look at that one there. Yeah. That one and that one. And men's. I mean, just so incredible. Keep going a little bit more. It's not can't be too far off. It's one scene. Far, I think. Yeah, but I think because when people are about to see this, it is such an unbelievable similarity. And again, ancient Japan and ancient Egypt are not supposed to have any type of contact whatsoever. Exactly. I think the early video on that. Just keep going. I don't believe so. I watched it today. I think it was later. My baby search for like Jeff. Yeah. I think it's a call for just little something. I think you have those little things where you can just jump to it. Some people do that in those videos. That's oh, this is a question. Why does you have a fucking watch on? Go back. Isn't that a watch? How dare you? That's an impossible. What the fuck is that jewelry? It looks like a watch. I mean, maybe it's jewelry, but it's literally on his wrist and it's a circle and it's with a band. Right. What is that? Is that a sundial? I saw fuck is on his wrist. Many anti-catheromectinism. I mean, it looks like my watch. It does. That's crazy. A lot of people I saw many, many comments with people saying the same thing. That's a watch. But of course, the explanation is like of course not. Just jewelry. Nothing to see here. But it does look like it doesn't it? Well, it just makes sense that if they developed weapons and they developed clothing and they developed shelters, then they figured out mechanisms. If they had the sophistication to be able to construct these buildings, why wouldn't they have the sophistication to be able to construct a watch? Right. An automatic watch. If you want to talk about ancient technology speaking of this, like on the left, that trident, many accredited to being originated from the Vajra. And did you see Elon Musk's bedside table picture that he put on Twitter? Yes, I did, but I don't remember a trident. Was there a trident in there? Look, the Vajra, which is comes from the trident. So the trident comes from that. He had that in the lower left corner of the picture. If you go to, if you were to Google, Elon Musk's bedside photo, lower left corner, that is the symbol that comes from ancient Hindu that is supposed to be the most powerful thing in the entire universe. This is a staged photo. I don't know if Elon Musk is trolling or if he's literally, because he's been talking about that he thinks that his life could be in jeopardy. He's going against the grain and all this freedom of speech stuff. And I don't see bottom left corner. Yeah, click on that. The Buddhism ritual object, if you Google the Vajra, the AJRA, that would, it's an ancient symbol. Like a cosplay gun and caffeine-free diet code. I don't know what that's about. He's given her those diet cokes. Oh, well, he likes it. That was, uh, no. No. Awful. And you liked it. What do you mean, like diet Coke? Yeah. I don't mind diet Coke. Yeah, you drink diet Coke. I've drank diet Coke. You're into that artificial sweetener scene. I'm not worried about it. No. I don't think it's really that big of a day. It depends on how much drinking. I mean, it's like Elon's drinking shit. Because he's got like the stains on the thing. But all right, so a lot of four of them and they're caffeine-free, which is weird. Yeah. So between that George Washington pistol and the fact, this is a stage photo. That's a cosplay. That's a cosplay from a video game. No, the one above it. The musket. Oh, the one above it. This is a stage photo. So the fact that he has that Vajra and the lower left corner, I wonder, is this conspiracy which I'm all into? Is he essentially sending a shot off the bow to his, the people who he thinks are going after him, which is that I have knowledge of something involving because here we are, like we have Randall Carlson, you're bringing back on. There's all this speculation that there has been a limitless energy device that has come from the ancients that has been essentially redeveloped. And then in a short period of time, you have Elon Musk posting this picture while he's also talking about that he believes in his life. Could be a jeopardy to take certain security precautions. This is a staged photo. It makes no sense. In the very 20th, 2022, my bedside table, this at 3.48 AM. What is this? Either he's trolling and maybe, or is he trying, why would he put that Vajra and the lower left corner, the symbol that means the other people can correlate with a limitless free energy technology that may have once existed and that's where the Trident comes from. So I don't understand how was the Vajra, how did it supposed to be work? Oh, that is a whole other thing. Like that I couldn't explain, but it's a sense. It's supposed to represent limitless energy. Some have said that. It's supposed to, what it does represent in Hindu culture is the most powerful weapon and device of the universe. Do you know anymore about it then? There you bunch of string. I know, I don't. I know this is the other stuff, the handbag. I was going to ask, go pee while you guys talk about that. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's a pee too, actually. Alright, let's pause. Really bad. You guys go pee. Look, you're right back. And we're back. We're back. We're back. We're back. That was excellent. Really? Alright, so where were we? History's bullshit. That's right. Any more of us guys all the secrets. He's got something. He's got some secrets. Yeah, I mean, he obviously felt very compelled to buy Twitter. I mean, it's not like it's not, I mean, $44 billion a lot of goddamn money and he overpaid for it. But it's not like there's need to have some sort of an uncensored distribution of information or at least ungovernance censored. This is why I'm such a fan of them. Anyone at this point in time, there's an advocate for free speech on your side. This is, we live in a wild time. We anyone with their eyes that's paying attention sees that there's people controlling information and throughout history, this has been proven time and time again to lead to tyranny when you stop people from sharing things. You know, so I'm 38 years old and growing up, I remember back in the day, people could say whatever they wanted. Free speech was real. You're allowed to have it. I mean, there's this area of people ridicule you and everything was fine. And now we're entering this age where things are being called dangerous like ancient apocalypse, that's dangerous misinformation. It's like, no, the only thing dangerous is stopping people from having a voice. Well, also, when you start attributing, when you put words on that, like racism and you start putting those kinds of accusations towards if you watch that, that special, the series and you, you say, Oh, this is racist, you're a fucking idiot. I mean, it's really that simple. Or you're a dangerous asshole who wants to change the reality of what this guy's actually talking about. Right. Throughout history, anyone, whether it's the Nazis, the Stalinist, the Maoist, and everyone else, anyone that's ever censored people, the people who censor other people, they're always the bad guys, historically. Always. A hundred percent of time, it always leads into a bunch of people getting hurt, and it's like rent cycle, repeat throughout history. This is one of the first times where educated, progressive people think of themselves as compassionate or advocating censorship, which is so bizarre. It's the same people, actually. The same people, same argument that they made three years ago against him. The Journal of American Archaeology, all the society of American Archaeology, dedicated 27 pages in a journal three years ago to attacking Hancock for his book America before. Yeah. Same accusation, same language, same people. And then what happened was when, his show comes out and it's got, you're there, I think Jordan Peterson was in one of the clips. And it just, I think it triggered some of the more maybe left-leaning publications to go and look for what are the arguments being made against this? And then that whole, that whole, all those talking points get amplified and boost and it becomes this much bigger thing. But it just terrified that they're losing control of the narrative. When that's, that's the big part of it. And that's the same problem they have with this podcast. The same problem they have with a lot of things that become very popular, that they can't control. They just hate the fact that people are just able to discuss things openly and freely without them being in control of it and getting all the greasy fucking fingers all over stuff. Right. It's unfortunate in more ways than one because historically it always leads to like a terrible abyss of oblivion. And they never stop, that's a thing. That once they start going after tyrannical control, historically it seems like it just never, ever stops until someone stops them. Yeah, which is scary. It is scary. But the reality is that I look at this topic, there's a niche community there into the ancients and whether it's archeologists that disagree with everything we just said or other people that agree with everything Graham Hancock says, this is a win-win for everybody. I think this is an opportunity for people to unite under a common interest and then start exploring these topics. For example, if I had them, if I had them. Graham Hancock says, this is a win-win for everybody. I think this is an opportunity for people to unite under a common interest and then start exploring these topics. For example, if I had won the lottery, I would have hired a bunch of archaeologists that are the biggest naysayers of anything that's alternative. And be like, hey, here's a salary that's get some blocks and then start cutting this stuff and moving it and just experiment. And it's a win-win for everybody. We'll learn something. They will engage. They wouldn't engage with you. I mean, it's one of the problems that Graham has with his detractors. They say they'll debate him. But then when he offers them to debate him, they scurry away and hide. Because I think they all kind of know and I don't think they're necessary anymore. Thanks to people like you guys who have really just examined all of the actual evidence without any biases or any sort of ulterior motive and any narrative that you're trying to promote. You're just looking at it going, what is this is wild stuff? And because of the fact that you guys exist on these platforms like YouTube, where you can get millions and millions of views. I mean, there are no mainstream archaeologists that are getting millions of views on their stuff. That's why they're better and be a socialist. It does drive them crazy. He's talking about it in some of these other things. It should. It's a socket distribution of information. And you're ignoring the most interesting stuff. You know, when you're looking at the evidence of Atlantis or if you're looking at these similar construction methods that exist all over the world, like, wow, what the fuck is the real truth here? This is what's so interesting. So a lot of people criticize Sir Graham Hancock by Jordan, not archaeologist. You're not historians. You can't be trusted, but I'm like, having outside eyes come in is so important. And you'll quick little example. I share with Ben the other day. So I came from Target. I was investigating fraud with them, busting employees that stole from the company. And there was a story that one of the one of the executives spoken front of us when I was an intern. And at that time, this is like 2013. Walmart was amping up their online presence to compete with Amazon. And as the story goes, they hired some executive from Pepsi. Pepsi is far more than a soda company. It is a distributor if it's anything. They move product from point A to point B. And when this as the story goes, this executive came in and on day one saw something, some opportunity for improvement that made significant changes with Walmart's ability to compete with Amazon and their online presence. And it's because when you have other people coming in from outside the box, whether it's been coming from the tech industry and having patents with HP, should I drop attention to it? Like some pretty cool stuff. You know, here I was a number of years ago watching Graham Hancock from Randall Carlson on the Joe Rogan podcast. And I remember going down the rabbit hole saying like, okay, let me see if there's some truth to these these alternative theories involving bronze chisels. Is this feasible? Is it not? And so I'm convinced that any reasonably intelligent person that simply looks at all points on any side of it can see like, okay, you know, there is something here. There is a mystery here. And going back to Graham Hancock and ancient apocalypse with all the criticism he's getting, I don't hear anybody advocating for exploring the the mini road. I don't hear anyone asking to excavate the 25,000 year old chamber in Indonesia. I don't hear anyone talking about anything in the show. Well, here's what's really cool. No one's paying attention to this archeologist. There's so many more people that are watching the show millions of people watching the show. And like how many thousands of people have heard the arguments, these archeologists are having it's it's it's a blip. It's it's literally they're like yelling into the abyss and no one's listening to them. Yeah. The night the nature of the discols has changed in a lot of ways. I mean, it's it has. And just having a fucking look, human beings have accumulated knowledge and information over time. And the idea that there's gatekeepers to knowledge and information that they have to come from these accredited universities, which are now being widely discredited because of all their wacky social ideas and all the crazy shit that people it's not necessary. There's just information and the you the what's what's happening right now with the internet is that your it's over use the the actual amount of information is so overwhelming. The idea that one group controls the access to information or what is legitimate about that information. It's not true anymore because there's so many like random people that are experts and that have like accumulated vast amounts of data and like you, you can just pull it off the top of your head. You're not even having any fucking notes you're drawing from and you're talking about all this different stuff. I mean, how many archaeologists can do that? It's like and how many archaeologists do it about these very specific aspects of this stuff, which is so confusing. And it's not being discussed in the right. I am optimistic that I see comments on my channel and you get it as well. There's people saying I'm going to go study archaeology so I can explore these alternative topics. I think there's going to be a lot of that. I'm sure there is. I've been contacted by students people that I think what's happening is is that they're being because this stuff is out there and it's it's becoming more mainstream. They're being forced to deal with the arguments that are being raised by guys like Graham. Like you do have to go and account for the evidence. You can't just dismiss it, which is kind of the prior generation of the old guys in the old guard now. That's a lot of the approach they've taken. But I'm hopeful also that yeah, because some of these students are said that who will be the establishment academics of the future and potentially also in charge of the textbooks and whatever of the official story means. They will. That's because it's really how it is with everything. Thanks. Yeah. So it's advances one funeral of time. It's in that. It's surprising. It's sad. Yeah. It's not though. It's kind of fun. It's kind of hilarious. Yeah. I mean, it's like it's it's really amazing. It's amazing that there's access to people like you now that you guys have these platforms like YouTube where you can just put these videos out in your videos and fucking millions of views and so do yours. It's amazing. It's really cool. I'm very grateful. And I want to give a plug real quick to rumble. I've been working with rumble. I've asked anyone who's following me go follow me on rumble. I've been working and talking to their their team over there. And these people are serious about promoting free speech and and having alternatives that are being suppressed elsewhere on their platform. And so I am about free speech. I don't care if people disagree with someone, that's fantastic. But don't censor people. So all that said, YouTube has been very good to me. And I want to be on there forever. But hey, I'll go. I need to diversify and I encourage anyone that's into my work to follow me there. Ben, you're on there as well. I'm on rumble as well. Yep. Yeah. No, I think it's fantastic that rumble exists. I mean, the Russell brand is over there now. Yeah. There's so many journalists have started to do stuff over there. It's great. Yeah. I love because I can channel Adam Curry for a minute and talk about when you talk about the internet and access to information outside of establishments. One of the dangers I do see and it is the fact that we now the internet kind of gets distilled down to these portals. Yeah. Everyone looks at it through a portal, whether that's a Google search or a Facebook or a social media engine. You could set up your own website outside of that. But the trick is how people are going to see it and go and look at it. So I do see there are some efforts and I came from that background. You've hinted at it. I've worked in data center and cloud and all of that for a long time. And it's just like this, that control of that of that information is eventually going to come down to the stuff we're seeing with the Twitter files now. We're just like, hey, we need to de amplify these things. Twitter calls a while. They are unbelievably wild. The stuff that Shell and burgers released and Matt Taiba and all these different people that have gone over the Barry Weiss gone over this data and like crazy. It's the government has had their fucking creasy fingers and all aspects of it. What have the conspiracy has been wrong about in the last few years? Well, that was what Elon was joking around about that on one of the podcasts that he was on where he's like every single one of them was right. Every single conspiracy theory about shadow banning, about, you know, lying about information, all of it. It's got to the point now. Six months is a difference. Yeah. It's at the point now. You can find you can figure out so quickly on who is not doing any research whatsoever. And this will sound crass, but I'm just going to say because I know it's the truth. Most people are getting their news and information while they're sitting on the toilet scrolling through social media and just scanning headlines. Yes. And that's it. And now me. My wife always accused me of that because I'll send her something. She said, did you read? I go, no, you read it. I sent you the headline. Do you not see the headlines? Headlines. Terrifying. Read that. Tell me what happens. Yeah. It's at the point now. People have to start, you know, this is what you do. I remember during, I hate to bring it up with the COVID stuff. And I remember watching every when it was first kicking off and they were doing the White House press conferences every single day. And I was listening to every single one of them. And I started to see extremely quickly that all these Trump would say something. And then all these headlines would show up minutes later and contradict what he was saying. And I'm like, oh, this is awesome. Everyone's going to see very quickly that like, you know, the mainstream with their little headlines are so inaccurate. That's not what happened. That's not what happened at all. In fact, what it showed me is that most people are getting all their information from mainstream headlines. Yeah. But they counted on that, right? I mean, when CNN was going after me for taking horse dewormer, there was, there were counting on this idea that they had this control of the narrative. But they didn't understand that I had already achieved like an escape velocity by that time where at 10 times as many people as them. So it's like, what the fuck are these people doing? And that it just discredited them further. Right. And literally was, was doing the opposite. They would hope it was doing. Right. It's false. Well, it's because it's, there's a difference between true and false right and wrong good, receive a lie. Generally believe this and truth always comes out. People, people can be had. It's easy to lie and fool people. But if you continue to lie, that one lie creates five more and those five lives create 25. And then before you know it, it's out of control and you can't keep up with it. Yeah, but counter that as the Soviet Union or what's currently Russia right now, if you have control, the narrative, you can hold on to that control for a long fucking time. And this is what Elon is so dangerous to the, to the establishment. Because all the of a sudden you'd have one major platform that's not controlled by the government. In fact, when Joe Biden was tweeting shit this inaccurate, Twitter was fact checking him. Right. Actually, that's not true at all. This is what you said about the economy's bullshit. And this and like, wow. And they just the government's deleting tweets, which is crazy to see. It's disturbing. Let me, let's give Elon Musk a shout out. The best thing I've ever done was pay my $8 and now it's $11 a month for my Blue Checkmark on Twitter. I've exploded on their since. I'm getting far more visibility. Best move ever freedom of speech. Thank you, Elon. I was gladly gladly sending another $11 next month. When he even started talking about buying Twitter just in the process of that, I think they must have released a bunch of shadow bands. And my shit went up 900,000 Twitter subscribers or Twitter followers in like a couple of weeks. Wow. I was like, this is nuts. And now it goes up organically. I'm like, Oh, this is what it's normal. Yeah, it's normal. This is like what it's supposed to be. But during the time I was dangerous. Yeah. And then meeting you at a rat meat, hold them down. He's dangerous. Who allowed this? The funniest part is all those people that dropped $5,000, $10,000, $15,000. I've even heard of numbers of $20,000 that people paid for a Blue Checkmark just a few years ago. Really? Yeah. People were buying their way in. People were doing the same people. Yeah, they were they bribing the people that worked there. They're making their money on the side. The same thing was going down in Instagram. And then apparently Zuckerberg, he shut that down, which by the way, why I don't care about social media, but that I don't have a Blue Checkmark on Instagram. And I don't know what it's going to take to get one because this would allow me to do people. Yeah. Yeah. Contact. Yeah. Yeah. You know, maybe you can get me off the shadow band list too. There's something going on. Like I used to get way more subscribers per day. Like something happened like a year and a half ago. It happened to me too. I just hit a, but I think it all, but the conspiracy is that it's a shadow band, but there's also a possibility that it's like it's favoring certain things like reels. Right. It seems to favor reels now more than everything else, which is like rare odd. Do you want to why? Why? So they are hoom they meet. Let me wear this. Careful. People the evils, the dictators, so they're rulers, the elites. Who this is. They are conditioning the human mind to be far more of a short attention span. So like TikTok as an example, you are people can't even focus on anything that's longer than a minute or even 10 seconds. They're scrolling through and they're not able, it is conditioning people to pay attention less. I don't think it's an accident. You could just look, it could be an easy way of making money and that might be the most simple thing. It's an easy way of making money because here's the counter that this podcast. Right. It's hours long, hours. Yeah, but it's the most watched. Yes. Yeah. But it's hours long and a lot of people watch the whole fucking thing or listen to the whole fucking thing. Like it's a lot. So it's like the opposite of what we thought. We thought that people aren't interested in learning things and not interested in exploring new ideas, they're not interesting in long form conversations. They want things to be quick. Right. Like that was when I first started doing it, people were going, he got to edit this. I was like, why? Like it's too long. So don't listen. Like it was like, this is what I'm interested in. I'm just going to do what I'm interested in. And it worked. But it's the opposite of the narrative. The narrative is everything has to be 10 seconds long. TikTok keep going. And we're just turning people into zombies. Well, then that goes back to the verifies what I'm saying or validates. So it's like true and false. If they're going to put, you know, put something out and short, you know, it's not working. Right. I mean, it might be working in some capacity on some people. But what's this say? New report highlights the decline of Facebook and Instagram as TikTok becomes the new home of entertainment. Oh my God. Me while it should be illegal. They should fucking ban it. And it's like, it's total Chinese spyware. And everyone is like, I'm on town. I don't even care. Look at my go into my accounts and find out my passwords. Yeah, passwords. Absolutely. Every it's more than just your credit card number people. It's literally every single thing in your phone. Every website you search all the text messages you make, it tracks all of the movements that you make with your thumb, everything. Yeah. There's a sense. Oh, but it's free. It's fun. It's lovely. And there's a sense. Anything that's if something's free, you are the product. You're right. Data. Your data is the product. But it's never been exploited like it is with TikTok. And it's not they also lied about where the data is going. Oh, it's always staying here in North America. Bullshit. It's going straight to China. Right. It's crazy. And they're they're also getting biometric data from people that have fingerprint readers on their phones or face, you know, face recognition. It's like there's so much data. It's getting it's really spooky. It is spooky. And in this world that we live in when they're controlling information, the one thing that freaks me out about talking about history is that they usually they as in people who are tyrants that that that that suppress and censor people throughout history, they go after the teachers. Mm. They're on there. It's more than just artists. They'll go after the comedians. They'll go after the teachers. And because it's going to be complete control at a certain point where it's like, you do not get to teach for a time of this last night at dinner about how what's her face down there in New Zealand, like anything just to draw them, which you say any one other than the government giving you information is false. What was there? Oh, I did prime minister of New Zealand. Yeah, at some point she's a great person. Yeah, isn't she? Yeah. Yeah. She's literally all well in in nature of it. Yeah, he never would have thought that before COVID. No, so many of them like Justin Trudeau is sweet handsome fella. No, I'm not sure what I thought. Stripes got shiny. I thought oh my god on so many people. Gavin Newsome so many fucking people. They seem benign. And then COVID came along in the opportunity to control people and a reason to do so. We're all in danger and they exaggerate that danger greatly and use it to clamp down on you and force you into these pharmaceutical drugs that you have to take and do this and do that. We got to lock it home and stay here and we're going to redistribute wealth and do something. It's like, whoa, you guys are fucking demons. I didn't know you were demons. I thought you were just governors and mayors and shit and shut down all the restaurants even if it doesn't make these sense. Yeah, I was even with my wife and I were talking for a little bit about it at time, that maybe moved back to Australia at some point and then COVID hits us like no fucking way. Where do you live now? Northern California. Get out of there too. I'm definitely am. That's an ice-tostraeli. Random sticks. It's a bunch of hits. It's a bunch of different. Do I think California is wild. It's like it's a very interesting place. It's all weed growers and cartel people. Yeah. Yeah. And I was I'm an Arizona. I thought I'm an Australian still trust me. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'm an Arizona. I thought I was safe. I'm not getting into it, but what they did to carry lake. I shouldn't go there, but there's Arizona was the last free place or one of them because like Texas is debatable. Florida is pretty free. South Dakota is free, but Arizona, everyone needs to be paying attention to what happened there. Yeah. The regularities when it came to the reports that people had at the places where they were trying to vote is really wild. Like I wish I knew what was true, so I could actually comment on it. My when I witnessed walking my dog in different neighborhoods was a lot of carry lake signs. And I didn't see one single one of Hobbs and Katie Hobbs, like her social media on Instagram had like 6,000 followers. I'm like literally on the election night compared to carry lakes at like 300,000. And I'm like that means something. It doesn't necessarily prove anything, but my point is that people I was talking to, she had a huge, huge, huge following. She was doing all the debates. Katie Hobbs hid, but I know what happened. I mean, I don't have proof. What happened? Are you allowed to say these things? Right? These are the things that they go like this. You know what I mean? This is like one of those things. You think there was some manipulation that led to someone else winning. Perhaps you'd have to be stupid not to conclude that if anyone that's looked into this, you would have it's an insult. It's insulting my intelligence to think that something. Let me just say it like this. I just have some questions. That's all. Well, all the people that were, it was at Maricopa County. Is that the area where they had the most irregularities were also the most Republicans? Yes. Well, I mean, Maricopa County has a lot of blue to it too, but listen, Trump Lincoln's provided no evidence to support her claims of election fraud. Well, this is on Newsweek.com, which is totally unbiased. No evidence. That's a legal case was thrown out by America, but County judge in December, Lake has insisted that the election fraud was involved in Hobbes declared victory and that she's the real governor. Yeah. But she was also saying that Donald Trump really won and he was the real government, real president. Well, what she says gets said almost every election. That didn't quote her, Lacy. I studied Kerry Lake. Let me quote her because I'm a, are you Kerry Lake's Porter, bro? Yes. I am a supporter of anyone that's an advocate for free speech, anti censorship and freedom and my rights. And what she said, a reporter asked her was pressing her on the 2020 election involving Donald Trump. And she said it very eloquently. She said she has reported I'm asking you. Do you really think that Joe Biden got 81 million votes? And the reporters like, do you think so? She's like, no, I'm just asking you. Do you think he did? She's like, I have questions and so do Arizona's and that's all I'm saying. I just have some questions. I'm allowed to ask questions. I think a lot of people voted for Joe Biden would a lot of people vote again. I don't think so. And I think that's why they're looking into his fucking classified documents that he got in the back seat of his Corvette. Maybe the Democrats think that too. They're trying to sing that dude. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I don't know Jack shit about politics. And I'm a little suspicious of their actions somewhere. I'm not even vote. I think it is. I think Atlantis is in the Sahara Africa. So just, I don't know anything about politics. Yeah. Yeah. And Elon Musk, let's excavate the lost labyrinth of Egypt. Well, the problem, I mean, I think one of the problems with elections always is that you can never say there's zero fraud because like no one thinks there's zero fraud. Like, like when you say, how much election fraud is there? It's not zero. So what is the number? And how much of it is Republican election fraud and how much of it is Democrat election fraud? I don't know. You know, I really, I remember they had that documentary on HBO back when Bush was president. It was called hacking democracy. And it was all about the die bold voting systems. Yeah. And that these voting systems have been manipulated to help the Republicans win. So there's always been this sort of this, there's always been this narrative that, you know, your elections are not fair. And a lot of that is being reinforced by these troll sites, these troll farms like in Macedonia, they have a bunch of them and then Russia and they've been doing that to try to undermine our faith in democracy forever. And so a lot of people, they get their information from these websites and Facebook pages that aren't even based in America. And they're purely designed to get us upset at the election process and undermine our faith in the system. And, you know, they found out that 20 out of the top 20 Facebook pages that 19 of the top 20 were all Russian troll farms, which is what all the Christian sites, 19 of the top 20 Christian sites on Facebook were trolls. And it's like they're doing this to try to get people upset about things and undermines our faith in democracy, creates more chaos and makes this more easily manipulated. It's really bad. And I really wish that we understood, look, if so many people thought that Joe Biden would be a great president, well, now, you know, you know, you know, he's not and now he knows he really was in mental decline. And well, maybe he can make a better choice in 2024 and let's sort this out. Right. But once soon as he said, I'm going to run again, they're like, the fuck you are. And then, you know, I think this is the beginning of a bunch of things that will probably come out of him. They flipped on him. And they'll turn on him. And then they'll put someone else in this place and do some weight in the wing. Yeah, I mean, he's problematic because even they fucking hate him in California. How they're going to feel about him in Arizona. How they're going to feel about him. But it's also like how, how much of it can be manipulated by the media. I mean, how much can people be manipulated by these headlines that you read while you're taking shit? How much of it, you know, how much of these narratives can be shaped to get people to say, look, it's better than better him than Trump. If it's Trump, we're going to have a nuclear war. Yes. Trump, we're going to have this. No, we're going to be tweets. Supremesis, we're going to have this in that. Mean tweets, Joe. That's this focus up. It's really a brilliant back. Well, he can't even tweet anymore because he's got a deal with true social. It seems like because they gave him his Twitter account back and he won't even use it. Yeah, I don't think him in the musker friends, I suspect. Well, I don't think it's that. I don't think he's allowed to, I think he has a deal. Yeah. I had a guess. This is pure speculation. But he has his own social media network. And it's very valuable. Right. So the only way that truth social is valuable at all is if he's not using Twitter. I see. If he starts using Twitter, I mean, he has like 29 million Twitter followers or something crazy like that. If he starts using that, no one's going to pay attention to true social. Right. Like why would I go over there and watch a bunch of QAnon wackos like scream about like pizza gate when there's Twitter or you could just go to Twitter and read what he has to say and see him, you know, arguing with people. Meanwhile, the Taliban's on Twitter and they just bought blue check marks. So people in the mad that Trump is back on Twitter. I mean, I saw people, I'm leaving Twitter. Like, do you understand the fucking communist party of China is on Twitter? Do you understand the Taliban's on Twitter? Do you understand how many fucking people are on Twitter and you're mad that Trump's back? Democrats. Well, it's just like when the guys on Twitter he says funny shit, people can attack him and they can go after him. That's what it's supposed to be. It's supposed to be like he says something and then let someone from the left let Elizabeth Warren go after him or let this person go after him. Let them duke it out. Don't fucking silence people right. Especially like this idea that it's dangerous to let him speak and communicate. What about you motherfucker? Someone's going to say it's dangerous to have you speak. Yeah, so it's gonna come down to it. Like they're gonna keep pushing it further and further and further until like you're gonna have a very narrow, window of communication, a very narrow lane of your ability to express yourself. And it's not going to accurately represent people and they're going to whisper things and pubs and whisper things and coffee shops and that's going to be the real truth. Yep. And this is like I was saying a few moments ago, which is that for decades throughout your life, people we didn't have this censorship. People are allowed to say things and worst case scenario they got ridiculed and laughed at and life went on and everything was fine. The merry-go-round of life worked out just fine with everyone being able to say whatever they want to say. And now all of a sudden it's a problem. So they're conditioning the younger demographic to be like right, this is this is dangerous misinformation. They're the younger demographic, these Gen Zs. They don't they don't remember what I remember before like the days before 9-11 being a senior in high school and that went down and just how everything is slowly started changing since they don't understand that freedom of speech was always a thing. There wasn't censorship and everything was fine. And now the the the censor and now you see problems. Well, there's also the problem that social media for the most part is controlled by the left. It's almost entirely owned and controlled by tech companies who are very progressive and educated and primarily lean left. They used to be the other way for a long time. The tech they blow with the wind a little bit in terms of political everything has been. But it's been different than social media. Yeah tech combined with social media like that's that form of tech is the distribution of information tech. It's not a tech like all the cool. Yeah, it's it's so different. Devin Nunes, the former California congressman who left office to run Donald Trump's app, True Social as we're being quiet as a platform continues to be plagued with issues. His app. Proost. So it's his Devin Nunes. No, no. Donald Trump. Yeah. Yeah. Like he owned like they his company runs it. Yeah. Yeah. I think that scaling is fun. I'm sure someone paid for it. I'm sure he didn't buy it. What's I was looking up this CEO is that you know is it? And Devin Nunes left to run Trump's like social media. Right. But you think he funded it. I'm sure there has to be some sort of a deal. I would just imagine if I was digging into because I would imagine there's investors like say if you're going to open up look, those apps don't do well. I mean, think about GAB and think about a lot of these other ones that they created GADER. There's a lot of them they created. They just went away. The all in me. If you got up, fucking figurehead is big as Donald Trump and he's banned from Twitter. And he's saying this is the only way to get the voice of the king. And you put it on True Social. People can invest in that. And if they're going to invest in that, they're going to be very hesitant. Well, how do I know he's not going to go back to Twitter? Well, he won't. He's not allowed to. I mean, that's just me guessing. I have no idea. I'm very logical. Totally talking out of my ass. But I would imagine that he has some sort of a deal. Also, I would imagine that if that is his company, he would be wise enough to go, you know what? This is worth nothing if I go on to Twitter. Yeah. So if I'm going to sell this one day and make a big profit. These are the people that invested the oil. Yeah, see you go. There you go. Look at all these people. 6.2 million. I got to invest at 6.2 million. Oh my God. I want to sell you a bridge, buddy. I got to say, I got a billion dollars. I've created every $4 million. One billion dollars. Oh my God. It's worth $40. That's hilarious. But the money remains inaccessible pending a successful public launch. In the interim, Trump's media ventures put together about 38 million in debt according to the SEC. That makes sense. And that money didn't come from Trump himself. So who provided it? See, that's what I'm saying. The money didn't come from Trump himself. See, I guessed and I was correct. Yeah. And so let's look at all these people. So look at all these folks. Karl Flueger, hello, Carl, president of the Texas oil company. I bet he has a big hat and a fucking giant bell buckle. And he put $10 million toward true social. Wow, it's a lot of money, Carl. Patrick Wall, CR empire holdings company that manages multiple gym brands, 6.2 million. Can you trow? Texas, another Texas, telecoms billionaire donated to Trump before, poked over a forked over four million. Wow, Jesus, people are all rich. That guy, the next guy, only 200 grand and 100 grand. So most of the people were like, yeah, they are rich, but still, that is not a wise use of money. You know, they probably got their wife, put the unated donate, honey. We need to get Trump back in the home. If it said they got a billion dollars in funding, whatever that just listed was even close. Yeah, that was a mistake. Well, the people are probably hiding. The other people are probably hiding or maybe they got a lot of people that don't need like a thousand, you know, because they got so the next one, like 200,000, but that's what maybe like people have been public about it. Yeah, that goes fund me, like, it's a lot. Go fund me. Well, listen, gentlemen, this has been a lot of fun. And I really appreciate both of you. Your YouTube page is fucking amazing. Please help people how to get to it. Thank you. Yes, it's uncharted x.com slash. Well listen gentlemen this has been a lot of fun and I really appreciate both of you your YouTube pages fucking amazing please tell people how to get to it. Thank you yes it's unchartedx.com slash c slash unchartedx unchartedx unchartedx unchartedx unchartedx.com find it you have so many great videos. Thank you Joe. Amazing content and your ability just fucking spit it out both of you guys I'm so impressed and Jimmy thank you so much for coming back and thank you for bringing Ben and yours bright insight it's you've so many fantastic videos I tweeted a couple of them today. Thank you Joe. Let's do it again yeah we're not to do it was a great time thank you so much appreciate you guys bye everybody