And we're live. Are you gonna update the people out there? No. Are you shut your phone off? Yeah. All your professional. Try to wait, sir. I'm doing well. Let's go on. Everything, it's all pretty weird out there. It is very weird out there. We were just talking about how weird it is out there before the podcast about how it just seems like it's very difficult to keep together during these times and to keep a reasonable position and to handle all of the pressure of all the people that get upset at anything you do. Left or right in the middle, centrist, your two centers, your two left, your two right, your unreasonable, your two reasonable, your two nice. You're not nice enough. Wow. Suddenly I feel like I'm in a marriage. Ha ha ha. Doesn't it seem like that? Yeah, it does. I think that this is why this is the era for disagreeability. If you're not easily swayed because you're somehow insensitive enough that you just want to keep to first principles, whatever it is that you believe, that seems to be the best hedge against getting swept up in the madness of others. How so? Well, I guess when I go metacognitive, I look at my yearning for group belonging. And then I also watch my inability to belong to groups that say crazy things. Yeah. And so those are two conflicting feelings. I think sometimes when people look at me, they say, wow, you're really contrarian and you have an easy time standing up to the conventional wisdom. And I don't think it's that true. I just think when those two things fight inside me, dialectically, the disagreeability is so strong because it's protecting a comprehensive view of the world. And so since everything already kind of fits together fairly well, I would say it's much harder to sway me because the number of things I would have to move cognitively to accommodate the wrong idea is quite large. It seems unnecessary, but it also seems like we should be able to disagree on things. And you should be able to point out with reasonable courtesy that there's something wrong with someone's idea and it not become a big personal thing. But oftentimes that's not the case. Well, so a lot of the things I think that we're exploring are what I would think of as heuristics. There's sort of rules of thumb that work fairly well within some domain of definition. And we've gotten so many of these conflicting rules. I mean, the rules of thumb themselves conflict. So for example, he who hesitates is lost conflicts with nothing of tension, nothing gained or something like that. Sorry, I forget. There's the cautionary aphorism and then there's the b-bola aphorism. And so we don't have a good way of sorting out conflicts that occur at the heuristic level. And then you also have heuristics meant for social cohesion conflicting with ground truths. So this is why biology is always controversial because biology is a science that tells us many of the things that we wish were true or just not true. I always think about Ben Shapiro's facts don't care about your feelings. Well, biology cares about your feelings. It just laughs at them and stomps on them and makes them feel very sad. Well, it also tries to explain your feelings too. Right, exactly. But if you really understand biology, the world is so dark and so interesting and beautiful and crazy, that it's very hard to recover simple ideas about how people should be once you realize that our being apes has deep consequences. Yeah, I have a very minimal understanding of biology. But in that understanding, I've come to accept some things just about being a person that I've never considered before. Such as. All the different things that are running your decision making. Like just what we're talking about, like the need to be in a group and all these are probably evolutionary advantages to fostering tribal behavior so you could all work together and feed each other. This is always pulling at you. And when people give people a hard time about virtue signaling, it is kind of gross when someone virtue signals. But we understand what it is. It's gross because we've all done it. That's one of the gross things about it when someone is just like really trying hard to act like they're disgusted by the way people behave because they would never behave like that. And they just want to let you know, I'm above this type of behavior. What's most likely because they weren't above that kind of behavior at some point in their life or they're not currently really above that type of behavior, but they wish they were. Or the part of them that's speaking is the part that's above that behavior, but that's not the part that's going to be operative after 11 on a weekend at a bar. Yeah, three shots in. All bets are off. The wheels are off the wagon. So I think we don't see ourselves. We are permanently in our own blind spot because the part of us that is just in right just in good seems to know very little about the other part. What's also this thing this need to belong and need to be accepted? Like we work to be accepted instead of work to be someone that you would want to be a part of the group, instead of being like really honest about who you are and how you think and how you behave and how you operate in the world. Instead of doing that and trying to prove upon that, you try to project an image of this. Then what here's a question for us. Why is vice signaling so much more powerful than virtue of signaling? Vice signaling like a person who admits their problems, like an alcohol who steps up and says I've got a real issue. Could be that way or it could be sort of Dan Bilzerian type vice signaling. Like you want to know what I'm into. I'm into hot chicks, weed and guns and a lot of tons of money showing it off. Well, he's super honest. That's one of the reasons. And he's bulletproof in that regard. Like you can't fuck with him. Like you can't say, hey, look at you. You're just a playboy. He'd be like, yeah, yeah, I like girls. Yeah, it works. Yeah. What else? Right. I'm nice. Like he's a nice guy. Talk to Dan Bilzerian. He's friendly. He's not a bad guy. No, I mean, he had this post, which was he was I think offering a hand to a woman up a stare and it said, come with me, I'll ruin your life, but it'll be fun. No, it was just like it's so disarming. Yeah. And I think that this is also partially a secret to your success, which is that you're a nice guy. You're really into fighting. You hunt elk. You're clear about which ones you're going to kill, which ones you won't, based on the reproductive cycle. You're promoting all sorts of things that people don't want to talk about to a fairly conscious level. And it's produced an incredible level of trust in an era where all of the virtues signaling gives way. I mean, if you scratch any person enough below the surface, you're going to see that they're really warning you about themselves. And so the people who are the most sort of self critical. And this is like, you know, I think I brought this up recently on Twitter about meta honesty where there was a in the Castro in San Francisco, there was a bar restaurant that was advertising free food, naked servers, plus false advertising. And it was just fun and playful. And as a result, you know, you had an instant desire to eat there and trust them. Yeah. So I think that in this world of virtue signaling, vice signaling is really the growth industry. And that's what's working for good people because they are more in touch and, you know, they are going to lie to you. And they're going to do all the self interested things, but they're not going to surprise you quite as much. Well, in the case of Dan Bilzerian, I really don't think he's going to lie to you. I don't think that's what he's doing. I think what he's doing is living like a guy who's got $100 million and happens to be 35 years old and likes to bang hot chicks and fly around in private jets and living some, if you see that fucking house that he's got, he just bought some crazy house in like Bel Air. I guess with that weed money. Jesus, he's got some, it looks like you probably cost $100 million or something ridiculous like that. It's a fucking insane house. But that's what he likes. Yeah. You know, the guy drikes likes to drive around for our reason. And, but he's a nice guy. So it's like, well, where what's wrong with this picture? He's doing things. Look at this. This is his house. What in the holy fuck is that? Does he have a golf course on his roof? What is that? Is this a fucking ridiculous house? Look at this fucking place. He gives us a dress out? Is that his address? It's pretty hard to hide that thing. Why the fuck would he give us a dress out? I don't think you can get there, it's in Bel Air. Whoa, look at this house. It's preposterous. Anyway, this is what he likes. But why is that bad? I mean, we only have 100 years of everything goes perfect. I know. What do you give a shit? Like, why does everybody give a shit? But they do give a shit. They give a shit a lot because for a lot of folks that are working, you know, making a good living, making 50 grand a year, whatever, that's completely out of the realm of possibility. And his lifestyle wouldn't be sustainable for them. I mean, yeah, because he's taking real risk. There's no question about it when you, you know, get everybody stoned and then you take them to fire automatic weapons out in the desert. Oh, yeah, that's real risk. And also the gambling. He does a lot of like crazy gambling. But this is the thing about the relationship with the unforgiving. This is partially why you think you're UFC and Jiu Jitsu life is that when you have a relationship with the unforgiving, you can say, you know, that guy doesn't really know what he's doing. But then you're in the ring, you know, you're the man in the arena. And you find out very quickly whether or not the trash talking, you know, paid off or it didn't. And I think that many people have no relationship with the unforgiving. And you take them out on a hike into, you know, the, let's say the Trinity wilderness. And then two hours in, they'll just sit down and say, I want to go home. Right. You're thinking like, okay, you're signaling something, but there's, there's no car service. And there's we're not calling a helicopter. You know, it's just that there's this, if you live in the social layer, you're surprised by the existence of the unforgiving. But girl, well, one, on one hand, I want to support people's ability to do whatever the fuck they want. On one hand, I want to support someone's ability to sit in front of a computer and whether you're working, you're writing code or you're writing a script or you're just fucking playing video games. Yeah. I want to support your ability to do whatever you want to do. Yeah. If you have the means, if you're not, you know, with your families on starving, this is what you enjoy doing. Why do I care? But as a person who's experienced a fair amount of adversity, especially self-imposed adversity, I would, I would tell you that you would benefit from it. I've benefited from it and I think you'd benefit from it too. You don't want to be that guy. The two hours into the hike says I want to go home. You don't want to be that guy. You want to be that person just says, well, this is what we're doing. And I'm going to figure out how to do this. And I'm going to show character and I'm going to, I'm going to be proud of myself at the end of this. I mean, I might have to walk for six hours and when it's all over my legs might be shaky and I might have to sit down, but that gatorade's going to taste so good. It's going to be like the greatest gatorade of all time because you're going to drink it. You're going to earn the shit out of this. You're going to feel it. And I think we learned about ourselves through especially self, well, any kind of adversity. You know, look, I'm coming off of being evacuated from the fires, which was for me, not that difficult. You know, I'm not poor. I got a hotel. I brought my family to the hotel. We got safe. Got my dog to the podcast studio and everybody's all right. You know, but for those firefighters, I mean, 12 hour shifts, battling the blaze or people who lost their home. Some of them tried to save it. There was a story about a guy in Malibu. The climb on top of his roof with a hose and tried to fight off the fire and he got severe burns and he's in the hospital. And I mean, it's raining ash and these chunks of fucking fire on people, these embers. They're falling from the sky and this guy's trying to save his house. I mean, that guy literally went through the fires. It would be a different person after this. No question. We've been in something of a reality drought, the number of people who have very little relationship to reality. I mean, you know, I used to live in Cambridge, Massachusetts. You come in from Boston and there would be the signs that fresh, killed chicken. Like no bones about it, man. Fresh, killed chicken. But like chicken McNuggets, nobody quite knows what part of the chicken is a McNugget, right? It's a good way to have abstraction that comes to you. And so I think we've gotten very divorced. There are all of these layers of indirection between us and the world. And when a fire happens, it's so overwhelming. We were just choking on the SF smoke in the Bay area. It just gets real after having been unreal for a very long time. Yeah. It's unavoidable. It makes you, it makes you buck up. Like you got to get out of there. We got evacuated Thursday at 2 30 in the morning. We were looking up. We're like, we got to get the fuck out of here. Like it don't give a shit what you leave behind. Just go. Keep your body and go. Everything else, it's either replaceable or you don't really need it that much anyway. Just fucking get out of there. And when you see that fire raging over those hills and helicopters are dropping water on it and then another house explodes because the gas line gets hit. It's just you, you, I saw that. You see that? You go, oh, there's, this is not enough people in the world to save you. There's not enough fucking firefighters or cops. There's too many houses, there's too many people and a bunch of these houses are going to go. You got to get the fuck out of there. And, but there's a certain, I was with a bunch of my friends from my neighborhood and my friend, Tom Segura and his wife. We all stayed at the same hotel. And we felt, we, there was like a tangible sense of community. Well, this is, I love this point. Let's imagine you go for a wedding and they house you with your third cousins. You barely know. If you're lucky enough that the sewage system breaks and like stuff is leaking out of the ceiling and you guys all have to do heroic crazy stuff to save the house, you're going to be closer to your third cousin than you are, you know, to your uncle. And this is this very strange feature of the world that kind of a random arrival of diversity is very often what bonds you to some particular human being. And if you avoid adversity in groups your whole life, you probably don't realize that you're never fully activated as a human being or particularly, you know, if, if men, I think don't form groups that in some sense fight or battle or contest together. So there's this very weird fact that apparently humans are the only species that organize contests in teams. And this is an intrinsic feature of being human. It's contests. Yeah. Do other animals have any contest? Well, just they spot the chimps. You know, we'll have these incredible rating parties. They're very methodical and they'll they'll attack somebody else. But I don't think that they practice it. It's like, okay, you're red team, chimp, you're red team, chimp. Well, we're the only ones that do stuff like that that can communicate, right? Like dolphins can communicate, but they don't do stuff like that. Right. And they're usually, like, you'll have two bears learning to play with each other, because it's safer to play with your brother and childhood than it is to just suddenly show up against some big ass bear and have to compete for females. I had William von Hippel on a couple days ago and he's the author of the social leap. And we were actually talking about this about one of the things that made human being successful as we came down from the trees and started walking around the grasslands is our ability to organize and to work and coordinate together. Yeah. Well, you know, but like African wild dogs are fairly good at this. And you watch what they do in their spare time very often. They just take the piss out of each other. So they actually come to each other's age, aid at a very high level in times of need. But like, you know, when you're just hanging out around the firehouse, you're really just giving each other shit all the time. Right. But something about the way in which we play being kind of divergent from the way in which we behave when we actually just need each other. And like you need to be on that line, you know, let's say, you know, throwing burlap bags and I just need you to do that thing and we're both facing something together. It doesn't have to be fighting in a militaristic situation. But I do think that this is one of the weird things that's going on with all of this emphasis on care and feelings is that often men need to give each other shit in order to form very deep bonds. If I can't tease you and if I don't know where the line is, like there is this line, which is like, dude, that was way too far. We all know that those lines exist and we sometimes have to go up to them and sometimes we have to experiment by going over them. But if somebody says, I don't like the way you're talking, that seems very insensitive. My response is, well, you're going to keep me from forming a deep bond with that person. You just don't know that that's how we do it. Yeah, they're shielding. They're putting up their shield. And often as, you know, to project a certain image to you, they want to be taken seriously. They want some respect. They can't deal with you goofing on them. That's true when goofing can go wrong. But I think that one of the things that I've been fascinated by is where did all this madness come from? Increasingly, I'm wondering whether it comes from social and emotional learning that started to be taught in schools around emotional intelligence. So this whole idea of EQ, I think, had a lot to it. But not all the bugs were worked out because a lot of things that kind of are in the neighborhood of bullying might be actually intimacy building. And so if something turns into some super disgusting, deadly hazing ritual, we all say, what the hell are you people doing? On the other hand, if it sort of three clicks back from that line, and there was mild discomfort, we humiliated each other a little bit. And now we're friends for life. Then the fear of the hazing ritual gone wrong may actually stop people from ever actually making the really deep bonds to last the lifetime. Well, isn't it like everything else? Some people are good at things and some people suck at it. So some people are good at being silly with their friends. And some people go too far. I mean, you experience that. Like I've had friends who experience that where they do a podcast and on the podcast, they fuck with each other. And they'll have someone come up to them that they don't even know right off the street and immediately say something like ruthlessly insulting to them. And they're like, what the fuck? And they're like, yeah, man, you do that showing your podcast all the time. I was like, okay, you're doing it wrong. I don't know you. We're not friends. We're not bonding here. You're walking up and saying something mean, calling someone about fat so. Exactly. It's like they just not good at it. And oftentimes that's some sort of a sign of social intelligence, a lack of social intelligence, a lack of, I mean, who knows what's going on in their home? Might just be bad information from parents and they're growing up in this environment of just very low level social skills. And now what we're doing is, I mean, I think that you're spot on. And now I'm going to try to readjust everyone around our weakest players. Right. So now the idea is that because that can be said in a horrible way, we're not going to let anyone say anything remotely adjacent to it. Yeah. You can't do anything that would be a precursor to it. So you're just going to say, well, you see that little patch of bad cells over there, we're going to cut off your leg in order to stop that cancer. And it's like, couldn't we do something a little bit more surgical? Well, and also there's some things that you're, there's a reason why we have this instinct to mock things. Yeah. Because people get out of law and then they demand too much goddamn attention and they become a problem. And this is a, I think I believe this goes back to hunting parties and hunter gatherers. Right. With a one person who just wanted too much attention, like you're fucking it up for this group effort. And that's kind of what happens socially when people claim these very ridiculous victim statuses. Right. And I think that picture that I put up on my Instagram a couple weeks ago of this guy, he had this crazy makeup on and he had this ridiculous description of himself like non-binary queer that also identifies as a Muslim and he was talking about quantum physics. The quantum physics got to help him appreciate his queerness. And I looked at that. I said, okay, maybe or maybe you just fucking crying out for attention. All I wrote was make sense definitely doesn't seem crazy. And people got mad at me for that for something so obvious. I looked, I just peered into the fucking deep dungeon that is the comment section for a moment. And I saw people like you would think that the people that are most susceptible to suicide, you would leave them alone. But your cruelty is, you know, you're exposing your cruelty. Listen, that's silly. That guy needs better friends. Your friends are even tell you you're silly. You got crazy makeup. Have you seen this guy? No. You have a photo. Look at this. I British Iraqi gay non-binary and also identifies Muslim. Listen, you need too much goddamn attention. That's all I'm saying. And I'm not saying you're a bad person. You should kill yourself. You shouldn't be queer. Be whatever you want to be. But if you're going that hard, that hard to define yourself. Like that is need a shit. That's fucking annoying. But your point is that you have to titrate the negative feedback. Yes. Right. So what you did was you gave him a small dose and saying, look, you might want to be a one of course correct a little bit. Well, the idea that there's any course correction, you're not sitting there celebrating this. Right. Well, that's the thing. Yeah. You're supposed to celebrate it. I'm supposed to celebrate so many things. Yeah. Well, you know what? You can celebrate it. That's OK. But you shouldn't get mad if I go, oh, that might be a little nuts. Because it's obvious, little nuts. It's a little nuts to paint your face with glitter. It's a little nuts. It's a little nuts. If that was just a regular person who's like, hi, we're going to take a JCPenney. My name is Wendy. And this is what I like to wear on my face. Like, OK, Wendy's a crazy bitch. Look at Wendy. Go look at Wendy. Look at her face. What is she doing? I don't know, man. She got fucking crazy glitter in her hair's 15 different colors. Yeah. And not the wrong. OK, but look at it this way. I have this weird thing, which I sometimes is called macula phobia, the fear of cosmetics. Really? Oh, man. Lips. What kind? Aishah. A smoky. No, it's like, well, this is the thing. This is that sometimes it looks somewhat normal and then suddenly doesn't integrate and the person just looks like they've got crazy stuff stuck to their head. And you're like, you've got crazy stuff stuck to your, well, that's how I perceive it. Now, here's the question. I can't be in touch. Like, it can't be Eric's got a problem with macula phobia. That has to be her. That word, it's freaking me out. It has to be. It has to be Eric. It can't accept people who wear makeup. And my question would be from first principles. How do you tell who to have sympathy with? Because this has been somewhat debilitating for me. Really? Yeah, sure. So it's been a real issue. You've struggled with it. Yeah. If you struggled with the feeling or struggle with the fact that you have the feeling. Everybody actually experienced. If you remember Tammy Fay Baker, so she was famous for freaking people out because she had no concept of how much, how many of us too much is too much. Now, what if somebody looks normal and then you turn around and suddenly their Tammy Fay Baker and you never can predict when that's going to happen. So that's like an interesting question about do we accept the person who I don't know why I have this? It's just that's something in my mind. Well, because you're a logical person and you're looking at this war paint that people are putting on and you don't understand the desire to do this. Why do you understand? You do, but you don't understand actually doing it. I don't understand why it looks normal. Like I have the feeling that to other people it looks very different than the way it looks to me. Right. Well, they've just accepted it. Maybe. Sometimes I accept it. And then suddenly, you know, I shake it. It's like you're shaking out of the movie. Like you see a movie where suddenly the mic is visible from the top. Ah, you know, like whoa. That's what I'm wearing. It's a movie. And that. But anyway, we all have these weird quirks. The question is with whom should we be sympathetic and with whom do we say well, you're being judgmental with me? It's a women's shoes that have gigantic heels. Those two letters that they could barely walk in. Yeah. That one freaks me out. It freaks me out because I see women walking in. I'm like, this is so crazy. Yeah. This is a choice that you're, I mean, I can't imagine. I'm paranoid, I guess. Maybe I've seen too much physical conflict. I can't imagine wearing something that would physically compromise me to the point where I literally can't run away. Right. Because you can't run away in those things. If you're in like stilettos, like these little things that you walk around in and your feet are all smushed in and you're basically doing tiptoes everywhere you go and you fuck, you've got to be killing you by the end of the night, right? You're not running away. There's a wolf chasing you or some shit. There's something going down. You're not, you're not getting away. It's just, it's a weird, like the desire to lengthen your legs and to give this graceful appearance. What's called Lardosis behavior? Lardosis. I'm learning so much today. Okay. So high heels were originally developed for men. It's a pretty pure taller. Not sure if it was to pure taller, only or if it was for riding. Oh, for horses. Yeah, maybe. For a lot of people don't know cowboy boots. The reason why they slip on like that is when the horse bucks and takes off your boots fall off. They're supposed to. I didn't know that. Yeah, that's the whole idea behind them. The reason you slip on and slip off and they have that heel where there's that wooden heel, that heel slips into the stirrups. So when you get, when the horse bucks, you don't want to get drags on, you want to that shit to just fly off and then you're on your back going, oh, look at that horse go. and then you go pick up your boots because they've fallen off and the fucking horse is gone, but at least you're alive. Oh, that's an expression he died with his boots on. Yeah, if you get, well, not really. I think that's like a gunfight type deal. But I think if you get dragged, I mean, if you get dragged, horses are going to run over rocks and shit. You're done. You're able to die all the time that are wearing regular shoes that shove their feet into stirrups and then you're stuck. That's why cowboy boots come off like that. Yeah, I remember when I used to ride horses, we'd have the guy leading the trail would take us up to a gallop and suddenly say emergency dismount was really terrifying. Yeah, and you know, you'd have to do it at speed very, very quickly. But I think that high heels got taken over by women because a lot of the things that we claim that we like about heels, that is the, I do it for height. I like the way it makes the leg look. Probably secondary to the curvature of the back and the way in which that is typically associated with sexual receptivity. So it's that particular posture that the heel connotes. And so the way I read it is that the cost of the heel is part of the communication. In other words, I'm willing to do something that is clearly not comfortable or for my benefit in any other way so much so that you can tell that I must be interested in sending a signal. 100%. Yeah. So the, well, but you have to deny the signal too. So part of the signaling is to say, oh, these are actually my most comfortable shoes. They always say that girls are hilarious. They're so comfortable. These are so comfortable. Right. Like how is that even possible? Those aren't crocs. Yes, but, but the deception has to be part of, now I'm like picturing crocs with heels. That was really weird. Well, the, the deception has to be you have to, you have to decide that you're not ridiculous. No, it's a shared deception. Yes. Then as the guy, I have to say, oh, that's so interesting. Yeah, but that's a lie. Well, we're all lying, but it's mutually understood as a lie. Yeah, but when the girls are saying, well, girls could say these are so comfortable because they're not killing them because they've accepted a higher level of pain tolerance with footwear than men have. Like if I had to just jam my feet into something pointy, like some pointy, and Spanish dancer type shoes, it would hurt after a while. Everywhere tie, I hate those things. Yeah. Okay. So that's some kind of uncomfortable thing that we do to ourselves as men. Yeah. Well, I used to have to wear one on a trophy limos. I think, well, I've definitely worn one since then, but very rarely. Very rarely. So I could kill you pretty easily with a tie. Like if someone has a tie on and I grab a hold their tie, yeah. Boy, unless you're a lot bigger than me, I might kill you. You've got to hold your tie. Ties are a hard thing to shake loose. It's really strong. Like you're a good tie is not going to rip. Yeah. Someone gets a hold of your tie at the knot. Yeah. You just twists and holds onto you. All they have to do is hold onto you. Grab an arm and just wrap their legs around you and hold onto that tie. You're a dead man. You're giving them a way. Holds onto you. All they have to do is hold onto you grab an arm and just Grab their legs around you and hold on to that tie. You're a dead man You're dead. You're giving them a weapon. Yeah, you all the time. All right. You've convinced me no more ties I just Grab that and just fucking twist. You don't have much time men You you don't have much time to get this arm off your neck. You get such a UFC You have to figure out it's a jiu-jitsu spin because you have to see you don't wear clothes But that you need to be able to grab a hold of someone's clothing like like a person with a leather jacket If you're talking shit and you have a leather jacket on you're with a guy who knows judo Yeah, you are beyond fucked you don't this this guy might as well have cannons coming out of his body like you're doomed You're 100% doomed he's gonna grab that leather jacket and basically this handles And he's gonna throw you up in the air and he's gonna hit you with the world The whole world is below And he's gonna drive you into the world and you're so fucked and you don't even realize it Joe, how happened you went up in fist fights never Never man. I don't know. I don't want to have nothing to do with that. I just get away. I would never want to get in the fist fight No, I know this is fascinating to me about this sort of the world here It's always talking about fighting and what can happen but just in our world there's like almost none of this in You know relatively boring white guy middle age you ever go on world star hip-hop? That shit's all day every day there's plenty of videos Most of the time it never most of the time nothing happens right but the one time when shit does happen if you don't know What how to defend yourself you're really fucked? This is this is true But then the thing is is that in all the practicing that you do you're also exposing yourself to the potential for injury. Oh, yeah So there's a question as to whether you're safer If you spend all of your time in this kind of well, what if something happens? I want to be prepared but the preparation for it is itself potentially fairly hazardous That's unquestionable But isn't that just like the guy who sits on the couch and never goes into the woods because he doesn't want to get tired I know it's very simple because like here we are I'm 51 years old and I'm in it all works So even though I've been injured I'm right here everything works. Yeah, but you also got out of shit fixed What if the UFC thing was like bold and interesting when you were a young guy? Do you think you would have I would have a hundred percent done it and I probably would have a much harder time having this conversation That's right. Yeah for sure. Yeah So I think I think you hit the sweet spot where you got the skills you've been in training idiom you really know what you're talking about and you're getting front row seats But not actually having to have your brain particularly take the pounding. There's no getting away from that That is the unfortunate reality that every fighter accepts there's no getting away from that There's there's an absolute possibility and it's not just your head It's also your joints a big part is your back and your neck I know many guys that have neck impingements and disc hernations and fused neck discs and then nerve pinches Whether nerves are impinged to the point where they have atrophy in their arms I know several guys who have that where they have one arm that's smaller than the other arm and it severely impedes Their ability to move and they used to be world champions two guys that have been on the show boss Root and Pat melitech two of the greatest of all time both guys have a small one small arm and one regular size arm Because of neck impingements for their nerves are literally pinched down by all the swelling and scar tissue and damaged discs yeah, well since we became friends I started just casually looking at this world and it's utterly fascinating I mean there's there's nothing like it. Well the jujitsu world I think you would there's there's two different worlds right there's the MMA world which incorporates all the different martial arts and Then there's the jujitsu world and the jujitsu world I think you would find yes, you would love it because it's basically To call it chess is not quite fair right because it's more complex than chess there's much more going on The degrees are freedom are so high But it's also easier to win if someone's better than chess because like you even if someone is fairly competent Chas will take a few moves to beat them and jujitsu if someone's fairly competent The other one is a master it probably crush it very quickly Yeah, but the when you watch two really high level guys trying to set each other up It's this crazy rolling exercise and leverage and position and then knowledge of moves that Eddie Bravo versus Well, I grace you yeah crazy. Yeah. It's hard to even know what's going on. It's crazy if you don't know It's one of my more difficult challenges of being in commentator is when the fight goes to the ground Explaining to people watching at home. What he wants to do right now is get his right leg over his arm And as soon as he does that now that arm it's stuck he's in trouble right now Yeah, you know and like to try to explain that to people so they can follow on go Oh, I see I see and he's gonna grab that he's gonna arches back and he tapped and people go Oh, and it gets people really excited about jujitsu because they see that and he go Oh, this is like really complicated like he's got there's like a dance he's doing and the other guy's trying to resist the day First time I saw the Gracie breakdown of particular fights where they've committed to memory every move Yeah, and it's like replaying the great games of like more fee or a couple of long-term chess and you're just thinking wow that okay, there's the evergreen game. There's the immortal game and That that to me is fascinating, but it's actually more interesting to me in the UFC arena because of the fact that that's only a component and that it's yes what I didn't understand was how much we could get close to unrestricted fighting and still have people fairly dependably survive with minimal obvious Disfigure this fig this fig there is even there's some we could even be safer if we eliminated weight cutting The weight cutting is the number one health issue in the sport in my opinion Yeah, number two is the brain damage and the impact and you know broken bones and things along those lines But the number one is weight cutting because it's so unnecessary It's such a such an issue that needs to be addressed because these guys want to compete at the highest weight Possible so you do you know how it works? No, okay So if you were gonna compete in the 170 pound division, but you actually weighed 190 What you would do is you would wait until you would follow a pretty strict diet keep your body weight in your fat at a certain level and Then when it comes down to a few days before you would dehydrate yourself pretty radically Yeah, and then rehydrate yourself scientifically using the crud there's a bunch of guys like George Lockhart guys who are Experts in this and then they'll give you the exact right amount of nutrients right amount of potassium and zinc and they want to replenish all of your electrolytes and get you in a perfect balance, but you're still Compromised and if you don't have a guy like a George Lockhart or someone who's a real expert in nutrition and understands biology and can get you back into that position You're most likely going to compete compromised But you're going to accept that Significant compromising because you're going to be a bigger person than the person you're fighting but they also like Enboxing in particular the vast majority of deaths have occurred in the lighter weight divisions and a lot of it is not just because of the head trauma But because it's head trauma to someone who's dehydrated. It's interesting. Yeah, it's like it's it sucks And it's it's contrary to what martial arts are supposed to be about martial arts supposed to be about skill for skill It's not supposed to be about cheating and the cheating thing is like your Dehydrating yourself. It's like sanction cheating. You're saying you're 170 pounds You're like if you say this the 170 pound champion and get on the scale is 193 with the fucks going on This isn't 170 pound. But how frustrating if I want to meet you in a different class like I wanted to fight you my whole life But we're really separated well you can lose weight the right way Look if somebody wants to compete at 170 pounds in my humble opinion They should actually weigh 170 pounds my friend Cam Haines is a ultra marathon runner and One of the things that he does when he gets ready for ultra marathons is he loses body weight But he doesn't have any body weight to lose so he'll he'll burn three thousand calories and eat two thousand calories And that's how he loses weight. He lets his body eat itself So he gets down to the 160s and that's when he runs these gigantic long races like 240 miles But I know he's done this you can do this like you don't have to dehydrate yourself But they choose to dehydrate themselves because they replenish and then they get much bigger when they get inside the octagon When he's 165 he's actually 165 that's just what he weighs and that's a the best way to run 240 miles So he does it through discipline But these guys that are doing it and it's not their fault because it's already been established It's a part of the sport It's been there for years and years and years and it's it's sanctioned cheating and everybody does it and it's the worst part of the sport Because it's really damaging to your kidneys terrible for your organs Your your body starts to shut down when you do it too often Your body doesn't want to lose weight anymore So it starts to really hold on to that water and guys follow a sleep and pass out and bang their heads off walls and fights get canceled Like pro like championship level fights get canceled because guys black out and crack their head off the wall And this is this has happened in the in the UFC before it's just super super unnecessary and unfortunate and part of it is because there's not enough weight classes There's like you know, there's 155 and then there's 170 The difference you 155 and 170 is not just 15 pounds because if you actually weigh 155 and this guy's dropping down to 170 that motherfucker could be 190 plus And he's just figuring out a way to cut weight to get down to there and that happens all the time So you're you're dealing with you know, it could be 25 30 pounds difference between you two guys If you're if you actually weigh with the weight classes when you get into the octagon So people are forced to drop weight There's forced to go lower if you want to compete at a world-class level They're forced to take this extra risk and it could be mitigated it could it could all be stopped by Hydration test the the UFC could step in all the athletic commissions could step in and say enough is enough You're gonna fight at what you weigh and we're gonna give you more weight classes So you could figure out what's the weight for you to be best at and I hope it doesn't take someone dying Before they figure this out because it's one of those things that people have done like Circumcision they've done it forever so they just keep doing it but if they just started doing it tomorrow people like why did you cut that baby's dick Are you fucking crazy? Well, I've always cut baby's dick. I've been cutting baby's dick's for years like this is right It's like you need more of a Yiddish X you get used to it. Well, it's not just Yiddish I mean, I'm Catholic my dick I cut It's like practiced. Yeah across the board under the the guys of you know Being sanitary and prevention of age is always stupid reasons to cut dicks Really, it's just a tradition that doesn't make any goddamn sense now. It's not the best analogy to weight cutting The full getting dick I do want to Pick up on an analogy which I'm curious about so when you're trying to describe the ground game Yeah It's super tough for a lay audience because the picture doesn't necessarily match what you're seeing because the the layer of expertise Makes a bunch of random arm movements and head movements and hip movements. Yeah into something else We have the same problem in like math and physics where everybody wants to know What's going on with that thing and then when you I would be listening to like the physicists on your program I don't think you have many mathematicians But it's so confusing to figure out How to talk to the world about things that people everybody wants to know about and I was just curious is if you saw a parallel In those two things those are very high art forms. Yeah Um Sean Carroll has done a really good job of trying to explain things Neil deGrasse Tyson's done a really good job trying to explain things well, I saw it the explanation of gauge symmetry Lawrence Krause yeah on your show which is like from To my way of thinking one of the most important principles in the world. Yeah. I still have no idea what the fuck he said exactly Well like I read his book. Yeah, and after I read his book That was the number one question I had I said, okay I need you to explain to me what is gauge symmetry. What does that mean? It's so weird that he didn't I don't think he expected I mean it just busted out. Yeah, I don't think so either that's it, but I think that it's so hard to To like okay. Here's one of my I will get back to gauge symmetry maybe but like When people say the universe is expanding right what the fuck does that mean? Like every smart every smart person says Into what right you know like it's the universe. What is it expanding into right and where's it going? Right and what it doesn't make any sense because the linguistics of the universe is expanding isn't really what the So you're saying the matter in the universe is moving outwards is that what the universe is expanding? No, no what it means is The infinite universe is getting more infinite or no So the first of all was that they they did you say that yeah I was trying to be silly the city of his kicking in yeah So if you think about this bottle, okay, right? It's the slices of the bottle that are expanding But if you think of the bottle is the universe the bottle the bottle isn't expanding It's just the cross sections That are expanding and so that's what they really mean What they really mean is something like the space time metric on space like cross sections has its volume form when integrated is is higher something like that It's some some mathematical statement, but the universe is expanding is not Helpful to me like if I wasn't able to read the math. I would say I don't get it Well, I don't get anything Quite honestly, I'm not being self deprecating. I don't get the big bang. Yeah, I don't get it at all. Well, okay. Here's what somebody should tell you okay? There are two kinds of singularities When you try to solve Einstein's field equations for gravity. So gravity's a thing Einstein tells us pretty much What we think gravity is The curvature of space and time and when we try to solve his equations We get these black hole singularities which called Swartzjill Singularities and when we get this initial singularity which we associate back to the big bang with the Friedman Walker Robertson model In some sense those singularities are Indications to us that we're not at the end of physics and that Einstein's equations aren't the real story and so rather than sort of saying They're a pretty good model up until this point and then we kind of really don't know what happened then we have the observational Thing that we would map to the big bang and then we have the model thing that we would map to the big bang and to be honest with you We pretty sure that our models don't make sense past a point and now we're having this conversation Past the point where we're pretty sure they don't make sense that would be much more honest to me But because we have this desire to to blow people's minds gratuitously and Everybody wants to how did everything begin and where are we who are we and we want to sort of answer more of that than we probably should Hmm, that's an interesting way That makes sense. Let me give you an alternate spin on quantum mechanics Okay so typically people say you know the mind blowing thing about quantum mechanics is that it's probable listed and That is kind of mind blowing, but if you actually say it differently you say look in classical mechanics like Newton stuff that we feel more comfortable with you have good questions and bad questions like if you and I go Hang out at the beach and I say to you Hey, where is that wave? Concentrated at what point does that wave wave live? You look at me and say it's a wave. It's not concentrated at a point. It's all along the shore so as a classical physicist you to say that's not a good questionnaire and when I ask you a good question like How fast is that wavefront moving? You know along this trajectory or something you can give me an answer and it's definite So as long as you ask a good question in classical mechanics you get definite answers When you go to quantum mechanics and you ask a good question Technically that means that the state vector is an observable of the Hermitian operator representing the question never mind Funny thing happens you get deterministic answers. There's no probability involved whatsoever So if I ask a good question in quantum mechanics I have the same property that I do when I ask a good question in classical mechanics I get a definite answer. There's no probability When I ask a bad question in quantum mechanics Instead of like classical mechanics it says, you know Screw off. I'm not answering that. That's ridiculous. It's a bad question Quantum mechanics says you really want to ask me a bad question. All right, I'll give you maybe this answer and maybe that answer And here's the probability distribution that I'll actually give you either of those two answers and what's more? I'll even kick it into the state that I that you asked about so for example If you ask where is that wave concentrated? So like let's say this is my coffee cup and I drop a little drop in the center of it That creates a circular wave that radiates out and I say where is the wave concentrated? well at one second it hits the coffee mug Let's say it's a big coffee cup and it one second after that it's concentrated again in the center So that becomes a good question only when the wave becomes Reconscentrated in the center of the cup, right? But if that wave were a quantum wave I could ask where is the wave concentrated and with equal probability suddenly the wave will concentrate at some point along the circle that represents the wave Right, so what would your answer read then? Well the point would be it'll concentrate at one of these points around the circle at random with equal With equal probability and suddenly the wave will concentrate randomly When it's a quantum question. So this is why quantum mechanics is so confusing quantum physics are so confusing to people Well because they hear that and they go okay, this is They just infuses when in my head like jello well, that's the thing But the point of if I if I have a wave and I slow it down I can look at a wave in a coffee mug right and I can see that if I ask where is the wave concentrated You would say it's concentrated at like half an inch out from the center of the cup You know say no, no not what ring is it concentrated or what exact point? It's not concentrated at exact point But that wave in quantum mechanics which is not concentrated at an exact point Behaves differently when I ask a bad question. So the point that I'm trying to get across is Good questions have exactly the same properties in classical mechanics and quantum mechanics. There's no introduction to probability theory The weird question is why is quantum mechanics answering bad questions? Well, maybe even weird question is not just why is it is quantum mechanics in an adolescent state of understanding? I mean it is a part of the problem that they don't know enough yet and they're trying to like Explain what they do know what they can prove on paper and for a person like me like well What do you know? And they're like well, we know probabilities. We know this we know that and a person like me It doesn't have any studying in it just goes worth What does that mean? Well, that's that's great So like let's say we were having a conversation about genetics and we were looking only at the DNA We didn't see epigenetics right in terms of like methylation patterns then you'd shove everything onto DNA and maybe you had no concept of like development and The model would work up to a point would explain why you have blue eyes or brown eyes But it wouldn't explain all sorts of other things and so now then you over Overdeveloped that model so I think that what you're saying is really Einstein's intuition which is I'm not saying I'm not saying that this is wrong I'm saying this is incomplete and then when we finally get the answer We're gonna say oh that's why we used to think of it in those crazy terms. Hmm. So back to gauge theory. Yeah gauge symmetry What the hell is that all right? Well, here's the here's the craziest thing. Okay? There is a very confusing visual image of the fundamental unit that you need to appreciate what gauge symmetry is all about and I had Jamie loaded up Under the tab called planet hop And this is gonna be chopf hopf What the fuck am I looking at you are looking at the most important object in the universe? What? That looks like some trippy screensaver on your laptop take another puff my friend because it's worth it This is what you're looking at is a principal fiber bundle and it's It is the earth those are the continents that's the cool part about it which is This is very confusing to figure out what you're looking at, but it's finite in other words If we stay at for an hour or two on this and we actually answer all your questions You will actually know what a principal bundle is and you will know the arena in which gauge theory exists for folks at home They're just listening and they will what the fuck are these guys talking about? What is the name of this video Jamie? It's not a video. It's a small File on a page I typed in planet hop, and it was the first thing that showed up on math dot Toronto dot edu Okay, so extended thing planet h o p f for anybody wants to look at this if you're just listening and you have no idea why I'm freaking out This was done by a friend of mine named drawer barn aton. I actually coded the same thing up Strangely enough didn't do it is brilliant a job of coloring it. It looks amazing by the way so Okay, what you're looking at is a two-dimensional sphere that is the surface of the earth where an extra circle is Included at every point on the surface of that sphere which you're now visualizing and that extra circle which would be called the fiber When you take the totality of all of those circles together one for each point on the surface of the sphere They create something called a three sphere that is all the points that are one unit of Distance away from the origin in four dimensional space So that three dimensional sphere is the analog of a two dimensional sphere sitting in three dimensional space So think about a caramel apple if you've ever made caramel apples you get a disc of caramel and you wrap it around The sphere that is the apple surface, right? So this is the three-dimensional version of caramel wrapped around the three-dimensional Sphere sitting in four dimensional space Now do you understand any of this Jamie? I'm trying. Well, look dude. It's totally trippy right? Yeah, and so we're not gonna get it completely during this session However, I think I lacked the tools I don't think so if it we lack the time So the first thing is you are finding out that one of your friends thinks this is the most important object in the universe And you've never even heard of it right much less know that there's one visual example. What's a fuck? How's this happening now exactly? It does look fucking crazy well Okay, this is what was discovered in the mid 1970s as the connection between mathematics and different what we call differential geometry and the Discipline of particle theory so two guys Jim Simons the world's now the world's most successful hedge fund manager and C.N. Yang I person who might arguably be the world's first or second greatest living theoretical physicist had a lunch seminar and they said why don't we figure out how do we talk to each other and What they found out is they both had developed a version of this picture and independently independently so it was the Rosetta stone that Unleashed a revolution so when Lawrence Kraus was talking to you about gauge theory He was saying things about chessboards and you color it white and you color it black a super confusing to me I would rather your people be confused about an Actual example of the object on which we do gauge theory that you can visually see Right now if I started to tell you what gauge theory is It's pretty simple So here's the here's the description. I never hear anyone say When you're doing differential calculus I don't know if you remember differential calculus You're trying to figure out the slopes of lines and brought instantaneous rise over the run So that always makes sense to be okay. I figure out how fast it's going up versus how fast it's going across That a question arises which is where do you measure the rise from? So for example if I say what is the height of Mount Everest? Jamie will say 35000 yeah Something crazy like that, right? Just go 1000 say base. Well, let's get an internet connection Let's take guess what do you think it is? I don't know. I can't remember. I want to say it's 35000 What do you think that it was 29? 29.029. Oh What's the highest was the highest one? Is it key to all right key to the second right is it is ever the highest? Yeah Okay, so okay Everest 29 would you say 29 29? 29 above what sea level okay? Where is Mount Everest located? The Himalayas what's that what's see? Oh, there's no ocean. All right, so right like we snuck in It's above sea level and there's no ocean so we start from the center of the earth. We have this structure called the geoid Which is the interpolation of sea level as if sea level is if the earth was only ocean and there was no tide right? And as if there's some sort of so we snuck in the reference level That's my point is that we teach these kids to repeat why it's 29,000 in change above sea level and there's no sea So that reference level is the magic of gauge theory Right, which is that we measure the rise over the run based on a custom Level so a level that we all agree upon so for example Let's imagine that you and I are in some country experiencing hyperinflation Right, and I'm your boss and you say dude. I need a raise. I say well look I've told you I would hire you for you know 10,000 denars a month and You say yeah, I said well your salary is constant. I took the derivative of it I've paid you 10,000 last month 10,000 this month So you're getting the same amount derivative equals zero. It's constant salary now you have to come back at me in calculus You say no, I don't like your notion of the derivative because what you're doing is you're measuring the absolute number of denars That you're paying me but what I want to do is I want to measure it in purchasing power because I'm losing money every month That you don't increase my salary. So I now come up with a version of the calculus in which my salary is not constant because it's being measured Relative to purchasing power rather than absolute units That's gauge there is that you're bringing in a reference level That does the differentiation so you're measuring rise over run by customizing the problem So these were two different applications of the calculus the cheating employer says I want to go with constant denars The gifted employees says not so fast. I know gauge theory. I want to use a custom reference level which is purchasing power Right, so it's like sneaking the geoid into Tibet to measure Everest. I've got my custom level This makes sense to you. Yes, it makes sense right, but now explain it say what he said What I mean to we need would need a new reference of what you want to measure what would I a new conversation? To have a rough like a flat level right right. I guess yeah, it would be really difficult for me to recall a day from now Maybe wait left the weed No, it's not my health. So lack no weed might help I might recall that my Papa mushroom cap see what's up. It's still in Reference to quantum physics like how you would you gauge symmetry well, but let's look at some more cool stuff Okay with the visual cortex because everything that we can do visually should inform what we can do linguistically So you should push everything into the visual realm that you can What do you mean by that like well? I just showed you the hop vibration which is the only in some sense the only mature picture I can show you of a principle vibration in geometry or physics That is honest and has the full complexity. It's got a certain kind of naught-edness to it It's got something that we would call curvature and it is visualizable and so It would be better that we spent you know a day or two on this most important object Which we think reality is based around and that you visually Got comfortable with it and then you said okay now. Tell me again with gauge symmetry is and then instead of Lawrence talking about this and that you visually got comfortable with it. And then you said, okay, now tell me again what gauge symmetry is, and then instead of Lawrence talking about this chess board and the colors and all this stuff by analogy, you'd actually be seeing gauge theory visually. Like I could program a computer and have done so to show you visually what a gauge theory is. And it takes some time to sort of understand what the trippy pictures are. But let's bring up the Escher staircase. And Jamie has a nice wrinkle on this, that instead of using MC Escher staircase, he's got this animated guy who just keeps going down. Mm. All right, now what's going on with those stairs? Now the stairs are sort of an optical illusion because obviously it can't just keep going down. But then you build these systems like rock paper scissors. What's the best thing to throw in rock paper scissors? Well, it depends on what you throw. Well, but we should be able to agree that rock is better than scissors. Rock is better than scissors. The paper's better than rock. Right, so you go around that thing. And now the point is that you get to like rock is much better than rock. Right, and that seems crazy. Now that concept would be what we would call hollinomi. The weird sentence rock is better than rock because of that going around the loop. Why rock is better than rock? I don't get it. Like rock is better than scissors. Scissors is better than paper. Paper is better than rock. So by transitivity, rock is therefore better than rock because you went around the loop and came back to rock. It's like MMA math. Yeah. Or if you're changing currencies and you don't spend any of it because you keep you using your credit card. By the time you come home, you had more money than when you left because the exchange rates did some thing so that when you changed into each currency, you somehow got richer. But by saying rock is better than rock, you're denying the fact they're exactly the same. Well, no, you're not addressing it. You just want to continue to do the same. That's the linguistic fallacy. So the idea that this system here, so those stairs in engaged theory would be these reference levels for the derivative. And you can have situations where the reference levels don't knit flatly together. And so by virtue of that, we would say that the system has curvature. Curvature is the eschreness of these better than transitive statements. Well, we're looking at folks for people who just listening. We're looking at, if you've never seen those escher etches, those sketches, they're very strange because what there are is a bunch of staircases that appear to always be going downhill even if one of them is above the other one. It's very strange. Very strange. And this one we're watching an animated guy roll down this staircase constantly, even though it really looks like somehow or another, it must go up somewhere, but you don't ever see it going up. But it's also a factor of the illusion of perspective and how it's drawn and playing games with lines. Exactly. But if you do this very weird experiment, which we didn't know about until the late 50s called the Arinoth foam experiment, if you run a electric current through a wire that's insulated, it appears not to have any electromagnetic field outside of the insulation. However, if you do some sort of quantum interference experiment, you can tell that there's current going through because it affects the phase shift, let's say of an electron orbiting that insulated electromagnetic system. So nobody thought that that was going to happen because they thought, well, an insulator would keep, we thought the electromagnetic field is what determines the shift in the electron. But it's insulated, so there is no electromagnetic field to worry about. It turned out that it wasn't the electromagnetic field alone. It was some previous geometric concept, which was called the electromagnetic potential, that determines something about the phase shift. So this is your staircase in the case of electromagnetism. It's like the photons are the analog of those steps. They're partially what determined the derivative operators is reference levels. And again, in our discussion of the, am I paying you the right amount in a hyperinflationary economy? So all of these things you're trying to figure out, well, that's an optical illusion, but that effect actually occurs in some systems, not as an optical illusion, yes. So this weirdness requires a fair amount in terms of either study of math or learning visualizations. But there's no way to achieve it in my experience with linguistic communications. All the stuff that gets said about, the universe is expanding, or let me tell you what it gauge theory is and what. There's a reason it's confusing, it doesn't make any epic sense. Right. I see what you're saying, sort of. But so this is like what Feynman said, if you think you know quantum physics, you don't know quantum physics. Well, there's some of that. Like, there's one of the most important things in the world is this thing called a spinner. Like the electrons and the protons correspond to things called spinners. An average person has no idea that spinners exist. What's more, spinners have a property that when I tell it to you linguistically, won't make any sense. All right, okay, let's do this with coffee. Hit me with it. Okay, so yeah. Thank you, sir. Perfect. All right, now here's the problem. Okay. Hold your cup, no. Sorry. From the bottom. And here's the first challenge. Without spilling it, I want you, and without readjusting your grip on the bottom of your cup, I want you to turn your cup 360 degrees. No, no, sorry. Turn your fingers should not change on the cup. Oh, okay. Turn the cup 360 degrees without spilling it and try to take a sip. Okay, that didn't work. No. Without coming back, how would you take a sip? If I got it all the way around that way? Yeah. Mr. G to do it, sir. I don't have to help myself. No, no, you're going to do it. All right, you ready? Yeah. Are you going to go around, sir? I'm going to go 360. Okay. Right. Now I'm screwed. If I don't bring it back underneath. Oh, I see. So that system required 720 degrees of rotation unexpectedly. Oh, you just keep going. Right. Okay. Now the idea that there are objects that don't come back to themselves under 360 degrees of rotation, but require 720 is probably something you've never thought about before in your life. Right. But without that, you wouldn't have the poly exclusion principle. You wouldn't have the stability of matter. And this thing is called the Philippine wine dance. Jamie, do you want to? That's not very seductive, Joe. It seems like some very odd ethnic dance. Yeah, but maybe you could do 11th planet jujitsu. Here we go. So this spinner is one of the coolest, most important objects anywhere. And it was discovered to be important in physics by a guy named Paul Dirac. Right. It's fun. OK. So this 720 theory is entirely responsible for the world that we live in. This is so bizarre to watch this. And no but an animation. And nobody knows about it. Unless you're hanging out with physicists, they don't tell you that electromagnetism has to do with the fact that there's a secret circle at every point in space and time that's invisible to you. They don't tell you that there's stuff that requires 720 degrees of rotation. They just say mind blowing stuff about. Whoa. So what is happening in this 720 degrees of rotation in the quantum world? There's an object that is requiring this just the way the cup arm system requires 720 degrees of rotation. What object is this? It's called a spinner. And that spinner is how we model the electron, the neutrino, quarks. All that is spinorial matter. Sir. That's a good long pause. I like it. Yeah. And where does this fit in in our model of the universe? Like what is the function of this? Why is it there? What is it? How do we know it's there? Well, we know it's there because when Dirac, so there was this problem with the Schrodinger equation. Schrodinger equation takes one derivative in terms of the direction of time and takes two derivatives in the direction of all the spatial directions. But because Einstein told us that space and time were woven together for the theory to be relativistic, you need the same number of derivatives of time as of space. Because space time is sort of one kind of semi-unified object. All right. That means you either have to boost the number of derivatives of time up to two to match the two derivatives in the directions of space, or you have to knock the two derivatives in the spatial directions down to one derivative to get it to be equal. Now one direction gets you to something called the Klein-Gorden equation. What Dirac did is he took a square root of the Klein-Gorden equation to get these spinners. So he had these numbers. He didn't understand at first that he was going to get kicked into this world of spinners. He came up with a square root equation in which A times B thought to be numbers was not equal to B times A. It was like equal to the negative of B times A. So it was like what two numbers when you multiply them matter in which order? There wasn't numbers. It was matrices. So this was one of the great insights. Rival T Einstein in terms of the depth of what it told us about the universe. Most of us haven't really heard of Paul Dirac. We don't realize that he has one of the three most important equations in physics. Now when you say three most important important in how it's applicable to everyday life or important in how it's given us an understanding in quantum physics or important how it's understanding is significant to quantum physics. We're talking about bedrock reality. Like you and I are having a conversation and if you're a matrix fan and what we might call the construct. What is the construct made of? The way I do it is I think of it as a newspaper story. There's where and when did it happen? There was who and what was involved and there's how and why. Okay? So where and when is space and time clearly? The who and the what to me, let's say the who is the spinorial stuff. like electrons, protons, neutrons, quarks, the stuff that we're made of. And then you and I are only able to see each other because we're passing photons back and forth which are force particles. They're not spinorial. They come back to themselves after 360 degrees. They don't require 720. So this is sort of the, if you're going to go to a play you'd have the dramatic personnel of the play given to you at the beginning. So this is what this universe is. It's a story about space and time. Where and when? About what is in that, who are the players and what equipment are they using? That's like bosons and fermions. And then there's the how and the why which is the equations and the Lagrangians, the govern the rules of play. So for example, if you and I start to go to the beach and we've got a ball and a net and you think we're going to play volleyball and we actually somebody says, no no we're going to play CPAC Tuckerau which is like volleyball played with the feet in a martial art style which is awesome. Yeah, we've showed a video in that recently. It's a series from Thailand or Boston. Yeah, they're really good at it. Amazing. It's amazing. It's like ballet martial arts, soccer, it's volleyball happening in one thing. We should do this as a nation. That's a different set of rules for a ball and a net and two teams that you could have done it one way is volleyball and you could have done it another way to CPAC Tuckerau where you're using your feet and on your hands. So those, that's sort of the breakdown of what a physics theory is. You got to tell me where and when you got to tell me what's in the game and you got to tell me what the rules are. And that's what this place is. And so theoretical physics is the most interesting of all of these fields to me not because it speaks to us about our daily lives because it speaks to us about where are we? Where is this thing taking place? So it seems to me that there's a small number of people like that are studying this stuff that are, they're getting passed biology, they're getting passed gravity, climate change, all those different variables that we're constantly dealing with. And they're getting to the very things that make everything. And what is it under the wiring? Lift, lift up the board. What's going on in here? Right, it's like getting to a computer down to the zero and one logic gates. Right? So that thing, we've got three or four equations. We've got three or four different kinds of objects in the system. We seem to be, and people are gonna not like what I'm about to say, but screw them, we seem to be almost at the end. Like these equations are so beautiful, they're so tight that it's almost most mysterious because it feels like this thing, like a movie that ended prematurely. How so? Well, when we found the Higgs particle at the LHC, there wasn't anything left that needed to close to explain the system. We know that there's dark matter out there that we don't understand. We know that there's dark energy out there that we don't understand because of astronomical observations. But all the stuff that we know about, when you look at it and collided at high energies and figure out what mutates into what, there's nothing missing anymore. So it's like, you have got this odd thing where everything got very, very simple, very unified. And it felt like we were gonna get one or two more giant unifications and the whole thing would be tied up with a bow. And right now, we just don't have anything that is needed to close the system. So for example, when you have radioactive carbon decay, what you see is that one of the neutrons flips into being a proton. And it spits out an electron when it does that. So it's like a trans nucleon, it shifts what it is. Okay, that electron doesn't carry off enough energy to explain how energy would be conserved. There was something missing. So this guy Wolfgang Paoli said, I bet there's a particle that's neutral, so we can't see it. It won't leave a track in a cloud chamber. It won't have any effect that we can see electromagnetically. But it's carrying away some of the energy, because I'm not gonna give up on conservation of energy just because this particular process doesn't seem to conserve it. And sure enough, there was this sneaky particle that was spiriting away some of the energy of the system that couldn't be seen because it didn't interact electromagnetically. And it didn't interact according to the strong force. The only thing you could use to trap it would be the weak force and the weak force was so weak that it was very hard to see it. Okay, well there's no neutrino that I know of left to find. There's no thing that's missing in our standard model. And I'm just not satisfied. Nobody's satisfied that the play is over. Well why would the play be over just because we've discovered all the neutrinos? Well, no, it's that we had an easy job when there was stuff that was missing. Then you just hypothethes out. I bet there's some invisible thing that's carrying away some stuff. Let's go look for something that's hard to see. So they find it. And so they find the higs. So they find the higs, they find the neutrinos, they find torque, gluon, plasma, and... Well I was gonna go there, but I was gonna say that they found like alternate generations of matter. So you and I are made out of the first generation of matter. But there could be like alternate Joe Rogan, made out of second generation matter or third generation. We don't know of any generations beyond these two. Hold up. Yep. What are you talking about? So like the electron has a relative called the muon. That behaves exactly like the electron except it's heavier. And the up and down quarks that make up protons and neutrons have relatives called strange quarks and charmed quarks. So there's like a second copy of Lego that has all the same properties as the first copy of Lego, except it's at a different mass level. Mm. So it's just denser, but it's a almost identical copy. And nobody wanted this thing. So the famous joke, there was this guy Isidora Robby who was like a kind of an ethnic Jew in New York. And when they found the second generation of matter, he responded as if it was a group of people at Adele. And he said, who ordered that? You know, and so that's the joke and physics. Who ordered that? Nobody knew there was a second generation. And then like then they hit their self or the head, you know, there's a third one too. Everybody's just like, what? Why? Where are these things coming from? So the fact that you don't know this, like what a profound disconnect that you're having all these physicists on the show. And these are the basic secrets that were, these are rock solid. These aren't, this isn't speculative, multiverse string theory, wulu Schrodinger's cat stuff. This is like, this is ground truth. And we don't know it. And we don't know it because nobody will show you a picture of the hop vibration. Or there's a concept called the group, which is how we think about symmetry, that no mathematician or physicist can, you know, go a day without talking about groups almost. And we act as if it doesn't need to be taught in high school. Like it's too, it'll blow your mind. We're not gonna teach you the groups even exist. So we've built the professional version of this, the subject around objects that we don't even tell you exist when you're studying in school. So though, if you think about the portal story in childhood, there's this story about either it's a rabbit hole or a looking glass or a wardrobe or a platform nine and a half or whatever these things are. I don't know what the Harry Potter version of it is. But how do I get from the world that I'm in to this new amazing world? And even find out that it's there. And that's what I think theoretical physics is failed to do. It hasn't built a portal for most people to even understand what the issues are or what are the objects, what is the game, how close are we to understanding what existence itself is, which I think we're very, very close. And the square root, this was what I was gonna say before about Dirac, is like the most profound object in mathematics to me. And the reason is, is that when I ask you, what is the square root of negative one? That is a question that can be posed entirely within the familiar. So the real number is you're comfortable, you owe money, you have money, so I need plus one and minus one. Square root, understand what times itself equals my number. And when you say what's the square root of negative one, there's no answer inside of the real line. But there is inside of this extension called the complex numbers. And so it's like you're in flat land, and you're trying to figure out, is there anything beyond flat land? So the great thing about the square root is it's a question you can ask in flat land that gets you out of flat land. Jesus, you confused the shit on me. Are you with this? I understood that part of it, yeah. I got understood that part. The complex numbers thing got weird when it was in algebra. So when I'm taking like rotations of the coffee cup where my arm isn't involved, I say okay, is there a square root of that rotation? And like, what does that even mean, dude? All right, well now I put my arm into the system and my arm plus coffee cup gives you spinners. Oh, dude, I did not even know that spinners were here. I did not know that any object required 720 degrees of rotation. So the cup arm system we just exhibited it, you don't need to learn Clifford algebras or all of this extra jazz that would get you to spinners mathematically. But you need to figure out how do I discover the work, the hidden world? And think about this from the perspective of like ayahuasca. Somebody takes ayahuasca and they have no idea that their brain is capable of this alternate state, or LSD, or 5mo dmt. All of these things are like panic rooms in the mind where if you lived in a house for 20 years, you think you know your house. And then one day you pull an old musty book off the shelf and suddenly the bookshelf swings open. And there's like a holy crap. There's like a second home inside of my home. Well, that's a lot of what psychedelics are like. And then you can get the square roots in that they're portals. They can get you from the place that you know into a place that you never imagined could exist. Do you think that the teaching of groups and a lot of these concepts in high school would facilitate a better understanding of it from the general public and adulthood. Hell yes. Hell yeah. And it would, what do you think is a resistance to this? Do you think that you're not too complex or not applicable to jobs? Is that the idea behind it? Is not something that you use in everyday life so that it's just too weird to think about? The fact that there's cousins to the electron that are fat. Yeah. It's much worse than this. Bodybuilder cousin to the... Yeah. You want to bulk up and get made out of strange quirks? Yeah, one of your cousins is made out of lead. No, I think it's much worse than this. I think the first of all, people are terrified of just how smart children are. The differences between children have to be buried. So some children are graded abstraction. And a lot of the kids who are graded abstraction are learning disabled according to the teaching system. Now I personally think that most learning disabilities of a particular type are actually teaching disabilities. People don't know how to teach the smartest kids. And groups and things, you're gonna lose some people because of the level of abstraction. But you're gonna get other people who have never been able to buy a base hit in mathematics suddenly start over performing. So the problem is that when you teach this stuff, it's very disruptive to notions of the hierarchy. Have you thought about what are the causes of these different levels of perception? Is it education? Is it genetics? Is it environmental? Is it some sort of a chemical balance of the mind? Like what do you think causes people to be more perceptive to some of these concepts? It's a good question. So the thing I just showed you with the planet earth in a way that you've never seen it before, I know of only two people who've ever created that image. I'm one of them, Jerome Barneton, is the other, maybe there are many more, but I've never heard or met them. The number of people who first of all know what the hop vibration is, I would guess is really deeply know what it is, a few thousand people in the world. So if none of those people are gifted at trying to visualize or none of them care, none of them program computers, the number of people who could present that to the world is so small, it's such a tiny priestly class that your odds of getting anyone figuring out how to make this understandable or very small. So we're talking about a very small priesthood, most of whom are too busy trying to do new research to want to care to communicate, many of whom are not gifted communicators. Many of us realize that we don't fully understand these things. I mean, I can show you spinners mathematically on a page, but if you ask me in my darkest moments, do I believe that man really knows what spinners are? I don't think so. There's all this stuff that to me looks like the monolith in 2001, it's just too freaky, it comes out of nowhere, and it's at the core of reality. Like if you really wanna blow your mind, look at a tiny collection of these objects, principal vibrations, spinners, exceptional Lee groups, this E8, 248 dimensional monster, this, what is that? There's a 248 dimensional set of symmetries, which seems to live only to be the symmetries of itself, where everything else seems to live to symmetries something else. And no bow on this, you might have to spark that juice, and then I'll just join back up again. Let's do that. There's this thing called the Titsfordenfall Magic Square, after this guy named Jacques Teets. And these guys figured out how to generate these sets of symmetries of dimension 52, 78, 133, and 248. We don't know why they're there, they're like the platypi and a kid of the mathematical world. They're just different. They don't seem to relate to anything else that we know yet. And that's what's so fascinating about them. And these are discovered by people that are trying to figure out the nature of reality. They're discovered by people who are trying to find more of these bizarre equations. But who's discovering these and what's the impetus? Like what is... Well you ask very natural questions. Like you've probably seen, you ever played Dungeons and Dragons as a kid? Luckily no. Okay. Well you were beating people up. I was now beating you. Stop it, I've seen one video. Anyway, you had these die, right? You had like the cube die, the tetrahedral die. What is this Jamie? It's the E-A pattern. Beyond space time. Oh this is my 8D surface pressure. This is my arch nemesis. When I was telling the story last time it was first over October. Yeah, Garrett Leesey. But by the time. Could we took me under the jungle to meet this sort of differential geometric warlord who lives in the north of Maui? In the jungle? Far away. Yeah. You don't remember this? I do now. Yeah, you cut off my story man. See you next? Yeah, I'm sorry. That's all right. Go for it. Here we are again. Put that back up. So, whoa. What is that? Well this is based on the 8 dimensional, I'm almost certain it's going to be based on the 8 dimensional root system. So inside of the 248 dimensions there's an 8 dimensional donut called a torus, like an 8 torus. And it generates this pattern. And that pattern in some sense encodes the instructions for building the 248 dimensional object. So somebody probably pushed an 8 dimensional thing into 2 dimensions for your viewing pleasure. And does this accurate? Like when you're looking at this image that we're seeing, does that make sense to you? I mean, I can make I can relate it things that makes sense to me. If the idea is, you know, can I look at it the way I'd look at a barcode and say, oh, tie it unscented? No, right. I have no idea. But this is an accurate representation if you're looking at it in 2 dimensions. Yeah. So what I'm trying to say is you don't even know to worry about this pattern. Right. Because you've never heard that these things exist. And this is like the closest that we come to, you know, genuine mysticism where we have these objects. If there are aliens, they know about E8. Right. Because E8 are the aliens. What? E8 is the alien. Yeah. I've been, I mean, I'll go to this later. I don't want to interrupt your story again. No, I don't have an idea. So what I'm trying to get at is this is the majesty and mystery of being a mathematician or a physicist. These findings. So if what I was to say by Dungeons & Dragons, you're given these dice where the normal die is always a cube. But the platonic solids you can have an octahedron tetrahedron dodecahedron, a cos the hedon, all these things. There's an analog of those five platonic solids in the next dimension up, which I think are called convex polytopes. So each one of those objects has an analog one dimension up. But it was found out in the late 1800s that there's a new platonic solid in dimension four called the 24 cell. Do you want to bring up the 24 cell? Let's find an animated video of somebody rotating this thing. So like this is something that played on you nothing about. We don't really understand what it's doing there in four dimensions. These are like communications from the cosmos. So this is like when Jody Foster was in the movie contact and they were getting them signals about how to make the time machine. Maybe. Are the portal machine? Yeah, but this is on an ena. This just doesn't come with an instruction manual. So part of it is you can prove that these things are there. And you don't know why they're there. And some of them touch everything. And some of them have yet to touch almost anything. And it's. there and you don't know why they're there and some of them touch everything and some of them have yet to touch almost anything and it's like a communication from pure design that there is so much beautiful structure and so much grace in the universe that we're just what the fuck is this doing here? What is it? Right? Well, what is everything, right? What is the whole thing? No, I mean look if you accept three-dimensional space let's say this glass, right? If you accept this glass I understand that a circle can spin the glass the circle circles worth of symmetry tells me what to do to spin the glass that's not that confusing Why is there something that the analog of a circle where a circle I would call one-dimensional because it's got one degree of freedom this thing is 248 dimensions and and it doesn't seem to live to symmetrize in the jargon we would say it doesn't have a defining representation of lower dimension so normally you have something of low dimension and you say what are its symmetries and the symmetries are of higher dimension this thing seems like the first thing it wants to symmetrize is itself so it's kind of self-referential it's kind of own-anistic so it's like a zero point of creation that's poetic language I would groove on that after 11 p.m. but I wouldn't call it that right now I would say it's like a throw is trying to pick somebody up hey zero point of creation right that's a sexy word yeah sexy what's describing it but like if we were saying the big bang existed and that means some point in the history of the universe it was this really tiny thing and it decided for whatever reason something happened and it became this enormous thing sure possibly enormous thing yeah that it had there had to be a point where it started right but what I would say is that we can competently take that story back to a point and then we have to say we don't really believe that we have any insight beyond that point but people want to go there anyway we absolutely know that it was tiny yeah small like a small than the head of a pin the whole thing I'm always uncomfortable saying right there settle but you can you can say a consensus you can say a lot of stuff about very early very small and it could that could turn out to be wrong it would possibly longer go 14 billion years ago in our minds as far as off for a guy like you mathematics you see it on numbers in paper it all computes you see the numbers 14 billion is a number that makes sense for sure but conceptually yeah like for a dummy like me 14 billion is like if I really if I'm being honest do I really do I really have an accurate understanding what 14 billion is but still winberg doesn't feel 14 billion either right but you know we're 100 yards is so 100 you can feel that right if I see a hundred yards I'm like that's too far to shoot a bow yeah like you got to get a little closer to be so you have some you have some kind of an intuition pump well you would know distance it's a rational distance you see in a daily basis right a hundred yards is a long distance a mile gets a little weird like is that a mile away how far is that oh it's six miles away wow I didn't think it was that far right there's there's weirdness in distance right but when you get to a hundred and 40 million miles okay yeah I give up but you get to 40 billion years yeah I get fatigued by that stuff so other people get energized like yeah man you have no idea how long ago it's humbling right within this the concept of infinite yeah like this is one of the things that Krause said or maybe was Sean Carroll that said it's really not that we know that we can see 14 billion years ago it's like but that's just as far back as we're capable of seeing right now and even if we did go further the light is actually moving slower like you wouldn't be able to see it right right right so you have this thing about with the spacetime metric which is sort of how things are feel like they're moving apart yeah you know Einstein said four degrees of freedom plus rulers and protractor is equal spacetime right so a spacetime metric is a collection of rulers and protractors so I can do length and angle including length in the time direction and that generates a derivative operator which we talked about before which is rise over run relative to a custom reference level the custom reference levels generate the escher staircase that we did and that generates the curvature tensor which generates gravity so strangely with all of this kind of like woo woo stuff that we've been doing we just came to a much better description of what theoretical physics actually looks like it's four degrees of freedom plus rulers and protractors gives you derivative operators with custom reference level the custom reference levels don't knit together that leads to an escher staircase the degree of escherness is the curvature tensor the curvature generates the gravity which is what's keeping you and I in our chair I really appreciate that you're understanding this in a way that you hope that someone can understand well not a problem not a physicist but you're explaining it very well that the problem is for someone like me I lack the tools to put it there I don't have enough open slots for these concepts well it's like it's like if you were explaining to me complex arguments in French but I didn't speak French so you're saying you know bonjour means this and then you're explaining all these other words and then you throw on it all together I'm like what and then it's cultural references then you have to deal with the fact that there's like some historical precedent to certain types of behavior that I've taken into consideration because these are French people that have lived in this way oh whoa okay but look that's nothing but let's drop some so you do this thing about like well for me to like me well I definitely am me to stop it you listen no I know me better than you know me that's true but you're also less honest than you think on this particular topic it's part of me chart now look when we hang out we hang out usually in a comedy club or at somebody's house right we don't like say hey we're going to take the afternoon off and we're actually going to learn theoretical physics right right so when I went to it I did stand up for the first time as I told you in the Arizona I was there oh it was insane it was crazy yeah you try and explain fucking quarks to people it'd be there'd be some real humor in that if you could boil it down yeah three quarks go into a nuclear yeah there's like a way to do I don't know there's a way to do it okay well who was the guy who did the some guy was doing I mean he was Brian Callan was doing quantum jokes what was he saying do you remember for god he just he had a bunch of words that he did very very quickly and kind of hung together I was like wait what yeah that sounds like Brian yeah he reads a lot but it's a clap of boy when I when I had to do my ten minutes of stand up man is that craft it's it's deep it's hard because you have to it's not just like telling jokes at a party it's really you have to measure the way the audience's laugh comes whether you're taking them along or you're going to divert all all sorts of things that I never thought about before do you know how you feel when you talk about the hop thing yeah that it's a part of everything it's one of the most important things and yet very few people know what it is maybe a thousand people understand it on the whole world what's odd is that number is probably identical to the number of legitimate professional stand up comedian in the world when I say legitimate I mean someone who can craft a new hour every two years it does Netflix specials the headlines all over the country it's small good travel all over the world and do stand up it's an insanely small number of humans and not only that my guess is that the number of people that you think are at the very top of that craft like when I really think about who really knows theoretical physics right it's time it's like it's smaller than 50 yep yep guys that I would pay to see live or women that I'd pay to see live it's less than 50 yeah and so part of our problem is that all of the stuff that humanity has developed is often resident in a tiny number of minds I feel very vulnerable about that theoretical physics has been faking that it's in a healthy state for a long time we are so vulnerable on the doorstep of actually cracking this puzzle in my opinion um well that's where our comparison's in because pretty much anybody could do stand up if you put enough time to it if you're silly if you figure out the craft but what you guys are doing is not just really rare but also the the barrier for entry like the cost of entry is exceptionally high like you have to spend an inordinate amount of time studying and understanding this stuff just to get to a base level of what you've been able to explain you've been able to explain like some really difficult concepts to the lay person that must have taken you fucking eons to learn and understand all your study of mathematics and of geometry and of all of them but I'm an imposter how so well I'm not a physicist right but you understand it make me be don't practice physics no no understand it well no it's it's something more audacious than that which is that when you see you know at ten thousand hours only sign you know only those who've done their ten thousand hours can come in mm-hmm my middle finger goes up I'm like I bet it's not ten thousand hours or if it is ten thousand hours I'm willing to get eighty percent of the juice in that orange with like ten percent of the effort well the ten thousand hours thing to me is it's cute but it doesn't factor in for phenoms it doesn't there's there's a lot of people that come into anything whatever it is with some natural abilities that are pretty undeniable um you know that's a weird that's a weird equation but like take take something very simple like the harmonica yeah most people don't know that that sweet blue sound on a harmonica comes from not using it the way the manufacturer said which is called straight harp and using it instead the way African Americans figured it out which is it's much cooler to base it around a hole that nobody was expecting to draw rather than four blow and that gives you a seventh chord that sounds like sweet blues music if you start to give some of that all right I don't know how this will work that was you got to move so what's the traditional way of using it what would it sound like like that would be Carmen pouring its fuck boy people music wearing its fuck white people god damn it white people at Carmen's alright but look not my point who knew when you get one of these things as a party favors a kid there's not somebody who says hey don't do that thing we put your mouth over it all right you know but who knew that that's the cool or so there's yeah but like the idea is that there's something called tongue blocking there's something called cross harp and there's something called the 145 progression with a scale that no music teacher ever taught you in grade school in piano all right so there's four secrets and now suddenly the world opens up I mean when I opened for Jordan Peterson Dave Rubin invited me and he said you know when he played a minute worth of harmonic at the Masonic Theatre so for 2500 people I became Dave Rubin's talking harmonic among you and so I opened for Jordan Peterson I said you know rule number zero life is too short not to play the harmonica everyone should learn to play the harmonica or know why they're not doing it there's this great thing in the Cal Berkeley fight song well win the game or know the reason why if you don't play the harmonica it's so nice it's so so few people do it there's so small number of secrets you have to have a reason because I can feed myself I can get housing shelter I can meet people anywhere in the world all I have to do is carry around peace plastic with some metal on it or you could be annoying like a lot of people like turn that fucking guy off why is he why is he playing that goddamn harmonica I don't want to hear that put it back in your pocket you go to your next trampoline you're really tainted in these people's estimation all right attention whore I'm not gonna lose my life well what's worse a harmonica or guy brings a guitar and start singing folk songs at a party on the animal house effect right yeah beat him over the head with the guitar yeah I mean he can shred he's gonna be fine it's great if you're looking to hear someone shred that's not okay all of these things are like options or financial apps if you can exercise them or you cannot exercise them you don't have to exercise them but I mean there's an equal number of things that people would say that are like the harmonica like you should be able to do slam poetry right everyone should be able to do slam poetry if you can't do slam poetry I can feed myself I can house I can I can do slam poetry I'll show up at a party and everyone wants to hear slam poetry is that true you're just trying to beat me tell yourself it's fascinating to me that's that harmonica's are this little tiny thing that people if it like there's not other ones right there's like other things are like these big ol trumpet looking things yeah like a harmonica's this little thing yeah like how many little things do you blow well that's that powerful in terms of like the kind of music that it makes exactly it is weird like there's no like balls right it's always that it's always that little candy bar looking thing like there's nothing like no ball harmonica is there anything comparable in terms of like musical instruments that is that little no that has that kind of sound no that's what it's optimized for but it's not weird yeah like there's two buzz and there's other things that are similar and then you get to like trombones and trumpets everything kind of makes sense then you got this little fucking thing so the candy bar thing right it's a mouth heart a mouth heart oh what's that other one they buying I know knowing knowing knowing these to do is those jusot timing movies is that what it's called morning morning morning now there's like a weird word for it is a weird word for that thing all harp jop harp yeah mmm what it is maybe I'm thinking okay yeah yeah that's one yeah like there's that's another weird one you can play the spoons yeah spoons are good well how about that fucking australian one when they blow into that big two did you yeah that one's the most we're dead that is like how hard with those guys trip and when they came up with that sound boy oh boy oh why why why why why why why like if you're in that's like like true to been throat singing dude that's good thank you if you're on hay dash berry and there's a dude and he's got one of them digger he do's out and fucking hat you're supposed to throw some money in there just out of respect this guy brought a goddamn digger he do to the corner well you know the coolest recent what it yeah give me some noise from this motherfucker 10 hours of it just give me a little bit that is dm t music I know if you're tripping balls and somebody plays that you they'll take you to a new dimension that you've never accessed before like the pain on fort two and everything well actually is quite interesting the center sento dimate church yeah around the ayahuasca stuff has a lot of really interesting music to listen to its straight is the kind of mind mind blowing well there's also there's I don't know is that one or the something devegetalled there's one of those similar christian based dimethyl trip demean ayahuasca type churches that they sing songs about jesus they trip balls and sing songs about jesus and what's really weird about dm t in particular and I guess you could say the same of mushrooms but mushrooms apparently when it synthesizes yeah it's real similar in chemical content to what dimethyl trip demean is I'm gonna fuck this up but I think it's and and dimethyl trip demean is dimethyl trip demean and then when it's synthesized by the bot when the body processes siliceye and I think it produces something called four fox four eloxie and and dimethyl trip demean I think it's real close I might have fucked that up but I think it's so close that it's like their cousins okay so there's something with about music in these things and one of the best ways to get out of a trip if you're if you're really tripping balls with mushrooms is the senior way out of it really you can sing your way out of a bad trip you can actually control the trip with good music and one of the things that's really constant with dm t is these echaros that these shaman will sing yeah and these echaros with the like thimbals and like a little bit of drum and these like really rhythmic singing it makes the hallucination dance in like a really obvious tangible way it moves around itself and it changes and guides the trip well that's what my hypothesis has been that it's sort of some sort of that's one right there this is one I've personally experienced I've actually tripped listening to this song and it was like these geometric patterns these entities that seem to be conscious they were like moving around this is the guy this is the ayahuasca row this is the shaman blowing tobacco this is part of the ritual they actually blow tobacco on you while you why you do that so this guy was just this little rattle and singing and sometimes there's actual singing not just whistling but there's like a in their language this beautiful soft rhythmic sort of song and the hallucinations dance to this to the sound to this music like they're supposed to dance to it like they're part of it like it's not just that you're having music on top of the psychedelic experience but that they merge yeah they merge and the psychedelic experience experiences a hundred percent affected by this so it's not just that there's chemicals that are interacting with your brain you're doing something too by responding to that music and then the music is doing something by enhancing the way your perception of this experience is and all that is dancing together like they belong together it's fascinating shit yeah I mean my hypothesis has been that the music acts as a prosthesis to sort of lock you in because the experience is so powerful yeah I mean maybe okay it's always a little bit weird you know try to imagine somebody says do you want a glass of scotch and a shaman to go with it you know like what you probably need one you know someone at a bar that's like we're gonna drink this we're gonna drink this good intentions no one's gonna be grabbing anybody's dick no one's no one's going setting no one's getting rude here there would be no wedgies right there'd be nothing nothing rude will be said you will you will think for a good solid five seconds before any hasty moves like let's let's let's understand that I love the great benefit kind of get great benefit from this in terms of our ability to be loose and to be silly and to enjoy each other's company but if a demon comes out right in this time you must address this demon personally on your own don't pull the demon out and throw it at the party right this is good stuff that's but that's what what happens so you know bad drugs to throw in that demon that that thing where they figured out that if you put a worm in the miscal stuff it would be a great marketing device north of the border right yeah yeah yeah just tell some story so now we we're gonna open that with what that is that's what I think is a marketing gimmick next and then and then what we do is we we found our own tequila company and we only it's so exclusive that you can only buy it if you also hire a shaman really about make tons of money yeah and if what if the the worm actually was psychedelic like what if there was a way to be genetically engineer a worm to be intensely psychedelic like the worm literally is made out of ayahuasca like we we why don't we put a toad in the miscal well don't they do weird shit like that where they little take tomatoes and they'll like use fucking frog DNA in the tomato to make it live longer but isn't there some weird shit they're eating with cool stuff is the green fluorescent protein stuff you can have glow in the dark rabbits and fish she makes these yes yes let's get some glow in the dark bunnies man they can do that right there is something like that right so you have Jamie do you have glow in the dark rabbits no but I do have the genetically modified potato with frog genes to resist pathogens yeah what in the holy fuck yeah so how weird is that GM potato uses frog gene to resist pathogens like that that's real can we do do GFP rabbits so what were we on before this what was talking about we got to rabbits whoa how to point on tequila with oh so what if we engineer yeah that little worm right to be like 100% DMT 100% DSP works you get down to that worm and whoever chugs to the bottom and choose on that worm just oh you immediately transform what is the fuck am I watching these are these glowing rabbits yeah that is so weird dude it's so weird hoverboards and archery stuff we need rabbits we need glowing rabbits here's a problem man my kids have rabbits and they're cunts those rabbits are little assholes they don't they don't give a fuck about each other we have two of them is so rude this is what happens they're both males unfortunately here's what happens when you get two male bunnies and you put them in a gigantic chicken coop they fuck each other up it's bunny UFC every day with these little assholes all they do is kick each other's ass they chase each other around this chicken chute coop and when they get a hold of each other they bite each other and they kick each other they fuck each other up because they're both boys and they don't want a boy to be running shit as these two bunnies fucking each other up dude this is what they do bunnies are fucking ruthless to each other these two little assholes just chase each other all day long and beat this shit out of each other that's all they do why don't you do commentary i'm not gonna i'm not gonna encourage their babies their color coming one of them is actually missing um so here's what happened we are chicken coop burnt down from the fire but the chicken survived one of them got scorched they all got fucking PTSD it's crazy i go near but they're alive all right so we had a maneuver them and move to but one bunnies missing right found one bunny one bunnies missing so i think it's better for the one bunny that survived and the one bunny that probably got jacked by an eagle or some shit like that that's a rap son you had a good life you beat the shit out of your friend for a year and a half solid just kicking each other's ass it's fucking horrible the ears are totally jacked like the ears are shredded like like an old bag to the death that you missed i don't think so because there's nobody i think i think a bunny got out and it probably ran away or who knows the f*** happened and coyote got it or some shit i mean there's a lot of hawks a lot of hawks in my neighborhood it's most likely a hawk yeah yeah but whatever there's one little bunnies by himself now i said whoa the other asshole they're both assholes to each other it's not like one good bunny they just find each other and like fuck you imagine just that's all you do for years right so that's bunny life you get two male bunnies together and every day is fuck you fuck you yeah they run at each other and one one's always trying to get away one's always trying to eat and the other one jump on them start biting them and kicking them and the other one will do the same they'll rotate you know it's very funny the the last two Jews in afghanistan both had to live in the synagogue it was all they had left that's really all the hell out of somebody somebody went yeah somebody went to go visit the last two Jews in afghanistan and said like why aren't you guys friends and one of them says here i'll show you hey small want to have lunch they got the guy says prop dead he says you see what i'm working with it's like the most Jewish conversation between the last two Jews they can't get along so they like the two rabbits that all the others went away well they're probably really horny and lonely and confused i suppose yeah i mean what the fuck there's only two of them they need to get to israel stat why do you want to die and then the last one is just just buy some be the last guy someone talk to him i know if it's possible for you to get to Jerusalem that's your people they'll just you have a party over there everything will be great jewish food everyone speaking Hebrew everyone's united well like the last three Jews of carolos is this young woman and two guys just let no neither one of you forget this thing i know it's rough man it's rough it's crazy to think there's a country with zero Jews like zero yeah yeah like nope the whole country like whoa whoa that is is no melting pot here sir zero zero melting just one ingredient whole pot it's all stew it's it yeah with it the Taliban actually really needed the jewish community because they wanted to be able to say we've got great relations with afghanistan the jewish community they just didn't say was too guys yeah too dudes at hate each other exactly very polarizing true i don't know how we got into oh glowing bunnies i'm not getting any fucking bunnies man all right if you get to guide a girl together you got to fix the girl otherwise you're gonna have a million bunnies and they're all gonna be kicking each other's asses it's all they do the bunny apocalypse well what's really fucked up is reading about animals that that fight like right out of the womb how they they kill their partner they could look at the civil side yeah put it pull up our obligate civil side in blue in Nazca boobies what are those what's in Nazca booby they live in the nazca lines or these what are these boobies Jamie help me out here we're hang on the word booby how do you spell that naz cca and then boobies the usual way i'm trying to remember what i was reading about where obligate the civil side when one animal comes out the other one tries to kill the other one almost immediately has to high in us oh high in us high in us there's been there's been evidence of high in us attacking they're sibling while it's in the amionic sack and there's when they come out the bigger one or the stronger one of the one of whatever one's healthy will almost immediately start attacking it's sibling and try to kill it pull up that that's true i'm pretty sure that's true i want to see boobies went into this i went in this crazy rabbit hole about hyenas recently would bizarre animal that is so this the the false penis yeah the false penis is just one aspect yeah everything everything about 20% of the women die okay here it goes obligate civil civil size when a sibling almost always ends up being killed fugitive civil side means the suicide fact gold tiv like it's a choice versus you got to do faggled tut-tiv faggled faggled faggled a civil side means a civil side may or may not occur based on environmental conditions okay so it's sometimes will happen if there's not enough resources well so the idea is that the i think the breeding cycle is discretized so either make it or you don't and so the danger of laying one egg and having it not work out is very oh this bird is fucking this is brother up and it has to be in front of mom and dad because you want to prove that you're worthy well that is insane right so mommy look at he's beating it to death so this is because there's not enough food there's not enough food to do too so the first one the second one is a spare and the first one proves proves that he's worthy by killing his sibling the spare in front of the parents and says yeah you can invest in me i got this thing he's is christian what kind of bird is this is probably nazka or blue-footed boobies is my guess that is insane it is insane it's hard to well this is what i said about biology biology cares about your feelings and the mom doesn't give a fuck about around the mom the mom wants and look the mom's excited this one's dying look no fuck up in the mom's like mom's excited hey the older one knows what it's doing he's viable Jesus Christ well nature is pretty brutal pretty brutal no it's it's bizarre seeing this from oh god i don't want to see this thing slowly die dude it's bizarre seeing it from birds but i think it's even more ruthless the way that lions yeah hyenas yeah hyenas killing their siblings that almost uh i think they were saying it's pretty universal that is when the first one comes out they try to kill a second one well you know this thing about lion female lions getting excited by the murder of their children whoa so when the new in the new male takes over the pride his first order of business maybe let's not stop wasting resources on the previous daddy's offspring yeah so what happens is same kind of thing the hyena gets out and immediately starts killing its sibling they're fighting to the death right out of the womb look at this fucking mad battle as babies look it's got it's got the sack on it and they're just trying to kill each other this is a a pretty and mad battle as babies. Look, it's got, it's got the sack on it. And they're just trying to kill each other. This is a, a particularly ruthless animal. They were, they were saying that 60% of hyenas die as they're trying to get out of the tube. Wow. What? I didn't know that. Yeah, 20% of women die, whether females rather die when they're giving birth. Well, that's because of our crazy brain to body ratio. Well, it's also, they have a, no, female hyenas. Oh, that's giant dick. Sorry, I thought you were talking about high rates of human mortality. Female hyenas die 20% of the time when they're giving birth. All right. Because the baby doesn't come out right. Like they have this crazy, you know, they have a phopienist that is actually a vagina. It's a, it's an enormous huge and gorge clitoris. It's far bigger than the males. They have to pull it back so the male can calculate with them. But then when they give birth, it has to come out of that dick. And they don't, it doesn't always come out right. So like, Google that because I might be wrong about the numbers, but it's some exorbitant number of babies die and a huge number of women die. Women, I keep saying women. Female hyenas die. That's why fuck up. But they're also weird and that they're way bigger than the males. And that's the, because the males won't let the babies eat. So that's one of the things they think. Like if something is their scavengers, the males are just trying to push out everything smaller. So because of that, the females have to get an angle, fuck off the kid has to eat, like even if it's their kid. That's cool. It's 60% suffocate on their way out. Yeah, 60% of them die on the way out. Yeah. And I think it's 20% of the females die during childbirth as well. Pretty sure that's what I read, which is fucking bananas. I mean, 60% though, imagine 60% of all kids die on the way out. And then the ones that don't die, if you got two of them, one of them kills the other one. It's a rough neighborhood. Oh, it's matriarchal society. And they get birth through that fake penis. Yeah, that's what I'm saying. Yeah. What is the purpose of the fake penis? What is fake penis is it dominate the men. They get on top of the band and they go, listen, bitch, this is how it's going to be. And they got a big old strap on. They peg their men at all male hyenas or cucks. They all take it's crazy. It's crazy. That's where we're heading is a country. It's a country diameter. Really? Oh, Jesus. Ouch. Pides, wheeze. That creates a high death rate for first time mothers. Yeah. High death rate. It doesn't say here how many, but I think it's 20%. Have you ever seen the, uh, like the full human clitoris? Yes. I've seen one. Have you not in the wild? The full, the full clitoris? No, I know. I'm, I've never seen it like a biological. Can you pull up the, the internal clitoris internal clitoris? I think it was only discovered. Is it not allowed to be shown? I was trying to quickly think about that. Yeah. I don't know. You just trouble. Well, you could pull it up and just don't show the world. Just show us. Okay. Yeah. I think if you put that on YouTube, we will be demonetized and possibly kicked off the network to Google that yourself. Yeah. Google it. And be careful of the wrath of the government. It's an enormous structure that I think we didn't fully understand. I don't understand how we could have missed it. But my understanding was we didn't fully understand the internal clitoris. Where it goes. Right. Right. And they're on the left below. It looks exactly like this sort of space, uh, ships from war, the world's 19, 50, three. It's all that stuff on the outside. All you see on the outside is a little tip at the time. We're going to get in trouble. They get mad at us. Does that picture make you horny? Not at all. Makes you afraid, doesn't it? It seems like an alien. It should shoot you like a baby. It's a big thing. Like that's the Ridley Scott alien, the face hugger. Wow. Yeah. Well, just the look, it's very weird that we've just come to accept what the shape of the body is. Body is very bizarre. I mean, if we were all shaped like stingrays and we saw a person, we'd be like, what in the holy fuck is that thing? Yeah. Whether it's articulating fingers and look moving its eyeballs around, sniffing things with nostrils. Like we just accept the fact that this shape is normal, that it makes sense. Well, this is why Ceflopods from last time when we were talking about the cuddle fish. Yeah. I just learned something new, which is that Ceflopods are under consideration to be the next great model organism for biology. So if you think about how weird it is, it's some branch of the phylogenetic tree, so far distant from us, that these mollusks have such advanced minds and, you know, their skin is the wonder of the world for sure. Yeah. Nobody knows quite how all of that, not only do they have these chromatophores to get the camouflage right, but they also change the texture of their skin to mimic things like coral and all this stuff. Oh. Wouldn't it be cool if we made Ceflopods the next great model organism and then we started doing comparative, like not only neuroanatomy, but connectomics where we're trying to study how their brains are organized because they're so far away, they are probably the closest we will ever get to meeting aliens. I think I said that the last one is here and I'm really excited if that goes forward. Well, it really doesn't seem like anything else. Right. Whether it's a cuddle fish or whether it's an octopus, like, you're like, oh, it's like kind of like a squid. Like, yeah, a little bit. Like a person's like a monkey. Yeah, but like real different. Well, the nautilus is crazy. You know, maybe a vlog. The cuddle fish is the most interesting for sure. They're both faucets. Yeah. They're all intelligent. Right. But like they regenerate. That's another part of it that's bizarre. Yeah. Well, it would be fun to do. I mean, I would imagine that nuts and salamanders in the tetrapod category would be the best for us to study for regeneration. I like how they regenerate up to a point. Like nature will say, yeah, you can grow an arm back, can't grow a head back. Sorry, fuck face. That's a wrap. Yeah. You know, you lose your head. Nature's like, ah, you gave up a big piece. You gave up the queen. It's over. Yeah. Games over. See, if you lose your tail, like, ah, it's debatable. Do you grow your tail back? We could do them. Right. Lizards grow their tail back, you know, but they only grow like most of it. They don't grow the whole thing. But the nuts and salamanders seem to have this very high regener. And you can just get the arm off over and over again. There it is. But you can't get their head off. Yeah. Why do you like their head off? I don't. But I mean, just saying it's weird. Like you can't like chop them in half from the waist down. They don't seal up and grow a new waist. Like that's it. You can only get rid of the limbs. Yeah. But you can get rid of the limbs. Like nature has evolved a strategy for dealing with predation. Just give them the arm. Give them the arm. Take it. Pop. What do you think of the fact that we had this successful head transplant in monkeys in like the early 70s? Yeah. And then we walked away from it. Probably good move. Otherwise, chicks at Beverly Hills would be getting new bodies. Just getting their head screwed on to new release. Yeah, getting new heads. Yeah, people would figure out a way to transplant their brains. Everyone wants to lift forever. I just have an 800 year old brain and talk about how to get a little motorcycle victim. Yeah. So people are going to start doing. Well, then I guess it's going to be. We walked. I thought it was kind of a weird move that we would succeed at that and then say, okay, too much. Can't handle it. I think that's what they did. Yeah. It was probably hard to get funding. People thought you were playing God. The guy who did it, I think was maybe his name is Robert White and he was a devout Christian. So it was really, it was good because you know, there was a lot of this reverence for human form. And if a religious person is doing it, we feel better than if somebody is like, desecrating. Right. Right. Some atheist, asthma scientist. There is no hair. I've been he's cutting the heads off. Dogs are me attaching them to monkeys. Yeah, that's what's also like we think of it as like, okay, it's one thing if you're trying out medicine on a monkey that might save babies. But it's another thing if you just say, hey, what happens if I cut this monkey's head off, stick it on another monkey? Well, there's all this crazy. I don't know if you've ever seen this. The Russians had this film introduced by JBS Hal Day in great English biologist was also a communist and therefore very pro-Soviet. There's this experiment. It was experiments in continuation of the brain after death. And they hook up the head to an artificial circulatory system. And they sort of continue to have interactions where they swab the head and they get the eyelash movement and the tongue comes out to lick and eat things. It's quite interesting. I would recommend it. Yeah. And Dane has one of the greatest quotes not only is the universe queer than you suppose. It's queer than we can suppose. What a great quote. It was also the inordinate fondness of Beatles. Inordinate fondness of Beatles? The Archbishop of Canterbury found himself I think seated across from Hal Dane and wanted to needle him because he was a communist atheist. And he said, tell me, what does your study of the biological world inform us about how great creator and how they in shot it back? He said that he has an inordinate fondness for Beatles because Beatles are so highly speciated. And what was his reaction? Well, I think it was a different era. It's like smoked burnt but like to our way of thinking it's not that hard of a burn. Well, we're really committed to the idea that all the stuff that we can do manipulating the planet and sending rockets into space that that's more important than what an ant does. What we're really committed to this that our significance, although it's clearly if we're working together, we believe in a sense of community, it's more important to each other, to us it is. But to the whole thing is really more important. Sizzou, I mean, if people didn't exist, if we were wiped off the planet, all the other animals would be okay. They really would be okay. I mean, we would gain and lose more predators and we wouldn't be controlling the population sure. But if all the ants went away, that would be a wrap. Yeah. That would be a wrap. We're done. Okay. There's no more people. This is why we decided that if we lost all insects, well, especially all ants, like it probably would collapse all the ecosystems that we need to sustain human life. I have a feeling that those water bear tardigrades would be like, suckers, I got rid of the ants. We're the only one left. Well, we wouldn't be able to make it, but a lot of shit would make it. A lot of other stuff would make it. That's true. But the thing that I think maybe we'd make it anyway, maybe they're wrong. We just don't understand human food. Try to freak this out. Yeah, maybe. Didn't read that. Find out if that's true. If all ants died, human beings would go extinct. Just google that. I think I read a paper proposing that and they were explaining the critical role that ants play in all these different ecosystems and how the biomass of ants worldwide is equal to or greater than the biomass of human beings. Okay. I don't have any intuition around that. Yeah. Sounds reasonable enough. I'm pretty sure that's true. And so, but our idea is that we're more important. But we are. I have cable. Yeah. That's not why I think we're more important. I have 4G. Do you have 4G? Okay, maybe that's more important. I have a 70 inch television. And I have an eye watch. Yeah, it must be more important. It's stupid fucking ant. It was dirt house. If I can just piss on your house while I go jogging. Yeah. I'm more important thing in you. Yeah, I don't. I don't know. I need to reach in. I need to reach in. I need to reach in. Yeah. Obviously, nature doesn't want to protect you. You got your house in the dirt. It's a whole amount. It's a mound. Okay. I don't know why I want to get serious. I'm just trying to fuck with me. But the really interesting thing about humans is that we're the only species that understands what game we're in and we can reject the game. Every other species is playing the game. So you know, you know my brother very well. Very surprising to me that my brother only wanted to have two kids and didn't want to like spend all this time down at the sperm bank, you know, making donations. I said, you're a evolutionary theorist. You ever think it's kind of weird that you're not very playing this game very effectively. And he, you know, shot me back this thing. He said, if you actually understand the game, why would you want to continue to play it? I thought that was like really interesting that somebody who sounds like his wife does one anymore kids. That's why they're rationalizations. I get it, bro. Yeah. Derrida Khalei found says all insects dying, not just ants. All insects. It would take 50 years for people to disappear after that. According to this science explorer article. Hmm. Find out the biomass of ants. That's even trippier. I hope I'm right. But I want to get rid of this anti human thing. Because it's not anti human. I know. I know. I know. You're just human. Neutral. No. Biologically neutral. If I just looked at it objectively. Yeah. I don't think so. You don't think so. You think it's more significant because we're more significant to each other. Well, there's no significance in the whole game if you just take a completely material. It's like, what do we care? It's one rock, one spec big deal. The problem is if you accept that as an answer, then you've failed by just taking the nihilist way out. Sure. To me, they have this annual question at edge.org. Finally, the guy got exhausted and went to ask another one. I'll finish this up quick. Here, do you think? I'm sorry. Anyone take it? Ants do our ants outweigh humans. Individual workers weigh an average from 1 to 5 milligrams according to the species. Then combined all ants in the world taken together way about as much as all human beings. That's interesting. Wow. Yeah, that's what I'm saying. That's fucking bananas. Ooh, they are 15 to 20% of the terrestrial animal biomass. And in tropical regions, when ants are especially abundant, they monopolize 25% or more. Ooh. I'm an after. I have a buddy mine, Brian Callan. Yeah. When he was in college, he spent some time in the jungle. He was thinking he was going to be a biologist. He was going to study insect. He was going to be in... What is it? Insectivore? Intimals. So, they had to sleep in these elevated tents. And they had to paint like some sort of like turpentine type chemical all over the posts. Because if they didn't, the ants would crawl up the post and eat you in your sleep. And then literally climb in your ear and start eating you and tell everybody and you would die that way. Like people have died. Elephants have been eaten by ants. And he said you can hear them walking in the jungle. Like in the night, you hear the footsteps of fucking ants. Because there's so many of them. If you're in the wrong place at the wrong time and there's a path of these motherfuckers moving your way. They send a signal that we got something here and they crawl up you. They just all start crawling up you. And there's so many of them you can't avoid them. Well because they're not really separate animals. They're used social... I'm an optura has this weird property of this haplodipoid structure so that the females are highly related to each other. And so in the same way that your cells aren't individual animals, they are all conspired to create you. There is a sense in which in this world of bees and ants and wasps and things, I'm an optura. The real entity is the colony. It's not the individual. So if I took a psychological approach to you and I just went sell by sell, you're this collection of 10 or 50 trillion separate entities. And that's what makes ants so terrifying. This is that Kripakya and the great anarchist was sort of an amateur naturalist and he would look to natural systems and say why humans cooperate like this. The point is we're not structured to cooperate in this U-social fashion. The way they cooperate is so uncanny when those leaf cutter ants design those intricate cities with... They have places where things ferment and where gases are released through holes in the ground. And it doesn't make any sense that this little tiny brain could figure out this enormous structure, but somehow or another when combined and not just one version of this. But millions and millions of these designs appear all over the world and they see if you can find that video of they fill the leaf cutter ant colony, they fill the home with molten metal. Yeah, it was something like that. They call it these crazy structures. Yeah. I think they flooded it with concrete. They flooded concrete in all the holes and then they dug out everything around it so you could see this structure and then they explained what... This is really like well thought out. They have portals and they have... This is how they get the food in and this is where they take the leaves and they let them rot and they turn to mulch and there's like a gas release. It's distributed loosely coupled system. What makes it seem so amazing. I mean it is utterly amazing. But if you think about it as individuals making decisions that conspire to create these structures, it's less... That's more amazing than what it is which is it's a loosely coupled distributed system. So that's how a B hive will send out explorers and they'll report back and they'll do the dance and the dance communicates the information. To get all these coordinated activities in what other systems do you suppress the fertility of females because the relatedness is so high. Oh yeah, this is gorgeous. Yeah this is the video we're talking about. So this is... It's really huge too. And they have these... Looks like tunnel systems and then they lead to these big circular areas where they're really almost uniform in size. It's a really strange way or similar in size. So they have these pathways that go to these like rooms, these circular rooms. And there's just this incredible network of these tubes and circular rooms that they uncover and it's fucking enormous. When you look at how big this thing, I mean if you had to look how big is that? Was that 80 feet across, 90 feet across or something like that? So they're continuing to dig this up. They're not even done in this video here, but you see all the pipes that extend to the left and to the right. So they've developed some sort of complex civilization, some weird bizarre network of these passageways and rooms and they do it just like this everywhere. So some pattern has emerged in their species that has set them up to act as this collective group and then operate in this similar fashion all over the world, wherever they exist in that sort of, with that kind of dirt they can manipulate right that. That alone is one of... That is a massive mystery. I mean how a little tiny thing with a brain that's almost imperceptibly small? It's this tiny little head, it's a little head. How does he figure out that hole? How does he figure it out tunnels? But he's not really. And they're not. That's what I'm trying to get. They're working together. Okay, so if you look at, for example, sea elegans, the nematode with a thousand cells for the entire body plane, 300 of which are neurons, we have a complete map not only of the cell lineage diagram, which is how this thing unfolds from a single fertilized egg. But we also have a complete wiring diagram of its nervous system. So this is something that locomotes, it moves around, it eats, has sex, and it's only got 300 neurons. Which of those is an extremely primitive machine, and they send signals to each other. And we still don't know how the thing really works, even though we've got the entire thing mapped. Jesus. This was the great insight of Sydney Brenner that we would make the worm, the great model organism, because we could actually map everything about it. And it is astounding to me how little we've learned. We've learned a ton from it. But I had thought that we would have gotten much farther in understanding the brain. Did you see this recent discovery of a 25 foot long sea worm that apparently is not just one organism? It's like many organisms together combined? No. Yeah. I got to find out about that. Yeah, you got to see this fucking thing. It's insane. And I think this is a very recent discovery, at least one this large, and these guys are swimming around with this thing. It looks impossible. It looks like they landed on another planet and they're experiencing this thing. Like this thing, this, whatever this is, I'm pretty sure with it what I read. I've read it really quickly as I was running out the door that it exists. A large 8 meter worm-like sea creature stuns New Zealand divers. So they're looking at this thing. But I think there's many different organisms inside of it. I don't think it's one individual organism. Yeah. It's made up of hundreds of thousands of organisms. I've never seen that. Yeah. Like what? What does that mean? This is a weird tube for folks that are watching this or listening to this rather. What we're looking at is these divers that are just tripping balls here. They're like, what? And the fuck is this? And it looks like an enormous tube-like jellyfish type creature that's in the water. It almost looks semi-translucent, right? Would you say? And it's dwarfing them. It's enormous. It's so big. It's like the size, what moves and changes. But it's sometimes it's larger than a human waste or a human chest. And other times it gets real skinny. But it's fucking huge. Like look at that. What is that thing? I'm stunned. Well, the fact that it's, I don't understand what they're saying. It's made up of hundreds of thousands of organisms. Like how is it made up of different stuff? Like what is it? Like have you ever heard of anything like this? Like the Portuguese man of war, I think, is like five different organisms, isn't it? Is it that collaborate and effect? Really? Portuguese man of war is not like a one thing? Look at the size of that thing above the water. That is fucking crazy. Pyrosome. Just whatever the ocean is. Like that, like we're all, we're trying to look in a space. Like I wonder if there's aliens out there. They're here. I know. They're white fucking there. Like whether it's cuddle fish or octopus or this goddamn thing. Whoa. Pyrosome. What the fuck? That thing looks like a geometric pattern. That's a nice, weird one. Look at that one in the upper right hand corner, Jamie. What is that weird looking fucking? What is that thing? 60 foot long jet powered animal. Oh, god. It's like a civilization. It's like a ship of these things flying through the ocean. What? Have you ever seen this before? What the fuck is that? That is so weird looking. A come on man. That looks like something from Avatar. Doesn't it? Yeah. It totally does, right? Something that comes up that tree. Hopefully put it in the new movie. Yeah. It's called James Cameron. Look at this thing. So this is what those things are. But the other one is a very smooth or it's low resolution and we can't get a really good look at it. But that's what it is. It's this collective group of hundreds of thousands of organisms that combine together and they're getting jacked by that turtle. All you bitches. What a weird, weird organism. Look at that. Look at this picture. What if you stick your arm in it? It's just... How bizarre is it that there's a civilization of these things all combined. But what they are is individuals that operate as a giant tube. You never heard of this before. No. I'm so happy we found something you don't know about. I don't think anybody else does that. That's how fucking weird one man. But yeah, the idea that the ocean is really an alien world. Yeah. Well, the funniest part is when you hear these guys with their remote... ...submersibles and they find some new life for them. Yeah. They're like, take me down, leave me those. Wait. What is that? They're getting really excited because it's the ability to meet aliens. There are new things. Yeah. We've kind of sort of mapped out the biological nature. More or less sort of... Yeah, there's like a few weird things you find in the jungle weird bugs. Where's that? Vietnam kind of surprises for us. Here with fangs. Ever see those? Oh, the Sulawesi Bors or the deer? The deer. Really vampire deer. I don't know. I don't know about vampire deer. It's the craziest looking thing ever. It's deer with fangs. Like crocodile looking fangs that come hanging down like this. This is some jackalope thing. No, it's not. It's a weird little animal. It's on a big deer either. Well, did you know... Look at that thing. Vampire deer. That's a real animal. Look at that. How fucking strange. What was in this coffee, Jamie? Look at that thing. Look at the fucking teeth on that thing. It's probably something akin to their antlers. They're used to defend themselves. Okay, that's not real. That one's not real. Because that's a mule deer. See that one, that you just picked, that's some Photoshop bullshit. What's interesting is apparently, Elkh have these things called, people call them ivory's now, but what they are is at one point in time they had tusks. Like a boar. Like giant tusks, they're probably aided them in their fights. And they eventually shrank and now they're just this weird sort of nubby thing. I actually have some here. I'll show it to you. Yeah. Well, they're in the after the podcast I'll show them to you. But they're this weird thing that's like not quite a tooth. It's ivory. It grows inside their head. And at one point in time it was some kind of a weapon just like their head is. I mean the antlers are... You know, it's the largest... How did we describe this? Well, it was the quickest growing thing in the animal world is the antlers of an elk. Okay. Look how fucking huge they are. They fall off every year and they grow back every year. And it's all just for fighting. And they used to grow back tusks too. Or these to have tusks. They asked the tusks were permanent. But they used to just, that's just for duking it out. Yeah. It's crazy weapon. Sexual selection. Well, you want it on a really weird thing. The dung beetle, there's a conserved system whereby in some dung beetles the amount of weaponry you have is your antler is inversely proportional to the amount of copulatory apparatus you have where it counts. Wow. And so if you have really impressive weaponry, you're not able to do quite as much. And that may be the engine of speciations because the vagina and penis in that system is a lock and key. And so if something shrinks too much, then you can't necessarily get the job of that. So if a greedy dung beetle with giant horns just fucks everybody up, his genes can pass on. Maybe there's a certain round of cooperation that's needed in the dung beetle world. Yeah. You can't have an oppressor. Kind of a gingas con of the dung beetle world. The patriarchy and the dung beetle world. Look at the size of the antler on that guy. Yeah. But girls make fun of them. Probably in the dung beetle world. Look at the size of the antler on that guy. Yeah. With the Lamborghini. Exactly. Like what's he doing over there with his giant, it looks like elk antlers. He probably is a tiny little dick. You want a guy who's just got a little like that guy. Probably hung like a roach. Right? He have a hunting question for you. Okay. I started looking into this primitive hunting thing. I was positively predisposed towards hunting. And I turned myself off of, I mean, I don't hunt. I turned myself off of hunting by watching the affect of some of these people who are baiting and killing bears in ways that it just doesn't feel to me like hyper respectful. Right. And I wondered if there's like a deeper layer where if I got even deeper into it, I would understand it or am I actually correct that there is something weird about the affect of attracting some beautiful bear to a kind of easy place to kill it and then just getting super excited about doing it in. Well, your natural instincts, there's a reason for them and you're most certainly correct. It's a weird feeling. The idea that you're going to trick this bear and thinking he's going there to eat and then you kill him. Bear hunting is different than any other kind of hunting. In the first of all, there's a lot of emotional attachment to it because people love teddy bears, things along those lines. Bears are this idea that they're beautiful. They definitely are. Yeah. They're definitely there. Also. Osteol attachment to it because people love teddy bears things on those lines, but bears are This idea that they're beautiful. They definitely are. Yeah, they're definitely there also One of the more ruthless animals in the animal kingdom and they're all cannibals all of them and the males Don't just go after the cubs they eat them and they they go after them specifically to eat them and then when the males get chased off The female will eat her own cubs and this is universal right? They're also responsible for the death At least 50% of undulate calves and fawns whether it's moose cows So they don't have any of these issues So they also are really difficult to hunt and their populations thought by wildlife biologists are important to keep under control So like by all of that so in areas of extreme density like forest you will not kill them unless you bait You will not so if you you want of two things has to happen They have to use dogs which is what they used to use a lot All right, they used to be California until the 1990s. They outlawed hound hunting and then the out odd Bating around the same time what they essentially did in Northern California is they outlawed bear hunting But they didn't you can still hunt bears, but it's extremely difficult almost impossible with a bow or very very unlikely Like your rate of success would be extremely though If you want to control populations if you like to eat moose and deer or you want to have them keep healthy population And you don't want the bear encroaching on these rural homes and these areas You have to control their populations and there's very few other ways to control their populations other than Bating them so assume that I was positively predisposed to hunting. I do think that they're beautiful creatures I think they're emotional creatures, but I understand yeah, they're all they're all beautiful. Okay, so I mean I think I mean I think they have frogs are beautiful. They're fascinating. It's the affect that freaky. Yeah, it should it's it's a weird form of trickery And we don't think it's sporting right but the idea is that if you really want to control their populations You have to accept that this is a necessary evil. So some that I grasp it. Mm-hmm. It's still at the level the thing that surprised me was That the affect wasn't the expected affect of the hunter With reverence in some sense sufficient reverence for the kill. Yeah, that's what flipped me out Well, there's people get excited and they get happy that they're successful because hunting is difficult And then if you take that context you've take that out of context and people get happy especially when they're good happy They're getting happy around people that have no problem with hunting See one of the problems with respect is that it's assumed that you only have that respect if you don't have happiness That goes along with that so we understand that that there is some amount of sadness some amount of happiness Is a weird like a feeling of loss. It's so there's a lot of weird stuff that goes on The surprise and the reason I'm asking you is is that I had expected that I would have the difficulty Bears equals Teddy bears and get past that I keep going going around this whole thing and then when I finally got to the end It was just that there wasn't the right balance between Sadness ecstatic elation It's hard it's hard to it's hard if you're not there experiencing it It's hard if you're not involved in this hunt for many many days and it gets very difficult You put it and you don't know if it's ever gonna happen But the bear hunting in particular especially over bait is way more problematic Psychologically okay, I think there's a really good argument and I support this argument that you must keep bear populations in control If you want people and and all those other animals to live in harmony got it because if you don't There's nothing else that keeps their populations in control by the other then bigger bears Grizzly bears and grizzly bears and they get out of hand our way scarier. That's a real it's a real giant problem in terms of our Anto permorphization of these animals, you know attaching these human attributes and these human thoughts and thinking of them as our Friends in the forest and then what they actually are to people that live out there not My guess is that if I went hunting with you I Would expect to see you elated after three days of frustration. Yes on a on a good hunt I expect that you would use the kill Responsibly that you would for go certain kinds of kills. I don't have any of those issues I think I think that where the issue is is that I wouldn't expect an unbalanced elation Yeah, I understand what you're saying and especially an unbalanced elation when you're hunting over bait for an animal that is not necessarily thought of in our culture as being an animal that you eat which is bear and a lot of times people think that you don't eat them Black bears in particular actually they taste very good and people do eat them When you deal with people like I have friends my friend John and Jen rivet who live in Alberta and there they are hunting guides It's a real necessity up there to hunt bears Okay, because there is nothing else is keeping their populations in check and if you ever go up there you see an Extraordinary amount of bears like you could see 19 20 bears in a day. Wow. They're everywhere Okay, and there's a high density of them and they just decimate the deer population they decimate the moose population and There's some of them that learn that they can get into garbage cans They can go they're breaking up people's cars and destroy them. They've killed a few people, but it's pretty rare Most of the time they realize that people are dangerous and they stay the fuck away but it's not what What I appreciate is spot and stalking traditional prey animals. That's what I like to do. I like to spot and stalk deer and elk because I feel like first of all they're the most delicious They make Whether it makes sense or not they make the most sense to me in terms of like a prey animal They're the ones that I covet the most what I want to do is I want to go and get older mature Animals that are undulates right whether it's a deer or an elk at the animal that it's spread its genetics That is already it's you know seven eight years old nine years old is animal that doesn't have much time left if you get it now You're probably getting it within a year of its death Whether it's by natural causes wolves cold starvation you're you're doing it Probably the most humane you're giving it probably the most humane death. It's reasonably possible for this thing unless it falls off a cliff and even then it's the It might survive that for a little while when you're shooting an animal with an arrow It's dead in seconds right you know you hit it in the heart and They've I shot an elk this year it literally walked four yards and tipped over it just step step step boom I'm very impressed with the skill of some of these you I guess this is the primitive hunting movement with spears and see that's I think you should I think it should be really careful About anything that you do that's not that accurate. That's that's an issue Yeah, it's a giant issue. Elbow's are extremely accurate I mean there's guys that can shoot a paper plate at 120 yards every single time They could shoot a little plate like that They'll bet their life they could drop an arrow into that at 120 yards every single time You can get good at that you can get if you have good technique and reasonable control of your emotions and your anxiety Sure in the heart in the heat of the moment You don't ever shoot anything at 120 yards though you're shooting at things 30 yards 40 yards and the degree of success is very high with skilled hunters if you they're ethical in the shot their shot decisions That primitive stuff is like why why you throw in spears like what are you doing? You're trying to prove that you're better than people that use a bow and arrow like this is not an accurate or effective thing I mean it kind of is but you have to be like five yards 10 yards like what do you got to be 15 yards max Even then I think part of the thrill of it for them is putting themselves in danger. There's a little bit of that If you're shooting oh you're going after a bear. Yeah, like I've seen some of these things filmed where The person looks like you know they're up in there. I don't know what to call it their little tree stand tree stand and That doesn't look like They're putting a lot of risk, but some of these people are clearly getting off on This is the primal hunt right and this is they're going backwards into something where the animal could surprise them and What I wanted to do is I wanted to re-equaint myself with You know now that I can I can watch somebody actually in that moment Try to figure out what my ethics around hunting were and I thought that I had prepared myself and I just I thought when I when I saw you Find out where Joe is Because I have no question knowing your ethics and how you think that You would have a very subtle perspective on all these different kinds of kills which sorts of animals Yeah, if you get to spears yeah, you're in a weird place like Like you say, oh, I only spear wild pigs we're trying to get rid of them anyway Okay, well, that's we're in a weird place We're in a weird place because uh ethically I think you have two choices three choices Your three choices are rifle which is number one ethically Realistically because if you shoot something with a rifle you you can be really accurate Like out to a hundred yards a hundred percent of the time like unless it's crazy windy out or there's some weird conditions Altitude can affect Ballistics but not that much out to a hundred yards You're fucking deadly if you have a really good control squeeze in the trigger You're not jerking everything you're not panicking Then bow is second, you know bow it requires way more practice way way more Fine tuning of your motor skills, but it's still possible. Okay, then you have crossbow which is even more effective than a bow faster More feet per second faster feet per second so that it travels at a flat line because it's going quicker before it drops They all drop at the same speed right bullets and arrows all drop at the same speed They just don't get get there at the same speed. Okay, so the same amount of time like if I'm shooting something at a hundred yards With a bow I am aiming with with a site that is calculating for the fact that the arrow is going to drop significantly in the time That it takes if it's going 280 feet per second is like a normal speed for a good bow with a good heavy arrow That's 280 feet per second that goes a hundred yards. Okay a bullet is going to go a hundred yards far quicker But in the same amount of time it takes that arrow to get to that target the bullet is going to drop the same amount of the arrow Yeah, and that's what most people don't understand So a crossbow is more ethical because it's more accurate It's this have fewer moving parts you could actually sit it on a rest and just squeeze the trigger easier to manipulate and the the arrow is traveling faster so it's called a bolt traveling faster so it'll drop less After that Shit gets squirrely. Okay after that. It's like you throw in spears. Okay. You got what you got an out of ladder Okay, all right Well, you can kill things with it and people have done it, but it gets to like how accurate are you and it? What is what's your ethical brain right an ethical range for a really good hunter with a bow and arrow is probably 80 yards You know, maybe it's a moose 90 yards something big But with a spear like what do you got you got 10 yards? So you know Why that's the question? I was doing it for meat are you doing it because is this your Mount Everest? You want to kill a pig with a spear and are you saying that a pig is not worth as much? So you should be able to kill it with a spear because these are all weird They're weird decisions, right? They're weird decisions And people make those with bears they make those decisions with black bears like people that live where they they consider them nuisances right they they kill them. I mean they used to be used to allow them to shoot You still out of hunt used to be allowed to hunt black bears with a spear in Alberta until a big scandal a couple years ago Where a guy filmed himself doing that he shot a bear he killed a bear rather with a spear and was Who didn't holler in and and people got to hold the video and thought I was disgusting and protested it and then people from under armor dropped wife from their you know, they had this sort of sponsorship deal with them and It it ignite it caused a rift in the hunting community some people think you should be able to hunt with a rock Yeah, I don't hear what you hunt with it should be a lot with anything and other people like hmm Okay, but what are we doing are we just going out to get meat or are we putting on a macho performance of our ability? Okay, this is exactly what I wanted to get at which is If you know that a population has to be controlled and you want the meat yeah Then it makes sense to me that you have to open yourself up to some of the pleasure of the kill that makes some sense but what I saw just like flipped me out because it Was it was it was above and beyond. I saw a spear and yeah and other things and you know I was impressed by the some of the skill I'm impressed by some of the bravery But it's like why right? Yeah, I'm just doing it to population control you're doing it for the meat. This was the surprise to me Yeah, like I got like a kind of second by it That's not surprising It's not surprising, you know, I mean I think if you If you were there you'd probably be even more conflicted because you're actually were there in the presence of the thing dying Yeah, you know watching a bear die on a video is one thing that being there alive when they die is a completely different thing It's it's it's a very complicated thing because we have these deep set emotional connections to certain animals that my friend Steve Ronella who's gonna be actually on tomorrow He calls them charismatic megafauna. Yeah, then we have this different view of certain animals bears in particular But if you use the animal respectfully respectfully and you kill it ethically and you do I don't have any problem with hunting bears and in fact I think it's actually a nest it really is a necessary task It's something that even if you don't like to hunt bears if you're living in a place like Alberta You probably should hunt bears because you should do your part. There's a lot of them out there and You know one of the things that becomes an interesting relationships relationship between the moose hunters and the deer hunters and the bear hunters that they have kind of Those smart ones have come to an understanding that even if I don't hunt bear I need those people out there doing it. Okay, but it's how do you do it and why are you doing it? I think you I've seen animals dive very quickly with a bone arrow. They dive very quickly I've never seen animal die with a spear. I don't think it's necessary But I don't want to be the person that tells you you can't do it if you have an ethical range of five yards and You only hunt bear with a spear at five yards and you kill it immediately you hit it and kill it You're right, then you're right. Yeah, it's not based on the method. It's based on What what are the ethical parameters around the country? I'm appreciative and also I would kind of be a hypocrite because even though I can ethically kill Something at 40 yards or just figure out what the number is depending on the size of the animal Even though I can't do that I could do it way easier with a rifle So why am I using a bow and arrow? Why do I want to make it more difficult? Why am I making it more challenging? Why am I requiring myself to practice? But you ask me these questions. You're very self aware. It's a very important question to ask because if I was just doing it just for the meat I would probably be mindful right. Yeah Yeah, I think that that that part of it has to do with the primal association with the kill and then the key question is How do you want to indulge that what is the setting setting blah blah blah? So that was that that was the thing that I found shocking is that I had thought You know, I understood something about the need to control population It's the affect which really killed me. Yeah. Well again, we're talking about bears You know, it's not just bears other animals as well. Yeah. I mean, I saw I don't want to focus more on it necessarily But it's just the question I had to ask you because I sort of I was very surprised by my own reaction Well a lot of people are taking issue my good friend Ben O'Brien who's a brilliant writer who's actually also a hunter Is advocating that people stop taking what he calls gripping grins what a gripping grin is like say if you shot a beautiful deer You're holding the deer up by the antlers and you're smiling. Yeah And he's advocating that those photos are problematic because people who don't hunt look at it like you're some blood thirsty asshole That's super happy that something died and that's not even though that's not how the people feel when they're taking those photos What there are is happy that something which is very difficult which you know, especially using a bow most people go home empty-handed It's right requires too much fitness Physical fitness because you're going up and down these mountains it requires too much Accuracy and training and technique and archery most people fuck it up and then there's dealing with anxiety most people fuck it up but After it's all over there's this great feeling of elation, right? You did it I can't believe it came together Wow because it was probably not going to come together and people get happy Now these are people again that already accept hunting now if you take someone who is an animal rights activist or someone who deeply Appreciates animals and then you show them that photo they have a completely different association with what that photo means What that photo means is here's an asshole who's a trophy hunter? Okay, but let me get my thing out I don't know any species that celebrates a kill for food With glee chips do Oh, sorry. Sorry. You're right. Yeah, and they kill a monkey. They get pretty happy well Then they do it socially and then they they share it You know throughout truism they scream in each other. Yeah. Yeah, so that's not shimzer my least favorite species almost of all their whole The worst. Yeah, terrifying little fuckers So where where do you think we are on the political front we haven't even touched that? I think it's right the same way as bow hunting versus spears and rifles It's all there's this world's messy, you know all these things are messy. Do you see a way in which this political epic comes to an end? The only hope that I have is through reasonable dialogue becoming Unaccepted and appreciated thing a celebrated thing and that this is possible that people can realize that there's some stupidity to this team mentality that we have his right versus left which is almost all a good percentage of it is He's assumed identities right these these predetermined patterns that get adopted in order to as we first started talking about this in order to establish yourself as Someone who's in a group right you get accepted by this group and you see it left and right I mean I don't want to name any names But there's a bunch of people to do it blatantly you see them and I've even seen them switch teams And you see them switch teams and I don't buy their rationalizations when it comes to ideology But I think is what they're doing is they're switching teams because they realize there's an in on this team Right and they could just say this is the problem with the team I used to be on those fucking losers and they're really Benedict Arnold right and like they probably have as much of an affinity to the ideas of one side as they do the other side They just go all in on one side to get acceptance from the group right You just know why people change their opinion that much over two years or something like that Or you know it's like they just decide this group makes more sense now And I've been attacked by people on the left So I'm gonna go to the right or vice versa and usually what it is is I mean When even when they say they've been attacked like oh you fucking baby There's three hundred million people just in this country alone If you put something out there publicly and a thousand people attack you don't act like you're being persecuted Okay, you have an idea you've you've launched that idea out into the zeitgeist and people took a big shit on it You know whether it's people on the right or people on the left You got to be able to argue your point one way or the other and not just immediately jump ship on someone who shares Ideas with you decides that your idea sucks and maybe they're wrong and maybe you're right But you got to argue that through but this idea of these partisan Patterns that people just seem to automatically fall into they're so detrimental to dialogue They're so detrimental to us under really understanding each other and really having some sort of a sense of community Right this is a giant community of 300 million people that's what it's supposed to be Yeah, and this idea that it's this group is trying to fuck it up and they're trying to turn us all Muslims and this one Once everybody to be gay and this one wants everybody to fucking have free food in this and it's this does nonsense This is nonsense. We need better understanding and You know the word better education gets tossed around a lot But it also means better social understanding right better social Education like an appreciation of who we are and why we think the way we think and calling out Weasels on both sides of the pattern like calling out weasels on the right that are pandering that are just trying to like get up You know the repeating a lot of these like accepted beliefs because they know that they can hit this frequency and a lot of people Sing along or the same thing that are people are doing on the left They're doing on both sides. I think most reasonable people have a collection of ideas that they share from both the right and the left and most reasonable people are reasonably compassionate and I think that's one of the things that we're missing some a reasonable sense of not just ethics but an appreciation for each other for all of us as a group and Just that I think if we can celebrate reasonable Conversations and celebrate and understanding of other people's perspectives right be able to just look at how you're looking at things and have empathy Okay, let me see where you're coming from with this. Okay. Let me put you myself in your shoes Okay, instead of just immediately like fuck you you cook and fuck you you this and instead of thinking about it that way if we just just Just try to just everybody exercise a little bit more so we're a little bit more calm Right and come at this from a rational place and try to like realize like What's a prior exclusion? I've been experimenting with a very dangerous idea, which is I keep hearing about chief inclusion officers and you know I thought about You know, I think from a from a ecclesiastes, you know to every season There's a purpose under heaven. So if there's inclusion there also has to be exclusion right and like deep platforming or unplatforming somebody is an active exclusion and very often It's very interesting that the people who are for inclusion are very focused on the need for deep platforming Which is an active exclusion? So should we have chief exclusion officers that both monitor? Who is being excluded including you know somebody like James de Moore at Google? Like is it ethical to exclude him or are there certain voices that need to not be at some tables in order for something to make progress? because if you always have the voice that the most extreme that doesn't accept the game Then it's very hard to move forward within the game if you're constantly being reminded, you know, so we have this We have a series of situations in which it seems like some perspective that very few people hold terrorizes majorities or you know group of people who sort of can more or less get along with each other and Keeps pushing us into this very divided landscape, but I was just curious You know in terms of our group of people that we we talk and hang out with in common Where you see the high leverage is that we're be we've just finished the midterm. We've got this 2020 election. It looks to me like Hillary is kind of I and whether she wants to get back in the game This Trump thing has completely You know, it's like it's like the dress is it black and blue or white and gold for like it could be eight years right yeah, and I just Have you thought about how this ends? Well, I would never be so presumptuous to think that I have any idea how this ends Okay, I've proposed various scenarios to myself and I don't like any of them I don't like where it's going because I would I worry about and this is also again hypocritical that Because I think it probably should burn down and be rebuilt from the ruins. We're not going to get such a clean thing It's not gonna be clean. I know no. This isn't very clean either though. Honestly. It's that guy won. It's not clean Have you if this is he loves Putin? You know, this ain't clean, you know, the whole thing is weird It's the the the bankers having the amount of influence they have the fact that there's too lobbyists What is it what's the number like too lobbyists to every member of Congress or too lobbyists to every senator? From the farmed, sooticle industry by the way the number of people that have influence over The way our laws are shaped. It's it's so fucking bananas right now, right? So so off the rails Is that what it is? 12 but I didn't type in specifically, but there's 23 registered lobbyists for every member of no, I think from the pharmaceutical industry they were saying not 20 just I think It's two for every member of Congress in the pharmaceutical industry Yeah, the question that you started out with like deplatforming people I think we're impatient and I think we're we're we really want to make sure that this vetting of ideas happens quickly because we see the answer We we see the solution we we see that this is incorrect And we see these people that think the world is flat or idiots and we think that these people that this I think this and think that We think they're all wrong and so we want to stop them from talking But that doesn't work. It just works for now. It it it it oftentimes feeds those ideas and it also it You have to question like why are you so sure? Why are you so so sure that you are correct that you want what you don't just want Your side to be heard exclusively you want to you want to silence these other people's ability to participate in this argument Even if they're totally wrong. I think that's dangerous because I think that the weight of fight off Ideas that aren't good is to introduce ideas that are good and you're gonna you're gonna have a bunch of people that agree with the ideas That are bad, but I think that That's a part of this whole figuring things out like you need to have bad ideas floating around there to appreciate good ideas If all the ideas are good like what do we do get it out against right? It's not bad to have these bad ideas broadcast What's bad to not have someone say hey, these are bad ideas? Okay, but like you need to see the pitfalls of racism. We need to see the pitfalls of crime We need to see the pitfalls of corruption. We need to see it in action I think it's like stock markets windowing. I think in a lot of ways it's important We need to understand that this is a pattern that people fall into continually over and over again When they have control over the money when they have control over They'll even move the numbers. What do I do this? How about if I tell you that this is gonna go down and then you invest some money and I put some money in your bank and we work together What's makes money? There's what people do right if they just fucking do it over and over and over again Should you punish them? Yes, absolutely, but I think it's kind of important to see some fucked up behavior just because we're not done We're still in some sort of emotional and psychological and even physical evolution We're in the middle of this thing and I think that bad ideas facilitate comprehension Like these really shitty ideas that a lot of people have what they do is they facilitate a comprehension of why we think dumb shit and Sometimes you don't know why people think dumb shit Please see someone over and over again that thinks dumb shit and you get to see that whether it's Alex Jones or whether it's who it fill in the blank Okay, what guy do you want deep? Yeah, but I don't okay, so here's my thing I want a lot of our leading experts Deep-platform Okay, well you're going deep. Yeah, I mean just spray paint. I don't know fucking big A on Tucker Carlson's driveway Well, if I think about who the great danger is is it Alex Jones? You know who veers towards tinfoil hat land with some frequency or Is it the people who were selling weapons of mass destruction in Iraq as a response to 9-11 or? You know the people Let's assume that you're a reasonable person on immigration. You neither think that borders should be open or closed Then you start hearing Fessors say you know the great thing about immigration is is that it has absolutely no costs and all of them are better than all of our people because You know they're highly trained they're highly motivated adhering professors say, you know, the great thing about immigration is that it has absolutely no costs. And all of them are better than all of our people because, you know, they're highly trained, they're highly motivated, they're young. You're thinking like, okay, what kind of thing has all benefits and no costs? You're not even entering into a rational description. And now we're hearing like all these trade deals that got negotiated. Yeah, that kind of wasn't true. All those things that we were telling you that if you question these things, you were a backward protectionist. And you were just stuck in the old world and you couldn't embrace the new. Yeah, that was all bullshit. What I think is we have a crisis in expertise. Institutional expertise is at an all-time low. Nobody really trusts any of our institutions to be an authoritative source of ground truth. It's not to say that everything that the institution says wrong or everything the experts wrong from it. It's just that there are almost no experts or institutions that aren't willing to distort facts in order to pursue institutional goals. That that's a giant issue, right? Right. And so I don't actually want to deplatform these people, but I do have the very strong sense. You know, when I when Elon came on your show and Peter Thiel, my friend in boss came on Dave Rubin show, I thought that was quite a moment where this alternate network of distribution, which is not under centralized control started to be seen as comparably powerful and important. And I think some of the noises that Tucker Carlson just made today, Rubin about, well, hey, you're doing this out of your garage and you have the freedom to do anything. I'm beholden to the structure in which I live. Yeah. We're at a very interesting place with respect to what is this thing, this alternate distribution network for for ideas that's unpoliced by the institutions. And you know, I think I've been convinced in the last two days that I need, this is advice that I got from you at the beginning, you said, you need to start a podcast. I think I need to start a podcast. I think you need to start a podcast. Just keep going on about the hop thing till people figure it out. Not just about the hop thing, but like, but we have to return to some kind of stable sanity that I'm positive that the institutions can't return us to because the institutional interests really have to do with the fact that certain kinds of growth on which they're predicated, their existence is predicated, have evaporated. So all of these institutions are extremely vulnerable to corruption at the moment. And the real revolution, as I'm seeing it, is that high agency individuals are out competing traditional institutional structures in terms of mind share. And some of those high agency individuals are irresponsible. You know, they're like Milo types that are kind of trying to light things up. And some of them are extremely responsible. And some of them, you know, we'll do a few inter responsible things, but we'll self correct. And this new world that is being born is a huge check on the institutions, but it's still largely separate. Like in my right that you don't do a lot of network television. I don't do any. Yeah. Anymore, but I used to, I mean, that's how I became famous in the first place. Right. You know, but yeah, I don't do it anymore, but it's also because there's nothing fun out there like this. Like there's no place for this. Right. Other than this, this is the only place you could do this. But isn't it interesting to you that we're still have not like Jordan had to be dealt with by the mainstream because the book was too big. His effect was too large. I think his effect on the internet is bigger than the book. I think the YouTube videos and the debates that he has, the one that I was telling you, the recent one interview with GQ. It's so interesting. It's really good. The woman's very smart, but she gets trounced. And it's because he's been in the trenches with this stuff for a long time. I mean, he's he's fighting a very strange fight of dialogue and of interpretation and of discussion and and the freedom of intellectual sovereignty. You know, there's a lot of people that want you to think a very certain way and use certain words and say certain things. And it doesn't matter whether or not you're in fact racist or sexist or homophobic or whatever. There's a weird battle of control going on that it's a heart of it as much as it is a battle of inclusion and diversity and strengthening our overall progressive mindset. There's a little bit of that too, but there's also an undeniable game that's being played and people want to win. There's scores that are being scored. There's points on the board that throwing in new agents. They have teams going at it. And whenever Jordan goes on one of these conversations, these video interviews and there's a feminist and Jordan Peterson like there's a fucking game going on. We're watching a soccer we're watching a wrestling match. This is jujitsu. They're playing intellectual jujitsu and Jordan's really good at tapping people. He's really good at it. And they get pissed. They keep sending in new chicks. They said in that Kathy Newman lady and he's like, so what you're saying is that didn't work either. She just got devastated. She got rocked. And this is what's happening over and over and over again because whether you appreciate what he's saying or not, he has some facts that are undeniable. He has some positions that are based on a rich understanding of history and of Marxism and of communism and a lot of the problems with people with compelled thoughts. If you're compelling people to behave a certain way, compelling people to talk a certain way. And we're not talking about compelling people to not commit crimes or violence. We're talking about weird things like compelled pronouns. And so if I take if I take your analogy because you brought it up, that he's like doing jujitsu. So in some previous era, and I thought your description of the early days of MMA was fascinating that we just didn't know what fighting was. So we didn't know who would win or what systems worked. And if you think about the mainstream media is like I keto. Some system that maybe has some validity and some very rarefied context. And it comes into general purpose fighting systems. And it's dismantled very quickly. So now we have this weird situation that we've got this new world of kind of rule laden, anything goes discussions more or less. And the mainstream world doesn't want like the I keto world doesn't want to acknowledge that this weird UFC type thing is happening. How long does that go on? It goes on for as long as it it takes. And this is similar to I think that what's happening intellectually. And this is one of the reasons why I don't think you should stop people from expressing these bad ideas. There's one thing for stopping people to say, hey, we need to kill black people. Stopping people people said, we need to kill white people. We need to kill fill in the black. What are the group is? Yeah, that's that's different. You're you're you're completely stepping outside of the realm of civilization and into war and violence. And we could all collectively decide and we should all collectively decide. We should have ethics together. Like whether it's right or left or in the middle, we should all decide, hey, you can't do that. Because what you're doing is you're you're calling for violence against someone who's not committing any violence. Can I pause you right there? Yes, I think there's a really interesting point. Okay. Let's assume that we know that that behavior needs to be down regulated in some way. You can try to silence the person where we just physically duct taped them so they can't say anything. Right. You know, we put them in jail. We won't don't give them access to the media, etc. etc. Or we can shame them. Or we can kind of take them aside at what layer of this sort of communication stack to very good question. We should because I think one of the things that we haven't done is to positively say we agree with you that the speech is offensive and it is potentially dangerous. But we think it should be down regulated differently than the deplatforming option. Well, the deplatforming option, the real issue is there's only a few different avenues for these people to express themselves publicly. Okay. Right. And the argument that's really strange is should these be regulated like a utility? Or should they be thought of as private businesses get to decide what's on their channel essentially? Like it's almost like a private NBC that everyone can broadcast on. What if it's none of the what if the problem is we're trying to pretend? Is it like a dinner party? Is it the public square? Is it a utility? And it's none of these things. I think these ideas what I was discussing that like there's there's a reason why good ideas and bad ideas should go to war. It's the same reason why even though I kind of knew that most Kung Fu was bullshit before the UFC. Right. I want those guys to get in there and try. Oh, you got some death touch? Hey, come on in. I want to introduce you to a guy. You know, this is his name's came Velasquez and you're going to try your death touch and he's just going to wrestle you to the ground and beat your fucking brains in. Okay. Right. But that's not going to happen because you know death touch. Good luck. And you let him duke it out. And that is the balance of the little ideas. But it is a little no, no, but but when you deplatform people, that's when it's not happening. I agree with you. But what I'm trying to get at is that it is a state. I hadn't really thought about it. The extent to which Jordan is the only one of us that they've really gone after like this. Well, he's first of all, he became famous from this. Right. This is the battle was how he emerged. He emerged from this battle over the use of compelled pronouns for various genders. Like the one he had. 78 different genders. Similar but not. Okay. Okay. The difference is Brett's position, he comes from a different place. The way they were going at him was so much more unreasonable. They were saying right away that what he has to do is leave work because he's white. They were basically saying a racist thing and everyone universally acknowledges his racist except for the super lefties who thought that it made sense because in their mind every white person is somehow or another guilty of at least at the very least using your privilege to advance the world at the to the negative impact of people of color and people of other ethnicities. So they decided that they are going to have a day of exclusion and instead of this day of absence having black people and people of color stay home, they were going to kick white people out. So it became an aggressive act instead of an act of appreciation. It became an act of punishment or an act of exclusion. Right. And by people that are clearly out of their fucking mind, that was also part of the problem. Is there, their arguments or incoherent? You would see that fucking stupid president of the university standing in front of those kids and they told them to put his hands down because he was threatening. You're, you're scaring us. You're making violent gestures with your hands. So he puts his hands down and they start laughing. Okay. This is nonsense now. You're in little kids. You get little kids running, you get wore the flies on a grand scale in a state university. And it's all, I mean, this is a public university. Right. I mean, they get funding. Right. This is all chaos. Nobody agrees. They got baseball bats. They're looking for him if he's coming back to the school. The kids form these vigilante groups with weapons over what, like who's threatening you? Like what is happening with these new weapons? Okay. But the big story there was the non reporting. What do you mean? Well, the New York Times, Washington Post, all of these major organs NPR. They didn't report. They didn't want to touch the story. Well, this is what, this is my, my big theory here is that every outfit that has a, a grand narrative cannot report the news that goes counter narrative. So racism by blacks against whites cannot be reported by any outfit that believes that racism is impossible by blacks against whites. That's such a preposterous position. The idea that racism is exclusive to any group will but the redefinition of that definition. The redefinition can suck a fat dick. It's a stupid redefinition. That's true. This idea that the only way you can be racist is if you have power over that other group. That's nonsense. And human beings act as individuals and they always have power over each other. You have power to intimidate. You have power to isolate. You have power if you support that. But what I could be choosing about this is that there is no pretense of consistency. I mean, on that side of the aisle, it's like we're going to throw out the following 17 completely contradictory rules. And then we'll tell you which rule is operative in any given moment. So, you know, I was going to throw out this concept of the Hilbert problems for social justice. So one of them is you cannot understand me because my experience is too different. And you must understand me because it's so important. Right? Or we are all similar enough that any deviation from 50-50 shows you the amount of sexism in a workforce. And we are all so different that once you include women in previously male occupations, you will see a great benefit because of the diversity So there are all these self-contradictory couplets that you have to agree to. Well, that's the weird thing is who assume that I just buy all of your stuff. I think we've made a terrible tactical error. We fought these bad ideas rather than saying maybe we should just accept all of your bad ideas. And then show you what kind of weird world. No. No, no, no, no, you can't do that because they don't make sense. You can't say, oh, yeah, they make sense. Well, and then how do I know when you're serious? Well, but that might just let those through and those things fail. But that's my point is that by showing the internal, this is in mathematics, we call this reductive ad absurdum that once you take on too many different points, you show the conflicts showing that those things can't all be true. There's no way in which if I accept all of your ideas, I can run anything. So you know, take this thing about a trans exclusion from Victoria's secret. Right? Are you in here, about this? Oh, God. So the idea is that the Victoria's secret lingerie division had to step down where there was a scandal in the background that somebody had said we don't actually want trans people walking the Victoria's secret runway. Right? And so very interesting, you have a company that is dedicated to the commercial exploitation of humans as sexual objects for the privilege of the male gaze. And now you're angry that it doesn't include trans into that exploited class. So just without without getting into whether this makes like good economic sense or anything, there's just the issue of self-contradiction. But isn't that a reduction in view of what Victoria's secret is? Isn't it possible that a woman can feel empowered and sexy if she's is wearing lingerie and it's not just to the exploiting of the male gaze that it just, that she appreciates looking attractive. Wonderful. So take that off. Okay, right. Exactly. So the idea is that you're both going to say that that's a positive female empowerment issue. Right. And it's a terrible male exploitation issue at the same time. Is it a terrible male exploitation issue? Like what if a guy likes, what if women decide universally they like guys wear leopard skin underwear and guys start wearing leopard skin, tidy, tidy underwear? Well, this is sexual sludge. But yes, but that's the difference between that and women wearing lingerie. If women wear lingerie and they do it because they like to be, you know, I understand that and they like to be more attractive or to accentuate their attraction. So then the sexual self-objectification is an interesting issue. That is an issue of empowerment or is an issue of oppression. It could certainly be. If a woman's healthy, take that all on. Why does it have to be exploitation though? That's the question. What I'm trying to say is you've taken you. What some point you've made too many arguments. There's this concept called the principle of explosion in mathematics. The principle of explosion says if you can get one contradiction through airport security, you can blow up the universe. As soon as you allow a single contradiction in the unity of knowledge, everything can be proven. Right. So everything becomes meaningless. So the game in some sense in mathematics is frequently to say, well, let's take all of those beautiful things that you believe. So you've just enunciated some. I've enunciated some. You throw them all in. Instead of saying what's true and what isn't true, you say, are these compatible? And these ideas are clearly incompatible. So for example, one of the tricks that I use is to look at advertising for women, two women, and what phrases get used. So if you use the phrase, turn heads this summer, in quotes and put it into a search engine, you'll find all sorts of revealing outfits that are intended to court the male gaze. You say, well, maybe that's not really the male gaze. Then you put in a phrase like make him drool. And that will be used to market to women. And so this issue about can we at least get to a point where we're talking about the internal contradictions of your position? Like I don't even want to get into what my position is. The first thing that's scaring me is that you've said so many things so strongly and so dogmatically. And this doesn't have to be about gender. It could be about race. It could be about class. But once you've said too many things, then I can say, look, I don't see any way of squaring all of your positions. And it's not it doesn't even have to do with me. Right. I think that's where we haven't gone to yet. So you think letting them come up with as many preposterous things as possible. And then once it gets to a position where the idea is contradict each other, expose that. Well, that's my point, which is once you've told me all of your principles. Okay. Then I'm going to say great, I'm confused. Do you feel that I have to understand you or that I can't understand you? Because I don't know which is operative in this situation. Tell me the rule how I decide which principle that you've stated governs this situation. Right. So easy. Go ahead. One last point about that. I don't want to have to refer to you where you say, well, you bring me each individual situation. And I will tell you which principle is operative and which principle is an operative. That doesn't work. I want you to list your principles and list your mechanisms for resolving the conflicts within your principles. And then once you've done that, we can actually evaluate what you're saying. But at the moment, it requires you as an oracle to tell me which of your many contradict, you're seemingly contradictory positions is operative in every particular case. So for example, we did that one with the person who is the quantum, x Muslim trans trans, you know, everything going on, which is operative? The person with machella phobia, which is an extremely rare psychological condition, or the person who appears to be deep into some self, you know, some radical self actualization principle. They're even a person who wears that crazy makeup should be able to wear whatever they want. It's nothing wrong with it. You should be able to dress like Paul Stanley from kiss. Yes. Yes. You think assume that that's true. But what if, for example, as a heterosexual male, you don't want to watch the crying game at the Victoria secret runway show. Do you really think that? Wait a minute. Do you really think the Victoria secret to run way shows for the heterosexual male in some sense? Yes. What guys, you ever watch the Victoria secret? I have it. That's what the guy said. He said it was a fancy. That's what he's branding it as a savor. No, no, I mean, there's something between a fantasy of Victoria secret. The senior executive recently told Vogue that trans models don't belong in the fantasy of Victoria secret fashion show. Well, you know, that's that's on him. You know, he wants to be just because he said it doesn't mean it's true. I get if you looked at the graph, male to female viewers of a Victoria secret fashion show. It would be like a few pre-proveasant boys and the vast majority of women and maybe some gay guys. But that's it. Is that right? Yeah, it's gotta be. What the fuck is sitting around? It's on it an hour. What are you doing? Oh, again, some popcorn ready for the Victoria secret fashion show. Dogs coming over and Mike. We're gonna draw the TV. That fuck out of here is porn and then there's everything else. Everything else is for chicks. Okay. Runway shit. I don't know. The single guy out there watching runway shit. It's like, you remember when playboy had playgirl. That was for gay dudes. Baked dudes. Yeah. It's not for chicks. Okay. They don't want to see that. And we don't want to see runways. We're not we're not here for runways. We get bored easy. Bunch of chicks walking around the run to wear. Yeah. I think you're calling it very, you may be right about who the audience is. I have no idea on the demographics. I've never watched one of these in my life. But it's not the case that I believe that male the male gaze is nowhere to be found here because it's a very weird thing that the female is largely buying an amplifier for something that is supposed to excite a male. But it's a little bit to me like the female is the magician buying magic supplies at a store for the audience. Right? Sure. Sure. That's a good way of looking at it. I don't think there's the male gaze is absent. I just don't buy his interpretation if that it's a fantasy for men that's ruined with trans men or trans women. I don't have a I don't have a I don't have a dog in that fight. Seems silly. Seems silly. It's like if you don't want transgender people to be in there, you just have to say you can't say it ruins the fantasy. You just say we're only hiring people that have vaginas. I don't know. Do whatever you want. Like you could like there's certain jobs if you go to Chippendale's like are trans women showing up a trans men? Are they a Chippendale's where they're just moved down there because they don't have a dick. And but they're all jacked and they look like a man. Is this what women want to see? And are they transphobic? If they don't want to see that, right? If women go to a you know, one of those all male review shows and it's all trans men, but they're heterosexual and they're not really into trans men. Are they all transphobic? Yeah. So what I'm trying to get at is there's a hierarchy like I'm not that interested in this in the particulars of the Victoria's secrets profitability and what their statements are. What I'm more interested in is you've even nonceated so many there's so many different principles at work as to what should govern in a conflict that you won't tell me. Well, okay, when these two things, these two beautiful things that you've said actually lying conflict, how do you resolve the conflicts? And it seems to be well, why don't you consult us on every single one of these and we'll tell you, you know, case by case. And that can't work because what I want to know is I don't want to point you as an oracle. I want you to state what your positions are. I want you to state how you harmonize them. And then we're having a conversation, but as long as I have to keep going to you and your crazy definitions and your, well, this is operative on on alternate Tuesdays, then it doesn't work. I completely see your point. However, you can't give ground. You can't give grounded nonsense because that ground is never getting packed. You're never getting it packed. Have you allowed them to establish certain ridiculous principles, rules that are contradictory to each other? They'll come up with a reason why they make sense. No, no, you don't allow them to put it into the workforce. You say, look, before we put it into the workforce, let's just understand the 17 different things that you've said are absolutes. Well, you're basically doing then what Jordan does and every single one of these debates, you're letting people lay out their idea and then you shoot them down and you decide what's what's logical and what's illogical. I think that's that's the UFC of ideas. Right. And this is why it's important to let these shitty ideas into the match. Why do we still have so much caught up in the IKEA DOLIG and the Kung Fu Lee? Because it sounds good. People like the idea that you don't have to learn much. You could just go in there with a death touch and fuck people up. They don't want to think that, oh, you have to practice for 10,000 hours. You have to sprawl and work on your leg kicks and work on your leg. So maybe this public shaming is death touch. Well, debating these, I think, honestly, and I'm not trying to blow Jordan's horn any more than I already have. But I think what he does is very important because he is one of the few that engages in these people in these very public forums in these long-form debates where they go to war with ideas. And these are way better than their conversations. Because he's fucking good at it. They want to chop them down. They're not picking you so much. Because I'm friendly. I'm not as like, I'm not as combative as he is. And I'm also not as smart as he is. And I'm also not as I'm not. I don't have a good potential. I don't have the credentials that he has. Like when he's the University of Toronto professor at PhD, when he's going to war with these people, they're throwing out valiant warriors to die at his sword. Did you hear what happened to watch with Brett and Richard Dawkins? No, it happened. They appeared on the stage for the first time. Oh, and did they oppose each other? Oh, yeah. Really on religion. Oh, well, is Dawkins now religious? No, no, Dawkins is staunchly in that sort of new atheist. Right. Right. Aggressive. God is. I panicked because I know he had a stroke. Oh, okay. You know, you know what I'm saying? Like, I thought your brother was an atheist as well. Yeah. But Brett doesn't think that they're religion is a virus. It's not parasitizing. He believes that religion is actually an adaptation. And the weird thing was, he said, look, there's young Dawkins and there's old Dawkins. And young Dawkins came up with these two powerful ideas, the idea that the meme, the unit of ideation is a gene like object. He also came up with the idea of the extended phenotype. So when you talked about that ant mound that you're excavating, that ant mound is in some sense part of the ant strategy. It's such a, it's so deeply tied in that you have to consider the ant mound as part of the ant system because it can't exist without that complicated underground city. Right. And so what he said was, okay, if I use these two concepts that memes are like genes and that genes can throw off a bad meme instantly. So genes, memes have to ride on a gene and they can't parasitize it too much. And you also have this inclusive fitness, which is that maybe religions co-travel with us and allow us to outcompete those who don't have them because they seem to be found everywhere. They're so prevalent. Right. You have to, if you looked at it objectively, not looked at it in terms of how you feel about cult-like behavior and people's susceptibility to influence. If you just looked at it objectively, you know, from another dimension, you'd go, well, clearly this is a part of being a successful person. Tell me about it. Exactly. So Brett and Dawkins met and I think Dawkins had this kind of reaction like, oh crap, I'm meeting an ultra-Darwinist who's read my work taken it seriously and is feeding it back in and saying, you, you rich your Dawkins in your younger years established ideas who when that, when those ideas logical consequences are explored, it completely negates your late life hatred for religion because it reveals it to be an adaptation rather than a parasitization of the human species. You know, the real problem that I've always had with Dawkins and his take on religion is not that he's wrong or they're right. It's his anger that he has when he's talking to people that believe. Yeah. He sets up the kind of like heavy conflict that, you know, the way people interact with each other is very, the reactions are very dependent upon the attitude that a person has when they go into this interaction. You know, two people meet on the street, one person, one person meets that person says the same words and they wind up hugging another person meets that person and has a fifth fight. Right. Like what is what's the difference? Well, there's a lot of it is the way you approach people. The lot of is the way you accept people's ideas, the way you communicate with them, the way you allow them to fully express themselves with their judgment and he doesn't, he doesn't buy any of that. He feels like there's a war going on and he's got to shut down religion as quickly as possible. Well, that's the thing he wanted to. You're so good. No. All right. He wanted to fashion science into a cudgel that was maximally efficient for beating the crap out of religion. That's a great way to put it. And what Brett did is to say, actually your scientific work goes in the exact opposite direction. The reason I brought it up was it was one of these unexpected occurrences that when you have a meeting of these things and this is your point about the UFC is that the mixed martial arts says, hey, we don't know what's going to work. We don't know what's going to happen. Nobody knows anything yet. And gradually we came to understand that there were certain systems that were hyper effective and that even those could get, you know, you were making the point earlier about Brazilian Jiu Jitsu. We came to understand that there were certain systems that were hyper-effective and that even those could get You know, you were making the point earlier about Brazilian Jiu Jitsu Didn't keep advancing At the same level once we understood the role of all of these different systems in advancing fighting So the question that I'm having repeatedly is what kept Brett and Dawkins for example from having that meeting? Where I think Dawkins probably didn't fully understand what he was getting into when he agreed to appear with an evolutionary theorist on stage Well, do you don't you think that he's just very confident in his ideas? He's very confident in his intellectual capabilities. He's been doing these type of debates and shutting down these secular Or these these people that are I mean from various religions, right? I mean from he's he's had these debates with people from Judaism from Christianity He's been it's part of his career right. Yeah. I mean and even what the fuck's his name? the the Indian fellow who Everybody makes fun of what the fuck's his name? Dinesh, this is no the other guy the one the this the quantum guy that's always using Depeck Chupa guy. Yeah, that guy that guy is constantly using inappropriate Quantum words throws quantum into fucking vegetable soup and tries to make it to make sense He's used a lot of word salad, right, you know and I mean I've seen him debate him to I mean there's well Yeah, but you know you you like these videos of the fake martial arts guys Yeah, and they they they show up for the challenge because they've actually bought it right Sam was do put deep-off. Well, this is what I'm trying to get at isn't it interesting that in general the people who say you know Immigration is a pure good. There is no connection between Islam and terror The only people who oppose free trade or protectionist these people know enough Not to want to trans us Because what they're saying is is wrong, right? And they're expert enough to know that they are they've got a secret five point You know exploding heart technique or something and they know it's nonsense and so they won't actually think they do Well, then why don't I don't they want why don't they want in? I don't think they I don't think they necessarily do actually believe that they're wrong I do think that some of these people that are like super progressive and Very very committed to some of these maybe illogical positions on some of these ideas are a Afraid of conflict though, and I think that's one of the reasons why they shy towards progressivism towards socialism I don't think they like conflict So no no no they like to get together and scream at people okay, this is what they like to get together get together in large groups Okay, we know are you sleep you fucking racist you fucking piece of shit, but one on one They're cowards. Okay. It like this is this is the type of person that would think it's a good idea to show up and bang on Someone's you don't care them in their home that type of person is not the type of person that would it that looks forward to On an even battlefield engaging someone one on one and just Just open communication. That's not what they're doing what they're doing is trying to silence people scare people intimidate people Their bullies intellectual bullies people are bullies are almost always insecure. They're almost always scared So this is why there's been very few people that are jumping forward to try to go to intellectual war wouldn't it Rachel Maddow or Linda Sarsour one in I mean, they're pretty you okay? There's you're dealing with two very different types of human beings. So Rachel Maddow is one thing Linda Sarsour is a very very seriously religious person who's got some you know very deep beliefs as far as Islam She wears the hijab, but she means just as totally different things. No, no, but if I listed a group of people like the late-night Comedians there's this very weird thing that they all seem to believe the same like there was a secret meeting that they all agreed To a bunch of stuff that I I want to see the conference proceedings like what's how so well Just that they all kind of know that the Republicans are all horrible the Democrats are basically good people that They all know that climate science is settled science I mean There's some that they have these pretty pretty much of open borders are a great thing and That everybody who doesn't believe in that is only so is only not believing it because of xenophobia right whatever these set of beliefs are I don't see these guys in Open discussion particularly you know two hours long. Well, I don't think it's a that could you get? Stephen Colbert Seth Myers in here and have a discussion my guess is really yeah, I'm sure I'm sure I'm sure they'd be in some of their scared of having discussions with people, but I don't see them in a very they don't Be very measured because they could lose their job It's not it's not that simple like they make a tremendous amount of money right if they came and said Anything that could be misconstrued or misinterpreted even not even actually being something that's actually Transphobic or actually a homophobe but they're actually Xenophobic if they said anything that could be taken out of context and put in a small clip and then sent out and what and it goes Virally they're done look at Megan Kelly. Yeah, Megan Kelly had a question about why can't you wear makeup to look like Diana Ross why can't you whether some good reasons why you can't there's some good racial history behind blackface However, why is it that she can't even ask a question without losing her job like that's it pull the plug We have to make a fucking statement. We have bore violence That's exactly what you said about about the whole Kung Fu thing that is he only can exist in a protected context Well first of all someone like Megan Kelly can only exist in a protected contest with all these people and protected Contest even Colbert is like got to be one of the fastest minds on the planet that everybody I know who's smart who's done his shows as he just thinks faster than you do. Well, I'm sure he's very smart guy It's okay, but but he's also a Catholic the value. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. Yes. Yep This bother me bothers me doesn't bother me an organization of kid fuckers Well, how come he's not speaking out against all those kids getting fucked? Well, that's if you're a Catholic. Yeah, like I was raised Catholic I mean I'm not saying that he is I'm not saying that the people he knows are but this is a giant problem with that Organization, but that's not what's not bothering me. What's not bother would maybe I want to make sure that we're talking I think we're about to talk past each other so I want to bring it back. Okay I think you just gave me an answer Okay, he can't appear in this kind of a context because that might come up and He needs to be in a world with much more restricted rules where someone can't say it's an organization of kid fuckers. That's right. Yeah That's not just more restricted world that that's the reason why that has been able to survive That's what I'm training. Yeah, people don't talk about that But but is the idea that this is such a risk like your point about I keto is if you happen to be unarmed and attacked by a man with a sword this might have some value It would have some value of someone to attack you in a very specific way. I didn't understand Okay, so the idea is that that's a very restricted rule set on which to fight it, right? So now maybe what you just said to me which could open this whole thing up is that all of these people can only apply their ability to Have a back and forth of ideas if The rules are heavily restricted. I don't necessarily think that's the case I think they could do it in other ways I think all of them are Operating under this rule system because this rule system is how they get paid But I think Seth Myers a very smart guy. I know Jimmy Kimmel He's a very smart guy. They could do whatever they want. He could do a podcast He could do anything he can operate into any and any genre. I believe I think I would imagine the same with Colbert I I mean I think Jimmy Fallon same thing But when they're forced into that box and this is a hundred million dollar a year box You know it feels good in that box is fucking velvet walls and you get to drive a fat Mercedes and live in Beverly Hills You decide to stay in that box right maybe their mind is in that box Maybe they are a regular basis. Maybe there's not any restriction for them at all because this is how they operate all the time So I did the show with Jordan and Ben Shapiro on Dave's set right before Ben wind on real time with Bill Maher and Ben was kind of excited to do Bill Maher and said I don't think he's gonna rough me up But you know I think he's gonna be a gentleman. I think he's one of us and then when Ben sat down with Bill We saw this thing that was very We were sort of hoping because Bill is kind of the most Towards us of anybody in that kind of mainstream environment And what I saw which I hadn't really appreciated was that Bill was not doing this kind of open discussion thing a lot of his tone was leading Like surely you're not gonna say the done. No, no, no, no, no, no, no It wasn't just purely saying are you saying that right? It was all of this emotional instruction? Yes, and it was clear that to me that When I saw Ben on that in that context that There were only a few hours separating the two appearances and that the characteristics of that environment and where bills show is the most like this show That it's just too different. It's not it's not really the same ecosystem And you couldn't have an open debate unless it cuts off after seven minutes and the host is in control Well, Bill doesn't have any time that's well, this is part of the problem They are the terms of they have a very restricted format He was doing a conversation with Steve Bannon and he was on Sam Harris's podcast He was talking about it. He said that one of the problems was he got to this point Where he's like I was I wanted to ask him more stuff But I ran out of time right and I heard that I was like what the fuck kind of ancient system Are you operating here that you run out of time? But let's take let's take him in his word. Well, he definitely did run out of time Assume that that's true and so that Bill Marz said hey guys I want to I want the following situation I want to continue to do real time in the same format that it's always been done But I want to have a podcast like Rogan Where we take as much time as we need and I don't think those two things play together. Oh, they're fine together Yeah, I think they're fine together. But you're that they're that they're not well Here's the thing he went on Sam's podcast and I've I enjoyed him more than I enjoy him on a show I know because he had chapters didn't look the same way on Dave Rubin's show though He looked totally different. How do you look I didn't say it. Oh my god. You got to see it. Um, you know Tucker You know, I'm having my own weird issues where I used to you know My previous position was that Fox News is just propaganda and the Tucker was in that old Crossfire situation way back when Tucker was like opening up as a different person saying you have the freedom you're the new I'm still stuck in the old. Well, he must really feel that you must really feel like he is like Look, that is what you have to do if you want to survive on Fox News and again It's a velvet coffin you're in there. It's beautiful. Yes You're getting paid shit loads of money, but you don't necessarily have the freedom to express first of all You don't have long-form freedom And you don't have to freedom to completely express yourself across the border like you could you can't look at the left's ideas and say You know what I really like the idea of universal health care right? I really like the idea of universal basic income I really like the idea of paying for people school joke I think you and I actually have a really interesting difference of opinion and I think your opinion is there's nothing Preventing you from staying in the velvet coffin and doing this style of podcast and my guess I'm not saying that Okay, I'm always saying that would Bill Maher. I think Tucker Carlson probably can't do that. I think of Tucker Carlson left the Colbert dude Yes, I don't think so I think he could I don't think he would though I think he out of all of them and I think he's brilliant don't get me wrong and what I said He's from an organization of kidfuckers. It's not him. I mean, but he's a part of the cat But you could do Seth might you could do any one of these people. They're all bright The Catholic thing is a big thing I mean it's a big thing in terms of first of all the actual Reality of the organization and what they've done to protect people that have molested children. It's unprecedented Right, it's also something that I was raised in I mean I was catholic. I went to catholic school I don't think that he wants to do that sort of wild country Open type internet show. I think he enjoys wearing a tie and doing a straight-up talk show like the Johnny Carson show or the Jay Leno show And I think he's very very good at it. I don't think there's anything wrong with that I think a lot of people like that. That's my preference and I understand that but I think that's him. I might be wrong I'm just assuming I'm claiming there's a dragon or I could do different what a what a The Russian that if you tried to do both of these things You would be revealed you'd be caught between two worlds Where if if like I actually think that a lot of these ideas would collapse Just the way Kung Fu collapsed I Think you're probably right. I think if you had two people having these conversations in long-form instead of those CNN Three windows where he was battling it out for six minutes and then you know everybody yelling over everybody That is the single worst way to argue ideas. I think there's no greasy challenge There's not well Jordan Peterson is kind of doing his own great challenge that because he's the old gender Yeah, and that's he's the only one they want Yes, well, which is which is I think a little hoist crazy of the intellectual hoist crazy He's out there tap and wrestlers Yeah, I mean I think Not legitimately, you know, he's worked his way past the Kung Fu people and he's now on to like Olympic wrestlers I think they're throwing at him. This this latest woman was very good. Yeah, she's much better than that Kathy Newman lady She didn't make any of these ridiculous straw man arguments. She she came at him with her positions in her points It was interesting. I think what you're saying is true for everybody except Bill Maher I think Bill Maher would hold his positions in podcast form And I think he would just have more time to expand on them And I base this on him being on Sam Harris's show and I found it to be very good It was the 10th anniversary of religious and he was excellent on there I think he could do it, but I think he's also he can say fuck you He got in trouble for dropping an end bomb on a show in a joking form I mean he's a different cat the whole thing is very different with him is on HBO But when ice cube came to him and said you can't do that It was painful to me because I'm just positive that he had a carland style attitude about that word That's tough because in this environment again That's where he makes his living he butters his bread over at HBO And if you wanted to have a long-form conversation with that guy even on a podcast and he didn't have an HBO show That's one thing, but if you do have an HBO show You have to have a totally different attitude because one wrong you're walking a guy But the tightrope, but this is what I'm trying to get at is that we are too dangerous in some sense to play with Because he's he's asked to we've talked we being Bill and I actually went back and forth on an email about something Yeah, I dropped the ball, but now he would do anybody's podcast I don't think that's the case he could do his own podcast as well I agree that he would be the one most likely to be able to do both he could do it. Yeah, he could do it I think all of them could do it I think Seth Myers could do it too. I think Jimmy Kimmel could probably do it as good or better than any of them Jimmy absolutely could do it. I mean the only thing that's holding him back He's a man of his ideas. He's not gonna he's probably the least likely to Alter or manipulate his ideas of anybody that's ever done one of those late night talk show host He's just operating inside a format where you don't swear and you have a certain amount of time and you try to be funny And he's saying insightful stuff but he's a very ethical guy And he's also a very very smart guy and he's also very rich He's got a shitload of fuck you money, right? And I think Jimmy Kimmel could do it easily I think a lot of people could do it easily and I think they're gonna have to I think some some point along the line They're gonna realize that the restrictions that they're operating under unless they really enjoy that format I don't think those formats are gonna be there that long. I think those formats are a lot like sitcoms I think they're slowly starting to vanish, you know for every one rose an show that comes up Which is kind of nostalgic and you know that runs into its own disaster right? How many new sitcoms are there that everybody's aware of shit? It used to be every time there was a new sitcom whether it was friends or you know filling the blank whatever the show Seinfeld there was everybody was talking about these new sitcoms right nobody fucking talks about sitcoms anymore Well, this is that you know, this is the thing I took on this morning on Twitter which was Dave Rubin and Brett Weinstein myself were talking about this phenomena of Very high follower counts with psycho low engagement. Oh, yeah, that's fake. That's those are fake followers That's what that is well it may be but it's a lot of it, but it's very interesting that we're talking about Getting rid of visible follower counts and getting rid of likes who's saying that? Apparently there's discussion about Jack may have floated some trial balloons that Twitter is going to try to improve the level of conversation and by getting rid of follower counts Right and removing likes can you imagine thinking you're gonna improve the level of conversation by getting rid of a heart That you can switch on someone's ID heart, but it's a heart. Yeah, but it's literally a heart But it's feedback, but you're clicking on a heart. Yeah, it's on Instagram and on Twitter. It's a heart. It's a like Hey, it's a little heart. I love you. I'm gonna get rid of love Jack. Come on Jack. I'm gonna get rid of love Terrifying you would being Jeff why what what terrifying about that? I'm seeing you blowing kisses in my general direction I'm remembering all the videos. I've watched where you attack some sort of a punching bag with this vicious spinning elbow or something I just think okay We're talking about ideas here. You can't no I want to get down on that stuff later I want to make midlife crisis sick with some instruction for I think we got to end this okay We've done four hours and ten are you kidding me? I just show you what they said though This is just a couple of years ago. This is there we've been saying for a while We are rethinking everything about the service to ensure we are incentivizing healthy conversation that includes the like button We are in the early stages of the work and have no plans to share right now And this is in response to telegraph the telegraph saying Twitter to remove the like tool in the bid to improve the quality of debate Yeah, I think something really weird is going on. Well, I mean, what is the quality of debate and by whose definition? I mean You're definitely not going to change the way people interact with each other You're just not people interact with each other because they're anonymous and they have the incentive to talk shit It's fun. Okay, so the one thing I could ask as we close this thing out is if we could plug Not only my Twitter which is my main thing, but I'm trying to diversify into Instagram and YouTube should I get shut off Twitter Oh shit, are you worried about getting shut off? I'm always worried, but you don't say anything in flamatory Like what you you're very logical and reasonable guy It's so you think it's really gotten to that point. Well, yeah, I'm I'm actually worried that by being logical and reasonable I have more of a risk because the things that I'm saying Like we're also recognizing the lecture and very left wing you're progressive. Yeah, so why would they shut you off? Oh? I think because they're much more worried about a progressive who says that the current progressiveness is absolute stupidity That's much more dangerous than some right winger who's always against anything that's progressive Interesting there's a war of foot. You love that kind of stuff. You love that cloak and dagger type shit. Don't you? Yeah? I'm part of the ineffectual dark web Stuff I don't say ineffectual Internet national That's right. That was quite a big web. Yeah. That's what I call it. Listen. I have to I can't call myself a part of the dark web That's just too ridiculous for a man in my position. Okay, we'll see you at the same one of the thousand people That speak the humor across the land the lands listen. This is an effortless. Yeah, I could do this for I did that No idea it was four hours, but bye Flue by it was awesome. All right. Well. You can I just can't just give the the the names Please do all right. I think I am It really is five ten Jesus Eric R Weinstein on I'm I'm Eric R Weinstein Twitter. I'm Eric Weinstein PhD I think on Instagram and on my Instagram I linked you on the Instagram. Okay, so I'm Eric R Weinstein on Instagram And I'm on YouTube Eric Weinstein PhD. Yeah, and if you can't find his Instagram I linked it on my Instagram. All right. Joe. Thanks for having me. Thank you my friend lots of fun. All right, bye you fucks