How tied into the cartels are you right now? And are you gonna put yourself in danger by talking about some of the, on the podcast? Yeah, well, like I said, I've never been a member of the car. So just get the, I've never been a member, but I grew up with a lot of friends. And it's just like I was telling you that maybe slums out in the, and for it's gone where the guy's just like at the right place or maybe at the wrong place at the wrong time. I don't know how you wanna be the pencil to perspective where I've met these people like in different situations like street, like most of them I met them doing graffiti to be honest. When we were just bangers and we were just like, like just kids tagging in and like fighting each other, you know, fighting with rocks, if anything, you know, just like, hey, that goes whoever and we chase them now, you know, and then he passes a certain block and then we don't chase them anymore. You know, that type of stuff. But eventually all these little, and it's funny cause it was like the leaders of the crews are the ones that actually became leaders in what is it now, you know, like little sections of cartels and stuff. And that's how I communicate with most of them. Like I got my fair share, I've been locked up. You know, I've done my, I've done, I, that's the life I wanna live at some point. But you said you were never an official member of the cartel, but you obviously had, it could have been very easily happened that you could have been a member of the cartel. Yeah, well, the guys you grew up with are cartel members, right? Yeah, if I could, I'll get my membership like tomorrow. But now man, I mean, shout out to all you, well, you know, you're those to speak English. But I mean, it's a, it's a really like a great area to consider yourself part of a like cartel. You really have to be like, like working for them, like following their instruction, you know what I mean? Like because a lot of like, let's say, when I was 19, I used to cross people like illegal people. That's what I was arrested and that's what I was talking about. What do you mean when you say that? Well, crossing, I used to work for this guy. He would bring people from silence, you know, like just immigrants. And, and I was like, I was one, when I was young girl, I was crazy, like I would, I would meet all these like older cartels that weren't like my friends whenever he was like, older cartels. And I was just like, hey, what's up? Hey, like, what's there to do? You know, like I wanna make some money. Like, you know, I was always down for like, I was just looking for it. You know, that's why I was in jail in 19. But, but eventually he, he, it was this guy, we, rest in peace, don't search you. He, he was pretty chill man. He only, he never got into violent stuff or anything. He only crossed people, you know, he had like drivers. And he had people like me that walked him over because he actually like, he liked me. He, he, he, he didn't want me to like, he just saw how I was asking everybody for jobs and stuff like that. So he was like, look, come here, you're gonna do this for me. And it's like the easiest thing you could do to like, keep you the farthest away, but keep you working for me and like, keep me on his watch. So he will have these safe houses where he would keep the illegal people and like the immigrants that came in. And if we use papers back then, like if he had like boxes of, of visas and like all these papers that weren't reported stolen or anything. So if, let's say you got this away guy from was a heart, I know he's the lead who is trying to make it to, trying to make it back to Florida. So we find a visa with a, that has a USC residency. So you, you can work over here. So okay. So what we do is we give you a uniform, which we have tons of uniforms, like gardening uniform, construction, child uniform, all types of fish. So we'll dress you up as you, like if you were going to work, you know, give you a little lunch bag and everything. And you would just follow me across the border. Cause you never wanted me to do the driving and like the heart stuff, you just like just walk them across the border, take them to the trolley station, whatever, the H street or whatever. And somebody would be there to pick them up. And that's what I did for when I was when, when I started when I was younger. And, and what like, what are your, what are the things you have to like, look out for like, what do you have to do when you walk them across the border? What do you have to be aware of? That's, that's why he gave me that job because that's basically the easiest, you know what I mean? Like my charge was aiding and abating or abating. I don't know how he's, I think I was not able to be aiding and abating. They couldn't charge me with a transporting them because they were in my car. They were just follow of the following me across. But eventually one of them got arrested and they saw me that like, a few of them got arrested and I was on the cameras, I guess. And one of them eventually snitched on me. He's like, yeah, that's the guy that that I was following. How old were you? When I got arrested, I think I was 18 or 19, 19, yeah, I believe. So yeah, that's how I got arrested. I just crossed the board one day and the, the, the, the, it was actually a girl, like a 17 year girl. She crossed too. She was following me like a couple of people behind me. So she crossed too and I'm once I waited for her and I think she crossed off. Like, all right, we made it. I got her on the trolley and this is a funny as part because well, I was on the trolley. It was just me and another guy and we, we both had people following us, but his didn't make it and mine did. And I kind of had this feeling and I was talking to them and he was like, hey, I think, I think that might be answers. And I was like, I don't think so, bro. And even if they are, I mean, even if this white guy next to me was the cop, he could just go fucking so bro. Like, what the fuck is he going to do? What is he going to charge me for? And he wasn't the cop. It was like, I behind me. We were being followed like, where I made the drop and they picked up the girl. As soon as she opened the door to get in the car, that was picking her up all these cards, like on the cover cups, she started pulling up with like the little red and blue on the, on the girl. Yeah. And I was like, Oh, and it was like, it was ironing at the moment because I like, damn, they weren't following us. So I'm outside this roster. Just fucking with my hands, like I guess the wall and my friends getting arrested. And they're just like talking shit to us. Like, but they're referring to me as being cheap for you or being chiming and to touch it. And I remember I told her, I was like, what the fuck are you talking about? Me, he was Susan. And he was like, what? And they took my passport and then everything went like a little, a little quiet. I'm not saying they got scared because I was still arrested. But they, they, like they, they, they look, they watch their words after that. They were like, Oh, we got a USC. We got a USC and then they put me to the side. They were like, Hey, are these two tied? You know, like they started treating me like a little, with more respect. But at first they were like, yeah, we got you pictures, Paul, you're just being just silly. What year would this have been when you were 18? Should be 2009, okay, 2009. Okay. So, so yeah, they put me in the back of this car where it was, there was like a child scene next to them. And it was like a man and a woman that was driving me. So they just taking me over and I'm like, fuck, because that day I was actually going to roll to a dog school because my mom had given me shit about not doing shit and stuff. So I was like, all right, I'm going to roll today. As soon as I finish with something, I'm going to the, the dog school and enrolling that shit. So I got to, they took me back to the border and they made, they let me make a phone call. So I called my mom and she's like, what happened? I was like, well, don't say anything because I got arrested. I'm like in front of them right now. And they arrested me because I had illegal people with me. And so I was like, Oh, what's going to happen? I was like, well, I don't know. My budget got sick. He told me to send me to MCC and I just can't mention the MCC because she was arrested when she was arrested. My grandma, they took her to MCC. And like they just take everybody to the MCC to be honest. Everybody like MCC, the Metropolitan Detention Center. Well, over here at the MDC, but over there is MCC. So it's just the federal prison. There's others like the CEO, the geo and the CCA's. But what I was growing up, they were my mom and my grandma, they were involved in like some, you know, some shady stuff with some people from senior law. And I didn't know I was too young. It was like, I was like two or three years old, probably something like that. But but as you're growing up, it's tough. You hear your like the news or like the gossiping. And my mom having when she was like 17, 18. So I was like, and she's the oldest of her brothers. So I was like, the little brother kind of like they just took me everywhere. And I kind of have these flashbacks of stuff. And sometimes I ask my mom like, hey, remember this house with like the bulletproof windows and stuff like that. And she like, I don't know. You remember that, you know, she's like that. But eventually they got caught and I was really young. I barely remember this. I just know the story because we, we, I talked to her. But eventually, yeah, um, my grandma tried work for somebody else and, and, and, actually it was a good look for them because these two cross things, you know, these crosses like heroin, I think back then across the border. What year was that? Like the early 90s, okay, 93 I wouldn't say so. Yeah. So, um, so yeah, my grandma just, she was working for this one dude. And, you know, she was making her money. But then, um, his work stopped for a little bit of slow down as I understand. So like that. And she got, she got a job, uh, work from somebody else. So I guess this guy, I, I mixed up the story right here. But one of the guys actually are used to, um, to get like another bigger low, you know, so they snitched on her. So they would catch her and well, she's getting arrested, whatever, a bigger load of cross. So instead of sending her with drugs, they sent her with like, cut or nobody said in English, but they just sent her with like, when, when, when they ran it through, like, like less than 10% heroin, you know what I mean? It wasn't, it wasn't really drugs. So eventually they got like three months in jail, whatever. And she got deported. And, um, and my mom got her papers back again. I can't remember. Well, back then, the laws were a little different. So, uh, but after that, my mom just went straight arrow, like she didn't want to do, she wouldn't know anything about their life anymore. She like, she works from one day to Sunday. She's had like two to three jobs from times, you know, because she raised me by herself. I got two sisters, three on your sisters. But, uh, but after that, she's just went like that. But at this point, um, I started listening to like the music. I read a lot. So, uh, I hear names in the news and the newspaper and then I'm out in the streets. Now a little bit. So I'm like 13, 14 and stuff. And I'm hanging out with these older dudes. And they, they hear names like the Ariana's or like those chalkboard, shit like that. And it's just things that I've heard in my house out of gossiping, you know, just like the news. I mean, maybe they never met my grandmother or anything, but like it was just when you around that world, you know, it's just the news and stuff. Like gossiping the friends that come over and they're drinking and they say stuff. I'm there playing around. So I get to listen to everything. And you know how it is. They're like, he's a kid. He doesn't understand. What I kind of did like, I didn't understand. But as I grew older, everything started making sense. You know what I mean? It just stayed there. So, um, I was always a fan of music. I started listening to music really, really young. And I was learning to listen to like rap and Mexican music seemed to me like, like old people music, you know what I mean? Because it was like, I would just see like old people drinking and listening to like sad songs. That was my perspective of it. But then one time I remember I got this CD and I heard an archa go rida, which is like a song for the dedicated to like a story or not. Back then there wasn't that like they are today. But, but it was a story. And I love stories. I love reading. I write myself. I could see myself a story to her. So, um, when I heard it was a story, it really got deep into it. And I just started like playing more and more and more. And then all of a sudden like names, you know, like last name started popping out that I knew. But I'd have heard before like for like the family that my grandma used to work for. So, like something clicked in me and it wasn't really like, I didn't really get it. But my grandma, she's kind of still love a fan of that life. Or it still was back then. Like it wasn't like my mom, my mom, she was like, no, I don't want none of this like fuck this. But my grandma, she was still kind of like, she wasn't waiting to introduce me to some of that people when I grew up a little bit. You know, yeah, she was a gangster. She was a gangster. Just a little bit of background on my grandma. She made like some of these names that you hear now. Like back then when El Chapo wasn't the chapel that you know now, she was just like another mid level dealer. And my grandma would be one of those ladies that she had her best friend. She would be dating the dealers. And my grandma was like, hey, go bring us food. Hey, go bring us in. She would like, she would do like secretary kind of like stuff. You know, like may, you know, clean around the house, stuff like that. So she was around and she got her fair share of things of, you know, she got her fair share of knowing people. So whenever I came out to ask her, I was like, yeah, I heard this in a song or whatever. And she just break the whole thing now. She's like, oh, yeah, that's, that's him. He's married to this lady and she's committed with this lady. Their, their father's to this guy would like, she would give you the whole thing. And, uh, and that's how I started like, cuz mom, I wouldn't tell me. She didn't like, she didn't like me going like that way. You know what I mean? Which is, was clear where I was going. So, um, but she was always working, you know what I mean? And, and as a second mom, I'm always working and stuff that, um, she was living in T.J. But then, uh, as soon as she could, she found like a place to stay in San Diego. We're like a roommate and, uh, so like we'll cross the border every day because I'm on the school but I live in T.J. So we cross the border every day. Well, I'm telling you like, like from Monday to Friday, half my life was in San Diego and half my life was in T.J. What is like the biggest misconception when it comes to your experience living in Tijuana and Mexico and dealing with these guys and what you see on the media. When you see people look reporting on what's going on, when people, they make it sound like it's just a war zone down there. Like that. I mean, there's a lot of legitimate people reporting on it. Like Louise shut out to Louise for hooking us up and making a job. Yeah, exactly. He's one of the rare guys who are, I feel like actually in it, like reporting on what's really going on. Yeah, that's why I actually kind of connected with him and actually like them and, because I see his work and so, and I have a lot of report friends like on kind of of enhanced live on stuff like that that he knows too. But like I explained to him, I don't like how they like, I'm going to give you an example of cooking. It's the same thing. There's this author that write about Narko Corrillo in Mexico. I forgot his name right now. And one day they invited me to one of their presentations and they were going to talk about like the Narko Corrillo stuff like that. So I'm like, I got excited. I was like, okay, we're talking like academic people talking about like all this. So I show up there and it's really all academic like I was the only I felt awkward being there. You know what I mean? So I was telling you know, I was telling you, at least I was like, I don't like how they talk about like this world. And I was right there and they were looking at me like I was a little monkey in a lab talking like, oh, instead of like like talking like you mean like, hey, how was it like, how was your fly? You know, like just regular people shit. They were like, so how does it feel to be like, you know, they were not really like investigative tech thing like, psychology like, I don't know. I felt like I was being observed and watched and it wasn't really like, they invited me because I thought, you know, I knew one of them and I thought they were, you know, it was going to be just like some, where were these guys from? They're from Mexico. They're author, they have a lot of books and stuff like that. But but that's how I feel like like people, nobody there's to like Louise, nobody there's to go in the like we call it the wolf's mouse, you know what I mean? Like they just want to look at it from afar and report whatever they see. So they just get like like splashed on little information. But like Louise, I've been, I've been given Louise like some real good like, hey, this was happening and nobody's talking about right now. And he's been like looking into it and stuff like that. Yeah, what he did going into, that was crazy. House and filming all that shit. That was pretty mind-bending stuff. That was crazy, man. I told you that he was legitimately risking his life going in there and doing all that shit. I mean, if he would have got arrested, he would have been fucked. I don't think there's no arrest going on in this situation like that. Right. I mean, it might make it look like an arrest. Yeah. But uh, most likely I think they would have handed it over to like the owners of the house. You know what I mean? He said that he met. Um, yeah, I seen the video. I'll trap off something to name again as well. Oh, video. Oh, video. He said he met a video as mom and his lawyer when he first got there and he'd like wait everything to leave. Yeah. And like I was asking him, like, what is your biggest fear? Like running into this as a car. Are you there or whatever? Like, and he said he said, honestly, he's like my worst fear was having one of the police come and throw me in a jail in Saint Aloha or in Kool-Ya Khan. And that would be worst case scenario for a journalist like me is being in a fucking jail there with those guys. Yeah. I don't think, I don't think jail would have been it for him, bro. I, they call they have the sting and over there, the owners of the house and then it's very well known. They brag about it on the songs and stuff. I don't know if you heard the term La Tabla. It's a table board board. It's kind of like this. What's it called? The table, yeah, yeah, yeah, they say that too, but not this kind of thought like it's used for way different reasons. It's one of those like a yes, he told me about this. Yeah. So this, this is very common to happen over the road. So I, I, I even tell him I was like, bro, you're about to meet the table with that video. Bro, like I'm pretty sure if you go back and like, if one of them guys, good luck for him that he does this stuff in English. So like that kind of keeps on like not a lot of Spanish speaking, like consume because those people watch podcasts, bro, those people see podcasts, those people listen to podcasts, which people specifically like cartel people, like the owners of the house type of people. You know what I mean? They have timed bro. They have timed trust me like I've told them before. Like yeah, they, they, I mean, like I said, looking for him, it's in English. So his audience is like mostly on this side on the US because if it was a Spanish, that video would have been gone probably viral and like the Mexican minions stuff, like all the cartel TikToks and other stuffs, like those around in shit. I think that, I think that would have made them viral. Wow. And yeah, I don't think the police station would have been, would have been the place he was going, bro. He would probably, I mean, everybody would have known like, hey, they got somebody in the video. Oh, like that would have been the news in, in Kool-Aid. You know what I mean? Right. Yeah. He also said that out of all the journalists, like it could, I mean, I guess more journalists died in Mexico than anywhere else. Yeah. And he said they're all Mexican journalists, none of them are in our American journalists. Oh, no, no, no, yeah. They, well, they know the kind of attention they're going to get if they, they do something too. I mean, that might scare them. You know, they might do something like that too. But they, they would let them go home. So they don't want the hate on them unless he reported on some shit like where he really lifted up a little something. Oh, yeah, yeah, you know. But I mean, many of these reporters have died for like stupid reasons to be honest. I mean, and it's sad. It sucks. But, but then again, it's like a friend with some, he's like, what do they want to report? He's like, what more do you want? What more do they want to tell people like it's already no, everything is known. Like why the thing is like sometimes, and I'm not just finding the deaths at all. Like it's something sad that should not be like happening. But sometimes they get so involved in like reporting on, on a certain type of individual or a certain cartel or something. And I understand it's reporting and stuff like that. But if you're the guy that they're looking into, you might take it personal too. You know, you might be like, hey, why are you not reporting on them and them? And you know, why, you know, I'm not saying this happened within, within any individual or something. It's just something that I was talking to a friend about. And yeah, he was saying me like, bro, we know everything that's going on. Like there's way too many news outlets. Like it's not like we don't know that there's body saying that we don't know who's doing this is doing that. Why do they want to go so deep? You know what I mean? And then Louise talked about this too. He's like, it's just a part of like a reporter that says that it's like, grinding. Like doesn't care about anything but the story. You know what I mean? And I was like, yeah, that's why I'm not, I don't never want to be a reporter. That's why when I write, I tell people, I tell stories, I don't tell gossiping. If you can't read my stories, it's just, yeah, they're based on like real stuff. But I'm not telling like real, real shit that you know, because I don't want to gossiping. I don't want to tell like, cheese mess, what we say in Spanish. You know, I don't want to, it's not a page of where you're going to come here and find out about who did this and who did what it is like for entertainment. You know, but reporters, man, they get in there and it's sad because in Mexico, people die every day and you know, and it's pretty easy. How many of your childhood friends ended up in cartels? Wow. Oh, shit. A lie over there for right now. I don't have to say more than 20. More than 20. Yeah. Wow. When we were young and I had this graffiti crew, we became very popular as a graffiti crew, just because we threw big ass parties like our families did good back then. Like, well, my family is from San Diego. So everybody will work in San Diego and live in a Mexico back then. It was really, you were making money. All kinds of girls are using your house and you know, all this stuff. So when we started throwing parties, like other other, all my friends, families that were doing good as well. So we just threw like this for like 14, 15 years, we threw big ass parties. We just got a bunch of alcohol. Mama would buy me like, cause she would see like it was just like tagging and, you know, it was nothing, nothing like in parties. And she's like as long as I see where you're partying at that, that's cool. Because we rented houses like we did, we did real nice parties. We did like flyers and stuff. So we became pretty well popular in TJ with our crew. So when everybody is transitioning to this other life, I'm already well known. You know, like, and I'm doing stuff too. Like I'm not in this and you know, I'm not trying to say like, oh, I was just watching now. I was in the shit. Like I was looking for it. Like, and when you're like trying to get into it, like I was, you just do stupid shit for free. Like you're not even like, you're not even like bored. But you just want to like build a resume, type thing. Yeah. Like nobody's going to hire you. You don't have no experience. You know what I mean? Like you got to get this experience somehow. Gotta be in, gotta do internships for the cartel. Took thing. You know what I mean? You start hanging out with people and you start doing shit with them for free. Just typical, oh, hey, want to go with me? I need some. I got something to do. All right, let's go. I was already looking for this shit. You know what I mean? So like, so when I'm 19 and I get to jail, I already have my fair share experience of dealing with like, uh, car chill friends, car chill activities and stuff like that. but I'm not a member, you know what I mean? I'm not in there yet. And then, but I just keep getting like, like I said, now I'm in the MCC and I'm 19. And I'm kind of known. So when you show up to MCC and like this federal prison, there's all this, all this, uh, conspiracies and people with conspiracies like all the top dogs, you know, the most wanted fools out there and knows they shit. And, uh, I was young. I remember, uh, uh, I was really quiet and, you know, I just got there and started talking some people and stuff. And one day there was these three dudes, uh, talking to another guy. And, uh, these three dudes, when I first got, they, they, they kind of bullied me. They, they, they saw me that I was all dressed and stuff. So they were, they thought I was like, uh, like a good kid, you know, that did some stupid shit. So, um, I didn't say anything. I was like, I was already ready to fight one of them. Like, the next time he just looked like, I didn't, he wasn't picking on me that bad, but I don't need you to, for me to pick that bad on me for me to get like, I'm, I'm like, you know, I'm a check out that type of thing. What they say in Spanish, you know, I, I don't really take a lot of shit. So I was like, all right, next time this guy sees me that way or say something in the room, yeah, I'm just going to like, I'm just going to ask him to fight. But they're talking to this all, uh, older dude, like just came in for like, have a ton of marijuana. So I'm like, he has like a big conspiracy. And you hear about these conspiracies where you're there, like, oh, these guys are coming like, you see the news and she's like, oh, they're coming over here. Like, yeah. Hells the angels conspiracies and all these big stuff. So, uh, so he's talking about, about some people and, and they're like, they're kind of buying down to him because he's like a real like top dog, like, like, he's a boss. And then he starts mentioning some of my friends, some of my childhood friends. Um, one of them his family has been involved in the car show. So when he, when he joined the car show, he was already like, like, he got a good, a good job in it. You know what I mean? So when he mentioned some, I was like, I know, I know, I know, Andrew, Shout out to Hanalee is still in prison. I was like, I know, Andrew. And then one of the other dudes that like didn't really like me, he's like, how do you know? You're not a fool. And then I told the guy, he's like, yeah, he's friends with him and we grew up with either, and he's like, oh, no, he knows. He's like, no. And after that, everything changed. You know what I mean? Like, they're starting saying like, yeah, now he knows because I was young and I looked like a kid, but I was already on the streets. Like I was going everywhere. Like, I remember I used to steal my mom's cars and stuff like that. And I was just drive to like no places. Like, because a lot of people don't leave their hood and you know their surroundings. And I was just like, I learned how to drive when I was 12. So I was just like steal the car, like get a little pillow on the seat. And I get my friends, like, let's go. I pick up my friends and stuff. And we just drive all over man and just go meet girls and like go to places where other people didn't really want to go because they couldn't get a whole local car or whatever. And so I've always really been out there, you know? So when I get to prison, whoa, yeah, the tension there, because I never really made a prison. Um, I just started meeting people and like, we all know people that know people that know people, you know what I mean? So that gets me a seat in the table somehow. And, um, and yeah, when I get out, I still do shit. Well, like, I get out of them. Oh, how long were you in there for? Well, here's the thing. My original charge, the sentence was two months, 60 days. So I get off, but I get three years probation with sucks. But I don't recommend if you could do your time inside prison and get off without probation do that because probation, they just want to grab a hold of you. So eventually I violate my probation. I smoke, but like I said, I smoke a lot of weed. And I go, I keep going to TJ without permission. I see it doesn't pop on in the computer. So it becomes easy for me to go every day. What's it like going there? How do you cross the board? What is it? What is the border crossing like 20 TJ every day? Are you just walking across? But at this time, my mom has a house over in San Diego. So she lived there, but I have my aunt and my cousins that they still live in TJ, but they either work, go to school in San Diego. So like they'll cross early, spend like a few hours on my mom's house till it's ready till it's time to go to like work and stuff. So they're always at my mom's house. You know, they come and go in every day. So whenever I want to go, I'm like, hey, can I go? Can I catch a ride with you? Okay. And she go to my grandma's house and I'm going to my grandma's house. So you know what I mean? So and I'm crossing with family. So they never say anything on my way back. I thought it was going to be like, oh, you're in probation. Like where's your parents? Because you need your parents. So but then once I cross, I don't pop up in the computer because I didn't get arrested at the board. I got arrested inside San Diego. So like the people are getting arrested on board of day, they, they it pops up for them. But not for me. So once I figure this shit out, I'm 20, bro. Like I'm just going to fucking, I just kept going and stuff. Eventually they should get caught up with me, catches up with me with my probation. He's like, you're going to teach it for like 150 sometimes on register times. It's you came out dirty and like two tests. Like you're not going to school. You're not working like what the fuck? You know? So I'm like, now come on like, like give me a chance. So he says me to the halfway house. He doesn't mean two months to the halfway house. And that, there is just like, it was just boring, bro. Because I never really like look for a job or anything. I was just fucking doing whatever. Everybody was smoking spice and there are no if you, familiar with spice. Everybody was smoking spice. So I started smoking spice because I don't want to violate the probation again. So I just started smoking spice. And eventually I get out the halfway house and then the, I violate again for some, I, I can't remember where it did to be honest. Oh, no, they, they switch my probation after I come out the halfway house. They switch my probation. And the other guy is like, he, he, he wasn't having it. He's like, he, he, as soon as I fucked up, I can remember. I think I came out there or something. He sent me back to jail for four months. And after getting out to jail another four months in the halfway house. So I was pissed because I was like, I didn't even come in a crime. And I'm getting charged. I'm getting doing more time for this than for my crime, you know? But this time I mean like, I met more people like there was this big conspiracy. It's like the most one of people that I should now become good friends and not because we did leave a shit. Algardo Villarela is one of the most one of the people back in like 2008, 2009 El Gordo. Algardo Villarela now he's writing his book. So I helped him. He found out like that. I'm adding like a got a sense of writing and stuff like that. So he reached out to me. He's like, Hey, what I like about you writing is that you use our words and our lingo. So I want to see if you can help me out. And I was like, yeah, yeah, for sure. So that's in process right now. And and another guy that was with him, he's doing, he's trying to, he did 11 years. Algardo is still inside of, but another guy, one of my friends, his name is Fausto, shout out to Fausto. He did like 11 or 12 years. And right now he's doing straight is, you know, but he's trying to get into like the music business stuff like that. And I'm connected to that. So we hooked up on that. And I got him, you know, some, I got some Corritos too because he wanted some Corritos. So I helped him out with some of our friends and stuff. But there are these people that I met back then, you know, on, on national and now they're trying to do like some different stuff. And coming back to what you asked me earlier, how's my communication with somebody's, it's kind of like this, you know, like, like I said, some of them that are still very active. My only communication with them is like, hey, what's so bro? How you doing? How you doing? I'm not just here bro. Like chilling. Like I was telling you about this, this other guy. I want to shout out to my brother. But he doesn't speak English. So I don't know if he pointed it up. I got to get this podcast translated Spanish. Yeah. Yeah. So like I was telling you the truck, I hadn't talked to him in a while for a few years. Last time I talked to him, he actually had to, I don't know if he had to, but he killed. So like I was telling you the truck, I hadn't talked to him in a while for a few years. Last time I talked to him, he actually had to, I don't know if he had to, but he killed another of our childhood friends. Like we knew from... Yeah, it's just part of our childhood politics. And it happened in a party with something. So when the work gets out, you know how gossiping is, they get to, you know, they start mixing information. So they were saying that he was dead. That somebody killed him. So I was like, Oh, fuck man, you know? So I try to reach out, like reach out to a couple people. Like, you know, if he's alright, whatever. And so he somehow he gets a hold of me, he calls me. He's like, Hey, what's up? I hear you looking for me stuff. Like, yeah, bro, how you been? Like, are you cool? Like everything cool? And he's like, Oh, I thought you were asking about the other, so and so. I was like, Oh, no, what happened? I was like, he's the one that died. I was like, Oh, shit, man, that's so cool. I heard one of you guys too, but I don't know how I was trying to find a who. But I don't know this. I find this out like, how do you call it? The hindsight, whatever. Yeah. He was actually trying to find out if I was trying to revenge my friend. Oh, fuck. Yeah, man. He was like, he was like, yeah, you know what happened to him? I was like, not do you? He's like, no, man. But what are you trying to do? You trying to like go off to the food that that tumor would let me know. I was like, no, man, you know, I'm not really like, I'm not not sure to do that anymore because I was already like away from like, I was trying to wait for I was like, no, man, I was just like, you know, you guys at home, he's like, whatever happened unless you let you get to me. You know what I mean? He's like, all right, all right. And when he said that, I kind of like, what like, you know, I sensed that. And he's like, all right, all right, well, I just want to know if you were trying to like look for those, you know, if you're trying to do something, you know, and I was like, I think he's high. You know, I thought he kind of sounded something. He sounded mad or whatever. I was like, no, no, man, I mean, you know, this is how it is, you know, my focus die every day. Because it's typical, the typical line in the streets line, you know, full-dye every day, man, just like, as you'll be careful, man, watch your bag, watch your money. He's like, all right, man, cool, whatever. So after that, I ain't talking for like two to three years till him. And at this point, he's like, probably like a second level boss in the Tijuana cartel right now, currently right now. Okay. So two or three years go by and him and his boss and like, a few other guys, they want some. One of my best friends is a singer. He's really famous. Calli shallow. Hey, you got a gun. I got his hat right here. Oh, yeah. Hold it up. Hold up next to your face. People can see it. Yeah. Yeah. What a cool yourself. Yeah. So he, he, we became best friends before he popped off. Yeah. This is the slow. Oh, he's a microphone in the sand. Yeah. Yeah. And he did a Corillo for two of my friends that passed away. So I, I made his logo into my friends. I put them in my fingers. Wow. Yeah. That's why. Cool tattoos. Yeah. Um, so yeah, we become, I'm become best friends with them for because we start, we just clicked up and we're both looking for the dream type thing. You know, he wanted to be a singer and feel this stuff. And, and at this point, I really didn't know what I wouldn't do. I just want to do something creative. Like I said, I've always loved music since I was in. How are you making money? Where are you doing for work? I just sell a weed. Okay. I try to keep it with a weed because that's the least like I like I was doing earlier. It's like cartel won't fuck with me if I saw weed and like not even the loss sometimes, you know, because they think it's like a, they think I'm sending Reggie, but I'm saying like this fucking medical marijuana from San Diego. Oh, because this, if I start talking about this, it's going to be whole. I'm going to go into a home. Because I, I'm one of the first in TJ that started trafficking weed from America to TJ back to TJ. Yeah. Back when nobody was doing it. I, I started doing that shit. And I, I can, I can, I don't give a fuck. Who's like, I, I could show this podcast to any other food from TJ and I stand on my work. You know what I mean? I know what I was doing back then. There wasn't really that many. And that's why I got a lot of good clients because there wasn't really that many people willing to pay 15 bucks for a gram. You know, that's one of the things that blew my mind when Louise told me this. Yeah. I, you know, we talked about, we talked about this too. I'm talking about like shit, bro. Like how the fuck did that happen? 20, what? 2010, 2011, 2012 somewhere around there. Like, I mean, don't get me wrong. I did some other shit too that made me money. Like, um, well, this is a lot of years back. So sometimes my friends, my childhood friends, they'll be like, uh, a, uh, I had some, uh, friends in San Diego too. They were, they were just robbing fools. They were just robbing carto food. They lived in San Diego. They, they, they've moved from T1 up to San Diego. And they just started robbing like carto food. And they stayed in San Diego. So they wouldn't get killed. Okay. So they just started doing this shit. And, um, an event and I know them because they grew up on the block, on the, on the blog neck behind my house. So I know them since they were little kid. They actually younger than me. So, uh, and, um, I was staying in San Diego at this point because I was, I think I was, yeah, I was living with my girlfriend. So we were living in San Diego. And well, I'm just hosting. I'm just trying to find ways to make money. So, um, I call these guys because they're my friends. I don't know they're robbing at this point. I don't know what they're doing. I said, so I'm just thinking like, oh, I'm a child selling some stuff. You know, either like some middle men say, you know, like, yeah, I got my friend that has like certain pounds or something. Do you know anybody that needs them? You know, shit like that. And, uh, and we started kicking it with starts smoking whatever. And I find out all they shit like I found out what they're doing. I'm like, oh, no, no, like, I got, you know what I mean? Like I ain't trying to do another shit. So, um, one of my friends calls one of them. And they're like, Hey, there's this guy that stole from us. Like, could you guys go get them? Because they know what they're doing. Like a lot of people didn't know that they're doing what they're doing. And some of them don't even carry more because some of them see like, hey, that's how the game is. You know, some of them like some of some people actually want to kill them. But a lot of people like, they would rob from each other and they were still cool. You know, they'll be, they'll be talking to each other and stuff like that. And it was basically like, all right, you rob me right now. And then next time I'm a rob you, not like a, not like a word for word thing, but it was like, you know what I mean? Like something like that. Yeah. So eventually one of my friends calls them and he's like, Hey, can you go get, you know, these guys are, uh, they took some of my shit and they didn't pay me. So at this point, I'm not looking at it as robbing. I'm looking at it as, okay, my friend, you know, like a mission for them, for, you know, for these. So we go start doing shit, you know, we start getting to like our favorite of, of licks, you know, we start getting people and stuff and wrong. I didn't really like it, bro. To be honest, only did like three times, but, uh, I was really broke and I was really needed some money, but after I didn't, I didn't feel good. You know, even, I mean, I've done some other shit that you should be like, boy, you did that and you have a problem with this. But this didn't, I've never liked to steal, you know, I've never been the, the wrong type. So eventually I started feeling that kind of like, you know, I don't want to have that shit on my resume and robbing. What kind of other shit did you do that was worse than that? It's just such shit like witness and shit. I've seen a Mexico man in Mexico, like, you see people getting shot. You see people getting the tablazas. You see people. Yeah, we got off that. You were explaining that and I was telling the weeds told me that. You never actually kind of what happened with the top of the house. I was trying to see if I could find how is it? So you can Google it. What's it? How do you say it? Can you Google? How can you Google? It's probably Latabla or what's it? Latabla? Latabla. Guilliacan. Guilliacan. Or cartel. Yeah, it's just just keywords. Cartel Latabla. I'm sure we'll find it. Yeah. Latabla for the cartel. Yeah. Well, they use this to discipline people. They, uh, there's this, uh, Corrillo singer. There's this singer that, uh, he sung a song with a, about somebody and he didn't ask permission. So the guy got offended called the guy in, uh, shit, I was about to say some real specific. So, uh, uh, the guy, he has a, you know, how people use code names over there. Yeah. And it's usually numbers. So this guy, the guy that was offended, he has a certain number. Okay. So he gave him that, let's say 50. Yeah. That's too many. But let's say just 50, you know, he, they say his, his, his, uh, his code name is 50. So he gave him 50 tablas. And it's, uh, it's you either, like, put your hands on the table or whatever. Uh, ass out. You get spanking. And you get the spanking and then, like, people shit themselves. You know, you can't say it because you don't get like, like a small spanking, bro. It's this four by four tabla. And they're just laying it onto you, like, like, if, you know, like, if you just, there's their mother typing, if there's videos, I mean, I don't know. I'm sure you can show that on YouTube. But if you want to see, there's videos of people getting the, so it looks like a two by four. It looks like one of these, what's this? Like, one of these, like one of these, those tables made out of, uh, yeah, yeah, kind of like this, probably even thicker. But yeah, with, with a handle on the, on the edge. So you can hold it, right, you know? So when you're hitting them, doesn't, you know, and, um, and yeah, it depends on what kind of discipline you're getting the number of tablases you're getting. And that's really common, bro, because people tend to fuck up a lot. You know, the, the watch out that corner is the ponteros, the guys in the, in the motorcycle that are watching out for the, well, if, if military came in and you didn't see them and you didn't, let people know on the radio, you don't need the tabla, bro. Yeah, you're a singer. If you sing without a turdation about some of the shit breakdowns. No, but if he leaves your ass black, if you go to like, oh, no, this is a video. Turn it, don't, don't, don't, oh, he just got the tabla. Yeah, he just got it. Oh, yeah, the whole, but no, don't show it. He just got back of him is completely black. The videos of people getting it, like, that's the after fact. You can't find a picture of what this thing looks like, the, the, the, the tabla. It's just a song. Oh, okay. Yeah, so famous Corillo, it's a real famous Corillo and it's called the tabla. And it's, it's, it's, it's like a warning to people. What does it say? It just say, like, those who are like stepping out of line, you know, either tabla. That means guys who are getting the little tabla, they'll willingly just accept it. Like, I gotta go through this. Yeah. Well, boy, if you say no, you're dead. Yeah. It's like, so it's like, look, you get the, you fucked up, right? We get it. You can't get the tabla, but then you get to go home and rest. And we got, or you could get this bullet in the head and not go home for, you know, but, uh, so how did you get into bringing weed back into Tijuana from San Diego? Well, because I'm a donor first and foremost, I'm, I'm a part of it myself. You would think they would have plenty of weed down there. They got Reggie. They got Reggie. And, and, and remember, I'm going to school in San Diego. So in San Diego, they're smoking that back then, that skunk diesel, that white widow, like OG Kush, you know, and, and back then, you know, the famous song I got 500 because four friends will get put $5 on it and get a gram and then get somebody buy you a swisher and smoke the whole thing by forduse, you know. So I just started buying like little grams and eight. Well, at this point, uh, I was working. I got a job, I got a legal job in San Diego. I got a girl on the room, my girl, I'm trying to do right now. You know, I got, and, uh, but, uh, I want to make a little bit extra money, you know, I want to quit my job because I'm out of probation at this time. Dude, the day the probation call me, he's like, little bro, you've been doing, I will just for close this up. Um, I go to jail for four months. I meet a bunch of people and then I go to the halfway house. I mean, more people want to go home and talk about right now. But I only stayed there for three months because I kicked out. We were just so bored and we just so like, full of like energy stuff. We just started like checking each other. First, it was like the all the people went to the corner like, Hey, everybody got to be gotta be on the ship. And if you're not on your shit, like we just started being everybody out, not beating, but like body shots, just because we were bored and it was most of us were like on our twenties. It wasn't like really older people. Like it was all a bunch of 20 years. So we just full of fucking energy and shit like that. And we just with other criminals and shit, you know, so we just start getting in trouble with like being playing body shots. But we started playing like, it wasn't friendly body shots, you know, and I was like, I have fucking, uh, Bruce's and shit. We left other people, Bruce's stuff and shit. So one day the guard sees that one of the guys says, Oh, Bruce, stuff kind of like the guy with a taula. Oh, yeah. There it is. I don't like don't, we're just gonna react to it. I don't put the video on it. Yeah. Yeah. He's about to be a C. Oh, shit. It's just like a big paddle giant pal. Yeah, that's the word paddle. That's the one I was looking for. My God. God damn, bro. Yeah. If you move like that, yeah, he, oh, he only got two. Yeah, he's lucky. I think they do another. All right, I get it. I see what it is. When we said he was going to bring one next time he comes here, so I can have it and like put it on display in the background. Yeah, you should. Cool. Or I'll put on the shelf. Yeah, well, he was about to meet you. It's not good about that. What? Oh, Louis, he was about to meet the, that's what she was about to meet the tablet. Well, if he, if he will, if you would have been caught or you know, he did the dispensary thing and then they, yeah, so yeah, man, he should he just careful. Maybe because it's, it's, it's most of that are not going to get him killed, but it's enough to give you some tablases. You know what I mean? Like, they know like, you could go to the police, but like, they didn't kill you. So they're not going to make a big deal out of you. You know, yeah, well, that, that dispensary story with him was crazy because the dude, I guess the dude he was talking to, it kind of backed out of like the, yeah, like he was already like balls deep into the story with him. He was letting him in and he wanted it. But the guy wanted it like, he wanted to like let Louis in and tell the story, but he didn't want to give him too much. Pardon this brief interruption, but I want to take a second to talk about our sponsor, Verso. Now, you've heard this podcast before. Chances are you already know how obsessed I am with health on longevity, which is why one of my favorite guests to have on the show is nutritional scientist and neuroscientist, Dr. Dom Dagostino, who actually introduced me to this stuff. Verso is a company that is dedicated to translating scientific breakthroughs into products that hold a potential to increase longevity. The problem with aging is we accumulate these zombie cells or old damage cells that linger beyond their useful life. These zombie cells infect other healthy cells speeding up the aging process, causing things like hair loss, wrinkles, arthritis, cancer, dementia, and everything in the realm of aging. What scientists have realized is that we can manually induce autophagy, meaning the cleanup process of the old zombie cells and replacing them with new ones. Verso's new clean being, which I take every night, is a powerful blend of synolytic molecules that help promote the body's natural cleanup processes like autophagy and apoptosis, promoting better cellular health, supporting lower inflammation and natural cardioprotective functions, while boosting protection against age-related diseases. The three main ingredients in clean being are spermidine, lutolan, and a hydrocorsatin, which play key roles in the control of gene expression and are essential for cell growth and proliferation, specifically when it comes to cardiobascular and cognitive function, skin health, vision, and the immune system. Head on over to vr.so and use the coupon code concrete at checkout to save 15% on your order. I linked it all below now back to the show. Yeah, we're wanting to keep the name side of it. But Luis was going in for the names. I mean, right at the point, it's not going to the expensive view, not going to talk about hones, you know what I mean? And I get a point, I also get the other guys point to, and I didn't want to be that guy. That's why I talked to my friends, be like, hey, can I say this shit? Can I say this? Can I say that? Because I mean, I'm not going to change this role, even if I were to turn full on snatcher or whatever. I'm not going to change anything. I'm not trying to, but I'm not helping me. I'm not doing anything bad. I'm just staying on my way and anything. But at the same time, there's still my friends and the people that are not, I don't want to cause them any trouble. I don't want to get into the way at all. I don't want to cause them trouble or I want to help them. I was just, was so like neighbors. You know what I mean? Like, you know what I mean? Just say, was so dumb and keep it cool and everybody goes on the way. It's crazy watching like the history of Mexico and how the cartels became cartels, you know, from the the day of the plazas to the police or the to the Guadalajara cartel and then that being broken up into all, you know, the main cartels you see in Mexico right now. And it's, it's, it's wild to think about like what, what is going to happen in the next decade? I wonder. Do you ever think about that? Yeah, always. Yeah, especially because yeah, well, right now we really go to TJ because it's a full-on word right now. And yeah, if you're if you're like what they call out here, like a civilian, if you don't have nothing to do, well, yeah, you, they might get, you might be pulled over for, you know, for whatever reason sometimes, but you're not going to get any trouble. But now it's to a point where like you get pulled over and everybody's a suspect. It's just the war is gone so bad that like everybody's paranoid. Yeah, not with like, I was telling you that cops are paranoid. I mean, they were arrested all kinds of people that look all sorts of ways. So it's not like they're looking for the people that look, you know, dress or talk about wear and they're just going on for everybody. You know, they, they were arrested girls with their kids. You know, their rest of mothers, they were arrested all kinds of souls. It's just like everybody's a suspect, but it creates this tension where like the cops are not nice at all, especially what that's good thing to explain right now. What is the dynamic between the cops and T wanna and the cartel? There's one cartel and T wanna right now. There's three. There's three cartels and T wanna. Oh, kind of four with police, but yeah, let's say three. There's three. There's three. There's three. So that there's three different cartels and T wanna. While a horror scene in Aloha in Tijuana, but it's funny because they all branched out from the Tijuana, from the original Tijuana cartel. Once the original leaders started getting arrested, killing stuff, everybody just started finding other ways because the thing is with the Tijuana cartel was, it was based on the family, the Ariana Felix. Right. So when the Ariana Felix didn't like when the, the, what, it's a big family, what I understand and not everybody's involved, but when the guys that were involved either got arrested or killed, like, um, so Ariana feel it for people that don't know who Ariana Felix is, he was one of the main founders of the Tijuana cartel. They, they, is their brothers. They had the two brothers. Yeah. Well, there's a bunch of brothers, but the only like four of them were involved with a cartel, but I believe there's like eight. And there's a picture. I don't know if you want to put there's a picture of the whole family. Who was the brother that was on the David Letterman show that they like a Ramon Ariana Ramon, you're the violent one. She was, you got been coming, which is a brain and you also violent, but mostly the brains and you got Ramon, which is just like that the general, he was the killer. Yeah. Yeah. They started filming. Yeah. But they, they all had a, I think we're getting into all of these different. I know. Yeah. But, uh, they, the, the thing with them, is they were mostly rich, rich families. So they all could go to cook across the US before they were even criminals. So, so they were coming over to LA. And I guess one day, he was in, uh, where they filmed it. I think that was an LA. Yeah. And LA, yeah. And LA, and you could see, uh, well, if you don't know them, you don't really, you can't tell, but you can see he's kind of trying to like, uh, what do you call it? We're like a costume type thing like because he has like, yeah, this guy is terrible to scott. Yeah. And, and, and, and, but to the, the production guys, they're, it's funny to them because he looks kind of funny. Yeah. So they keep putting the camera on, he's like, nah, and I'll just payon. He's like, he's probably thinking about shooting them. He feels the next thing. Because he has that reputation of shooting people in the face. Like there's a story where he, um, he's getting out of a club or something. And he's like on the street and he's drinking and he's talking to a girl. So eventually a cop cop, so he's like, hey, you can't be drinking on the street and he just pulls out a gun and shoots them in the face. And that's how much forward they had. You know, he just drove off from that and nothing happened. So I'm guessing at that point where the day with litterman guys, like putting it, the camera is facing. He's like, no, just funny. He's like trying to get him to like, he had that like fanny pack around. Yeah. That baby, where is so he's like, not just funny. There it is. Oh my God. He looks like Tim Dylan. And yeah, man, I mean, he would be right next to him in LA. You know, waiting for the light to, you know, to change and you wouldn't even know. And that, and that's, that's really the dynamic in TJ. You know, there's another really famous comedian, YouTube, or other his name is Adrienne Marcello, shout out to him. He came a couple times in TJ for presentations, but he's kind of like interested a little bit because he hears the news and he's, so he's like, he's curious. He asked about stuff. So last time he came, he spent a weekend there. And then on his last day, I was like, so how was it? Did you feel like on say for anything, whatever? Did you feel like he was like, no, I'm in that at all. And I pulled up a new story. And it's like 16 people died this weekend, bro. And it was like, hi, for Mexico still like a high, high number for a weekend for three or a week. I told 16 people got killed in TJ where you were here. And you didn't like, didn't even feel like, wow, nothing, you know, and that's, that's it. And I I can like all this shit is going on. But if you're like on your, on your thing, like, you might not even know, you know, right. Now as TJ, is it, is it so violent in Tijuana because all the cartels south of there have to travel through Tijuana to get to the US? Yeah. I talked to one of my friends, the difference between like, let's say, St. Aloha, their history with like the narcos is usually because people don't have opportunities, you know, they live in rural areas, you know, the country, the government doesn't give a fuck about them. You know, some of these people don't have lights, you know, they don't have shit like that. So they come out of that and, and you know, they, they grow, they get into the business, you know, for bettering the lives. But in TJ, that people are getting into the business in TJ, in TJ, we got opportunities, bro. Like, people from the South County, TJ, to find jobs or to work. So like, people over here, we do it because we like it. You know, it's more like the thrill of it. Like, also this, this, this culture from, I was saying my friends from, oh, Nabil, Leon over there by, well, like, what is like, Luis, he gets, he gets all this like, Texas thing, it drips down to, to ours. But else we get LA. So we get this gang culture also. So you see like, like the low running culture is pretty popular in Tijuana. Like, all this, all this stuff that just fucking boils down to, to like, this American culture, just boils down to us. So this gang culture is really settled in. That's what they say. We were the tagbangers, you know, we did really, but we like the like game thing because we listened to like NWA or, you know, like gangster, West Coast music. So we grew up on that and then you mix it with like the all this traffickers and their gang life. And it just becomes a whole nother thing, you know, that's the difference between the like people in the South and the people in TJ. And that's why it's more violent because that's what I was saying with our young Felix, most of them. And they had, they actually had a group of of their carto that was called the narco juniors. And there was this people, there was this guys like the Westiest families of TJ and San Diego, their sons just became members of the carto. So that's like, I was saying like in the South, you got this people like doing it for, you know, for looking for opportunities, lack of opportunities. But over here, you got like literally these guys like sons of like a neurosurgeons and like all these important people, they're like the wealthiest kids, bro. And they're like with Ramon and them like killing people and like they're actually like if you make it seem like characters of a movie, they actually were like the real deal because they had money and they had everything and they did it. They shit themselves like they were the secretes like they had secretes, but they were doing shit themselves. They were doing it for the thrill. You know what I mean? They were doing it for the just to leave like, you know what I mean? Yeah. So narco juniors, they really left the legacy because it was this really rich kids that that were car tellboxes. So that's like well like 25 years ago. So now you got this new generation of Tijuana car tell. And that day I was, you called me like I said, I was talking to one of them and I was like, hey, so they want to ask me in this podcast about like what's up? You know about the life and shit. And I thought they were going to be like, not keep it low key. You know like like don't say much, whatever bro. They're like, not tell them where they shit. So like yeah, there's other cartels. But we're the ones, you know, like tell them with the new narco juniors. Tell them if you know about the back then what were the new narco juniors and he showed them this narco go read. I'm like, I'm not gonna play with those songs or but I'm gonna tell them like I'm gonna let it know. So and I mean, these new narco juniors, you look at them and they're like, I mean, they're wearing like, they look like rappers, you know, they're wearing like fucking 50,000 dollar outfits with like their chains and like fucking expensive shoes. They go to Dubai and like for fucking two weeks, new serum and land gold, new serum buying, like expensive shit, like taking tours in helicopters like religious and they're like, they're not past 25 probably, you know. And I know some of them because they're the little brothers of my generation of friends, you know, they're little brothers now. And now they're like, hey, I remember you used to, and I'm like, damn that's you. And I see them like all, you know, like all with like fucking old goo cheat out and all shit. And we're a private party with like all kinds of like, you know, shit. And now they're like the, not like the head of the cartel. He's like, he's looking out for them because their brother was like a really, he was respected in the cartel. He got shot. He got killed. And now the, the, the guy that the boss he just looked out for them. He's looking out for them in a way, you know, just giving them easy jobs and stuff like that way to make money and enjoy like, you know, because they can travel, they can go like, divine, Kalami stuff like that because they're not look, they're not looking for the, you know, they're not wanting it yet and stuff like that because they're, they're young, some of them are like 21, 22, you know, they're barely starting and they're already living, you know. And that's why they tell me that like, tongue with a new narco juniors. And if you see there is a narco series, a bat bunny place, the one of the most famous narco juniors, he placed it, the one that became a snitch though. Well, that's what, yeah, yeah, he sees not because a lot of narco juniors, they went back, bro. When they got a jail, they, they went back really, some of them went back. And so a lot of them, like they, they turned like the one that bat bunny placed, he's, they never seen them again. Well, I'm pretty sure like the family is because they, they, it's like a mafia thing is like their families, you know, like I'm compassionate to your kids and stuff like that. So they call each other family, everybody calls each other uncle TOA, that's my TOA. So now it's a junior generation of the one new generation that, I mean, like I said, this is 20, 25 years ago, most of these people get like 25 years in jail, but with good time, they get out in like 20. So some of them are out and, uh, and yeah, I don't want to say more, much more about them because they didn't let me talk about them, but, but yeah, some of them are out. And their, their kids are like, are, are doing falling the same steps. So we kind of like a distracted, but the main dynamic in Tijuana is there's, you said four, but there's three main cartels there. Yeah, I just, we just say four because the cops on top act like a crystal. So my question was like, what is the dynamic with the cops and the cartels there? Well, what percentage of the cops are bought off by the cartels and just working with them and communicating with them. And how many of them are just like rogue completely against the cartels completely against. I would say it's, I don't know. I want to say half. I think I'm just trying to be fair because I know there's a lot of good cops. I actually know a couple of cops that are not that, not that corrupt. Like they will take your 20 bucks if you rent or a real light type thing, but they won't kidnap you or they won't, you know, they won't like do shit like that. So you'd say half of the cops in Tijuana. I want to say something like that. Oh, shit. I want to say more, but I want to be fair. Like, I don't want to talk out of ignorance. But I probably say more, man. I mean, because just the shit that I've seen, like, I don't want to, I don't want to dis them my respects to all police corporations over there. But, but yeah, man, they sometimes they don't go fuck like, they be ruthless, ruthless. Like, and they work for all the cartels. Well, they kind of have to, to be honest, like, but different sections though, like, I'm trying to find a way to break this down. Let's say, let's say one cartel had bought off the homicide department. And let's say the other cartel has bought off the, what do you call the, um, when you're so drugs, but it's not not in a big scale, but in low school narcotic. Yeah, when it's like narcotic, you know, like they have, they have bought off like different sections of the police type thing, different cartoons. So it's not like back then we just showed up and you bought the command there or the captain and like now the whole police was saw your service. No, now it's like some people were for these guys, some guys were for these guys. And actually right now they're actually fighting amongst each other. Right now actually, oh, I remember this. I was showing Louis, a news story. They're, they're, they're having, eventually it was going to happen because, you know, they're serving a lot of people. They're, they're fighting each other because they act like cartels sometimes, really, they've arrested cops. Um, and this is public news. They were arrested cops like trying to sell weed that they confess, not weed. I mean, drugs that they confiscated mostly math and cocaine, in our fentanyl, like the pills. But, but yeah, they. like trying to sell weed that they confess not weed. I mean, drugs that they confiscated mostly math and cocaine. You know, or fentanyl, like the pills. But yeah, they've actually caught like other like police have caught other police trying to show the shit that they confiscated. And you know, because like they go and confiscate like let's say like 50 keys of cocaine from a certain cartel. And if if if the cops go and present it to like the authorities and do the right thing, like the cartel won't even trip. But if they don't find out anything about the shipment and they just lost, well, that means it's fully stolen. So now it's personal, you know, so now you see this, this, uh, this, uh, what do you call it? Like when they leave the signs and messages on the, on the bridges and stuff like a commandante, whatever, whatever you took this shit from us, you better either sell it back or give it back or risk, or you know, because one thing is getting confiscated and doing your job and, you know, presenting it and one thing as you stealing it from them, that's not a police job, you know? So that's they've been having a lot of trouble with that. And now it's even like it used to be like the guys that they were robbing against the police. But now it's like other police against themselves. They have this really famous group in, in Facebook, where they're actually looking for the like they're, um, they just, they just post every time they see the, the state police, because they, they've been getting this really infamous, it's already called it when it's a bad rep of just kidnapping innocent people now. They used to do it to like the state police. Yeah, they used to, to like criminals. They used to like, you know, if you cartel, oh yeah, we got some money from you. All right, we're gonna let you go, but we're gonna keep this 50,000 bucks. And you know, as a criminal, you're like, all right, cool, you know, fuck it, you know, you know, the drill, you know, what's up? But there's been news coming out with they've been doing it to like, uh, uh, regular businessmen, you know, you don't have nothing to do, but they see that you have money. They can't get a, you know, quite 10,000 from you, you know, they might be like, you better give up this money or we're gonna, we're gonna, present you to the, to the judge with like, I don't know, the fentanyl or something. And they're gonna say that, that they call you with it. And even though you can prove that they didn't, it's going to take months for you to prove that which months that you can do in prison. So you don't want to do that, you know what I mean? So if you have the 10,000 bucks, it's like a kidnapping, you know, it's just like a kidnapping. So they've been, they've been really having bad rep because of that that now they created a famous, I mean, a Facebook group. And it's not even car tell people it's civilians in this group. And it's like, like, uh, it's like people just, uh, reporting on them. Hey, they, they pull over this car. If anybody of use is, you know them, whatever, you know, they, they've had them there for like about an hour. And there's this other thing. Um, it's illegal to check your cell phones for the police to check yourself out, but they don't go, but that's the first thing they, they, when they, when they put you over, that's the first thing they ask for. Really? Yeah, they take your phone. If it's like, you better unlock it. What are they looking for in your phone? They look for the pictures. They look for the messages. They look for your notes. They look any, they look for everything. Like if you have, I mean, there's been times where there's like girls that were like, Hey, I have like an impoep, and it'll be, it'll be pictures that would be like, I don't better unlock your phone right now. And one of my friends once said, I cannot unlock it. BAM! Are you sure? All right. I locked it. And uh, and I mean, I think anybody, you go to the phone, you're gonna find something suspicious, man. I mean, even if you're innocent, you know what I mean? I believe that anybody has like, yeah, because there's always this talk like, I got in trouble once because I had, I had some of my friends, they were like, Hey, what's up? Uh, where's the weed at? You know, they just wanted to smoke. And he was like, Hey, why is he asking you for weed? So we, I did so we, but I didn't have proof that I saw it. So I was like, No, man, I'm just a stoner. I was like, we smoke joints. I don't drink. I was like, it's like, if you homey calls you and you're like, Hey, let's, let's drink a six pack. I don't drink six packs. I smoke joints. So my friends call me to smoke. So I, that's how they, they got, got it cut off with that one. But there's been times where I I haven't gone off. And I've met, I, you know, um, I've been through that drill, you know, the bag over your head drill, you know, tied up behind a police car. How long ago did this I don't know where? Uh, pretty, uh, let's say about two years ago, two years ago. Yeah, I was in, like I said, I've been trying to stay away off the whole thing, but this, this, this thing that came, uh, this is white guy, like ex military and he gets a bunch of guns. He sends him to TJ. And I bought a one firm one time, but it was just for me for like for my house because you're a teacher, you know what I mean? Like there's people like bringing in your houses, maybe you're such, you know, whatever reason I just, you know, you feel safer. Um, uh, I'm pro guns, you know, so I'm like, I just had in my house, you have it, you know, be in the middle of me. But, but once I bought that one of I bought that one gun. Uh, my friends like, and what'd you get that gun? I was like, oh, this, why guy hasn't? He's like, okay, you think you think you think you think you want to know? Like, yeah, show. So I, American guy, uh, he was like military. He goes to this gun shows or game, you know, what they do, like, expose the stuff and you get cheap. He has like a memory. She got a needle, he's like a very well-known buyer. So he gets a bunch of guns and he used to sell them in, in, like, get them in Mexico and stuff because they're clean guns. So like, I got one for myself just to keep in my house. My friend went for him. So just to keep in the house, but my friend's friend, he won at three. So I was like, yeah, he hasn't like, for me, he was like, yeah, he's right there. So he bought three, you know, then he bought like another three, then he bought like four, then he bought like two AKs and stuff like that. And now I was, I kept being the middleman because I was making like a few bucks on this side. But I sometimes I didn't even see the guns because they were, they had their thing going like, you know, they know who pick it out or whatever. So they just, my friend just got the money to me. So I could pull over and I have all these messages with pictures of guns and prices and the people I'm starting to do and she like that, you know what I mean? So, so yeah, man, they're like, hey, what the fuck are you doing? You know, like, like I said, sometimes they get innocent people, but this time I was fucking up, you know, I understand I recognize I was fucking up. But on my mind, it was just something like, it was, it wasn't that big of a deal until I was with the cops. So you got pulled over and then no, it was, it's some fucking bullshit. I'm, I, I've always been really careful, really careful. Like I remember my house never got ready because of shit. I've done like, I always stayed like, I've never been arrested in Mexico or anything. I was arrested over here with America and I was crossing shit and I was young. But, but after that little trouble, I've never been in trouble again. I've never been arrested, even though I kind of like fucked up sometimes. I've gone away with shit like that. So, so at this point, I was doing that shit and I'm in TJ and my friends like, hey, let's go to the Swagmin. I got to buy this computer. So I'm going, let's go. I just ran in a new house and I have no furniture and I only had like my bad acting. So I don't want to stay in there. I didn't even have Wi-Fi. So I was like, I'll go with you because it was like, wait for me here. I was like, now I'll go with you. So he's using a nober to maneuver around because that's that's the, that used to be the easiest way to move around because you don't get pulled over. They see it's an over there. You know, it's like, where are you sitting in the bag? The guy has an over application and so it looks pretty clean. So we move around like that. We get to the Swagmin. We can imagine being a fucking Uber driver into you on. Then when we're driving, we moving stuff. So knowing and some not knowing because I've been in there and the overs were like my backpack full of like two or three pounds of weed and like edibles and just all kinds of dispenser issue and they don't even know. So yeah, we go to Swagmin. Just to give you other context. There's been reports of like distortion going on Swagmin or like they have like little, little, you know, little shops. What are you calling in Swagmin? It's like little, yeah, there's a little, little different type of shops. Some of them sell drugs or some of are being started. So we're not there to look sort of nobody. We're not there to say anything. Which is there to pay for a computer that my friend bought for his kid that he's learning on a stream. But as you can see, I looked like a fucking mother of a teacher with all my tattoos and shows like that. So I just like, I got swagged and I'm like, I just got out the house. So I'm not even dressed like, you know, like I'm like a sweatshirt. My friend, my friend is like, he's dressed well. So we put us together. You know, it kind of looked like some cartoosh it going on. You know, it's all well dressed. He has a cholo with him all tattered out like, and they always say this is like, yeah, you're the hitman and he's the boss. And I know, I know, I know, I know, I got done. We're different. So we pulled up to the shop with a computer. And then what he's doing the business know that they're showing on the computer, the shit that it has. And he's both out of money. It's like a thousand bucks to pay for a per year. It's like like 3,000. And then all of a sudden I hear a cop coming back because I'm just like on my phone, like right outside the little shop on the alley. And then the cop comes. And I just seemed like staring around and look at me. It's all fat. And like, it looked more like a mall security. So I see him and I'm like, whatever. He's like, everything good. I was like, yeah, what, what, what, what, you know? So I just keep my own and then I hear all kinds of radios and walkie talkies and keys. And I looked him all right. And four cops, four or five cops just coming our way. At this point I'm like, I'm the only suspect in here. Like there's no way they're coming for somebody else. So my friends dealing with the stuff with the computer. So they just come grab me and throw me in the the current the middle current that they they used to close it to the other shop was close. They just throw me against that shit. And I was like, hey, bro, you're tripping. I don't have shit on me. Like, what are you doing? He's like, not shut the fuck up. They just came. Even the guy that was saying as a computer was like, hey, they're they're just wired. And they're like, yeah, shut the fuck up. You shut the fuck up. So they didn't even ask us anything. They handcuffed me and my friend. They lived the overgo. They let it overgo. We don't know if he's the one that that you know, like that said, something. Yeah, set us up or something. So we're going to the they're taking us out the so I mean going to the patrol car. They use pickups over there. So I'm like, these are stupid. We only have like a vape pen. Like, what the fuck are they because they're local police too? They're not staepolis. I'm scared of the staepolis. So they're local police. I'm like, oh, these two's like, they're cooler. You know, they're more understandable. I thought they're more like they're not that mean. So I'm like, they're probably going to take us to their private money. At first, I'm like, they're probably one like 50 bucks or something because we got a vape pen and they're going to threaten us to, you know, take us to the judge if we don't get some money. So you know, I'm thinking this is going to happen. But the guy takes our phones and puts handcuffs and throws us in the pickup truck, but in the back, like in the bed and just facing down. And at that point, I like, all right, all right, this is not like, I've been read like, like I've been, I've been through that shit a bunch of times that I was a kid, a bunch of times I have a run with a couple of lots more than a hundred times probably. And I know this is not one of the regular shit. So we're riding on the back of the car and and I kind of know where we are. It's like the other side of the city I grew up, but I kind of know where I was because I had a girlfriend over there. So I literally see we drive past the police station and at this point I was like, whoa, whoa, whoa, what the hell is going on? And some months back or something, I have some friends that were beefing with a cartel that is from the area that they were taking me. So I'm like, oh, they probably think that I'm from you. They probably think I'm associated with so-and-so and they're beefing and they're taking me over here. So I'm like, oh man, like, you know, this is not good. Not good at all. So yeah, man, we go up the hill and it's like dirt road and stuff. Like just fucking, you could barely hear like cars and like people and they part cop gets off and it starts talking to us like, come on, just tell me, tell me who you guys are. Tell me what you guys do and we'll see how we can help you. And we're like, what are you talking about? You didn't catch us doing anything. Like, there's nothing you can catch us. We're like, we just had a pen and my friend, I had like 300 bucks on me. My friend had the money. He was going to pay a computer. So he's like, bro, who'll give you the computer money? Just let me go. If it's for the wax band, like, I don't want, just let me go like, you know, but at this point, my friend was, was, uh, he's active. The friend I was with, he's, he works for this in the law. And he was active. He is active. So he starts getting messages because he was, well, what I mean when he's active, uh, because I don't want to get there's all sorts of branches in the cartel. He's in charge of like, uh, setting up cars to cross the border. Okay. You know, he doesn't sell over here. He doesn't do anything. And he just sets up cars over there and like, that's this thing, you know, he's like the, what do you call like the fright or like the you hot transportation? Yeah. Yeah. So, so he started getting messages of like some transportation shit he was doing right now. I didn't know because I'm not, I'm not like asking like, hey, who's what you doing? You know, how many? I don't care. Like it's just regular shit. So I just see him. He's working whatever. So he started getting messages and the cops are seeing and he's like, no, you guys are not nobody's like, tell me what you guys do. And they have his phone when you got most of our phone. And they haven't unblocked them yet. They just, they just seeing the tasks on the next but just from the tabs, he could see what the fuck was going on. Right. So he's like, come on, tell me, and then they have it like, on her knees on the bed of the, of the pickup truck. So we're kind of like face to face with him. Oh, shit. Oh, and he, he, since he, they found his message at first, they, they're like on block it. And he has that face, uh, I'm like, I do. Yeah, but the sun was setting him on the face. So he kept going like, oh, it's not working. Bam. Just fucking a right hook. You sure is not working? Come on. Like he, and before. Yeah, he was just talking on the face. But, and then my friends before he unblock, he's like, come on, man, help me out. I give you a thousand bucks. You didn't catch me with anything. Why don't you want to go to my phone? At this point, it comes like, now, now we're going to go through your phone. So we have to block our phones, mine's digital. So they just put the, put the, the, okay, have some print and that was a wrap. And, uh, and like I said, I'm always careful. I was always raising my messages, keeping everything clean. That's why I got pulled over a few months before and I got away, like clean because I didn't have anything on my phone. They went to my phone and I didn't have anything. But the other stuff that I was doing was like to, to this prior type thing. And I was basically like going and coming and going to San Diego. So in San Diego, I don't have to worry about raising messages. So somehow they were still there. But it was funny because after this, everybody was telling me, bro, you always raised your message. Yeah, like you literally forget what we're talking about because you raised the messages and pictures. How the fuck did they get you? And I was like, bro, we all have her fucking five minutes of super. You're like, like everybody, everybody's like, there's no way you're going to be. I mean, I've been in this and I've never had something like this happen to me where I've done some like really big shit and stuff. And this is the first time and I think I got away pretty lucky after this. Let me finish the story. So, so yeah, man, they start finding everything and by this time the local comes in, what nothing to do with us. They're like, oh, you know what, they put me back in handcuffs and they're like, and we're like, so what's going to happen? And they're like, oh, no, you'll see what's going to happen. And I just, at this point, I'm like, oh, I'm dead. Like if they don't want to take the money, they don't want to do like what the fuck we're dead. You know, why would they want to kill you though? Because I thought they were working for the cartel. That's beefing with my friends cartel. So I'm thinking there is some sort of confusion. Oh, you thought that they knew that yeah, because they took me to that area, the way it works over there, it's like, like certain sections, you know, like I'm by the beach. So most of the part by the beaches from like one people and then next to the beach is by other people. And then over there away from like to the east is like other people. So like, let's say the guys from the beach are beefing with the guys from the east. And I'm over there and then all of a sudden they start taking me to like the main, the main area, you know, like, so I'm like, oh, fuck, and like I said, so like a few weeks before there's something big happened between them. And we got it with people that that I know people from both sides. So like at this point, like my conscience is just betraying. I'm like, oh, fuck, this guy's thing. I'm, you know, I'm in the middle of this or something. And that he didn't take the thousand bucks here in a rest of them. Like what the fuck, you know, what else does he want? Like everybody would take a thousand bucks just for a wax paint. Like any cow would take him, you know what I mean? So he just lays it left. So they're like tied up in the back of the car for 30 minutes. I know this because my Google maps, my locations is on. So afterwards I looked at all the places I've been because they took me to like different places and it tells you how long you were there. So I was there for like 30 minutes. The longest on my life brought to be honest, the longest I was just thinking, I was, I was, what do you call like, when you like just accept this situation? I was like, I'm, I'm going to die like right now, like I'm, they're good at shooting me like, and then I just started thinking like, you had accepted it. Yeah, I just, I was just making my mind of like, well, just for a little, I always had this thing with death. Like I always felt like, you know, like I was trying to like understand it. Like I always had a problem. Like every time somebody dies, it just hurts me. Like, you know, so I started working with like a therapy and stuff like that just kind of like accepted somehow, like, you know, and, but it kind of helped me because it changed my, the way I start, I lived. Like that, that's one of the things that made me want to get away with it with, get away from all the stuff because I was like, I don't want to like, I don't want my mom to remember me as car tell friends guy that always did super she, you know. So I just went through a lot of shit like that. And at this point, I feel like I've changed. Like I've done, like I've done the music thing. I've been with the music. We made it big with the music, my friends. He went like for like star famous. And I just keep working. I managed to group of rappers in the book of local collective. I do my writing. I started the podcast. So I'm, I'm, you know, I'm doing my my list of. So I've this one. I'm thinking I'm going to die. And I'm like, well, you know what, I mean, at least my mom's going to be like, well, at least here, the chance to fucking change, you know, at least I got a chance to see him in a different face, you know, because if I would have died on my twenties, they would have just remembered me as this fucking, oh, yeah, he just fucking was up to no good or this shit. But now I was like thinking if I die now, it's going to be a whole different perspective. And you know what I mean? Even my shit's going to be viral, you know, even my, my, my, my social media stuff, they're going to be like, oh, because I'm pretty well known out there. And among, now among some famous people were in the streets. So I see you started like thinking about how you'd be remembered. Yeah, I just, I just started setting, I just started accepting it. I was like, well, at least fucking, you know, and then it got to a place where I was just so calm, like so, so, so calm. Like I was impressed with how calm I was knowing or thinking that I was going to die because my friend was shit scared. He was like, where do you think is going to happen to a girl? And everyone tell that I was like, you don't want to know what I'm thinking, about that. They're calling somebody else to pick up. I don't know who because that's what I care. It's crazy that this guy was more freaked out and he's actually active. So 30 minutes go by, which seemed like two or three hours. And we start hearing these tires again, the dirt run. So we hear like, and then we hear doors open and the cops get out of the car too. So you guys are at this point, you guys are face down just in the back of the truck. We're face down tight up in the truck. And I hear I'm wearing yellow sweatpants. So I hear the cops, the local cops, tell the state cops, the one in yellow, not in the face because he's a US. They said that in Spanish, but this basically they said don't hit him in the face because he's a US citizen. They found my passport. So I lead at this point. I'm like, all right, I'm getting in the body and we're getting hit. That's one thing I know for certain, you know, they didn't say nothing about, I mean, they wouldn't be worried about hitting me in the face if I was going to die. So at this point, death is kind of like a little bit out the way, but still not much, but you know, by the things that I kind of put together, I was like, okay, they're beating us up for something. I thought when you said in the face, I thought you mean like shot. No, they meant don't hit him in the face. So that's when I was like, okay, death is not what's next. Maybe it is, but not right now. So right now, the beating, which is kind of worth like shit, I mean, shut the head would be but I, I don't know what you're getting. So yeah, they just come over, they pull the door down or the bed of the truck. And we face up like this, you know, because we're all tied out, we're all scaring shit. So they look at us and at this point, I know who it is because I see the state police uniform and the patrol. And they see my friend and they're like, and I don't think he meant it. He just wanted to hit him to make it make us know that they were for real, because they didn't hit me in the face. And my faith was the only thing available. So they looked at my friend. He's like, I've gotten you before, bam, bam, and they gave him a quick one too. And my friend's like, nah, I never been in a row. It's shut the fuck off, bam, bam. So they just drag us out the, the pickup truck. I barely stand on my feet because I, I had hurt my leg. I was doing a mural. And I almost fell off the stairs. So I landed a little bit back. So I was, I was limping. So I, I was fucking trying to get in the other car that they were taking us through. They put us in the other patrol car. Now they put us inside, not in the, and the better the car they put us inside. But when my, when my head in between my knees and they just lifted out the, like the ankles and the backs. So we're literally, you know, fancy shit. And they just keep hating us on the way. It's three cops. It's one next to me. It's end of end of end of the back seat. It's my friend me and a cop and two guys in the front driver and the boss, the boss was a cop. I don't know if he was like a commander, something, but they kept calling on a commandante. He, that was, that was a guy doing the orders. And they take us to another place. And they pulled me back in the, in the back of the truck. And they just start, in the interrogation starts. And they just start hating us, man. I mean, they start hitting me in the body, like in my legs and my, my belly, my chest, back in my neck, you know, my back places where you couldn't really tell that they were hitting me, but it just fucking hurts. And, um, my friends and, and I guess, um, they were asking me some stuff, but they, they didn't really, we had some, they were, they didn't know how deep we were to be honest. We found this out later. They, when they kind of like lower down there, they're added to put, uh, they just start finding all kinds of shit on my messages, man, because I didn't, I didn't erase a lot of shit. And they were actually playing like fuck man. I have a friend. He's a jail right now, but he used to tell me every time he killed somebody. Every time he, he would send me ideas while he was shooting people sometimes. Like on messenger, he was like, Hey, I'm gonna do a job right now. These fools, they'd be fucking out, whatever. And I was like, and for like, I just like, keep going like, oh, Dan, you're crazy, whatever, this and that. And then I know you're like, look, look, look, hey, hey, like you hear shit in the audio like that. So I had an audio like that. And while it was playing, I tried talking to the cops. So he was listening. I was like, hey, hey, no, but let me tell you something. You know, I turned like fucking come up with something. And he's like holding my phone like turn it here. And it was, and I tripped out then because he didn't say anything about it. He kind of like, he was like, what the fuck? But he tripped out on the guns, because there was more like, I had this conversation. Let's say like you have cameras. And then let's say one day I'm driving by out here and I see cops outside of your house. And I show you a video like, hey, what's the world? This cops outside your house. And then you show me a video of inside the cameras. And you're like, nah, I'm watching everything. It's all good. So they see that. So they know exactly where it is because they got a video of the outside. And they got a video of the inside of the house. And that's the guy that was buying me the guns. So they, and I didn't, this all dismissed, miss the cops actually told the court told us I snitched on them. They trying to give me in trouble with them. But the point is they found, they found this on my, on my messages, stuff like that. And they were like, oh, who is this guy? I was like, I don't know. I never met because in the messages, it was like a middle grade, like I was talking, like the middleman, that wasn't really sometimes not even seeing my guns, but I have pictures of them. And the ones I had, I have pictures of them with this hand. So my tattoos were showing. So I couldn't really say it wasn't me because it was like, let me see. And then they grab my hand. Oh, that's you. Bam. Band, they just start hitting the roof. Because I wasn't as meaning to anything. Like, they just kept like, no, no, and then they, what are you saying? No, but like, what the yeah, like what the book? And so yeah, they found this stuff and they wanted me to take them to that house. And I just kept saying, no, I was like, no, I got I don't know who he lives with whatever. And they put the bag on my face. They actually took it from my friend because he was incigating torture and stuff. So I seen how one one cup. That's how I know it was too calm. The cop was like, no, he's too calm. Bro, like he's too, like he's too chill. Like, fuck that. He went inside. He grabbed the bag from my friend said, went outside and put it over my head just to like, so I knew it was real. But at this point, I don't know how was it calm. I thought like inside it was shitsker. But I guess I wasn't showing it. And because I thought I was just like, I was like, calm. But I was like, I fucked that. I wouldn't do shit to him. And they put the bag over my head for a few seconds. And that just kept saying like, I don't know. Like, like, that's the only thing you seen the conversation. That's the only thing I know. So what would they assume from you being so calm that you were just like, you've been through this before? You were, yeah, they they they they thought I was just way too used to this. They thought I was way too used to this that I would well protect it that I was like, because if the situation had come across where they had actually captured a guy who was a cartel and was not afraid of getting getting killed and knew that like there would be repercussions. Yeah, I would not show any sort of fear. Well, maybe, well, it depends what kind of car. So like, like my friend, he doesn't get violent. He's not a violent person. He's car, too, because he moved stuff and he works for them, but he's not a violent person. So he was scared. He was like, nah, just let me go. I want to see my kid. You know, he was begging for his love and shit. The first thing I thought about was like that video of a video, the first video of a video getting raided. And he like comes out, he walks out. He's on his phone. He's like, yeah, the phone call. He was like, so calm. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's that's kind of like that to that most people have. But but if you're like, like my friend, he's just like a real family dude, you know, so he's more of a, he was really nervous. He was like, uh, but, but like on some, like I'm on, I, you know, I kind of grow more of a violent in my room. I want to say like, and I do have my rungs with cops since I was young, like just a lot because I've always dressed like baggy and stuff like that. I always look suspicious type. I was always getting thrown in joviv with the, they take you over there for like, uh, overnight shit, you know, if you're walking late or whatever, for whatever reason, that would take me. So I knew a little bit, but I, I still get scared. Really like don't get me wrong. Like I still don't want to deal with. I always, I'm always nice to though. I'm never like, I'm never like on my, my, my, my, my, bravado type. I know I'm, I'm always like, Hey, officer, you know, I'm like, I'm doing good. Like whatever. I don't have license, but I don't have any drugs. You know, like I try to play cool. And, but these guys, they were just like on it. They, they didn't want no fucking nice part of it. They were like, no, no, no. So, uh, so yeah, they, they're, they're looking. I mean, they're like, now you're too calm. Whatever this, that they put the bag over my head, they find this stuff. And eventually, they just start asking me about like, all right, just give me a house, give me a name or something. I was like, bro, I'll give you my gun. I don't want to like, I don't have nobody else to snitch on, like I'll give you my shit. Like I'll give you my gun. It's in my house. Let's go get it. Like, you don't even have to like really like literally somebody can go out there and give it to you. Like that's the only thing I have. And at this point, they started getting calls because one of the cops took a picture of me. When they found the houses and when they found the pictures, one of the guys took a picture of me. Apparently he's connected with my friends, cartel. So no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, not different I was with. My other friends got it. So apparently, yeah, he shoots, they got this like telegram and apps like that, where they they got the whole group in there. And you should a picture and like, hey, anybody know this guy because he's snitching on so and so. So the cops have some sort of a telegram channel connected to these guys. There's always like, in the group of cops, there's always one or two that are in groups to stay connected with the with the cartels, whatever whichever they're working on. For example, like in case they kidnapped somebody who's part of the cartel, just like if you let's say for instance, I would have been a son of somebody important or something like that, you know, that would have been an item to tell them because like even like when you brag about being somebody that's not well looked upon, you know, unless you're like really, really somebody like, hey, I'm this guy, like don't fuck with me. But at that point, they know, you know, but when you're like coming up or when you're like, we're not even like a real member, like I was nothing. You can't really be like, yeah, you know what I am like, you know, that's not even the attitude, especially if you're on a, I've always been in a negotiated type. Like I don't get for like I get crazy sometimes, but with the cops, I'm always negotiating because you're not going to be them. You're never going to be them. So it's better to negotiate and be friends with them and be on the goods. So, you know, so yeah, I mean, at this point, yeah, one of the cops takes a picture of me. I didn't realize, but I was, I was handcuffed, takes a picture of me and sends it to the group. And everybody knows me because he sends it to my friends group. And once everybody starts like, Hey, what's up? Like, why you get him? Like, like, because I'm not involved and you know what I mean? I'm like, I'm like super like, they're party such. So everybody's mostly like surprised that they have me there and tied up and saying that I snitch. So now they're like, they're calling the cops. They're like, hey, what's up with my boy? You know, what do you need for him to let him go? Like, so now let's start getting calls from, uh, seen a lot too because my friend he's connected to. So I guess they send a picture to him to the other group. So now they got these guys looking for us. And at first, nobody knew like they had us, you know, because they just caught us like in the swab, mean like some random shit. But now they, they actually made everybody know. So now they just want to hurry up. They're like, okay, so what are you going to give me? And I was like, like I said, I got my gun in my house. I'll give you that. How are you going to do it? I was like, well, my friend, he's a, he's a psychologist. He lives right in front of my house. He's my child or friend. He doesn't not have nothing to do with it. And he knows my family. I can tell him, go in, get it. He'll bring it back out to you. You guys don't have like my grandma lives there. Like I was in TJ. I was like, it's my grandma's house. It's all family. Like, you know, there's no need bro. Like it's just a way to time you break into my house. Like I literally just will give you what I have. And they're like, all right, call your friend and tell him to get the gun ready and take it to the hoax or you know, or seven, 11. And um. The way it's the time that you break into my house, like I literally just will give you what I have. And they're like, all right, call your friend and tell me to get the gun ready and take it to the Hulk. So, you know, or 7, 11. And so I'm doing this negotiation. My friend is doing another negotiation with the one he's dealing with. Um, they're asking him for $3,000 after all of the shit they saw on your phones. They only won my gun and $3,000. Well, at this point, we weren't together. So we didn't know, but I was like, damn, the only one. My gun, I was like, I was asking for all of these kinds of information in shit. And now they only won my gun. I was like, okay, you know, what's going on? So, okay, so we come to an arrangement. I'm going to give them their gun and they're going to let me go. So they put me, okay, they put us back in the car, you know, same again, uh, head between the knees, hands behind your back. And it's a long drive because I live on the other, all the way to other side and city. So we're just driving and they're, they keep going through my phone and they're like, so why you got a podcast? What's up with all these pictures? Well, these famous people and stuff like that was like, well, I do, I've been telling you, like, cause I've been telling you, I do music, like I do this and then, like, I got a podcast and you know what, you should come to, you know, you should come and, let's talk about this at the podcast. I'm tied up, bro. I'm like, my head's between my knees and shitting back at the patrol car. And we're having like a little five minutes of bonding, you know, like, they're forgetting, I'm arrested, I'm forgetting I'm a victim. And we're just talking about like podcasting. We're talking about Elkhaldarong, shout us to that. I don't know, I'm personally good. I was trying, I was telling him like, and you ever seen this guy, Elkhaldarong? He's like, because they've, oh, okay, just going back, they saw pictures of, oh, God, who we around the one I was mentioning. And he goes way back. So the guy in charge, the cop, he's like, hey, what do you have pictures with him for? Like, what the fuck is he up to nowadays? And I was like, what do you mean? Like, you know, he's like, I used to chase him back in the day. Like, I'm from, he mentioned at team. He's like, I'm from the team of Liza Hola, typing, whatever I used to chase all these motherfuckers, whatever. And I was like, well, you should come and talk about this bro. Like, I was like, you should talk because I interviewed Gordo, and he's still in prison, but you should come and talk about this. And that's where I was like, you know what color on? He's like, now what the fuck is that? I was like, what you mean, you know, let's go there. And I was like, and the guy had my phone, the guy next to him was like, hey, can you pull up for the Instagram? He's like, what are your type? I mean, can you type? It's manifesto. He's like, how the fuck you type that? I was like, put her in my head. And so I was like, I type it for and they're going through it. Um, I actually texted, I don't know it. I never talked to him, but I actually texted this to his Instagram to say, I was told to him this story. They're actually going through this Instagram while we're tied up and we're driving to one of the houses and going through it. And I'm like, nah, man, he's a phony. I never seen it. Where I was like, nah, man, I think he used to do real deal. He's like, man, all these people coming out. If I were coming to your podcast and I told the story man, I would be giving a real thing. I was like, what was so? You know, and should we do it? And there was just, they were not going for it because like I said, there was only like five to 10 minutes of bonding. After we started getting closer to, I thought we were going to my house. When they made me look up, we were outside my friend's house. The pictures they found were outside that. So at this point, I was like, oh, yeah, we're bonding. We're just going to my house. I'm giving the gun. They're gonna let me go. So they're like, hey, all right, shut the fuck up now. They're slamming the bag. And I'm like, now, I'm telling a guy. So I look up and I was like, oh, shit. And I see my home is blocked. And I'm like, no, I don't know what house it is. And I'm like, no, I bushed with what house it is. I was like, I don't know. Like you seen in the pictures. Like I just drove to the bar. I don't know. I just know because he sent me pictures of his inside of the cameras. But I don't know what house it is. And the same cop that took a picture of me, he was a driver. He looked and he was like, well, that's the only house with cameras. So he took a picture of the house with cameras and he sent it to the text again. And he sent it to the group. And he was like, he's niche on this house. I don't know this. They told me this afterwards. But he was like, hey, he's niche on this house. And that's like, oh, no, no, no, no, that's one of our houses. Like don't do, don't fucking go in whatever. This and that. And I did like, they would have gone in if I would have told him like, hey, that's his house, shit's in there, whatever. They would have gone in bro before even like texting house. But since I didn't want to give it up, I guess the cop kind of like, he was like, aren't like me as first. I guess I don't know. But once he has, they were like, no, no, no, no, not that house. So they didn't go in the house. And after that, they just busted a U-turn and they took me to my house. So now we're getting to my block. I call my friend. I'm outside of. I'm like, hey, uh, what you doing? He's like, oh, no, man, not just on my way to also get a, give me a beer. You won't like, can you drink it? Because they drink it in my, I got a little in my studio. It's like a spot. It's like right here, if they come in and chill, like they like to drink beer. I don't drink, but I let them drink in my house and I smoke. So he's like, hey, I'm on my way to get a beer. Can you drink it? Your house, you, you, your house. I was like, uh, not, not yet, man, but I need a real big favor for me. He's like, what was going on? I was like, can you grab my gun? It's in my purse and one of my bag is and just take it off. So I'll pick there. I'll pick it up there. He's like, hey, dog everything cool. I was like, yeah, it's just just handle bro. Like it's real serious bro. Don't fuck it up. And he's like, yeah, no worries. But he's like, he's like, whatever. I'm just gonna give my friend like, that's what I was telling you before. He's in the middle of something. But we're so, we're so used to like this life. It's nothing like I could have asked him for my jacket. You know, it was the same shit. You know what I mean? So, so he gets that shit. We're part like a block away and we're seeing my friend go from his house to my house, get the back, go in his car and drive to the auction. So that's two blocks away. So he's like, that's him. Right. That's him. That's him. I was like, yeah, that's him. So boom, they go and they, and they pull up home and they act like they are like, are arresting him. Like they get him out of the car and he's scared. He's like, what the fuck? And he's thinking that I stitched on him because later on, he's like, bro, I thought he stitched. And I was like, bro, you're fucking psychology. He was just giving me my, like, how am I snitch? He's like, no, I wasn't. He was like, that friend that things he was in the middle, like, biggest. Yeah. He was like, no, man, like, but then after a while he's like, no, he was just fucking wrong. But he's at this point, he's thinking like, I fucking call the cops and then or something. So they take the gun from them, they search and whatever they get the gun. And one of the cops was like, hey, man, don't be hanging out with a wrong crowd. This way you get a friend, you're all with friends like this. Don't be hanging out with his kind of friend. Zero, good guy, bro. Like he starts to get on with a lesson, but then they get in the patrol car again. And they just start acting like they just, uh, rob somebody like go, go, go, go, go, and the guy's driving and like go this way, go this way. No, no, no, no, no, no, I know, I know this. It's over here. There's a lot of cops over here go this way. And I'm like, what the fuck? We're in the patrol car. Like running away from the cops like damn. So, so now we're going to my friend's house because he lives all the way the other side of the city. He promised them $3,000 at this point. I don't know, but that's what he told me. So we go, uh, we meet his mom at a public place like a car's union or something. And the lady hands over the money. And they lay my friend go. So the guy in the back, he kind of actually like, I think he follows me on Instagram because he was asking me like my social media. And I think follows me. He was like, hey, so we're going to let him go too, right? That's getting about me. I'm all tied up in shit. And, um, and one of the cops is like, no, no, no, no, not yet. And I was like, whoa, whoa, bro. Like you got my gun. You got the money. Like what do you mean? I yet, you know? And they just closed the doors. They get in the car and they just drive off. And I'm like, what? And then they took me to this like little industrial blocks. And they just like get the fuck out of the car and don't go back. Don't look back. Don't look back. Like a fucking kid. I've been like, don't look back. Look, walk straight. And I'm like, bro, I don't fucking one. Like I just want to go home at this one. Like you got my shit. Like I don't want to, they were scared. They kept telling me like on my way on, on, on, when they were going to drop me off, they kept saying like, hey, bro, remember, I'm doing your favor. Don't go, don't go crying to, you know, to, you know who? I was like, no, I'm like, bro, I'm, I'm straight. Like just let me go. He's like, no, no, no, no, we've got many people like you. And I help him out. He was like, look at this fucking side. He's like, I help him out. And then they fucking, they go and tell the, those guys, the bosses and now I get shit. So like you, I call you slipping today. I'm going to let you go with some money. And that's it. Be like, take it as a man. And he was kind of right. You know, I was fucking up. I was doing shavish. You know, I should have been arrested, but the streets and teachers different. So I didn't get arrested. He let me go home. And they took my gun from me. So it's even, you know what I mean? But I can sense his, he was scared, you know, like not, maybe not scared like me, but of a backlash of some stuff. Because all the people that just were like, I know him, I know him. So he was like, don't go tell them like, don't worry. To them, you know, and I'm like, bro, I'm fucking wanting nothing. I just want to go home. I know smokey joining me with my fucking dog. You know what I mean? So, so yeah, they just dropped me up and then it was in just your complex and they gave my shit back and they just drive off. And I was already fucked up with my leg. So now I'm limping like for real, my ribs are my knees and shit. And I get my phone now. And the first thing I do, I get the cool and see what I fuck I am. Cause I don't know where I am. I'm like, all right, I'm in the other side of the fucking city. So then my friend calls me the one that they choose. He's like, hey, where are you? I'll pick you all right now. And I said on my location, he picks me up. And on my way to this house, I'm checking my phone and it's just all kinds of messages. Man, like, hey, what happened? What are you doing? And one of the guys I trust the most, he used to be a military used to be. What do you say? How do you say? Teniente in English? Like lieutenant, maybe some of them? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He used to be, yeah. Um, but now, um, he became a personal security guard. Like you could hire like, you know how you hire ex-military shit. But a lot of car sale people hire that type of security guard too. So he's got connected that way with them. So he has communication. He doesn't work with them or anything. But he has good, they respect them. And he has good communication. So he was saying he's like, Hey, this is the word that's going around that used to nich on this guy and you better fix that shit because, you know, so I'm like, what the fuck? I'm thinking like, okay, I got off my shit. Like finally they let me go. And now I got handle with all this fucking pressure from the cartel and shit. Like that. The cops say you snitch. Yeah. I didn't know that. That's what I what happened. Like why are they tripping? He's like, well, no, they're saying that that you took him to this was us. I was like, if I would have said the shit was in there, they would have broken in because one time it happened to me, they caught my friend, they found pictures of shit I had in my house. And he said they were in my house and they broke into my house and they took him. So I was like, if I would have said that they would have did the same shit. Like it's exactly the same case. I was like, I didn't I didn't say anything. I mean, that's why I got the fucking bag on my head. You know what I mean? Like, and so these days probably week we're going to have go by of just negotiations of trying to convince them and trying to like because they were like, nah, the cop told me, bro. Like, I don't know what we like to me. I was like, why would I fucking like to you? It's like, whoa, because I could kill you. And I was like, nah, but I like, you know, so eventually like the guy, the house they showed up to the guy, he's actually my friend. Like it's not only a business. He was actually my friend. So so eventually you like, you know what, I believe you bro. Like, like I know I was tripping at first, whatever. And like I was tripping when somebody's not showing me like, I feel you grow like, I know I've been in your shoes before. But this time, that was in it. Like that's why they didn't bring into your house. Otherwise they would have just gone in burst it in. Like they always do, you know, but I didn't say anything. Like whatever they found, I know I fucked up because I didn't raise the messages. You know, everybody even like like the boss, I don't want to say them, but like the real head of the car to run out. He's like, hey, not just been there. What I'm inside is like, come on, don't be stupid. You raise the messages next time. And it's funny because like I said, everybody knows like, bro, you always erase the messages. Like what happened to the car tell told you that? Yeah. Yeah. Because he, yeah, he's because he was in the group when they asked for me. And I've met him like a couple of times. I shook his hand before and we're being like a departing and I know people that were from my know, a lot of people that were from. So so it's just this like familiarity of like like people are saying he knew me, but he doesn't really know me. You know what I mean? You know what I mean? Yeah, I know him like, you know, that type of thing. But, but yeah, like people next to him know me, people like on the same level of him know me too. So, so I was kind of like kind of like protected, I could say that from on that location. But at the same time, I'm now like, okay, we backed you up, but now you got to respond to yours for what the fuck happened. But at the same time, I was like, what am I responding to? You guys didn't get anything confiscated. You didn't, your houses didn't get ready. Like nothing happened to you guys. You know what I mean? Like I have no one to pay for my shit. Like, gave him my gun. Like, I don't want that guy beat up, you know? So yeah, eventually it was just like a little tension the first couple of days. And then now I'm cool with my friend, you know, like I always sounded like bro, like I know my fucking like Q fools like years later. So I'm just going to trust you and you know, like, and then know that we're cool. But now I trust him and I know he understood the situation and what happened. Like I said, man, the good thing is that I never get in trouble like the car show never had to do this type of things for me. Like it's not like, oh, they always got to be answering. You know, this is never that's when the one and only time happened. They were like, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. What the fuck? Like why you have him for like, right? So it seems like the cops are making shit worse down there. Yeah, they kind of are because it seems so backwards, but it seems like it's true. It seems like if they weren't there, there wouldn't be all this fucking bullshit. How yeah. And the thing is back then, we were talking about, you know, Ramon in them. They used to have, they used to be very violent with the cops. Like back then bro, like even when I was like 17 coming up, you could like literally be drinking in your car, whatever. If the local cops pulled you over, you would be like, hey, what the fuck are you doing? Like, let me look for go. You're like, you could be like a fucking painting. The assholes and they would have to bother their heads out because they were like, they were terrified of the cartel. And like, I don't know if I told you this was the phone. What time I was like, yeah, like 17, 18, and I was with one of my friends with him, one of my friends that passed away and he was very well connected to the way we're young. And they pulled us over. We're on our way to the liversome. He used to sell, like he used to sell like eight and stuff like that. And we just on our way to deliver. I was with him on the way to deliver. And we got pulled over by like two local cops. And he was trying to like, you know, I feel like he was one of the good cops. He was just in a, maybe just around the by guy that's that we're back in a row. But he seemed like one of the good cops because he wasn't backing down. Our friend was telling me like, hey, I worked for such and such. like, you should just let me go like we're being nice. He's like, hey, I worked for such stuff. I'm just on my way to do something. Let me go like, you know, I'll give you 15, 10 bucks back then. It was like 20 bucks like the rate, you know, for just getting pulled over. You should be like, hey, I got pulled over. I was just giving something to buy them some. Because a couple of scokers, palace caucus, that's what they say. You know, they lay palace caucus, you know, you should like 20 bucks, you know, whatever you have something. So we're trying to get away with that. And the cow was like, no, no, no, no, whatever he was like, I was standing his ground. So my friend called his boss and he's like, and his boss is like, hey, he had them over the phone, tell him to answer the phone. And the cow was like, no, I'm not talking to anybody. And back then it was like, oh, you know, and so my friend's like, hey, he's not picking up the phone. So my friend's like, so his boss was like, oh, what? Give me the patrol number. So we look bad. He's like, all right, P29, whatever. He hangs up probably like a minute and they call them on his walk in. They're like, you better let my nephew go right off. I didn't hear the rest. I'm guessing you know what they said. But the cow came back. He's like, hey, what did you tell me? We were for such and such. We told you, but we looked young. Like if I, I, I looked young at night, like 18, 18, I was, he looked like the youngest. So we took, we looked like two kids, you know, trying to play hard. But we were the real, like my friend was connected, you know, so he didn't believe us. So he was like, when he told me you guys worked with such and such and my friends, like I told you, he's like, oh man, he just got me in trouble, whatever. Like, bro, I told you like, I wasn't even trying to get you in trouble. Just trying to get on my way. That's how the local police cops used to be treated back then. Now it's just like, well, what I was saying is back then they used to keep them in line with the narcos used to make way more money than what they do now. Like what the buses do now. So they had just way more power where they like, would they just buy the whole police and they could kill like like police bosses, you know, and police. Police. That kind of money anymore. Because it used to be a one organization, but now it's all broken out. Now you got three cartels. If they worked together, they could become what, what it used to be. But it's not, that's not the thing anymore. Not even in a low, like everybody, all the big organizations, like what you see in narcos, all that broke down and everybody just start, it just keeps branching out, you know. Every time they catch someone, two guys come out. Every time they catch them. Which makes it work. Makes the situation way worse, way more violent. Yeah. And it also makes it violent amongst them. Because now like nobody wants to kill cops because it's too much heat. It draws too much heat. So nobody wants to fuck with the cops. They're they're shooting some like the ones that they kill recently, like from, or no, like seven years from, yeah, probably like seven years now. They kill them because they've been stealing. They've been, you know, they've been messing with the cartel. But back then they used to kill guys that didn't, that like didn't want, you know, plateau, plumber, remember that? Like, you work for us or, or, or, or, or that. We're back then they used to do that and that's how they ran the police. Like, that's how the police will bow down to them. Right now, nobody wants to kill police and I'm not saying they should. But right now, nobody wants to do that kind of activity because it creates heat. And they can't, they they turn away about more as businessmen to make money. The guys that are fighting, the guys that is violent or anything, are the guys that are fighting the little drug houses where they sell meth. And usually in those, they sell like their biggest income is meth, but they sell like little Reggie, they sell pills. They sell like, like, um, Yo, can you turn that back on Austin? Shit's fucking loud. It's, it's, uh, what's, what's the difference for postal and, postal retail? How retail? Yeah, it's like little retail. Like the retail, those are the ones that are killing every day because that's like gang violence. That's like one block is run by Sinoloa or one, another block is run by Jalisco and like the other two blocks are run by Tijuana and then like the blocks in front of it, it's all Sinoloa. So it's, it's just like gang fights. It's just like krypton bloods. And, uh, and that's the one section of the car show fighting. They have power over police too because the bosses of certain areas, they also pay cops. So like, um, like recently they had this, this other car show trying to come in where, where I'm from in TJ to this area where the same people have rules for like years. And now that like, many people are trying to come and take their stuff, but they're always like, they're always standing ground. And, um, so some guys actually opened a little retail trap house and one of their blocks and they, they police showed up and they went in there, they took everything and they left to their bodies outside. And, uh, and I only know this because a big deal, it was right next to my friend's house. And like three, three different friends living that block because this is a close street. And so no other street. So they all know each other. It's like a little, they always hanging out together. So, so they know everybody. So this happened. And now the, uh, the owners, the, like the owners of that turf, they went back and they're like, hey, we want to see the cameras of your house because we want to see what cops did this. So my friend, my friend doesn't want to be in the middle of it. He doesn't want to like, you know, so he just, he didn't want to show the like, he didn't want to give up the cameras, the videos. So they thought that we're going to kill him. So he had to move. Well, he had to leave his house because there's this war going on in this fucking neighborhood. And his cameras got what happened and now, you know, and, uh, and that's the section of the retelling trap houses part of the car. So that's, that's the most likely. The guys that work wholesale, um, it's very well known with one of them that is because most of them are pretty chill. You see them out in clubbing. You see them out there, like businessmen and they're like, you see them in parties. You see them, you know, you know, they're the bosses. Yeah. But they're not in like business. Yeah, they're more businessmen. So when one of them dies, you're like, oh, shit, like that fool, like either became a snitch for the DA or he was, he stole from somebody. He switched cars. Like, you know, like something, something out of that sort. But all the other, like 10 killings you see during the day, all the other 20 jose, the hardcore, the grandos that you see, that just mess heads. That's just, uh, yeah, friends of mess heads, you know, jeez. Yeah, junkies and a lot of innocent people too, man. A lot of it and said, I know in TJ when somebody dies, it's very well known that, oh, he must have been in, you know, something. But now, man, many people, like I was saying, you're like, it's like if we just have been launched and we're just friends, maybe we just met a war, like, I got the summary, he used to play soccer, but he was involved with the cartel. And he was with other, with the soccer player celebrating after, and they just came and shot off the place. You know, and it's this, this play where like bro, you know, who shot the place? I, they were, they were going to get one of them, the cartel guy, but he was celebrate with the soccer team. So they just showed up to the shop and just shot the whole place. And that's how many innocent people die. And they're not involved. Like, how do you, like if you're in a soccer team and a cartel member, do you just like, oh, you know what? I don't want to be in the soccer team anymore because he's playing. They really do that. Like really, really, really do that. Not really, man. You know, you, your first thought is going to be, well, I never see this guy. I don't hang out with him only seeing him in soccer play. So whatever, you know, well, also, Luis was telling me that when they rated a video's house, that the army killed tons is like, not tons, but there was a lot of civilians who got shot and killed during that whole shootout. And they, and apparently from what I understood is that they captured a video, like they had some paramilitary guys coming in a helicopter, take a video out, and then they started the big fucking time. If you hear the radio frequencies, you could hear when they're like, hey, where was the, we're getting rated by the white people or like the widows, you know, like, they're, you know, what are they? I don't know, where do you know, where does their actually reporting? Because, you know, they use Mexican military too, but they also, white people like the agents, they do operate. So well, known that they mentioned it in Corridos, and their own Corridos, like when they're bragging about stuff and anything, there's this, there's this couple lines where they're like, oh, yeah, we're, we're looking after the Marines, but also those undercover DA Marines, those DA that dressed as Marines. Yeah, we see you, we know you're there. You know, they say there's lines like this in the Corridos. So it's well known, man, because they're patrolling the streets and they're pulling people over, and if they pull like somebody over and they don't find anything, let's say they pull a mule over and they don't find anything on me, but I see that some of them are white, you know, some of them aren't speaking, well, but Spanish. So I go and they let me go. So I told my friends like, hey, there was, there was white people with, you know, so this word just starts spreading around so much. They see them so much as now it's like they recognize them, you know, so and the frequency is the radio frequency that they, they get on the social media. You could hear them saying, hey, we're getting ready to buy the weather like the weather is not sky. You don't know video like, you know, they're getting a video. So, you know, it's, it's stuff like that. That's not mentioned as well as the people that died, you know, like I was saying earlier, when they're going to, when they want to clean something, you know, it's kind of hard to pick and choose who's guilty and who's not because like I said, it's not certain type of people, you know, it's not like, oh, only these guys are like, only the guys are dressed like these are now man, like, especially in those rural areas where, where, look man, all these rural areas in Mexico, they have this, they never had a good relationship with the military. If you go back to like the days of the revolution and stuff like that, they were always fighting the military. It's always the military against this, the countryside people because they're forgotten, you know, the government doesn't do any to fool. So this, this, they say doesn't come from like the narcos, you know, it's been, it's just been boiling through generation generations. So these people are really going to back up their local, you know, in this case of video or chapel. So you as a cop, you're going and I'm gonna tell you that the whole town is against you. So like, I mean, I'm not saying they they don't purpose, but if you fucking shooting and then adrenaline and then you see a couple of kids, guys running someone fucking shoot them too, you know, maybe they were just trying to get away because if you see the shootout, they're shooting in the middle of the town. It's not like, I mean, it is in the outskirts. This is a rural area, but it's still a lot of houses and a lot of families and a lot of stuff. It's still like a neighborhood, you know what I mean? So the military has this, have this, a wrap of like just picking up the dead and disappearing. You know, even in, they started happening when they have this big shootout back in like 20, 2009, 2010, when these big shootouts are happening, when they're like, everything became militarized, you know, like the set does and all this stuff. And it was funny because you would see these news where it was like 14 sikarios killed, one arrested and one military injured in the leg. You know, like really? Like, nobody gave up. Like you killed the first two guys and nobody gave up and then start, start, start coming out like they were just killing them. They were in a rescue because they eventually be like, go by the judges. So the, after they shoot out, they just killed everybody, even the guys that were begging for the lives that were, you know, they're crawling like they were just shooting everybody. And it's, it's common sense. Like if there's no way the 15 sikarios uh, uh, fought to death, you know, at least there's going to be five that's going to be like, you know what, for this, you know, like, fuck that, you know, if that's human nature, you know? So it just, if you're like, like I said, yeah, I've always read news and stuff like that. I've always been on point with that. So you started seeing all these stories. And I asked my military friends like, this is military propaganda. You can't really say that how many military men are actually injured, right? He's like, no, man, the lieutenant is like, because if we do, we, we lower them around the right places. And they're going to think that we're losing. Like there were some places where like, it was only main news that military is that because the cartel will leave like tax of bodies in a very well known road, where it made it like fucking like obvious. Like you can't hide that that you guys are taking, you know, uh, death too, you know? So I asked my friends, like, yeah, we can't really, so what it's like the void or we can really say, we're talking, we kind of hide that information because we don't want to lower them or also the troops that are actually fighting out there, you know? And, um, because it's a mythological that, you know, like only one military heard in like, I mean, I know if the car is can't shoot, but, you know, like, I would expect to feel more, especially when they're like getting ambushed, like sometimes military will be like parked in a gas station. And then bam, another convoy of cars just pull over, bam, bam, bam, and start shooting at them. And they didn't hit nobody. Like really, right? You know what I mean? So I was sort of saying, well, what sort of plan is there? What is the president of Mexico talking about when it comes to trying to eradicate the violence, you know, these cartels? Like what do they say they want to do? Like what is their plan and what is actually being done? And do you think any of the shit will work? Do you see any end to this? I have a lot of friends. Not only in the cartel, bro. I have friends in politics. I have a lot of reporter friends alive. Like, I like all the stuff, but uh, what I what I've seen with this girl or anything, they, they, well, his, you know, his slogan, right? With the hugs, not drugs. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Hugs and I, but it's Albras, no, Alas, he's kind of stand on it to be honest because the cops are crazy. Like I was telling you, my silly, they're just, they're just taking advantage of like of the situation, you know, they're, uh, most of these, maybe even in St. Aloha, like the, the bosses right now, they've been bosses for like 10 plus years now. They haven't had no, like attempts usually used to read about, oh, they were close to alma mater. Oh, they, they almost caught a chuckle. He got away or, or whoever was, but the guys that've been here for like the last 10 years, yeah, they've been, they've been like, you see them in parties. I see them in parties. I've seen them like, and, and, and, but why, why, oh, video? Why did they get him? I think my, my hypothesis on that from different information, I got this, that, you know, how they, they say they stumbled upon them. They didn't know they were going to get them the first time they got them. Like when they ran into them, I think this is it's version where he's like, when they get them, they're like, oh, shit, they didn't know what's hidden, you know, but sucks for him, but now they know who he is. And now he was the fact that they, the whole thing happened, how they took him away from the government. Because it was public. They had to admit they now like, if he would have been arrested that day, he would, he would have probably made it like a with money, you know, probably bribing a judge, he probably would have gone out because he wasn't that big. He wasn't that known like, like his, his brothers are like in the, in the most wanted, you know, cartels and stuff but he wasn't really that much. Like he's well known among the things, but it's different to like, there's a lot of narcos that are not in the most wanted list that are big narcos, you know, we said that video was like the one son of El Chapo who, uh, El Chapo didn't want him to be in like the cartel business. He kind of like tried to shade him for they have many sons like that. They have other kids that are known. They have other, oh, really, they become known once they, they go to the darkside. But there's people like I was saying in the, or you know, family too, there's brothers that never, there's actually one that I believe he's in the Vatican that he's a priest. What? Yeah, you should look into that. There's one, there's one that's real. That's why when the whole with the hard thing happened with the card and stuff like that, they, they, they actually were getting a little bit of a backup from the church. And I mean, from like the church, not like local churches, you know, they, the, because they were what the family, you know how wealth and church is always like, you know, so they were always that family. And, uh, yeah, man, what are the brothers? I believe he's, I think he's in the Vatican. I think he's a priest. So, um, yeah, I mean, many of, So they were always that family and yeah man one of the brothers I believe he's I think he's an a Vatican I think he's a priest so um yeah I mean many of many members of these families they're not known they become known once they do something like a video once he started doing like the social media and stuff like that they start getting owned but there's chappo how many stuff do you think he has you know he's just fucking you're just fucking all these like virgins and shit you know like fucking and it's like a prideful thing for like you know all their generations to like get like these like virgins you know that's why it's you know like some of his last wife is the younger than his 90s and his oldest son I think you know what I mean right yeah so once one was just telling me about that and as well as Pablo was like a sick fuck like that too like yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah he's like he's right with super young man and he she was pregnant when she was like like 13 or something and that's that that actually goes a lot in the country over and it's not like um I'm not trying just to find but actually girls like want to you know like girls looks for these guys like if a chap was hosting a party all their little girls be like oh let's go and see if he fucking marriage me or something you know they actually like and then it's all glorified in our culture and stuff so it makes it like like makes it for them to think it's okay you know what I mean like well they're just looking for opportunity right yeah but it's also also this old school way of like getting young girls like because not it's not even the narcos like like nobody's like nobody's are getting like young girls too and young girls are getting older guys it's like it's weird you know I mean it's like you know how they back then they want to like boys go to work and girls get married yeah you know I mean so that's kind of the thing and those areas it's country bro it's not it's not like you know they got people that come and go to the city and they've been out but it's it's very it's very countryish you know it's very well yeah it's a real area you know old school ways yeah and but yeah I mean the one once they start getting known it's because they jumped in the dark so like I was saying you know all this on even he's been into the life since he was really young like I don't think he ever wanted to be like I don't know but I don't think he ever wanted to be like a straight up kid or nothing because him and almais of the sun they were like the they were basically I feel like they were teaching them to take over the business you know what I mean that's why they got they got so powerful like he finally very powerful and almais on the one that became a uh an informant he was very powerful too like uh and there's sometimes where people take charge that you're like yeah people don't respect them he's in charge but people don't respect them much well these guys they are they are love they like them you know they're more like and so they got they got the whole thing to to be the boss so like like him he's always been in the spotlight because since he was young he was he was a son of a chopper he's the oldest you know he's not an uncle a guy or not the fucking Ferraris and everything and eventually he went to jail for a couple years I think and then he got out and he's never been arrested since and he got out in like I want to say like it doesn't seven or something like that he wasn't a crash in the car accident something like that and he did like three years and they say that oh okay I remember I remember how these stories connect they say it in the streets that uh you know how chopper went to war with this cousins the butran butran labor I don't know if you heard of them they used to be like this Federation but they broke up once uh these two back up a chopper when he was in jail and stuff like that okay so uh when chopper gets out they still help them out and everything but the guy who helped chop was escaped the first time uh now I think you're talking about at least in Seattle like I had turned himself into yeah no no not him this this were actually other side of the cartel that was really strong I don't think maybe you've seen a picture when the military kill them they just fill his body with bills and their species own with like his body and they actually got in trouble for that but uh but yeah it was just this other section it was just like another version of another chopper another mile but they were brought up in the front of it was a friend of a train and our two of us run and they were the same but when when chobga route they started like beefing and they said this is the word in the street it's not not nothing I you know guy I'm thinking but they said that a chopper turned one of them in so that his son could get out because when when his son got out they arrested one of the other guys and then after that the brother of the one that got arrested he's like no you motherfucker's niche son my brother and he just went full on war and that's the worst starting in 2008 2009 over there within and it was like one of the worst and who were the guy and there were two guys that were a big part of choppos final arrest the two guys that were in Chicago the two brothers the brothers yeah that they're working with 50 cent now I don't know if you've seen it there make they made a they made a podcast telling your stories I saw that yeah 50 cent 50 cent tell me about that I seen a I seen a I seen this interview of 50 cent where he's saying he's saying how he met them I guess back in the day when they were deep in the game one of his artists they snatches chain you know how over here you guys you know they snatch rappers chains I guess and I guess one of the twins got it back for for 50 oh sure and that's how they met back in the day so now that 50s a genre 50 cent bro I love his series I love it I read his books and I got really yeah he's he's one more I look up to that guy but yeah man I like how he's turning all that into into like entertainment you know and he's turning like the the BMF thing you're about to be a Mf yeah he made a series about that and he put the the the sun of meat he's playing meat that's like getting a son of a choppo to play a choppo you know what I mean wow that's crazy that's pretty wild man yeah man that's and that's and that's he's and that's keeping it pure too that's keeping it like in the you know you're not just having any actors to do is you're actually having actors and know what the fuck happened and that are close to the to the thing you know but yeah man shot it fucking 50 cent but yeah he was working with a with those twins and and I mean my straight side is like man these guys are snitches you know like these guys turn on everything like they weren't they weren't a Mexico but they were over here so that's how that's why they were it was easy for them to snitch in a way you know because I think their father did get in trouble so I don't know if they I don't know if he passed away or something but I've seen a little bit of their interviews and stuff and because their wife also had like a book or something yeah like I think they got in trouble that too so but uh yeah man I mean it's while I like like if I feel my son tried to do it I don't think he could do it I don't think he could just all of a sudden turn a youtuber storyteller and and just going around to any story I don't think he's just too street for that man and I'm not saying the twins are not but it's really different when you when you grow up in the court and like them like family like you know that's going against all of your values all your how come how come you don't hear about almao he's not in any of the shows he's not in narcos right now he's in a chapel series he's in the old chapel yeah but it's funny how it's not in arkos they don't mention them or anything how yeah I feel like a lot of people don't mention him uh well as part of get shaking man because I think Luis mentioned it's here how he has like this background with the CIA and like yeah and people keep like blaming them every time somebody gets caught like oh he probably is natural like no stuff like that I mean yeah I think we was telling a story I think it's on his Instagram now where he just like made this whole video about how a guy who was like a former police officer CIA officer brother-in-law who became his brother-in-law who got almao into the cartel and as my son talks about this in his book his book came out like what five years ago maybe and more and this is information that's been there but nobody reads you know what he reads book it's not in a video so it's so nobody knows about it it's in a book a paper back yeah it's in like two pages in the two pages of like a book so like nobody knows why it will be on a stone tablet it's sort of fucking crazy yeah and and and just a little little thing there are one of the things when I started writing I actually actually how do you sell it when you ferment it's another word fermenting reading because all my friends that don't read I made them read they read my shit like they like just because it's my shit and they will call me and they'll be like hey bro I read that shit you published I mean I don't read but since it was you and you're like talking about life that she was cool bro keep it up so I was talking to one of my writer friend he actually interviewed me coming out of you know he wrote a book with him and he was like and he was like bro you're actually making people read like people that don't read yeah you know what I mean not just right you're pretty cool man yeah and yeah that's just something that's it still up to like because I keep getting it from my friends like hey man I read that shit you or I would have books and it would be like a shootout like in pages and now and I read it and I'll be like hey we're from 24 to 27 and now I have them reading in my studio like full that would never pick up a book they were reading on that would be like oh wow find me another one like that you know and then now we have to find them another like shoot out or something you know but yeah man most of people don't read so well that's information that information about the CIA wrote a lot it's in the book and I mean yeah he has this background oh I said that's in his book yeah his son talk about it you haven't read the book I have no I have no right god right you're missing out he actually I think in the book he talks about how well he's arrested he calls his dad well he's with the D.A. agents and he's like you know what I think that's when he tells like he's gonna tell and it's that's like yeah do whatever you need to do like say whatever you need to say like you do you do what you need to do to fucking save your ass and and I mean the way he tells him his book it just sounds so fucking like like thrilling like in a next book called the traitor the traitor he wrote it himself and it's so the cover it's him with a clown face that he drew himself his own face he himself he drew himself I don't know if you can find the cover in the on the worst of the out now what is he doing now well he's probably living in one of those random cities in the US where they are in the US like cover like he's got some sort of witness protection well he's he testified against the chopper too he testified against everybody oh that's his book the traitor no way he drew that himself wild his uh his attorney contacted one of the most was on audio there you go yeah his attorney contacted one of the reporters in in Mexico only if you heard about her on a bill Hernandez yeah yeah he he well his attorney contacted her to talk about the book and they became they I think they I think is over five years right in the book she she kept talking to them and the lawyers don't like that and and she's the one she's the author on that and uh yeah man I mean that that's a really good real role that talks about the whole background on a mile with his oh I it's son is telling about it with his dad's author authorization like he's very telling about how he called his dad what he's with the a rather are there any interviews of alma mater yeah it's only rindle they never released a recorder well no recorded video no he uh but there's pictures where you seen you never heard about this interview no there's just really famous magazine called processal I don't know if you heard of it and uh I believe it's one of the founders if not the founder he passed away already he was like this really respected uh journals and uh I guess in my own at my time and he reached out to him and uh he's like yeah I want to do an interview with him so this guy there's a picture of him I don't know if you could pull that up to it because uh his name was Julio I'm forgetting the name of the other journalist but uh who you something and he took a picture with a mile and they talk I I read it at this like 2011 2012 I think so um uh when I read it I remember they're talking like in one of myos cabins and and he's not really answering questions he's more like I think he's like letting him talk more as it was a long time I read this but it's it's really interesting it's really interesting that mya wants to get it like something out there do you know what I mean that that's I that's something I was telling you Lewis like hey how do you know when boys get older now am I yeah he should be really old man I mean I heard he said I think that he said something like that I don't know but that's what Lewis told me but yeah he I mean he must be he's old and all the stress were like just like I was talking about the stress of flying like you know he belly hurts and like all the stuff just imagine knowing every day every time you wake up that there's tons of people looking for you yeah and I mean tons literally like uh enemies military and interpolal like the a all this people like your head is worth 20 million dollars imagine the stress of that that's it for him yeah 20 million yeah that's why he has a Corio he's like they're offering totally mainly for me I spend that shit on the course that guy's got to be worth billions and it's Corio says he spends I don't know horse he literally says that that's oh my god he's like totally meaning to get me I spent totally meaning on a horse if that's that bars and that's a rap bar I don't know what's fucking fucking bar and coming from the guy you know I mean I'm no he didn't write the the Corio but he had to authorize it so it's you know so yeah man I mean what makes the most money for the cartels right now well it a little immigrants right now it's a good illegal immigrants right now they're going for like there's more than any drugs not more but it's a good money because they're paying like 20,000 per people like if you were trying to get across you will pay around 15 to 20,000 dollars and that's for one person and that's not like and that's like uh I could put two people in a trunk and just no drop them off in San Isitra that's my 40 books right there how has that should change since uh and what was the difference between when Trump was president now that bardance president because I mean we were talking earlier and obviously the relationship oh that's a picture yeah oh that's the journalist yeah who just heard yeah that's the name that was a long time ago yeah yeah that should be like what 29 I mean 20 2009 2010 yeah oh wow 13 years ago yeah I remember when when that came out everybody was stunned you know like and uh the reporter talks about how you recorded the conversation but that he never released it I think he did have a recording but it's only on on he's not he only typed it and it's not really that long or anything he's just like a little small talk I mean coming from a muy you want to hear anything you know you know what fuck a food here and she you know yeah so no how is the border change since Trump was president to now uh I don't think have you noticed anything any difference if there were any change when Trump was in the didn't change not really he he he I know he had one of his his campaigns for like the wall but there was never been a problem right you know what I mean there was just some sort of like yeah he if it worked for him you know it worked for him but uh I mean you see all these videos you see tunnels you see we have I mean not we but literally carto have catapults I don't know if you've seen them but there's there's this places in like Arizona and stuff where it's mostly desert so they just use like medieval uh catapults you know they have you seen the rants but they jumped the cars over where they jumped like the like the bahawk cars like the trucks I don't think I've seen the right bro if you can you should pull it up there's rants literally going over the wall videos of the shit uh there's pictures I know there's pictures because I think he got caught but there's there's one with there I mean if there's one picture how tall that ball is well like like 50 feet tall the one that the new one yeah but the one that was before I don't think it was that big okay and like I said there's places in the desert where there's no like where it's just a fence like what's you get like I know there's big walls like in the cities but once you get like deep in the desert like when you go into like like a arrow sea or like all the stuff in the desert like there's places where there's just like we just move the just move the little thing you know and just go in and that's why you show this videos all these illegal immigrants with backpacks because they're making money off of the illegal immigrants and they're having them carry stuff across so that's you know but yeah I mean so the drug stuff is kind of like small time now no I think I think it's still it's still up there that low coke that's always going to make money coke um marijuana will not that not not really unless you send it to like the states were still illegal you know because I know few I know people that send marijuana to states where it's like I think like miss if you don't know like places where it's still like where um we're still illegal and I guess they're still like uh market for Reggie you know or like really good Reggie so but I mean but yeah man I mean coke is always going to be there you know what would change if drugs became illegal lies in the US how would the how would the cartels adapt they survive like what would the violence change whoa I see like this look at it look at California with a weed you still got a black market I mean you got legal dispensaries and at first people were like oh even myself like man they're taxing like I don't want to go like tags I'll just go to my dealer you know he's still selling so like there's like in California it's the best place for weed like I'm pretty sure you know but it's still a big a large black market on it like a large black market like they're doing and not do it because I used to sell it like you know I mean so I I would get it from like at first I would before I found the dealer I would go to all the dispensaries and get all the like first and patient deals and all this stuff and just fucking buy all this shit but eventually like first and patient deals ran out and all this shit and I was getting it for uh oh third people third person price so eventually lee I I I connected with people with like locals in San Diego because I never really grew up in San Diego you know so I didn't really know like the streets in San Diego so eventually I started getting to know like a little bit of locals and street people and stuff and I wish they came up with some people like growers and stuff like that that that that get that actually I met him because they did this big ass events of weed where it's just like um like a group of vendors would just show up and sell the weed but there was events with like wrappers giveaway in San Diego and they were four hour long events so like by the time the police got a report on it was over and they would do it like in this empty empty um warehouse is a shit like that you know and they have a little community in this and we're like okay in the next event we're dropping up the area tomorrow at a certain time and they dropped the adi and then you go oh you know get free gifts in the entrance and you show up and there's like 40 vendors of different kinds of weeds in all the legal and this isn't a place where weed is legal like where you could you know but but it's expensive to put a little expensive you know it's like a million dollars essentially of that all these kinds of things so like I mean cookies that's how it came up you know the backpack boys that's how they came up you know eventually you got to rise up but it leaves this this margin for like black markets too and I think that's kind of what's what's going to happen with if like let's say if they legalize cocaine it's going to be the government's going to have control of it you know it's going to be probably not as pure you know probably not as good people say now it's definitely going to be pure because it's going to be better because it's the government but what the I don't you know like I don't try to make the most money they can exactly you know so we're giving it selling it through pharmaceutical companies so if they're cutting it but you still got this dealer you know that you always call like why would you just change what we just start going to the pharmacy when this guy's always been been selling to you since it was legal you know he gets a good shit he drives out he drops it off at your house you know you know so there's this kind of connection with the dealers I think maybe it's still early maybe if they legalize it and then in 50 years maybe you know everything change but but it's a problem with cocaine is the dealers in the US right because they're the ones that are cutting it with shit like like accidentally cutting it with fentanyl yeah other shit that people don't know what the fuck they're getting low level but then at the same time when when because car tells aren't doing that right no they don't they don't like doing that shit it's a bad rep but then again using users where they're like they find out somebody oh these and now they want to get that shit you know what I mean it's it's also like kind of the users for two where instead of being scared of like oh he oh these like I'm not buying from from his dealer they go like oh no we're where he get this shit from you know they want the the strong shit because in the mind they think like oh he died but I can't handle it you know what I mean yeah that's crazy and that's people that think like that they're like I want the shit that's gonna I want to be flirting with death when I'm taking extra and and you know it even becomes a joke when I see like like there's this famous video where rapper passing out up from a dad where he couldn't handle the dad so he just starts fucking coughing and he just passes out and me and the homies were like I want to have that shit like I want to get what he you know but it's that like a addict mentality I think you know where you think like oh it's that's too good but he could handle it I can handle it you know so that's the I think that's what folks have also because instead of the users being like you know like taking care of each other type thing that now they they want the shit that's killing people you know what I mean and it's not because if let's say you're a dealer that's cutting your shit with fentanyl and one of your clients that but you keep getting more clients you're not gonna stop you know what I mean you know what I mean you gotta oh it's Mexican cartels don't know what they're doing yeah full fentanyl on this you know what I mean so yeah man I mean it's a I know it sounds like a cliche but it's also a very lack of education on drugs because I remember when I I've always liked research everything everything in when I was young and we only have one computer in my house you have to be like off the phone to use the internet I would research like I would be on my friends and when I start like someone friends were doing coke really young and I didn't I didn't do coke till I was like 19 but some of my friends were doing like really young and I was I was like you know like kind of was like a mama's boy like I was raised by my mom like well but I became a bad boy so all these things like marijuana I kind of thought it was cool and I researched it I was like what does matter like when they taught me how to use Google in middle school they taught me how to use Google and ask Jeeps back in the day yeah I remember yeah so I would I would type everything well I love research stuff so I would research like what are these drugs do what does this drug do and once I school like math and coke and all that I was like oh what the fuck is that you know like I want to say eventually you see people doing coke all the time where you say I asked whatever I do bump and I wasn't really my thing like I was talking earlier I was first or not my thing I'm always like more we children but it was just all over like everybody's doing you know everybody's drinking and having fun and you say I would ever really do a couple bumps and eventually you become a coke if you know you're doing this every weekend and you think it's just socially but now every weekend that you're doing you want to do it yeah you know and other drugs that really really cause a lot of trouble and I want to speak on this it's actually I was thinking about this before or actually the legal drugs like there's this drug I don't know I don't know what you call it in English it's a Dribo Tril or Klonazapan it's konal Kalanapen no Klonazapan or real true I think they give it to people that have seizures it's a it's a really a down-bleptic people yeah like a pec people I think it's like a downer it just people take it for anxiety it's like what's all what what can you name some people like raviome's and then it's something something around that not as strong as senex but it's something like that and it's legal it's like a real thing that just like legal in the US legal everywhere okay and now but but this is one of the cardiosephic drugs because it just blacks you out and you don't remember anything and so they do that like when they when they go out and like commit murder yeah literally before they go they pop two with a Coke that's that's a little combo over there with a Coke yeah they it's it's the saying that we Coke it's faster but it's just you feel the gas uh the teary reading the pill so you feel like it's you're getting a much faster hang but it's just the same shit but but yeah it's it's kind of like Senex bro you know how people pass out on that and they just don't remember and they black out and they're like oh I woke up with like new clothes and shit like that or well these these draw particularly these pills they're very much used by by cicharios and by like regular people and like regular people are like I I know a lot they're like oh well I just use it to sleep well yeah but but you know take it you get all irritated and you're fucking yelling and you're hitting your kid shit like that like that's like math you know what I mean like what's the difference right and and people like I said I have friends that before they go commit a crime they pop that and they're drinking the Coke and they smoke maybe a little jay and they wait till i shits and then all the dry over there they do what they gotta do next days go by and they don't remember like they did it so maybe they remember a little bit but not that weight in conscience no I say if you like fucking did it you know well like yeah it's just it's so the lines are so weird when it comes to what's legal and what's not because like Coke it's it's illegal but we have fucking at a raw and all these other things that are basically just they're like one one molecule away from being just pure meth and and I think 90% of students in america are on at a raw every single day and I feel meth is worse than Coke if at all how Coke I don't think it would be like as strong as it is because Coke is not really that I don't feel as that strong as meth and and that's that's that's something else I really hate mess bro that's that's something I like I have close people like like a family members of stuff that can get over the addiction of meth and it's one of those things where it just sucks because like I tell people like at least her own at least it kills you you know what I mean at least you're fucking no dean one day and that's it but meth it keeps your life forever what is the difference between I've never done meth what is the difference between Coke and meth uh well meth is like I know what the difference is like let know what the actual difference is between the between the two drugs but like what is the experience what is the part about Coke is that it comes from a plant so it's kind of natural you know it's mixed with other stuff that get the the what do you call it the the ingredients the one that you want to get out to get them out but meth is straight synthetic meth is straight fucking medicine meth is straight pill yeah it's cooked up it's it's all it's just this yeah it's it's a worse and it's like the high like what is the difference in the high well getting high math and getting I've never tried meth I've always been scared I'm from the generation where when I was young and the older guys they were like there will be like hey if I received smoking meth I don't be like don't do this and then just seeing them bro like seeing them they're I don't want to look like that like I see something bad yeah yeah I remember I was so much like like the first movies I kind of saw Marwan and it was like Friday you know like smoking so so you see like pounds and it seemed fun like for me like I love this in the music and chilling my room so like would have joined it seemed perfect you know what I mean it kind of seemed like the vibe yeah but I seen like the meth heads and all these other fools at all dirty and like you know what was scrubbing she's scratching themselves yeah yeah that that's the that's the heroin heroin mix of scratch themselves oh okay and and but yeah I mean there's people that mix it there's people like to do meth with heroin and there's people that one of my friends he said he injected once meth and heroin he said it felt so good he said it felt it was the best he yeah they like like they like stretching themselves like getting high on the upper and taking the downer and like he said he ejaculate what yes he said he wasn't even holy she said he was he was he was very like just fucking like all fucking on heroin you know how they get all like oh fold it up and he said that he was feeling so good and then when he got back to the senses he he was yeah he was all stained up because he he came oh and he said that was the last time he did it he scared of he he did meth but he never did both and he said that time that happened he was like no fuck that that's too good I mean he he he got shot like a few years ago no rest in peace but uh he's one of the guys that at first he started building me in jail then we became really good friends after after he tried building me in he see he saw that he couldn't we became friends and uh when I got out I tried looking for him but they told me that he was he was bad in drugs and then they found them dead one one time but yeah like I was saying at least other drugs kill you man and meth just keeps you like a zombie forever forever and ever there's one of my friends dad the doctor told him like the doctor told him bro don't stop doing it if you stop you die like they literally like your body is so like used to this that you wouldn't take a what do you call it the withdrawal you body wouldn't yeah it will kill you like just keep doing it bro that's fucking that I mean yeah I hate that drug man that's one of the drugs I've never tried I've lost friends over it like I said I've even some family members that just get lost into them and I think that's the worst that's just that's one of the things like if I was ever like in charge like a president something I would be like against meth like oh yeah at all I know that shit I think it's when I was in uh a couple years ago I was in part of Iarta and when I went down to like the streets and I was like riding around I noticed on every corner there's like these little pop-up pharmacies with all of the fucking drugs or to Viarta. And when I went down to like the streets and I was like riding around, I noticed on every corner, there's like these little pop up pharmacies with all of the fucking drugs you could possibly imagine. And I was like knock offs. Have you seen the list? I was selling a Louis because he wants to do a story about NT. I was like, look, it's just, um, exit the United States walking and just walk to downtown in Tijuana. It's like it's like a couple miles, but you're going along like, uh, places. So it's not that long of a walk, but you see all these pharmacies with like, uh, sign in the front door with a Seattleist, federal, all the good shit, you know, oh, they're good shit. They just advertise it there. Like they're not fucking advertising, uh, fucking, I don't know, pep though or nothing else. Right. They got the shit that they know the Americans are coming for who is making that shicks. It's not the real, it's not the actual like brand pharmacology stuff. It's like, it's not really hard to make pills. You see how they press pills before? Like how they make the ecstasy. Yeah. It's not really the hard, man. I mean, but who is doing that though? The carto. Uh, it's kind of hard to ask because I don't think, um, shit, I've never been, I've never gone down that route. I hope to be honest. I mean, because I'm, I'm, I'm guessing they have to get it from somewhere. Maybe the supplier that's getting them. I don't know how it works for like pharmacies. I don't know, like the owners in charge of, of, of putting together his suppliers. I don't know if the chain of pharmacies already has a supplier. I don't know if they know what's going on or only the supplier. You know, I don't know I really know how, but, but just thinking that it's not that easy to do. It's pretty easy for anybody to do it. You know what I mean? Right. Any carto member that buys a couple of pharmacies, he could do that shit with his pharmacies, you know, just, just, just fucking make some fake, uh, see how these around, I don't know what the fuck I really, uh, what are the other ones? The hat are all in all that? Yeah. You know, yep. Yeah. I mean, it just seems like just from talking to you and talking to the weeds and, and, and cowled around and all these people, it's, it's this war just seems like it, there's no end in sight to it. And it's like, I think it started back. I think it started like, it's just, you know how when you try to, uh, put together a puzzle and you fucked up on one piece and I could take everything out. I think that's what happened. And since the beginning, they've put something off and then they just, I don't think fucked up. And then now all the fuck have had just been going on that day, we need like a reset button or something, you know? Yeah. And, uh, I mean, it's the, yeah, man, it's, uh, uh, I can't remember who it's all that was talking about. I think it was reasonable. Legalizing is still like, you ask them something like that. There's this story. Um, there's this, uh, this newspaper in, in Tijuana called the Cetta. It's like the most famous one because even before social media, that was like our social media, that they had the news or the cartels. Like that was literally like, you read that shit for like cartels and for machine. You know, eventually it kind of got watered down because they got started getting into politics. So, you know, now if certain people was related to politicians that they're involved with, they're not going to talk about it. So, you know, it got watered down. But first, and they got this video on their website. Um, it's like, uh, I think it's called a metaphor. They, they talk about this medieval times where they, there's this town and they have this dragon and the dragon is a metaphor for like the narcos and this dragon is always causing trouble in the town or whatever. And eventually the town finds a way for the dragon to cause shit and doesn't affect them because they found they try to kill them too many times and they just came back worse. So eventually they just became friends with them. And now we've, you know, and they try to make this as a story for like the more country. And I think that's kind of, that's kind of what's going to have to happen, man. I mean, yeah, sort of legalization with like amnesty. And like, because it's, I know it's like, you know, the Americans we don't negotiate with terrorists. I know it sounds bad, but I, if that's the only one to stop it, what's stopping you from doing it. I mean, if, um, you know, they're going to be like, like I said, some amnesty or something, but they, some of them can keep some of their stuff. Maybe do some time or maybe, you know, like what they're doing, we, your metaphor for the dragon is like, it's also like the hydra where you cut off the fucking head of the snake and it just grows another head. So now you keep cutting off, you keep cutting off like, um, uh, a video, like you, you arrest a video, you get rid of the lost chip eat dose. Well, now you're just creating a power vacuum, we're going to create more heads of the hydra. You're just creating more and more factions and creates more and more violence. And all these people have generations waiting to join, bro. Like, yeah, there's kids right now. Um, I don't have, I don't think it's going to be able to find it. There's this, there's this video, this Corribo has really famous right now. And it's about, uh, it's about the lost chip eat dose and their main security guy. Oh, chicken little. Yeah. And, uh, Luis was telling me all about this guy. He just evaded some sort of raid. Yeah. Yeah. He's, he watched the podcast. Well, he watches podcast. He watches podcast. I don't think he's speaking English, but he's, he watches, he's aware of what goes on in the, and social media. He's very well where I was selling lizards. And, um, but yeah, there's this Corribo on him right now that, uh, it's so popular. There's videos popping over like kids in like school buses singing it in field trips. Like if you know, you know, bro, bro, bro, you both know, it's like that, you know, they're singing Corribos man everywhere. So all these kids, like, I mean, most of them don't get me wrong. Most of them, they see it as music because what it is. But there's always this one or two kids that are like, yeah, I want to be that that was me, bro. I want to be them. Like when I started seeing like, well, I'm from a, uh, in TJ, uh, I didn't grow up around any famous singers and no famous rapper. No famous, nothing. The only guys that have money either you worked in the United States, they could touch you job. You had a nice drug, you know, and you were well paycheck, or you were, or you were in the cartel and you had a bunch of, you were cool. And the community, you know, the girls wanted you, you go to clubs. You don't have to wake up early. So you do whatever you want with your life, you know what I mean? Uh, so, so yeah, man, I kind of, I wanted to be that too. Yeah. And when you see these guys have money too, they're driving sick cars. Yeah. Yeah. And, and at first, you don't see, well, even if you see that, but then you're like, yeah, I want to be a guy, bad guy, you know, I want people to respect me. I want, you know, and then, and, and that's true. There's all kinds of kids growing up like this, you know, looking, that's why when, when I started with my friend, that he became famous and stuff, and he's just from a hook just like mine, we started getting like this sort of like inspiration for you and kids like to let them know like, look, we made it out of that shit without having to risk or either anything. We can chase the dreams, you know, if you want to be a musician, you can do it. Don't think because you don't see nobody around you doing it. You can do not. You can do it. So maybe my friend has this kind of like, we started this shit and see, you know, and he seems curious, but he has a lot of songs that are, that are not, not chorizo. They just chorizo talking about how he struggled to become where he's, you know, kind of like the narco story, but in the legal way, you know what I mean? Yeah. So, so we started this a wave and now even chorizo became more popular because now you don't have to see be an arkos to listen to the sabo karillo, you could be, you could relate, you know, to just some people that is in a struggle like rap, you know, it's just, so you could listen to a rap song and you can relate to the rapper they sing about his struggle. How he had to sell drugs to get by now he doesn't sell drugs and I just, you know, so it's the same story. We actually, that's actually, I love rap. So I told him I was like, look, rap is do this. We should do this with you because you got the swag and it's a generation. We started a whole trend. So yeah, man, I mean, now TJ has a lot of famous people. Now we have famous boxes that became popular because there's always been like sports and stuff, but if you're not into it, you didn't know about it. Now we have now their famous because of social media because we, there's everybody just trying to like make a change too, you know, there's this famous painter that he paints a phases of like our famous people from TJ or just any Mexican in like bridges and stuff in TJ. So now you drive around and you see like all these people faces, and they're not like narcos or anything. They're like, you have sea champions, you know, brand of Moreno. It's for TJ. It's a phase in, you know, in a bridge, big as bridge. And just like there's like different, I think all this movement started and now there's a lot of of good inspiration, you know what I mean? There because the narco was always the culture. No, it's nice. We're like, like I've told people I love it. Like I still love it, but I want something else. Like I'm passionate about creating too. Like I'm passionate about music. I'm passionate about writing. like that moves me too. So now that I want to like do stuff more family and like want to get on my way, like it's not it's not taking me what it goes. It's not that hard for me to give it up, you know, because this I'm passionate for this is right. But it wants to be found another path. Yeah. But once I talk about that shit and everything, I'm passionate about that too. It's like because I grew up in it and just the culture and everything, I know it's fucked up and I know it's all that I've suffered from death. I cried from every day. Like I still do from my uncle, he passed away last year just for being in the wrong place at the wrong time. You know, he he he was a real hard working man, but on the weekends, he liked to smoke a little bit mess. And he wasn't like a method. He's just like right after work, he would go. He lived in TJ. He worked in the shipyards in San Diego. Got it for work on Fridays. One of TJ stopped by the connect before pulling up to the cells, you know, take a couple hits and then go home and do whatever you need to do with this family. But on one of these stops at the at the trap house, some guys came in and they thought he was from the scene a locker to a new shadow. There's a hard working man that he's just like to get high on the weekends. You know what I mean? I mean, if it was legal, I'm pretty sure that he would have a safe place where you get high, you know, but like I said, it's if he came and he was going to take years for the program to everything get together for the black marker to shrink and everything. So yeah, man, that's like that. Like that's one of the worstest I've suffered recently. He was like my brother. He was only like eight years older than me. And his tragic because he never know. I mean, he he did a time and I think, but right now he was just a working man and family man staying away from shit and everything. And shit happened. And I mean, I could ask my friends, you know, I could be like, hey, who did this today? But I'm not trying to get it back into that. If I'm going to ask is because I'm planning to do something about it, you know, and many, you know, many of my friends were like, hey, just tell me who it was. Tell me what we need to do. We do, you know, we got you know, this stuff. But on my mind, I was like, if I do this, that's just pulling me back in. I mean, I know my uncle would probably like that for me, but I got to look up for my my own past, you know, whatever I want from my future. And I had already, I was moving out to San Diego and like getting away from stuff. Like, but when that happened, I like, I still had like a little bit like the weight thing and stuff or like the gun system. But once that happened, that was it, that was it for me. Because if I go out looking for the guys that did it, if I, I know I'm going to find them. It's this small place in Tia, I know I'm going to find it and I know I could do whatever I wanted to do too. But, but, but, but yeah, man, I just, that was just the end. That was just, that was like, yeah, that's, that's it, man. It's either now or never. Are there a lot of guys like you who have podcasts in Mexico? Are there a lot of like Spanish podcasts? Like you were mentioning that I got chicken little listeners who a lot of podcasts. How many podcasts are there that are like deep into narco? Oh, deep into narco, not really many. But in Koolakan, there's a few podcasts that's been popping up. Really? Yeah. And it's funny because they, they, they don't care about it's like they're recording for their own people, but they don't know that all of these people from all over the world. So they're just saying stories about, about Tablasso is getting tablatted out. They're just telling stories about people I used to work for, for whoever or the podcast became popular with the COVID. I mean, I've been listening to podcasts since, I've been listening to it since Saturday like radio like Patrice O'Neill and all that. I, I've always loved to listen to all that shit. So, and I always thought like, man, I should do this in Mexico. Like, but, but nobody really care about it. Like just listening to long ass conversations, though, people you don't know, like, they didn't seem attractive. But what's COVID hit, it's like, a couple of podcasts, one of them is one of the most famous ones is called Grativo in English creative. And he became, he kind of took the Joe Rogan vibe. And he's very intellectual. He's very smart. And, uh, great, great deal. Yeah, creative in Spanish. Grativo. And, uh, a where she based in Rob O'Lion Monterey. And Monterey. Yeah, Monterey. Monterey has a few podcast, pretty good right now for comedians. He's not a comedian, but I think he's trying to be. He's one of them. And, uh, Adrian Marcello, he's one of my really good friends shout out to them again. You should check them out. He's like a comedian. He's really funny. It's so Spanish, but he's, he's really funny dude. And, uh, but yeah, in Quilacán, a couple of of podcasts started coming out too. And one is called, I think one is called, I want to say Los Salusines, which is basically the, uh, what do you call this? Not the one of these, but like, uh, kind of, you know, just this person that talks like he that talks about like shit that's been through, but exaggerates. Oh, you know, kind of like it, that's what that's the name of the show. And I, and I think they have like, like lookouts, they interview, like lookouts and stuff like that. And they have really funny, like, you know, like pieces. And, um, that's the kind of shows that like I were talking about what you know, and I'm pretty sure you watch this a bunch of different because now they algorithm. Yeah. They put you all together. What kind of people do you have on your podcast? Uh, I started with, uh, singers, artists, because since I, I don't know many of them and famous and like there's a really big music scene in, in Tijuana. So that's kind of like when I'm starting, but, um, I'm taking a cartel members. So my cartel members are going to show like what mass, Solomon changed. I asked him one of them said no, one of the ones I started out that he was in, uh, that he did like 11 years. I think he said he'd be down to just do it. And like I tell like, hey, bro, don't, don't say anything. Okay. You try with like, say it, shit that you already did your time for, you know, say stuff that you do cool. Because as, as long as I want that view of the views, I don't want to get you in trouble. You know what I mean? I mean, I have not no snitch. I'm not no fucking black TV. You know, they fucking blame me for shit. So I always tell him this, but yeah, I mean, as Gordo, we are around. I have his interview. We are now recording everything, but he recorded with a recording from prison. Yeah. And contraband cell phone. So he's like, just wait till they move me to another prison. And then you can follow the shit. You know what I mean? So we're waiting for that. And then there's this other guy that just got out. I don't know if I should mention his name because it was national news. Him and his brother just got out. And they were decisive, like a Ramona, you know, they were, they worked with sites aside with him. Really? And, and their case became really, really in the news because the United States led them, stay here with, with work permits and everything. They did like 20 some years or more. But, but apparently what the guy was telling me, I'm going to interview him. I'm just like, he's just like getting comfortable. He said yes. But he told me that his attorney got the judge to approve them to stay here because they put this thing where like they said if they were sent back to Mexico, they could suffer torturing stuff like that. And there's a right against that for in America. So the judge, the judge gave it to him. And now they're living here with permits to work and live here. And people were in Mexico, Beijing about like, all these killers, they have charges, they haven't done time in Mexico. But they were, they were extra like in front of Mexico. But it's just, it's just this never ending up. People wanted people to do time forever. Right. You know what I mean? Like, because I have friends who are like, you know, people change, right? You know, like there's people that come out of jail and don't want to go back. What's the point of keeping their 30 years if, if with 15, it was enough, you know what I mean? And I mean, I get it. There's the other side of the coin where there's people at the 20 plus years and they just come on there, like, yeah, I'm court tell 100%. Yeah. I know people like that. And it's crazy to me because I'm like, damn, like really like I love that shit too. But I'm willing to be like, you know, but we want different, man. Yeah, man. It's it. I think it's going to take some sort of like evolution of culture to change this and, and, you know, seeing people like yourself trying to like rise out of this shit. You know what I mean? Like rise out of. I think you see more people like me at the time just coming. I think it's all this podcasting and all these creative stuff that just came in hand for like people like us that like, I mean, I've always like music drawing and everything, but I never took the time to go to school. You know, like, and all that, which I would have, if I were to learn how to do this shit, like I probably like my podcast would be doing good or I probably maybe not even a podcast, maybe something, something else. But, but I mean, with all these opportunities that you see and people like me setting examples for like, younger kids, you know, like, I was posting that I was coming here, you know, that I've been posting my, my little journey, you know, my, what's your podcast go? Well, he pulled up at a board of Alberta. Yeah, on YouTube. Yeah, on YouTube. And, um, yeah, I mean, I know people from all like reporters really injured like Louise people from his level. Um, I know writers. I know cartel members. I know sport people, uh, UFC people, artists, um, comedians, like I was saying, you know, I just been, I don't know man. Like, I'm not famous, but I'm even famous people and they like me. We become friends. Yeah, we just become like every time they come to the hip, they hit me up. The zero. Yeah. Yeah. That's me. The board of entertainment. There it is. My, uh, the logo is the, the highway and see it next to the border. But it's a very well site. So like, once I, I published the, the lower everybody was like, oh man, that's cool. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's dope. Yeah. I only have like four episodes because the guy that was recording me was his equipment and he moved. So right now I had to like, uh, make some legal money, which has took me to double amount of time. So now I bought my, I bought my mics. I bought my camera about two cameras. I bought my, uh, my mix has done. Yeah. I'm, I'm shooting now. I actually shot my first, well, when my equipment, I shot my first podcast last week, we should be actually I haven't checked, but my, uh, I should have posted it today that it was coming out tomorrow. Okay. So yeah. And that, this one's going to give you was because of the artists that have it's a real, real, how do you say, like, um, in Spanish, just polemico. I don't know how you say in English, like very, uh, problematic. Not problematic, but he has, he's, he's a character that people want to listen to him because I was telling, he's really into like that he really sunk to Tijuana, Carto only kind of like it seemed like he was part of the carto. Like he was their children. You know, so like people, many people, uh, he grabbed many people's attention because at first he started singing with his face mask with a, oh, with a face mask. He went and see, you know, because he was singing just so, uh, his, his lyrics were so, uh, he, he wasn't playing around with his words. You know, sometimes you play around with words. So you can say, shit directly, he was saying controversial. He was saying, yeah, he was very controversial. That's the word. He's very controversial. And, uh, we actually helped him. Me and my friend from Coicero, almost to him. He, he, he got him to do a do it with him like a feature. And my friend is already in the commercial level. So he, he was doing, he was a real good underground artist with like millions of views. Like I'm talking about that guy interview. Yeah. So once my friend opened the door from everybody was like, Hey, I made you, I, I've heard you music, but I, uh, I don't know how to approach you because you give this like this, uh, vibe that you card, you know, like you're more of a car challenge and a singer. So not many people wanted to like, you know, work with them, people in the industry, the music industry. But now that he came with us and like we opened all these, everybody was like, yeah, like I heard you and he was all psyched out about it. It's like, yeah, I mean, like I've been trying to go commercial, but people think I'm cartel because I only sick to them. But they're the only guys asking me for Cori was like, I don't see seen a lot of people as you, now that you are asking him about our first, there was no other people asking him to make songs about him. And he can't make a song about somebody without their authorization, you know what I mean? So, so yeah. So I interviewed him and since he has card show friends and I have card show fans, he's never been able to talk about that in another podcast. So with me, we, we mentioned names, we'd talk about a mess dropping tomorrow. Uh, yeah, that should be dropping tomorrow. Which is my editor's got, uh, I love to the, yeah, you got time. This won't come out until next Monday. So we got time. It'll be out with a time. Yeah, it'll be in Spanish, but I'm pretty sure some of you know, I'll put links to your, to your podcast. Thank you. But looking out. I find it. Oh, I know. It's fucking 2 a.m. I'm fucking. I've been up this late in the long time. Really, really? Probably because it's flat and like I said, I slipped a whole thing. So I know. And you, I'm pitching, but you traveled all day. Yeah, same. Yeah. But yeah, man, I mean, we missed out on a lot of stories like famous rapper stories out there in Mexico. Oh, yeah. What is like the cartel? That was a great story. We can't tell that guy's name though. No, man. You saw both of them and they're both famous and they're both relevant. The artist and the guy that was, that was a protecting. But yeah, man, I mean, some of these rappers and artists, they, they, they have to think that that rapper was doing a show in Tijuana and not I Tijuana. Thank you. Someone plays in the city. Oh, someone plays in Mexico. When they got there, they realized that overshitting people that are scoring us are cartel. Yeah. And I, and by, yeah, yeah, as soon as they got there, as soon as the, yeah, man, I wish I could give you a little bit better. But yeah, hopefully we can do, maybe we can do this on another episode. Yeah. Yeah. I can tell you the rapper. And I'll give you the, yeah. It's like a great cliffhanger. Yeah, it is man. Yeah. Cool. Well, say it for next time. I appreciate you coming on here and sharing your perspective. I think it's going to be extremely eye opening for a lot of people. Yeah. Well, yeah. I mean, I don't do this for people want to get into the life. Hopefully, try to keep it from, you know, there's other stuff better to do with your life. I mean, this sounds exciting. This sounds like more be typed and everything. But I mean, right now, I was just saying you the cool parts. I mean, I'm not telling you the other types of pride for my friends. I'm not telling you all the people I have doing life in prison. My friends that call me and they, they get motivated by me because what I'm doing now. And they're like, yeah, man, when I get out, like, I'm going to do like some positive shit too, you know what I mean? And, and that, that's a message I hope I spread with, with like these stories, you know what I mean? Yeah. I think that's what you're doing, man. All right. Hopefully, extremely powerful, man. Thank you again. All right. Thank you. Time for bed.