Thank you, Congressman, for doing this. I never talk about UFO. >> Thank you, Tim. Uh, never talk about UFOs. We don't do shows on UFOs, UAPs, whatever they're calling them, these mysterious lights, these objects, because I know for a dead certain fact that there is an ongoing 70-year ongoing disinformation campaign by the US government to soak confusion. Um, some of the people participating in that effort, I don't think they know they're participating in the effort, but they are nevertheless selling lies in an effort to get people off the trail of what this really is. There is something going on. What is it? It It's so hard to know. You're one of the few people from my perspective who seems sincere. Um, you're also al also informed as a member of Congress and so I'm just grateful that you're doing this uh because I think you're going to be telling the truth. So um what are these things? [Applause] [Music] [Applause] [Music] >> Well, I don't know. I think there's um a lot of different misconceptions about them. Um, you know, I I I kind of came into it organically, I guess. I had pretty cool parents. They would just um take me to the library and just let me stay or I'd ride my bike over and stay a couple hours and grew up in the 70s in Tennessee. And, you know, I guess now you'd probably taken to DCS or something for that. But yeah, >> you know, I went in there and I can remember there was a a stack of books on a thing and you know they had all the you know something on >> uh maybe the occult or something like that and then Bigfoot and then um or something on UFOs and I picked up the UFO book started reading about it and it it just fascinated me and I and I read the Bible. I'm a Christian. I'm not a very good one obviously by my chosen profession but but you know the Bible talks about um Ezekiel saw the wheel and >> people always say well that was a dream you know they always try to overexlain things in the Bible and I just think it was a it's written for simple folks like me and I agree with that >> and it was a translation though and at the time the most technologically advanced item that they had was a wheel and it describes a wheel within a wheel. >> Exactly. >> It describes a landing gear and all these other things that we would today say are modern-day flying saucers. >> And it's pretty specific and it's a pretty The Ezekiel passage you're referring to is it it it's not just like a parenthetical note. It's like a it's like a whole description. >> Oh yeah. He goes into it. He describes I think the landing gear in some translations uh it talks about it being hooves of animal like the hoof of an animal which if you see you know you see when we went when we went to the moon that there's um the landing gear the you know it's got a pad if we actually went to the moon um I know there's a lot of people there that don't believe it but >> I'm arching my eyebrows but we'll refrain from comment. >> Yeah. Yeah. But the um but but uh so I'm laying on my couch. Fast forward, I'm in Congress. I'm laying on my couch and I'm I'm getting ready to go to sleep. I sleep in my office um in shower in the gym. I'm not, as my banker says, he called me one day and said um he said he said, "Brother, you're um" He said, "I'm pretty sure that you're the most honest member of Congress, but I know you're the poorest." So, so I I I do that. And um and so I was watching there was a thing on UFOs and they were talking about um some former members were involved in some stuff trying to find out something. I thought, you know, I'm going to start asking some questions. And then I'm walking down the street and the center of all media in Washington DC, TMZ, his name is Colin. He's a good friend of mine. We've been to lunch and hang out some, but he he stopped me and I didn't know who he was and he said, "Hey, I'm with TMZ." said, "What do you think about this UFO report that's getting ready to come out?" And I said I said, "Brother, it'll look like it was shot with a shotgun because it'll be it'll be all redacted." >> Oh, yeah. >> And and then um and I said, "And if it and it won't come out when they say it's going to come out." >> And I said, "Really? Why?" And I said, "Well, probably because the original report is probably going to have something in it and they're going to pull it back." And sure enough, they did. And it was heavily redacted and it was just a big fluff piece, nothing. And then I said the magic words which end up putting on one of my t-shirts which I sell on my website that um more people believe in UFOs than believe in Congress. And um >> and for good reason >> and for great reason. Um and so people started calling me, you know, all these national figures that are you see reporters, legitimate reporters like yourself, people from all over the country. And um so I start asking questions and um and I get with Luna and some other folks. Matt Gates was involved in it at the time. And um we uh we went to the chairman and said, "Let's have a let's have a hearing." And I think they really Tucker I think they just patted us on the head and said, "Sure, we'll have the hearing, you know, and they're going to make fun of you and go on." Turned out I talked to some old-timers that were there um reporters. They said that was the most uh the most attended hearing they'd ever had. They had to open up another room and there were people lined up down the hall. When I walked out at um I see it was I guess in the morning I I walked out of office had to be on an early show about it at 4:30 in the morning. People were already lined up outside the building and they come from all over the country. One guy came on his vacation and there was ministers there. There's people. So, it really touched a nerve and um >> they're hoping for disclosure. >> That's exactly right. The truth and they're tired of being told they're idiots and you know and the funny thing about it all is is that when I go to speak to groups it never fails that somebody of prominence of prominence will come a doctor, a lawyer, a PR person will come up to me and say, "Hey, I had a experience. I was sitting at a I was helping out a colleague. I I rarely go out of town. This is kind of unusual for me. So, this is kind of a a interesting deal for me up here, but I went to another congressman's district to help him um run for reelection. We're sitting in a country club and um and I'm not a country clubber type, as you can probably tell. Jackie Gleason said, "I wouldn't join a country club that have somebody like me." And I'm sort of like that way, you know. And I sit next to this lady and she was classy. You could tell she was she was old money. She wasn't new money. She wasn't She had nice jewelry on and she had the clothes you could tell were were nice and she was she was just a classy lady. And she said she said, "Well, Congressman, about those UFOs." And I thought, "Well, here it comes. You know, I'm going to get popped." And she said, "I had an experience when I was um when I was in college." She said she talked about going to pick up her um her brother and this thing followed them down um it for several minutes. You know, it was um cylindrical shaped um and it followed them. It was I think it was close to dark and it was kind of lit up. It had a I think a bluish tint to it or something and it flew it followed them for quite some time and then it just took off and they were like, "What in the world was that?" and they, you know, this was in the 70s and um and she said, "I really haven't really told many people that." And I get stories like that. I had a and and when they film you when I was early on in Congress, I had plenty of time obviously. Um it being the 435th most powerful member of Congress and you know these uh History Channel, all these folks would come interview me and they would do one time they interview me for like an hour. So they would take segments of that and put that out for just multiple issues, you know, of of their TV show hunting UFOs or whatever. And I remember I was in Nashville at the time and a colleague, a former state legislator, a guy was in leadership called me up. And I remember he and I, it's kind of ironic that he was back back in East Tennessee and I was in Nashville for a get together I was throwing for our state legislators cuz nobody ever when I was in legislature, nobody ever did anything for us from Congress and I just get down there and throw him a spaghetti dinner or something, you know. And the phone rang and it was him. And he said, "Timbo," he said, "I just saw you on TV on the UFO show." And I said, "Really?" And I thought, "Here it comes. He's going to pop me." He said, "Let me tell you a story about when I was in the Navy." And he was older. He was hollering back at his wife. What year was that? And she would holler. It was I think it was in the late 50s. And he was on a um I believe it's a tin can, but that's a destroyer. You probably know more. You could But anyway, he was in the Navy. And he said they were, it was early on when they were first um putting nuclear um uh missiles on subs. They were unloading a missile for the sub. And he said the sub got out there and then this thing just flew over the top of them. He said, remember said, Timbo, if that thing was two city blocks, it was it had to be two city blocks wide. He said it was cylindrical. And he named it and he described it. And then he said it um um he said it just took off. No noise, no heat, no vapor, nothing. And they all just stood there and we're talking. They're going, "What the heck was that?" >> Yeah. >> You know, and then they get back on shore. They go back to shore and he said that um you know the men in the suit, he said, "I figured it was CIA or something." And they said, "If y'all don't is this national security? If you ever talk about this, you'll be busting rocks for the rest of your life if you're lucky. Well, there's nothing like ending the day by the fire, book in your hand, dogs at your feet, cup of coffee at your side. I can tell you it works. And what makes it better is Cozy Earth. We're not even sure you've heard of the bubble cuddle blanket. We have. It's a big deal. It's soft, textured, perfect for settling down after a long day. It's like a cloud, actually. It'll make you sleepy just dreaming about it. Speaking of which, Cozy Earth also has what you need to take your sleep to the next level. We hope you're seated because this may blow your mind. Bamboo sheets. Bamboo. The fabric of the future. Actually, they're they are amazing. Can't believe they're from Bamboo. They're temperature regulating, moisture wicking. You actually sleep cooler, smooth, breath, breathable, super durable. If you don't believe it, try them risk-f free. 100 night sleep trial and a 10-year warranty. Upgrade the place you spend the most time, which is your bed. Onethird of your life at least. It begins at cozyearth.com. and use the code Tucker for 20% off. That's cozyearth.com. code Tucker. And if you get a postpurchase survey, let them know that you heard about Cozy Earth right here on this show. Because home is not just where you live, it's how you feel. Cozy Earth the best. So that attitude has not changed. >> Not one bit. >> No. And the question is why? You know, why would the US government have an interest in lying about something that's visible to millions of people around the world? So many people, as you just said, have had the experience of seeing them in person. Why would they have an interest in hurting those people, calling them crazy, >> right? >> Threatening them, um, etc. So, tell us about your experience as you've pushed for more disclosure. What kind of reaction have you received? >> I think the arrogance from the federal government, um, there's a control thing that you see in every aspect of government. Everybody in power wants to keep you out of their little circle of power, >> of course. And I think the monetary concern is there. I if if could you imagine if they had something that would could heat homes in the summer in the in the winter and cool them in the summer and had zero cost. I mean it's something that we could it would put everybody out of business. The war pimps at the Pentagon would have to go out of business. they wouldn't we wouldn't have to be in wars all over the world which are if you get down to it's it's about oil. It's always a battle oil. And um and so you've got the greed factor, you got the power factor, and then you got just the arrogance. And the Bible talks about professing themselves to be wives. They became fools. That's right. And there's nobody in Washington that doesn't think they're wise. >> I wonder though, I mean, for sure. So you think there um this is an effort to hide the existence of superior technology because it's a threat to existing industry. >> I think that's part of it and also but it's like this you you we're motorcycle guys. Say if I took a say I took a brand new Indian or Harley-Davidson down to uh back in time to you know the Mayflower or whatever and gave it to them you know they would maybe shine it. They wouldn't know how to >> do anything. I mean of course they didn't have car we don't have carburetors. They wouldn't know how to do anything with fuel injection. They probably couldn't ever make the fuel high enough octane where it kick it off. They maybe could get it started if they got lucky at some point, right? >> But that would be a rarity. I think that's sort of if there is something >> that they can't they don't know what it is. And I think too >> they have um compartmentalized this stuff. So you think foyer, I'm going to freedom of information. Everybody says, "Well, just freedom of information at Burchick. Go to Area 51." There's nothing at Area 51. they've moved it to right pad or something else since then. But the point is is that everybody in government is looking down the barrel or looking in their little area. And to their knowledge, most of those people are telling the truth. And they sent it off to these these there's five or six corporations that it's been in it's been disclosed in in um in hearings that we think probably has some of this technology, but it has been so compartmentalized the people. I mean, there's nobody alive that was around when in Roswell of 47 and incidents that happened in Texas and others all over the all over the world. And so, they don't really know what they're looking at. They're looking at something and they've they've associated it or given it to these corporations that have a quasi governmental connection, but they're far enough apart where I can't go foyer. I can't go foyer Ford. I mean, I could, but they're just going to tell me go jump in the lake. I'm not going to tell you. But I'm I guess I'm stumbling over kind of the most basic claim that they make, which is that all this information is classified. >> Yeah. >> On what grounds could the federal government justify classifying reports of things that it's servicemen have seen? >> Every time it's national security, Tucker, >> what does that mean? >> I I don't know. But they but you have a group of people that are so afraid of the well the industrial war machine that funds their campaigns. So, you go to these, you look at all the people that that that stop when I have a disclosure bill. I just want to know, you know, I'm not saying they're out there, but we're spending tens of million. Every department, FBI, CIA, um I'm pretty sure TVA doesn't, but they probably should, but there's probably every every alphabet agency in the country has a have a has a wing that's investigating these things. NASA, they are all doing it. They're all doing they'll admit that they're they're looking at something, but then you come to them, they say, "They don't exist, but we need the money to do it." And now the interesting thing is, >> and that's in the budget. >> Oh, yeah. And now the interesting thing is is that the um uh is that they've um u seen that the opinion polls are showing that over half the people in the country believe something else is going on, >> of course. >> And so now they're saying, "Hey, we need money to study this." I mean it's it's the cat drag going after its tail really and it's just a circular thing that they just after money and they don't really care. >> Well, of course they don't. That's for sure. But there is a process by which the Congress demands disclosure and that process has been thwarted and I'm just interested in getting details on how that happened. So the UAP disclosure act of 2023 I think >> required disclosure that passed right >> allegedly. But again, who's going to enforce it? >> So, but what did that do you remember what that act required? >> It is um I do not believe it passed. The one that I'm thinking about did not pass in the Senate because you remember I had the bill. It was two pages long for disclosure. >> What did it say? >> And then it just said if it dealt with UAPs, UFOs, it disclose it. If it if a file contains it, America has a right to see it. Unredacted. And Chuck Schumer's was several hundred pages long and it was celebrated by everybody and it set up a commission very similar to the Kennedy assassination which here we are you know 60 plus years later and still you know they're telling us this single bullet >> that that was and you're you're a gunman that they found on a gurnie that was basically unscratched >> you know an hour and a half after the assassination in in the hospital at Lakeland >> after going through two bodies >> after two bodies. and bone and everything else and it doesn't it just but anyway >> so but Schumer's solution was we needed a Warren commission to tell us the truth about >> to who can decide and that basically would just cover it up and I trust America >> why would of course of course there's but why would Chuck Schumer do that like what's his motive do you have any idea >> I think his staffers drew up the bill and I think honestly in their in their mind they probably thought it was the right thing. But here's my thing about staffers. Everybody wants to talk about sta, you know, the the the the swamp, and I always go through this. A swamp is something pretty cool. God created a swamp. I I grew up frog gigging and fishing around swamps. They're pretty cool. They're they attract animals for good reason. >> And um uh and so Washington DC is not is is not a a swamp. It is a sewer. It is a man-made creation. Now, figure this. You've got a staffer. Um, and Republicans were supposed to be less government. I look at these st we get these pictures made every year, every couple years. I don't know why. I've never seen the picture. I'm not going to hang it up my dad gum office of your committee, you know, and all the people on the committee and then all the staffers behind it. I counted one time on ours, I think it was close in one of my committees, close to 50 people and I guess the Democrats would get 49 people. You know, we're supposed to be less government. So you have a staffer say that contra that is and the committees are just too big. And too many of these chairman the biggest mistake they make is we're going to be different. We're going to be different. And what do they do? They keep almost every dadum staffer and the staffer is already plugged in with the lobbyist with the K Street crowd. And they're the ones probably getting a little trip somewhere, maybe going out for a steak dinner, going out for drinks, and they're compromised. And so how many I can't tell you how many times I've seen a good bill become a study bill. >> I completely agree except in most cases it's like obvious why industry would want to subvert the legislation like they don't want the regulation. They don't want competition. You know there are a lot of different obvious reasons and you sort of see how the staffs are paid off. I get it. >> But UFOs like is there a UFO lobby? Like who wants that? Who's paying for that? >> I think and why? >> I think you've got major technology corporations, um, a aeronautics, um, some of our missile defense people, for some reason, they do not want this released. >> That's very weird because whatever is going on is clearly or would seem to be a threat to them. >> Well, look at the You >> don't control your airspace, which we don't, right? >> Why is that not a problem for Rathon? >> Look at the financial disclosure of the people that always fight me on these bills. That's what I would tell you to do. >> And if we were to do that, I can think of one. >> You see the names of a couple those with those a couple of those corporations. >> So, it's defense contractors are the bottom line is I think what you're saying is that the defense contractors for some reason we can only speculate don't want this information disclosed. >> That's correct. >> Well, that's a very powerful lobby. Of course, >> it's one of the most powerful ones. That's why we're That's why we're um sending $600 million to Ukraine and the uh national defense authoriz which I didn't vote for. Um I wanted to give our military more money, military fighting men more money, but I didn't want to give the war pimps any more reason to Ukraine or any of these other wars we're in. >> No. And the interesting about the $600 million, uh, I was told by our leadership and in in a in a conference that the president had requested that and then I talked to the White House and guess what? The president had not requested that. >> Right. That's right. >> Just $600 million. So, Burch, what's they going to do with that? >> I watch people jump. I mean, I'm not the world's great Trump expert, but I feel like I paid pretty close attention. I hear these people jump up and down. Trump, this is in the name of Trump. That's like that's the opposite of what I think he wants, but whatever. Well, Grand Canyon University is not like most American colleges. It focuses on the things that actually matter. It is not a ripoff. It is the real thing. It's private, affordable, Christian university located in the heart of Phoenix, one of the largest universities in the country. Actually, at Grand Canyon University, education is more than academics. It is about opportunity. The chance for every student to live out the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. Rights are not given by the government. They were bestowed at birth at conception by God. That's just a fact. And Grand Canyon University is not going to lie to your kids and claim otherwise. It tells the truth. So, I know you're thinking, "A quality education is rare, so this probably costs a fortune. Colleges constantly jack up their costs. They probably do the same." Well, they don't. Actually, GCU has maintained the same tuition for 17 straight years. They're not in education to get rich at the expense of students. The whole thing is actually about learning. How refreshing. With flexible online classes, hybrid learning options, GCU offers 340 academic programs. Students benefit from a collaborative learning environment, dedicated faculty, personalized support to help them achieve their goals. The pursuit to serve is yours. Let it flourish. Find your purpose at Grand Canyon University. Private, Christian, affordable. gcu.edu. Um, so I'm not surprised by anything you've said, but I do think it it raises like the the core question, which I still am confused by. It's like why would Rathon be so opposed to the disclosure of this information? So, what exactly hap where are we with disclosure? >> A lot of people think that there that these folks are the ones that have the material from whatever craft or whatever it is. That's what I've been told by people in government in that are in the know. And I've, you know, it's funny. It was like um >> these companies have benefited from technology from whatever these things are. >> Apparently, that's what they're telling me. Yeah. >> And inform people, not just people >> No, not just some guy on the street. And it's funny. I've I've had a um the deep throat moment, you know, where Nixon um was overthrown and and somebody comes up to me in the hallway in a crowded hallway. Uh somebody who I would be consider a friend and said, "Burchett, man, you really don't need to be doing this stuff, don't you, man? You're kicking a hornets's nest on this thing, you know, >> on the UFO stuff." >> Yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. And um I've had them try to use it against me in campaigns and things, but you know, they don't we don't ever raise enough money to to matter anyway. >> Use against you in campaigns. >> Yeah. And the whisper campaign or they put it out on the internet. Burchets's, you know, all he cares about is this. No, I just care about where's the tens of millions of dollars going. I have a right to know. >> Well, like this is the biggest story in our in human history, I would think. I mean, like what is that? >> Are we alone? Yeah, >> clearly not. And so you're satisfied, just to get to basics here quickly, you're satisfied that whatever we're seeing in the skies and have since at least the Second World War, since at least the development of nuclear weapons, >> Yeah. >> since Hiroshima, whatever that is is not foreign military. >> No, cuz here here it is. If it was Russian, I mean, honestly, Putin with his ego, he would ride barechested down Pennsylvania Avenue, get out of UFO, you know, wrestle a a bear on the front porch of the of the White House and get back in his unifor. I mean, we he wouldn't be bogged down in Ukraine. If it was China, they would own us. They they clearly partially own us now. Man, if it was America, you wouldn't see Trump standing on a um an aircraft carrier and a a jet flies by and breaks the sound barrier and everybody freaks thinks that's the coolest thing in I mean it would be something a lot cooler than that. And so I just don't think we have that technology or we're able to utilize it. >> So you've So in the course of your probing into this, no one has ever taken you aside and said, "Hey, Burchett, back off a little bit. This is our stuff. We don't want to disclose it." Pretty close to that. Pretty close to that. >> But you don't believe it. You don't think this is our technology? >> No, I do not. There's no way it is our tech. No way is our technology. There's uh you and I've talked to too many pilots. Why would we risk Why would we risk our best I mean I've talked to the best I've talked to the best pilots in the world that are ours. Some of them not all of them. And that have told me I mean one guy I remember I was at the Capitol Hill Club. It was just an unusual encounter. or a guy spoke to a group and and he followed me out and said, "You know, Tim or congressman or whatever." He said, he said, "That thing was 14 ft." And he went like this from my canopy. And I thought to myself, "Why didn't he say 15? Why didn't he say 20?" But he said 14. And then um he just he said this thing, "It wasn't ours." He said, "I don't know what it was, but it wasn't ours." And that's all he said. And I had a very high ranking member of the Navy describe some underwater experiences they'd had with something that was doing 200 m. Best thing we got is probably 40 >> was doing 200 mph underwater >> underwater big as a football field and that's no fish. >> So is it possible given our current understanding of physics for any man-made machine to go anywhere near 200 mph underwater? >> Not with our technology. No. The best we have is probably in the in the high30s. And he was converting it, of course, knots is what the the Navy guys would do. But there's nothing. >> If I fire a 3006 or any high caliber rifle underwater, it doesn't go 200 miles an hour. I can I can probably catch it in the length of a swimming pool or so. >> Yeah. Or it just falls down. >> Yeah. That's what I'm saying. I it's like >> so we've got u and this was this was described to me in areas and I was quoted on some I was just quot all I do is quote people that are that are that have knowledge but this was one that was um he was talking about there were five or six I think deep water areas of the ocean you've traveled a lot I have not um there's not a lot of deep water areas around around East Tennessee at Fort Lden Lake or anything but you they're talking miles deep and of that you've heard this before. We know more about the surface of the moon than we do the surface of the ocean. And he said, "These are areas where we see a high propensity of these UFOs." And there was a case where um it was fairly well documented. Um they uh uh had a multiple sightings. They were doing a maneuvers and had the the ships or boats, whatever you want to call them, out there. I'm not a Navy guy. And um and there was the sighting in the air and these the pilots radioed back and said, "Hey, is there something going on? Is there another operation? We got some secret technology stuff we're working on." They said, "We don't have any." And they, you know, Pentagon, nobody nobody knew about anything. And they pulled it back and then um they pulled everything back, scrubbed the mission. And then the next day all their internet traffic had been scrubbed. But this guy was kind of a wonk and he'd made copies of it. But my, you know, the point I have there is why would we risk multi-million dollar apparatus and why would we put something in the air around our best pilots that could have a crash because these guys are talking about there's actually, you know, they've have come close to collisions. Why would they do that? They would not do that. That would be stupid. I mean, there's even even, you know, I always say military intelligence a whole lot like congressional ethics. I don't think it really exists much anymore, >> but um anyway, it's um I just don't think that we'd be risking that. So, that that that's my proof that it's not ours. >> So, how many uh military personnel have you spoken to about their personal experiences with these things? I'd say, well, I don't know, eight or nine, 10 maybe, you know, but I have to be real careful because I'm I'm clearly somebody out there and I'm not backing down on it. I'm not ashamed of it or anything, but I don't >> You have no reason to be ashamed of it. Why would you be ashamed of it? >> Well, that's what they try to do is they try to shame people. >> Oh, are you are you are you hiding relevant secrets from the American public? I don't think you are. >> No, but >> why aren't they ashamed? Well, I have to be careful about the white flags, the stuff they bring stuff bring people bring me that's not real. >> Well, that that's that's why we're talking to you. >> Yeah. Well, that's >> I've had a lot of people come to me with stuff like that. >> Yeah. And I've got these pictures and I want to show you this. I've got this, you know, I'm always afraid I'm going to end up on a in a refrigerator up in North Carolina or a freezer in North Carolina somewhere, you know, cuz I I don't I'm not going up there and checking out some guy's fines he's got. And you know, and I >> So wait, but do you think So I think what you're saying is the disinformation campaign run by whomever. Maybe >> that's real. >> Well, it's definitely real. Uh, and I assume it's run by the US government or its satellites and the defense contractors, but part of the way that they discredit people who are interested in finding out what this is is by telling them false things and then >> they tried to destroy their careers. They did that to one of our guys. Um, one of the the very first person uh the first hearing we had, if you remember, some weekly newspaper reporter found out that one of the guys suffered from PTSD for because of his military career. You know what? In Tennessee, we embraced that. My daddy put on Pelu in Okinawa and to the day he died, I never woke him up over the top of him. I always woke him up by his big toe cuz he might have woke up on one of those dad gum islands and pinned me up against the wall. And so, and we celebrate our our our heroes and but Washington DC just destroys them. And to think that a weekly newspaper found out this guy's medical history, which is a total violation of the law. Somebody should go to jail for it, but nobody did. They tried to destroy this guy. And that's and you know, that's what happens to people in Washington DC. That's what happens to our military heroes when they step out of line because of the the sewer or deep state or whatever you want to call it. But that that that's what they and that's why we need we need real whistleblower protection for them. >> Well, I agree with that completely. Um which we don't have. No. And by the way, I know two whistleblowers who are living outside the country cuz they can't come to the United States. >> Sure. >> And I'll have people actually I've had people call me. One last thing. I'm in the Longworth building. It's no secret. It's public record. But I've had people that'll call me or send a message to me and want to come by and they won't come in that building ask me if I can come outside. I've had people call me and want to come to the house in East Tennessee and and because they don't want to come to Washington DC and talk to me. There's a a well publicized television show that was on for a while that um I didn't know I didn't know they were coming. I mean I they said some people wanted to talk to me and it was a a trusted friend and I said sure send them bring them up to come on up to DC and they said well they don't want to come to DC and they drove from wherever to my house in East Tennessee on a Saturday afternoon and then they put some stuff on a on a screen that was pretty compelling. What was it? >> Was aircraft flying it. Just crazy um stuff that we can't do that would turn you or me into basically a catch-up package. It was not uh >> no human being could handle the G. >> No, not at our well with the technology we have, the GeForce would just have just torn them apart. And you know, was it was it unmanned or whatever? I don't know. But these guys and one of them was a um well they were scientists. Several of them were scientists and there >> they came to see you. >> They came to see me. Yeah. And I because it's kind of u >> Wait. So what do you do with that information? >> I try to try to grasp it within my very small brain of and what am I supposed to do with that? I I ask God all the time, what do you want me to do with this stuff, Lord? And right now I'm I'm I've just got to get enough disclosure. I I' I've come to the realization that nothing is ever going to happen, Tucker, until we have somebody in the White House that says enough is enough and just discloses it. And I hope President Trump, you know, I have discussions with him privately and other times that I'm not um I've talked to his people, but at some point there's several of us, Luna and myself and several others that are concerned about this issue and we want some answers. >> We've got none. >> We've got none. zero, >> right? Zero. So, you have definitely heard about eight sleep by now. People are talking about the well-rested people, you know, are talking about it. It's a company with one mission, improve your sleep, and is changing the way Americans get a good night's sleep. And trust me, they need it. So, we just received word that their team is launching a new product. It's called the Pod 5. The Pod 5 is an original, totally innovative mattress cover, plus a blanket that uses precision temperature control to regulate your body's sleep cycles and give you the perfect night's sleep. It ranges from 55° for the cold plungers among you to the 110° for the sauna fanatics. That means no matter what you prefer, you're covered. And the bottom line is you sleep better by up to an hour. It actually works. The Pod also detects snoring and adjusts your bed's position to reduce or stop it. Whoa. Belleaguered ladies across America rejoice as one. Everyone here can tell you there's no better way to be alert, productive, and happy than by getting a good night's sleep. And eight sleep can help. Visit 8.com/tucker. Use the code tucker to get 350 bucks off your pod 5 ultra. If you don't like it, just return it within a month. But you're going to love it. 8sleep.com/tucker. What is that? >> I think that is the sewer. That is the industrial war complex. I think and I stated that in the in the committee. I think part of the thing they do is they outrun the clock. They outrun the clock. They you know um we either stumble, one of us gets in trouble or they get us in trouble or they lose or they move on to another object, you know, another shiny object somewhere else. We Americans want their pizzas in 30 minutes or less and that's about Congress's attention span, you know, cuz we're always on one and then it's the hot issue and then the news cycle changes. Two weeks later we're on to something else. So you guys are often members of Congress are often uh briefed in skiffs. You know, it's a secure location. Then they immediately go and call CNN and tell them, you know, everyone was at the But if a member of Congress received quote classified information about UAPs, and then immediately held a press conference and said, "Here's what I just heard and saw, and yes, I'm breaking the law, but like tough Why don't you do something about it?" >> What would happen? >> I don't know. They say they can imprison us, but I don't. They, you know, that's what we're told at the beginning. We're not even supposed to discuss. Some people will tell you, you can't even tell them that you've been in a skiff, but the press is waiting for you as soon as you walk out. >> Who told who told who says that? Leadership of the press. >> Oh, yeah. Leadership. Yeah. And they'll And you I've been in a skiff before where they'll say anything discussed in here. We remind you it's punishable by law. And you know, it could it's a felony. But the problem you get in there a lot of times it's the arrogance and the lies that are told to us. They contradict. I mean, I I they'll contradict what another department has said. They'll say, "This does this didn't happen. This doesn't exist." And then another one will say, "This is one we don't know, but we can't figure out. There's just no answer. It defies all of our reason." And >> so, these are the briefers from various federal agencies that you're talking >> and they're generally arrogant. You know, this one kid with a man bun. I always remember him. He was uh very arrogant. And then I asked him about some specific instances. was, you know, there was one where we had a nuclear um facility something Buzz did and the actual facility shut down. It was famously >> documented and he >> in the Dakotas I think. >> Yeah. I can't remember exactly. I have to I have I read I read so many of these things but and he said um I remember he said >> um >> we have no data points on that >> and I thought and I said dude it's in all Google it it's everywhere and you I just I get very frustrated Tucker a lot of times I won't I go to the these classified briefs and part of the reason you go to a classified briefing is to get information which I'm sure that's where a lot of the stock trading goes on but but I think they bring you in and tell you stuff you already knew, so you can't even talk about it. I think it's a trap. I don't That's why I don't go to a lot of the classified briefings because again, I can just pick it up on the street right after >> the Congress funds the agencies that are briefing you. >> That's correct. >> So, you could say to the man bun kid, you know, son, I pay your salary. Yeah. >> So, maybe you >> Well, it's during the Biden administration, so I was a little bit out of >> Well, I mean, at this point, Republicans control the Congress, so like >> allegedly >> I don't understand. I just I'm honestly baffled as to why no >> too many there's too many. It it's it's crosses both lines. I think you know that that money runs deep and they contribute a lot to a lot of people. >> So of the issues and some are wellknown. I won't even bring them up here but they're very wellnown um that have bipartisan consensus. You know like both parties agree on this issue. You would say UAPs are one of those? >> I would say they are. I mean AOC's in there. I mean they're all in there. You know, it's just >> Does AOC show any interest in this topic? >> She does. She does. I think, you know, she's concerned like everybody else. Where's where the tens of millions of dollars going? And I'm sure she could think about >> Well, what the hell are these things? That's like an even deeper concern. >> Yeah. >> The money's fake. We just make it. >> Yeah. We just print it. Yeah. >> And but it Well, we've had, you know, what are they? We've had sworn testimony where they'll tell you, they'll say, um, yeah, I've seen Beings. There's a movie coming out and >> and hold on. And the testimony says this is sworn testimony. >> Sworn testimony. They've got they've uh there beings and there's there's u saucers or some craft or something. But there's a movie coming out pretty soon if it's ever allowed to come out. I was in it a little bit. And um and you have former members of the CIA. You have others that positively say they were there and they identified these things. They diagnosed them and they saw them. They saw the craft. And you know, there there's enough people out there saying it, but they're just so suppressed. And the media moves on so fast on something. And you know, I've been on so many of these interviews and they're playing the the theme from um um one some crazy TV show or something before I come on, you know, and they're just making a joke out of it and I get it. People want to laugh about it. >> I don't get it at all. >> Yeah. I mean, I I get the fact >> seems like an absolutely I see >> they just want to humiliate me and I don't >> It's a deadly serious topic objectively speaking. And if >> it's a national defense issue, it's everything. It's everything. I mean, it's not a national, it's a world defense issue. >> It's a lot more serious than Black Lives Matter or any of the other nonsense that we've, you know, become obsessed with over the past generation. So, um, yeah, there's I mean, that tells you right there that's part of an an operation designed to discredit people who ask questions, right? >> Yeah. And I've had I've had military personnel call me and tell me that they've they've chased these things. They've been in the water. I had one guy tell me a story. He was an officer and he was in the water fishing off um I think it was on the east coast and this huge craft flew over the flew over them and then these several jets were flying trying to keep up with it and he identified the jets cuz he was obviously an Air Force officer and um and he said look I I just want you to continue on this thing you're not a lot of people have seen stuff and he said, "I have." And you know, and I mean, he had a distinguished career, but it just continues on and on and on and it gets, you know, we get patted on the head and say, "Okay, you can have another hearing and then we do it." But but until somebody in the White House says disclose or somebody walks out of one of these labs with something and is um and shows it and puts it on YouTube before he's allowed to commit suicide. Um I think you're going to that's the only way we're going to get to the bottom of it cuz it will never it's so deep the layers of the onions or onion is so deep you just keep peeling it off and it's just a different person a different story. You go over here and and and you know the naivity of of of Congress. You have members telling me, "Well, let's just get a let's go over here and get a, you know, we'll get a tour of the of the of where you think these things are." I say, "Dude, once we announce that, you know, the U-Haul vans are already been there and gone." You know, it's it's not it's not that way. It's not going to work that way. We're Congress is not going to walk in there with all its magnificence and arrogance and find something. Simply Safe stops crime before it happens, which is the way to stop it. Most security systems work backwards. They react to a break-in. They alert the authorities once someone's already in your house. Woo! You don't want someone in your house in the first place. You want to deter that. That's why you get Simply Safe. AI powered cameras detect threats while they're still outside your home and then alert real security agents before anything else happens. Those agents take action right away. Confront the intruder, let them know they're being watched on camera, call the cops, sound a siren, triggering a spotlight, whatever it takes to get them out of there. That is actual security. Simply Safe's monitoring agents have your back even when you're not at home. Wait for someone to break in in a home invasion. Yeah, no thanks. We trust Simply Safe. Why will there are no long-term contracts or hidden fees? It's been named best home security system for 5 years running. And there is a 60-day money back guarantee. Setup is super easy. The app is simple to use. The monitoring is reliable. Real peace of mind whether you're at home or not. And right now you can save 50% on a simplysafe home security system at simplysafe.com/tucker. Simplysafe sim plysafe.com/tucker. There is no safe like simply safe. If the p the public is being lied to by the government, if there's a, you know, continuous ongoing publicly funded campaign to lie to the American public by its own government, that is justification for overthrowing the government. That's my opinion. They can't do that in a democracy because we own the government. They don't. And so that alone leaving aside the reality of UAPs is, you know, it's enough for I mean what why is it so hard for somebody in authority either in the White House or in congressional leadership to say we want this information and we want it by the close of business today or else you're fired or we're going to send soldiers in and get the information. I I don't Why is that hard? I just don't think it's profitable for them. I think there's too much money and it goes too deep and you have a lot of soldiers. They're not literally soldier but people just follow orders and they think and they said it's national security. They think it's national security. >> So it sounds like you have no confidence that this stuff's going to emerge. >> No, I have zero confidence on this side of when I get when I leave this earth. I'll probably I'll know then. But >> you will instantly >> instantly. But I don't I don't have any confidence in anybody in Washington currently. I have confidence in Trump. I really do. I think if he's if we can talk to him seriously about this uh for a short amount of time, I think he'll just tell him to jam it. We're going to do it. >> Well, I mean, we had, you know, these sightings last year over New Jersey, over the the whole mid mid East Coast. um that the entire country saw and they were on video and we were going to find out what those were and then it was like nah it's totally we don't need to know what that what was that? >> Well I I I still think it was a it was part of Chinese um influence. I think when they flew the balloon over they they wanted to it was 50s or 60s technology. They didn't have anything. They weren't they are I mean they got enough spies on the ground in every university and every think tank and every um uh national lab whatever they got them there but they um they wanted to see what our response was. They um they saw our political response which was zero, our military response which was zero and our press response and the only thing was the people were outraged about it you know and they shot it down off the coast of Myrtle Beach. So, you think the drones, the so-called drones over New Jersey last fall were a Chinese operation? >> Something or something very similar, somebody experimenting to see what our response would be. Because, you know, you could you fly an airplane over the country and and somebody's going to pick it up. But you fly a drone, they could have small nukes, could have been a biological agent. And and I think now they know they could do that. At least under Biden, they could. They can't do it under Trump. So if that was the Chinese who did that um and the US government did nothing and >> I think they had contractors here that that provided them with that. That's that's that's my theory. >> What any idea as to why the US government would want to keep that secret? >> No idea. Either then the current administration doesn't know because the people that knew are gone. I just think the past administration was was smoking mirrors. I mean, Joe Biden, if you ever had any conversations with him, I mean, it was clearly uh very clueless and it was very scary. If we'd have been in a position, whoever was calling his shots from the Obama administration um scared me a lot. And of course, they were the the puppet masters, I feel like, under this under Biden. And I felt like he um and the people around him just ran a muck. I mean, you saw with the >> But why not I don't understand and I'm trying to keep my growing rage under control. Like why not tell >> Well, I'm outraged. >> Why not tell the public something true once in a while? Why the constant lying? Cuz if you if you're constantly lying, then then by definition you're evil and you don't want to think that of your government, especially people you like in government. But like why can't the public know anything ever? Do you have any theories? >> Tradition, I think. >> Tradition. Okay. >> I I just don't The more and more I know about government, you know, I I've been in this gift before and I've walked out and I remember one time I called my wife. I said, "Honey, go to the store and buy canned goods. We we're completely wide open." She said, "All right, sweetie." And um >> So, what do we get for a trillion dollars a year to the US military? Do we get anything in return? Uh, we got some enhanced stock portfolios. And I'll give you a good great example. When Joe Biden gave our military or excuse me, our missile defense system, I you know, I haven't voted for a penny for Ukraine. I'm proud of that. It's not my dad gum war. I'm not sending my 18-year-old daughter to a a country that most members of Congress couldn't find on a dad gum globe. Yeah. And um so you have um we give them our our missile defense system and then we have to replenish ours which we should. We can't be left naked without any of that defense. And guess what? Some of those contractors we described get a a multi multibillion with a B dollar no bid contract. And who do you think has bought stock in that in that company? Members of Congress two weeks prior to the president making that official notice. And um and you see it time and time again. I mean, do you honestly believe members of Congress are making five and six? You've met some of these guys. I >> mean, they don't they can't come in out of the rain, some of them. >> Yeah. >> I'm guilty of that as well. But they're making five and 600%. >> Yeah. A lot of really damaged >> return on their five and 600% return on their investment. And and war is great for business. It's great for It's great for the economy, but it's not good for I don't think it's good for our soul. >> Wouldn't No. No. There's nothing worse. killing people is not good. Um I know that's a controversial statement. Um yeah, >> but why is it why is it impossible just to ban stock trading for members of Congress? >> That's a great idea. Um I have the bill to do it and that's why you know we have a bipartisan group again, myself and Pri and I never get her name right, but um Cortez and me and Chip Roy and a bunch of others, you know, we've got a we've got a bill, but it's not going anywhere. >> Why? because too many members of Congress. I mean, we were told by leadership that, you know, these these guys can't afford can't afford to be here. You know what? If you can't afford to be in Congress and go get another dad gum job, more people have played professional baseball in the major leagues than a Benny Knight should be an honor. The idea is they should be allowed to do insider trading which is a felony because well all you got to do is disclose it and then if you don't disclose it it's a slap on the wrist. You know I I make skateboards and um it's cheaper than a psychiatrist. I make them out of bamboo and banana fibers and crazy stuff and it's a great >> You make skateboards out of bamboo. >> I do. I do. >> A lot of congressmen do that. >> No, I'd say one does. I'm pretty safe in betting that. I would say it's cheaper than a psychiatrist. It's good. But and I gave one to Tulsi Gabbard and you know and it gets views and and people I people all over the country want to buy these things. So I'm a capitalist. I'm thinking you know I'd like to sell a few skateboards. I go to the ethics people. I take my uh DC chief with me and she's very smart. My Knoxville chief is a lady. They're both incredibly smart ladies. So I take the DC lady with me and she's making notes. I mean, you know, I got to get an attorney involved in this thing. I have to have a business plan. You want to do insider trading, be a member of Congress. You want to sell skateboards, you better get you a dadgum lawyer. And that's what I'm having to do right now. I mean, I'm building a business plan. >> Leadership actually said to you, "We can't stop insider trading because they need the money." >> Yeah. And they've And both parties, I mean, it's one of those You talk about one of those issues that both parties agree on. Both parties leadership does. And because they don't want to upset the apple cart and and America, that would be such a a great thing to show America. Hey, we're going to try to do what's right for once. >> Do they know how much America hates them? >> No. Every one of them every I always remember in my hometown when they did away with um insider trading. I mean, I'm sorry, not insider trading. They did away with um term limits. Excuse me. And they were interviewing some of the office holders. I remember one office holder said, "I just don't know if this county is going to exist without us. I don't see how they can go ahead." And and I thought it was like I checked my my calendar. Is this April Fools? I thought it was a joke. I thought they were actually kidding, you know. I mean, that is the >> arrogance county do. >> We're still there. >> Still there. Yeah. Okay. >> Great bond rating. >> Wasn't consumed by fire >> when I was No, no, the Lord didn't come down and crush us like Sodom and Gomorrah. But, you know, um but anyway, they've um they continuously for us and now we've we've pushed them. Now, the head of the Treasury says you need to do it. Trump says to do it. And so, Luna says I'm bringing Merchants's bill to the floor. I'm gonna do a dis, you know, a discharge petition and we're going to bring it to the floor and get enough members to sign on. I don't know if we can or not, but we're going to try. But here's the thing, Tucker. We'll pass a bill if we do, if the if leadership shines on us, and we'll pass a bill, and then it'll be a tough bill, and then the Senate will pass one a little tougher on something we can't agree on. And then we'll say, "Look at those guys in the Senate. You know, they're 150 years old. They can't they're so crooked." And they'll say, "Look at us. we're a bunch of creatins, you know, we don't know what we're doing and then it'll go away and well, we tried. And that's just the game they're playing. That is a game they play with everything. Either that or it's a study committee. So many bills, and I was talking about that with the uh the staff, you know, they'll they'll get you to do, oh, don't do this bill. Let's do a study bill and then come back next year with all this information. You know, Tucker, have you ever seen that last scene in Raiders of the Lost Arc where they're going into that warehouse? You know, it just goes on and on. I'm pretty sure that's where all the study committee bills go to after they pass them and you put in your local newspaper, oh, look at this great bill cuz it has the same title, but it doesn't do anything. And then um then you don't and then the next year you don't pass anything. You you don't come back with anything cuz you've already so-called passed your your your lame bill. And um and that warehouse is full of all those reports because I've never seen I've never ever seen one of those reports after we passed those bills. >> No, of course not. I just wonder though, I mean the details of this are interesting, but I think the broad outline is already known by the whole public, which is this is fake and these people are in it for reasons that have nothing to do with the public interest. And I, you know, everybody wants to rail on Pelosi. She's not on, if you go on the unusual whales website, she's not even in the top 10 for insider trading. >> Yeah, she's I think she's number 11, but you know. >> Yeah, I know some of the people on that list. I do too. I know every dad gum one of them and and there's a list of a hundred and my wife always checks it every year. She said, "Honey," I said, "I know, sweetie. I mean, my 12 my buddy Tommy Syler manages my $12,000 portfolio." Everybody do like I do put it in mutual fund, but I pulled it out last just recently just pulled it out so I could pay for my daughter's school. Um, which is what I established it for in the first place. But it's, you know, and that's and when this airs, I'm going to make a lot of enemies. And here's what's going to happen. I'm going to tell you without a doubt. Maybe not since I'm going to tell you. >> How can they be mad at you? >> Pointing out the obvious. Somebody will come down and sit beside me, somebody in leadership or somebody I'm friends with in Congress and say, "Hey, man, some of the guys are really upset with you on this." I say, "Well, on what?" And they say, "On this what you said on such and such." And I I've said this before. I said, and this will be a chapter of my book if I ever write it. And I said, "But you know it's the truth, right?" And they go, "Oh, yeah. We know it's the truth. We just wish you wouldn't say it anymore. You know, I can't tell you how many times I've had that conversation. >> But there's no shame. Like, we've all done bad things. >> 12% of the population votes, Tucker. They Nobody Listen, it's a game. We need to start People start needing to get their grandkids to educate them how to how to get on the computer and read these bills that we're passing. And look at the game we're playing with y'all. These 3,000 page spending bills that, you know, fund whatever you need for your lab or whatever. Then you read down and it's funding circumcisions in Madagascar. I mean things like that literally drag shows over or abortion which is abhorrent and so I you know it's just a it's just a game and it's a and America needs to start paying attention and Congress members of Cong look people they always have any more people to vote but as long as they're winning that's what leadership's about in either party is staying in power. It's having the Suburban. It's being three deep with security. It's never standing in line at a at the movie theater or going to a ball game or a concert. You know, it becomes self-preservation. >> I remember when January 6th happened and I was shocked. I was completely shocked by it. And um I was the last House member to leave the floor on January 6. >> Good for you. And I was like, "Wow, this is I hate vandalism." Whatever. Now I look back and I'm like, I understand exactly why they did that. I'm not mad about it at all. I think that Congress should have taken notice that people are really, really mad at Congress and instead they just ignored it and are like, "No, everyone who did it is a is a Nazi and we need more security." Really, that's your takeaway. >> You need more security. Maybe you need to act in a way that people respect so the country doesn't hate you cuz you're supposed to be representing the country >> and the 100 plus federal agents that were intertwined. The whole thing was fake. Obviously, I was >> Yeah, I don't even get into it. Yes. No, I spent a lot of time fighting about this at Fox News when they, you know, people resigned when I said I think this was like a setup. Oh, I can't work with a Nazi. It turned out to be true. Um, but >> again, it's a it's how many years later and nobody cares. >> Nobody cares. So, it's not I'm sorry to make it about me. I didn't mean to do that. It's just I'm mad about that topic. But the point is, >> it's your show, brother. >> No, no, no. It it No, but it's just it's about the Congress and I think you need a legislative body, not against the Congress in theory. What I'm worried about, here's the point that I'm attempting to make in a long-winded way, which is if you don't pay any attention at all to how people feel about you when your job is to represent those people, that system can continue and you you're going to get a January 6th but for real at some point if you keep acting this way. >> It will be an armed >> like actually actually. And a lot of people will applaud it. I'm not rooting for that at all. I'm just saying that's going to happen. Do members of Congress get this? Do they understand how hated they are? Do they care? >> I think there's an arrogance associated with being in Congress. I think it's a complete arrogance. Um I I always remember one time I was uh at a UT football game when I was in the legislature and a former member or well they're all they're all dead. Most of the people I served with, a lot of them are. Pulled up, parked illegally, got out of their car and come strutting across the parking lot. And my buddy said, you know, who the heck is that? And I said, "He's a pretty big deal in Nashville." He said, "Tell me ain't in Nashville. He's in Knoxville." And I, you know, and I've always remembered that because u now that guy's a judge who was telling me that my best friend, but he um it was just a, you know, a wakeup moment that I realized early on that that everybody has got this FFT type mentality. And it's who can represent better than me? Nobody. And I can tell you right now, there's probably 200,000 people in my district that could probably do a better job than I am. I'm just hard-headed enough to stick my head out. >> People don't want it cuz it's frustrating. >> Yeah. And they see the security issues now, too. >> Is there ever a moment in, you know, like at lunch with your colleagues where somebody says, "Man, have you looked at the numbers? People really hate us. This is a problem." >> I usually don't eat lunch with my colleagues. So, >> okay. But I mean, >> I have a few close friends in >> during the course of a day at work in the US Congress where you do work. Does anyone ever note that like >> we're more unpopular than like Chlamydia >> and that's not good. >> No. Yeah. I'd say we're I'd say Chlamydia out outranks us. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, no. No. Definitely. Chlamydia has its defenders. Um, >> no. In defense. >> No. >> No. But yeah, there's a bunch of us. I mean, we we see what's going on. We just shake our head. But it's a lot of frustration though, Tucker. You know, we're in the minority. You look at spending bills and then look at the opinion polls on things like Ukraine, other things, and you look at the board and you're wondering where are we at? Yeah. What's going on? And um you know, and for guys like me though, it gets incredibly tough because um you know, the big boys start calling and the the bank account dries up pretty quick. It's hard to raise money for somebody like me. It is incredibly tough to raise money. A lot of most of my contributions are just hardworking, God-fearing people who'll send me $10 in a Bible verse, you know, and I don't um the billionaires usually are for me the day after the election. >> Yeah, I noticed. And they're out in force against a couple of your colleagues who >> said things that are totally consistent with what the public wants, >> right? And >> the billionaires don't want it. >> They don't want it. And they and they control a lot of the media. And um but fortunately now for the internet we can >> yeah bypass >> people like you and I can bypass that. >> Oh, I'm grateful every day. Can I ask so you're um you represent >> Eastern Tennessee which is much more conservative than say the Memphis area or even the >> Actually I did one point better than President Trump, but if he were here today I'd say that was in fact an error and that you carried me over the finish line, Mr. President. >> I think you would have to say that. Yes, sure. Um, but so your threat is not in the general election like it's it's an R plus whatever. >> Yeah, it's a primary but it's just >> it be a primary, >> right? But they could drop big money in and the dark money and >> Okay, so that's the a member like you is vulnerable in the primary. >> Yeah. And someday I'd like to maybe if I had the opportunity to get to the US Senate, I wouldn't mind doing that, but that would be Katie Bar the door. They'd pour the money in all over the country to beat me. So, of course, but you're even seeing with a couple of your colleagues are getting primar um by billionaires because they've said things that are, you know, true but not acceptable, I guess. But are you worried about being primar? >> Yeah, there's only two ways to run. Scared and unopposed. And I I'm I'm a product of the primary. The first race I won, I I beat an incumbent in a state house race, 99 house races that year. I was the only person to beat an incumbent. and um I won with just two and 3/4 percentage points ahead. I knocked on over 6,000 doors. I I'd been run out of town on run out of business by the government. And um it was a great lesson, but I did knocked on over 6,000 doors. And I think I raised I think I raised around eight or $9,000. I can't remember. And I thought, how am I going to spend all this dad gum money? You know, every morning I'd wake up, my mom and daddy of course were living then. And um I would throw up cuz I had this horrible taste of peppermint in my mouth. And the reason I had peppermint because I licked all my stamps. That's back in the day. You had to lick stamps. >> Yes. >> And I remember one morning I woke up and I was rolled up in them. I was like in a cocoon of stamps. But you and I wake up every morning I'd throw up and mama would make me a turkey sandwich on white bread and give me a Sprite and I'd get right back and knock on doors >> for breakfast. >> Yeah. That's all I could hold down. Then I'd get out and knock on doors all day long. And um you know I lost over 20 lbs, got bit by a dog, took off my shirt, I look like a target, I just read on the rings and white in the belly, you know, and and um and so but it was um I learned wore out a pair of New Balance shoes and um the only shoes at the time that were made in America. So I I'm kind of big on that. And so um we won and um spent four years in the house and then um I just come off of a business deal. I had a mulch business. I had a composting business. And I'm I'm a capitalist. But I can remember, you remember that scene in the Godfather right before he dies, the original Godfather, and he's spraying that on the on the tomatoes and the little grandb babies running around him. My daddy had one of those sprayers. I remember he he grew these tomatoes. And at the time, I remember I think he spent $20 on tomatoes and fertilizer. And we got like three of these gnarly tomatoes. Of course, this is in the 70s and we're family of public educators, so 20 bucks is righteous bucks. I said, "Daddy, I'd like to try that. I want to try organic gardening." And he said, "All right, you go ahead." And at the time, Kub used to come by the house and um a chipper truck and they'd pick up all your brush, you know, throw them in the back of one of those big chippers and they'd spit it in the back of the truck. And I said, "What do y'all do with that stuff?" We take it to the landfill. I said, "Really? How much they pay you for it?" And they said, "They don't. We pay them to take it." This was in 1978. I was in the eighth grade as the wheel started turning. I thought, "Man, that's a business idea." I said, "Dump that stuff here." So, they dumped it and I composted it and I had a crazy, incredible garden. Squash, beans, strawberries, um, tomatoes, of course, and I I fed the church, the the neighborhood, everybody come by the house. I friends and me, they give them a sack of tomatoes. Well, fast forward, uh, went to college, six years of undergraduate studies at the University of Tennessee. I thoroughly enjoyed my college career, six years of studies. Um, I didn't drink or smoke pot and it still took me six years. >> That's pretty good. >> End up agreeing to technological adult education. I was certified to teach shop. Took a few art classes and apparently I got an art certification I think on my certificate I believe. But anyway, so um I can weld and fix motors and I can burn your house down if you need it wired. I can't do that very well. But all the other machine shop stuff I can do that or I could at the time. So, I came up with this idea. I taken all the city's yard waste and I presented it to then the city mayor. I said, "What are y'all doing with it?" I said, "We take it to the landfill and they could pay me a reduced fee of what they take it to the landfill. I would grind it and then sell it." Well, we had a blizzard that year. So, we did about seems like we did 30,000 tons that first year and they paid me around, it was under 20, but just say $20 a ton. So, I was making $600,000 and this was in um 91 or '92. I was been out of college for a little while, worked in the business world. And um I I literally I would have been a million. I I became very wealthy, but I had to grind it. So, it cost me about a half a million dollars. So, I was still clearing $100,000 living at home with my family who's public educator. So, $100,000 was pretty righteous bucks. But then I sold it. I sold it for um for I think it was $20 a pickup truckload. So I was selling between um I would sell four to 5,000 pickup truckloads a month. So I mean I was raking it and it was all cash and I reported everything and had accountants and made sure I was crazy honest. I gave half of it away to churches and schools. Well, somebody decided they wanted that business what I think ended up happening and um they accused me of taking toxic waste. They said there's bacteria in that newspaper articles. There's bacteria in his mulch. Well, human body contains a half a pound of uh a quarter pound of bacteria. I mean, it aids in digestion. If the earth didn't have bacteria, it'd be a cube. I mean, we just press, you know, nothing would. So, the Smoky Mountains, there's not in these parks out here, there's nobody running around in a white suit collecting every leaf, you know, and and putting it. So, God had a plan and and bacteria is part of it. Well, of course, it had bacteria in it. and they would test it and they did a faulty test and finally it just got ridiculous. The EPA even came in and and oddly enough, the day after they closed my business, I got the EPA report and it cleared me and said, "In fact, there is bacteria in there, but there's not abnormal amounts. There's nothing." And the head of UT's microbiology department, I'll never forget this. He Tucker, he ate my mulch on the news to prove that this was just bogus. This is crazy. And the state would come in and shut me down. They get >> How was it? >> Huh? How's the mulch? >> Delicious. >> Yeah, >> delicious. Um, tastes a lot like chicken. >> I bet. >> So anyway, um, uh, I end up losing that business. And I remember my dad told me, he said, "Put an American flag on top of that mulch pile." And I did. And he said, "This thing's bigger than that." Daddy's World War II veteran. Nothing. He's calm under fire. Man, him and mama both were wonderful people. Mama flew an airplane during the Second World War, depression era. Didn't have electricity. She's senior in high school. They were tough people. And they didn't like what they were doing to me. And apparently the public didn't either cuz I knocked on I said I knocked on over 6,000 doors and beat a respected incumbent I guess in the primary and um and I never looked back and I became I was in the state house for four years, state senate for 12 years and that's sort of been my thing even with the UFOs. My thing is when people come to me because you can hire a lobbyist, you can hire a lawyer, but the average working guy, they call the they call the front desk and they asked, "Can I speak to Tim?" because they think they know me because they're, you know, the government's ripped them off. And I always remember during that time it was when um do you remember Travelgate under the Clinton administration? >> Yes. And it seems like I think Hillary and Bill they they if I remember correctly they these people that were running the travel operation at the White House and Congress they ran them out of business. They >> so put their friends in there >> so they could put their friends in there and those people traveled the country because I remember they had a half a million dollars or they had 300,000 in legal expenses. I had more than that in the mulch business. I mean they were threatening a felony. They were going to throw me in the federal penitentiary over this thing and because I wouldn't give up. And they had and I remember the University of Tennessee, this liberal professor gave his kids extra credit if they would come pick at me. And they came down there and they brought the neighbors, they brought neighborhood people down there and they had misspelled words in their signs, you know, and they'd park their BMWs around the CL around the side and they could come pick at me to look like they were just and they all dressed down. It was the most pathetic thing. And the and I remember the uh the person at the city that was really orchestrating it all against me was um I remember seeing them hug the reporter that was writing all the nasty articles about me and I just you know the whole thing was just and and I saw I see Americans getting run down the road and that I think that's why people like me appeal there's not a lot of folks like me obviously in Congress but folks like me appeal to people because they've been run over and they know they can call me And I can and I'm not judgmental. I just say I don't care if they vote for me or not. Have people that are convicted felons. People have killed people before and I've helped them out and cuz I don't care cuz I see the system. It ran over me and I was just some white middle class kid from West Knoxville and the system ran me over. >> Well, speaking of someone Well, I've got two questions before I forget. One, have you ever been threatened since you've been in the US Congress with a primary challenge by your own party? Has anyone in your own party said, "Knock it off or we'll fund a challenger?" >> They flew, from what I understand, a couple people were flown to DC. I know one apparently was, and I think the other one was, and they either called me or called somebody else and said, you know, no, Tim's Tim's a good guy. >> Why? Why? >> Cuz I rock the boat. I'm not >> In what way? >> Question leadership. I don't I call them out. I can remember one time. Was it the UAPs, do you think, or >> No. Well, I mean, they use that. They think they can use that against me. It's other things. It's much deeper than that. I can remember when I went um in conference, we were at the Capitol Hill Club and they meet over there legally so we can talk about fundraising and then we were in the capital and have our conference meeting, talk strict politics. And I asked the head of the committee that was carrying the bill. I said, 'Ma'am, I said, 'How much money is in this bill?' And she said,"I don't know." And I said, "No, I mean, the bill that you're talking about right now, the one that we're getting ready to spend all this money on, how much is in it?" And she said, "I don't know." And leadership said, "Man, you can't what are you doing? What are you doing?" I was like, "What do you mean, what am I doing? I come from Tennessee. We run a balanced budget in Tennessee. It's a crazy concept. We have zero debt. That's why everybody's clamoring. >> Leadership didn't want you to ask how much money. >> It just made everybody uncomfortable, I guess. I don't know. But it things like that. I get it. I get it. I I ask questions, you know, that it just it's just part of the system. They beat you down. they beat you down and then you see him and then you know next thing it's like um that's like in Cool Hand Luke where where um Paul Newman is um he comes back they beat him down and beat him down and he's he becomes you know the the warden's boy but then in reality it was all in hacked and he ends up stealing a truck and getting killed but I don't plan on stealing a truck and I don't plan on getting killed. I'm not suicidal. Congress won't continue to exist if they keep acting like this. I mean, >> this country will not continue to exist. If we don't get our financial ship in order, we will sink. And it is we're 36 trillion in debt. Nobody cares. All they care about is getting through that next election. That's bottom line. Leadership, anybody else. These people are all my friends. I'm not making any friends. s I notice people who have a different view or say things like you're saying. So Massie above all um Marjorie Taylor Green, you I'm not saying you guys agree on on everything. I don't think you do. >> But we're all very close friends, >> but you have the a similar orientation which is like actually pro America. Is this good for the country or is it not? And all three of you are either dismissed as crazy or really really hated. In the case of Massie, it's like, you know, he he's he's the target of like a very serious >> Oh, they're going to spend he'll spend they'll drive his money up and spend millions against him. >> Is he going to win, do you think? >> I don't know. I don't have any idea. I don't I haven't looked at the numbers. I don't I don't pay much attention to polls except election night. If it's close, then I question those. >> Yeah, you have every reason to. You said it uh earlier in our conversation that members of Congress were compromised. What did you mean by that? >> Well, I was on Can I Can I name a rival of yours or maybe I don't know. >> I want you to name anything that comes to mind. >> I was on the Benny show and it was early on and Benny and I become friends. I didn't realize he was so close to Charlie Charlie Kirk, but he um um but he had me on early on and I and I I did honestly I didn't know who he was and he asked me about that and I said well I said here's the way it works. It's the way it's worked in the past. The Russians even have a name for you know the honeypot. You um and I don't go on overseas trips much. I've been to one trip and that was prior I' I've been on one Kodell. Um that's I went to the Mexican border and I went down one day with um um Andy Biggs who's no who's a good Mormon who's hope maybe be the governor of Arizona. But he um he said, "Bridget, we're going on this trip. I know you don't go on these things, but it's just it's it's just it's one like you'd like. We'll go down there and back. We'll stay in an awful motel. we'll eat some cheap Mexican food, some barbecue, and we'll put you on a plane back to Tennessee. And I said, "All right, Andy, I'll do it." And um um but you know, that's about it that I've done. And so what happens is you're you're you're overseas. You're being told how great you are. You're sitting at a bar and somebody and they know what you're into, guys, gals, combination thereof, drugs, whatever. and they'll hook you up and you're thinking you're the stud, you're the, you know, your wife's away. Nobody will know halfway around the world. You end up sleeping with somebody and then, you know, you're out. Next day you're flying back to America, you know, you're you're back front row at the church, you know, and then um you're getting ready to make a key vote and somebody comes up and whispers in your ear, "Hey man, were you in a motel room with a girl in, you know, Istanbul or something?" And he was like, "Oh crap." He goes, "Man, we don't want that out." He goes, "No, no, no, no, no. We don't we're not going to put that out." I said, "If you can help us on this little bill, though, you know, now that's the way they used to do it." And I'm not so certain they don't do that now. And it's funny when I did that show with Benny the next. And oh, I caught hell. I caught hell. >> You said that. >> I said that and members said, "Oh, you can't be saying that stuff, Burchett." What? >> You know, >> truth hurts, I guess, for some people and other people. Have you ever, by the way, just parathetically, ever been attacked for saying something false or only true things? >> Only true things. Only true things. So, I'm It's funny. The next week, Tucker, there was this huge and I said it always gets covered up and everything gets covered up and then somebody owns you. That's compromised. That'll be the title of my book. If I ever write a book, Tim Burch, it's compromised Washington because that's what happens or has happened in the past. The very next week, a Chinese prostitution ring was busted in where? Washington DC. And who are the and it was listed in the paper. Who is their client list? Um, high-ranking officials um in government, elected officials, and lobbyist. Now to me that that that's all kinds of red flags going up all over the place. Well, and then the next week the story disappeared. >> Yeah, >> of course it did. But I think what they do now mostly is they have jobs. If you look at these guys and gals and uh you know they're they have a wife and or girlfriend that'll work in one of these industries. I mean $100,000 to a multi-billion dollar corporation is nothing. and it's it's extra supply of paper clips or something. I think that's how they do it now. You have them in in political offices, you have them in business offices, you have them all over. And >> you have what? >> They're employed. And so they own your ass. >> Ah, >> see they're employed by these people. I'm sorry. >> Get my wife a job, get my girl a job, >> get them both a job, you know, and keep them separate. And um you know I know of I mean it's it's just it's just common. I mean I hear about all the time. I hear about >> very common. >> I hear I mean it's I mean they just talk oh she she works over at defense, she works over at justice. She works for this case or he does or somebody does or they work back in the district for such and such. I mean it's just human nature. >> People that members of Congress are sleeping with either legally or not are employed by forces that want to control members of Congress. I that's what they used to do and now I'm pretty sure you know I I knew of instances where that happened when I was in the legislature and now they do it but through the employment agencies >> through employment agencies. >> I mean just I mean they employ them is what I'm saying. >> They employ them. Yeah. No, I mean I I know a bunch of members of Congress I can right off the top of my head I can think of with spouses in this or that in >> and they might be incredibly qualified but the reality is America's not buying that. Nobody should but again 12% of the population votes. This is what you get. >> I have noticed just having spent my life in DC that people's personal lives are getting weirder in the Congress. Have you noticed that without without implicating anyone by name? I don't think I'm imagining this. It's not just sleeping with your scheduleuler. It's weirder than that now. Have you noticed that? >> I try to stay in my office as much as possible. I >> Well, I just want to say for the record, I never heard of anybody participating in an orgy in Washington DC in my entire life and I've heard a lot about it recently. So, that is I wasn't there. I'm not going there. But I think that's real. So, >> I've never been I I don't know if it is or isn't. I'd like I'd hope that it isn't and I'd like to think that it isn't, but I've never been invited. So, >> yeah. I >> when I was in the state legislature, we used to talk about that how we knew some people were pretty shady >> and um but you know they never they would never come to somebody like me and offer me anything because they knew my background. >> No. And they know you're making skateboards in your garage. So you're busy >> in my barn. >> Your barn. So um one of the members of Congress who all of us were encouraged to think was weird and to hate. He was almost like a ritual sacrifice for the sins of the of the entire body I felt was this guy George Santos. George Santos was not even a full-term congressman from New York who was uh you know like a serial fabricator. Made up all these kind of amazing stories about his life and he played on competitive volleyball. He worked at Goldman Sachs and it was all kind of it was all fake. He was he was both Jewish and something else. I can't remember. Anyway, it was all made up. Um he wound up >> We always say Jewish. >> I think I heard Schumer say that. >> I was amused by the whole thing. Maybe >> I was too bad. But I just thought who who is Congress to stand in judgment anyway? >> But I don't Well, that's it. But I don't remember George Santos ever advocating for like killing innocent people, which is like very common. George Santos had one of the most conservative voting records in Congress across the board. Conservative. I mean, sometimes I'd look up there and think, "Dad, gum, George, that's a that's a little harsh for me." You know, he'd vote against something that was and I'd say, "It cost $5 per bite. We're broke." And I go, "All right, G, you're good. I'm good with it." You know, >> interesting. >> Yeah. So, um, George Santos wound up in prison, and I spoke to someone this morning who's close to George Santos, who visited him in prison, uh, this weekend, >> right? >> And told me that he saw George Santos um, shackled in chains and he's been in solitary since he got to prison. He did an interview. >> He's doing time in a federal lockup, too. >> In a federal lockup, in solitary confinement >> 24 hours a day. He's 24. He gets out, I think, 1 hour to maybe eat and take a bath. >> What is going on? How did George Santos wind up in prison for like 7 years and now he's in solitary? >> What's P Daddy doing? Four maybe. >> Oh, I know actual criminals who were who were like celebrated on the front page of the newspaper. So, I know a lot of them. So, >> whatever. Not I don't want to lecture the deep unfairness of life, but like >> what is that? Why? I think he was a sacrificial lamb and I think our party and everybody else just kicked him to the curb and said, "Look how righteous we are." >> And I just don't, you know, he'd always sit with me on sinners row. That's what I call it. Every time somebody would get in trouble, they would or perceived to be in trouble cuz I'm not, you know, I I I've said this before and I I mean, I'll say it publicly. I George was under a heck of a lot of pressure and and I call myself a Christian and if I sat there and watched him kill himself over something and and he went to hell, I'd have that on my soul and I just don't want that. And um and you know my chief of staff called me one day and said hollered, "Hey boss," I said, he goes, "I know what you're going to say." And I go, "What is it?" And he said, "Nobody wants to take George as their mentor. Would you be his mentor?" I said, "Sure. sign him up and he just shook his head and I said said, "Yeah, he'll do it." And then um and George and I just became fast friends. You know, his his office was caddyy cornered to mine and the press would be just lined up down the hall and I some kid would walk by close in stature down the other, hey, there's George Santos. And they'd all run down there and and chase him and I'd have fun with that. And then um George would come in the office and I would talk to him about that and I'd talk to him about my faith. And you know, I just said, "This ain't this is not reality, George. Don't I" And he I'd say, "Promise me if you think you're going to take your life, you'd call me anytime, night or day." He said, "I will, Tim. Don't worry." And he never did, you know, but he would call me from time to time. And >> but who is like, "How did he wind up in prison for long?" >> And to me, I just don't understand that. We just turned our back on him and and >> the Republican party leadership did. >> Oh, absolutely. They don't want anywhere near it. We have to, you know, I guess they >> like he's creepier than they are. Sorry, that's not true. >> Well, no. >> True. That's so I'm just You don't have to say that. You work there. But they're they are way creepier than George Santos. Fact. >> George is a very interesting guy. And yeah, he fabricated a lot of stuff, but he's literally doing more time than than P. Diddy or what? Combmes or whatever his name is. >> Solitary confinement. >> Solitary confinement. And generally solitary is where they put the violent people, the people that have committed heinous crimes. And I hear people say, "Good, good. But I hope they lock him up for the rest of his life. And I >> heard someone say that about George Santos? >> Oh yeah, I've heard it >> where >> in Congress. I've heard him talk about it and how bad it made it look for us. I was like, for us? I said, have you not read the papers lately? We do a pretty good job of making it look bad. >> I don't think George Santos started the Ukraine war. I mean, what? >> No, we just I don't know. I think again, we're a little big on ourselves sometimes. >> So, um, it does seem he's clearly being punished. He clearly has powerful enemies. I'm not sure who they are, but or maybe I I don't understand the whole thing, but how this person called me this morning to say, "Can you save George Santos?" I mean, I said, "I'm a podcaster. I can't save anybody." But I I don't know. This This is like the This is truly wrong. What's happening to George Santos? It >> is completely wrong. Uh yeah, he he committed I guess he he took money he shouldn't have, but >> was a campaign finance violation. Yeah, a campaign finance violation. Correct. >> Right. The whole category is >> and you know they they stack so much up against him. I think the amount of time he was going to do was just incredible if he'd have stacked them on top of each other. >> But then to torture him once he gets to prison, >> I think is he's if he if he if he lives through it all, he's going to he's going to have one heck of a story to tell. >> You don't want to live in a country that does that to people. I don't think I mean >> so only Trump can save him. Is that kind of where we are? Do you think? >> I think so. I think so. They can commute. You know, they they did these reality TV show people that he didn't even know. Um we happen to know George. I you know, give him community service home lock up or whatever, but I just think it's a waste of taxpayers money and it's a waste. It's just it just doesn't seem right. I just don't unless everybody else is going to go to jail for a longer amount of time for the crimes they committed. >> Well, I mean, I remember very well Bill Jefferson. I mean, I've just watched a lot of different scandals in the Congress. Almost all Democrats and the Democratic party stood behind those people till the till sentencing. >> Oh, yeah. >> The leadership. >> You remember they all walked out of Congress when Clinton was and and they you know, I was there that day. Um Yes. 1998. I'll never forget it. So, um, the Republican leadership with Marjorie, Taylor Green, with Massie now, and with Santos, just like immediately, we we've never heard of the guy and we hope he dies in prison. Like, what is that? Why can't the Republican party have leadership that stands by its people and stands by its voters? Is that too much to ask? >> I think we read our opinion polls too much and not our souls. >> Yeah. Well, I mean, what's your sacred duty? It's to represent the people who elected you. That's the whole purpose of being there. >> I always thought, too, our anger, if we had to be angry at anybody, it should have been the Democrats who did the opposition resource. I mean, you know, opposition research on on George. I mean, you could have Googled and found out that stuff. You could have called the school and said, "Hey, is he in school here?" or whatever. >> Lying on your I mean, the guy's like an epic artist. I get it. Yeah. I mean, I don't, you know, I'm not defending wine. >> Is that federal is that a federal crime? >> Well, you just spent an hour telling me how they're lying about UFOs, which is a pretty serious thing to lie about. They're shutting down military bases because they can't, you know, cuz the they don't control the airspace. So, that's very serious. >> They're lying about the Kennedy assassination. They lied about September. >> Yeah. The funny thing about Kennedy, we had him in on our committee. um Luna chairs it in this oversight subcommittee and we had a doctor in there who was um in the um emergency room with Kennedy and he said there was clearly an entry wound, an exit wound and an entry wound and an exit wound going the opposite direction. >> Yeah. >> And you know one bullet supposed to that magic bullet did that >> shot John Connley and the president simultaneously. >> Well um those files have not been fully released as you know. No. No. And they never will be. They never will be. And just power control and and and these and the CIA or whoever would have to admit that they were wrong. They'd have to admit that they were wrong. And the arrogance is just I think once you take the oath, you you get an oath of arrogance >> that you got to protect us our our past and we'll protect you kind of thing in the future. And I just think that carries on with them all. And they for whatever reason. >> Okay. But George Santos pretending to be a highle volleyball player is the real crime. >> That is the crime of the century. >> He said he worked at Goldman Sachs. Kill him. >> Okay, just to put just to put deception in perspective here cuz I think that you know not all lies are the same. >> I agree. >> Uh okay, final question. Since you more than any member of Congress have thought about this, as candidly as you can answer, what do you think based on what you've heard the UFOs are? Actually, I think again God created the heavens and the earth. And every night I go out with my dogs, usually at 4:00 in the morning, they go to the bathroom and look at those stars. Yep. And I see the light from those stars. And it's hard for my very small brain to compre comprehend this. A light from those stars left there before the time of Christ. And some of those stars don't even exist that we're looking at today, >> right? >> Which is hard for me to fathom or as a good old voice would say, hard for me to fathom. But I I think there's something else out there. I do not think we are the best that God can do. Now is there something here as that's you know proposed to me with these deep sea areas I don't know is something been here but the um the way for me to comprehend anything traveling light years I mean it's just beyond belief that is beyond belief but now there's this quantum I've been explained quantum physics and I really don't understand it how something can be here and instantaneously be hereim simultane almost simultaneously. And that that to me begs the question of how does that fit into all this? And if something's here in these deep sea areas, has it been here for, you know, thousands of years? And that's the other question. That's what, you know, these folks in the Navy kind of and I have to be real careful >> with the folks in the Navy. What >> that that I've talked to about this undersea type >> and what have they said? And they said, "We don't know what's down there." And they said, "There's we think there's a reason that they're over these deep sea areas that we cannot get to." >> And so I don't >> their belief is whatever these things are, >> they've been here. And and obviously if there was if they meant harm to us, we I mean we're doing a pretty good job of harming ourselves. Um just look at our political structure. But the the truth is is that we just don't know. And I don't know, my my thoughts are kind of evolving on it, Tucker, to be honest with you, because I I get to the point sometimes where I'm kind of beat down. I think, "Oh, this is crazy. There can't be." But how many of these people got to come forward to me that I that I know and respect u tell tell me what they've seen and there's no no explanation for it. And so I I just think it's another one of those things I'm not going to know till I'm in heaven. I mean I I know that sounds that sounds weird and and >> it doesn't sound weird at all. It sounds entirely true. And that's true for a lot of things including understanding people's motivations including your own motivations. Like we don't understand anything. I mean of course >> we don't I mean it's every you know and and science can't get out of its own way. every time they find something new, you know, it's um like the celacanth for instance, it was a a loed thin fish caught off the coast of Madagascar, I believe it was, and it's supposed to have been extinct 50 million years ago. But all of a sudden, it's here and then they well, you know, there was this but they can't explain it. And I again go back to that Bible verse, those professing themselves to be wise became fools. And I I think it's I was on a a show the other day with a a guy named Lo. He's a UFO guy. He's um Yeah, I think he's at Harvard, I believe. Anyway, he um he was talking about how science what he likes about science is that it's that it it's it's changing and it's and how it but a lot of scientists it's like, you know, this is a brick wall. This is way it is. It's not going to change. And I think with the UFOs, that's kind of the situation we're in. Um, I just tell you, I've talked to too many people that have just sworn to me what they've seen and um, and some that I can't disclo disclose, but and I would hope that eventually that those people are able to come forward. >> Yeah. And in general that people would start telling the truth. It's it's an act of liberation when you do. Congressman Timber, I appreciate you coming on. Thank you. >> Thank you, Tucker. [Applause] [Music] We've got a new website we hope you will visit. It's called newcommissionnow.com and it refers to a new 9/11 commission. So we spent months putting together our 9/11 documentary series. And if there's one thing we learned, it's that in fact there was foreign knowledge of the attacks. People knew. >> The American public deserves to know. We're shocked actually to learn that, to have that confirmed, but it's true. The evidence is overwhelming. The CIA, for example, knew the hijackers were here in the United States. They knew they were planning an act of terror. >> In his passport is a visa to go to United States of America. >> A foreign national was caught celebrating as the World Trade Center fell and later said he was in New York, quote, to document the event. How do you know there would be an event to document in the first place? Because he had fornowledge. And maybe most amazingly, somebody, an unknown investor, shorted American Airlines and United Airlines, the companies whose planes the attackers used on 911, as well as the banks that were inside the Twin Towers just before the attacks. They made money on the 9/11 attacks because they knew they were coming. Who did that? You have to look at the evidence. >> The US government learned the name of that investor, but never released it. Maybe there's an instant explanation for all this, but there isn't actually. And by the way, it doesn't matter whether there is or not. The public deserves to know what the hell that was. How did people know ahead of time? Why was no one ever punished for it? 9/11 Commission, the original one, was a fraud. It was fake. Its conclusions were written before the investigation. That's true, and it's outrageous. This country needs a new 9/11 commission. one that actually tells the truth that tries to get to the bottom of the story. We can't just move on like nothing happened. >> 911 commission cover. >> Something did happen. We need to force a new investigation into 9/11 almost 25 years later. Sorry, justice demands it. And if you want that, go to new commissionow.com to add your name to our petition. We're not getting paid for this. We're doing this cuz we really mean it. Newcommissionow.com