the general good experience. In fact, they say that exercise is one and a half times more effective than SSRI's for curing depression. Oh, in a heartbeat, man. I'll take my, because I take SSRI's and I do exercise. If I take my SSRI, I don't feel really anything. I just feel like, oh, I took my SSRI. But if I go for a run, like, even today, I had to go run a couple miles. I was like, I know I'm gonna be on here. I wanna have, I wanna like just be in like my, I wanna have my good energy going. I'm gonna go for a run, you know? And so, yeah, I think it, I know that it makes me feel better if I do something athletic, you know? What SSRI are you taking? I think I'm gonna lexapro right now. I think the generic one, whatever the cheaper one is. You know, I think it's, I don't know what it is, but it is, they say it's fine. You know? So I don't know if I believe him, but I mean, I'm taking it. Now, I would like to, I would like to maybe take 30 days off and try ayahuasca again. I feel like I'm getting back around where I would like to do it again, you know? Yeah. Yeah. I would, man, cause I wanna fucking feel when we write up their own natures. Fun to be in there. Eave dropping on natures. No, it's boy. Yeah. God, I'll be right up there. Yeah. Would you say, boy? He's dropping on natures. Right up next to it. Oh, dude, yeah. Oh, I, Oahuasca, dude, you're fucking mother nature. You'll be, you should break up that wiener and you'll be like, damn, I didn't know mother nature had a wiener, you know? It's an natures going there. It's powerful, dude, that ayahuasca stuff is real powerful. So I would like to do that again. What is, what is the reason why you take the SSRIs? I think cause when I'm off of them, something feels wrong. I feel it's a battle about it's a battle to even if I do running and I do fitness, right? It's a battle to keep myself even. So instead of dealing with that at a more intense level, I choose to take them because it just makes it a little bit easier. I don't think it's taking the easy way out though because if I don't take them and I still do all those things, it's hard for me to get to a good baseline. What do you mean by wrong? Like, wouldn't you say you feel wrong? What is it feeling? I feel like at any moment, kind of my feelings can just drop off into like a really surprised low. I don't know where for no reason. Yes. Sometimes with a little bit of motivation to it, right? Or some trigger. But it's the level that it drops off to. It's too much of a drop for me to not get some help. Before we're a little bit and it felt manageable, that's okay. But when it's pretty steep, it's like, oh man, this feels sometimes scary. Yeah, I know what you're saying. that it's gotten doing that ayahuasca stuff made it a lot better than it ever been. Neil Brennan said it basically cured him. Yeah, he's the one who took me to it. Yeah, he said it made him much happier. It cured him of like a lot of his what he felt like were personality disorders that he had, you know? Like Neil's a great guy. He's very, very smart, very smart. And sometimes, you know, I wonder about real smart guys. They're just always thinking about things and maybe too much about certain things. And you know, you just get overwhelmed by thoughts and anxiety and emotions and anxiety is a lot of what anxiety is a lot of is fretting about possibilities for a lot of people. You know, it's the inability to live in the moment. And you fret about anxiety and a lot of it has to do with childhood trauma. A lot of it has to do with genetics. A lot of anxiety is a weird thing. They think that anxiety, whether it's a learn behavior or not, you can actually get it from your parents. I don't know why. See, what's it? I could see that. Can you get anxiety is anxiety genetic, Google that. My mom made us anxious. Yeah. Yeah, dude. Sometimes we go get ice cream, dude. And she would like, she's like, she'd get angry if we should get so angry if we dripped any of it. Here it goes. There's clear research showing that anxiety is influenced by genetics. In fact, expert notice a family connection for anxiety even before they understood how DNA or genes work. Have you had a close relative with anxiety or chance of developing is about two to six times higher than if you don't? Well, I don't know if that's genetic or if it's just like, learn behavior. Yeah, if your mom is always or your dad is always like, baw, they're fucking anxious and you're like, take them over and they're always fucking tickling you. Then you're going to fucking feel tickle about that. If you're always getting fucked with it. Yeah, yeah, something, you know, bug in your, something even just tickling you with their words. Genetics of generalized anxiety disorder and related traits. Well for sure mental illness is genetic. There's a lot of people that are mentally ill and the children are mentally ill or their family's mentally ill or it's like, it's, man, I used to have a much more ignorant view on mental health because I have my own mental health issues, which I'm sure we all do. But mine was like, just don't be a pussy. Get your work done. You feel great. And I don't have to take anything and even though I don't have to take anything, I'm still doing something to mitigate it. I'm doing something every day to work on it. And when I don't, I do feel it. Right. It's like a lot of people do. So I was wondering, maybe those people just aren't doing the work. Maybe they just got up in the morning, went running before work or did something before, maybe they could get through this and not need a fucking pill. Yeah. I don't think that anymore. Interesting. Yeah. I think, yeah, there's times where I thought that I'm just not tough enough. I'm just not doing enough. I'm not, I'm not enough to battle this. Right. And, um, and then I get to a point where so many times I tried to stop taking it. And it's like it's too much of a discrepancy that makes things unmanageable to a point where it feels like it's unfair to be that unmanageable to myself. So, um, I get back on it, you know, and, and I don't think it really bothers me or anything like that. But it's kind of the same with alcoholism. Like I thought alcoholism used to just be like somebody, could and stop drinking or whatever. Right. But there's so much more, I mean, alcoholism is only disease if we'll tell you you don't have the disease, right? Mm hmm. That's correct. Like imagine if you put on like a shirt, right? But every, every couple of days, a shirt was like, guess what? You don't have a shirt on. I don't think that's a good analogy. I don't know if it is, but it seems like it. But that's what alcohol is. Alcoholism would tell you you don't have a problem. Right. You don't have a problem. I have another drink. Yeah. You have another, have, have, have some more Coke bomb. Yeah. Have, have another family.