two, one, boom, and we're live. First of all, cheers, gentlemen, let's have a little bit of a toast. Relax, Bob, thank you very much for doing this. I really appreciate it. I understand that you've told the story many, many times. You've been grilled many, many times and it's very stressful for you, so I really, really appreciate your time. For people who don't know the story, there is a documentary. Jeremy Corbel has a documentary out right now. It's called Bob Lazar Area 51 in UFOs and flying saucers. And flying saucers. Not our Area 51 in flying saucers. I first heard your story decades ago. I told you last night when we went out to dinner. I've seen pretty much every interview you've ever given. I've followed the story incredibly closely. But for people who don't know the story, let's give them the bullet points. You used to work at Area 51. In Area 51, you got it. Well, you know, we want to be accurate. Area S4. S4. It's about 15 miles south of Area 51. You worked in what would you describe it? I guess within the Area 51 compound, you can call it a subset of Area 51. And you got that job. Before that, you were working. Before that, I had worked at Los Alamos. Right. National Labs in New Mexico. And you were involved in what kind of work? Nuclear weapon development, physics. I mean, they do everything there. So how do they approach you to say, hey, Bob, once you come on out to the Nevada desert? Well, the way this went down was at that time, it was 1982. I put a jet engine in my Honda. And Los Alamos put it on the front page of the paper. He said, you know, Los Alamos, man, physicist at the lab, you know, built this 200 mile an hour. You know, Honda jet car. I drove to work every day. So I was known in Los Alamos, the guy with the weird car. And you could hear it from, you know, a mile away. Anyway, the day that came out on the front page of the paper was the day Edward Taylor, the father of the hydrogen bomb, was giving a lecture down there at the lab. And we didn't have much going on that day in our group. And I asked if I could go down there. And I went down there early, and Ed Taylor was outside leaning on a brick wall there and reading the front page of the paper. Now, this is a guy at a history. So I introduced myself, hey, I'm the guy you're reading about there. And we talked for a little while and it was cool. You know, fast forward to years later, I had moved out to Las Vegas and had, you know, left Los Alamos and went on to other things. And I wanted to get back into the scientific community. Yeah, I left start other businesses and that sort of thing. So I sent resumes out and one of them went out to Ed Taylor and referenced our meeting, you know, back in that the day. And anyway, he remembered me and gave me a reference, somebody to contact at EGNG. And that's pretty much how it started. So you get a phone call or a letter? Like, what do you get? Well, I got a, what did I get? I got a letter initially and went down for an interview probably a couple times. And it was down at EGNG special projects, which was at McARan Airport at that time in Las Vegas. And did they give you any sort of job description of what you were applying for? They said it was for, I can't remember exactly what they did. This was a long time ago, but I think it was advanced propulsion or something like that. Something relatively generic and they said, it's in a remote area. You know, it's going to be some days on, some days off. And, you know, it was kind of a, it was kind of not exactly a full-time job, but you might have to be out there for two weeks at a time and take two weeks off. So it was kind of a, the works schedule would be kind of broken up. And did this seem attractive to you or did it seem weird? No, I, it really wasn't weird because people that work at the test site, anybody that's familiar with the area up there, you know, working at the New Glier test site, or at the Tonopot test range north of there, that's typically how things go. So you had known about it from the scientific community because the area 51 at that time was still... No, they didn't say anything about area 51. Okay, so they just said it was in a, you know, in a remote location and you just know it was up at the test site. Right. So, but there was no mention of area 51 at that time. So they've done hundreds of nuclear tests in Nevada, Nevada that whole area was, there's been, there's giant chunks of Nevada that people... Yeah, there's a big piece in Nevada and it's split up into different areas. There's a nuclear test site, there's area 51, there's the Tonopot test range north of that. There's little sub areas, there's areas where they test chemical weapons. And things like that. So it's all broken up as a, you know, gigantic test area. So take me back to first day on the job. You accept a job. They take you out there. Yeah. It's the first day really, I didn't really get to see a whole lot. The first day was essentially just paperwork. That's when I flew into area 51 proper. And I left McCarran Airport and flew what they call the Janet flights. Just, you know, a passenger plane from Las Vegas to area 51. And it was really just going through mountain paperwork that day. From security clearances to, it was like two or three hours of just solid paperwork. And that was, that was really an uneventful first day. When did things get weird? When did you realize that at what point in time did you say, hey, this is not normal work. Like this doesn't even seem like it's from this planet. That, I can't tell you what day that occurred on because so much time has gone by the days of kind of fused into one. And I can't separate it. Was it a slow burn or was there a moment of recognition? Well, the, the, the first inkling I had was when I came in, there's this facility that is at S4. It's in the side of a mountain. And normally we had pulled in with the bus and gone around the front through a normal double door. This time that I went in, there were a hangar doors open. I went into the hangar door. And in the hangar door was the disc, the flying saucer that I worked on. I saw it sitting there and we walked by it. I had a little American flag stuck on the side. And I thought, oh my God, this finally explains all the flying saucer stories. It's just an advanced fighter and this is fucking hilarious. Right. So I went by, I slipped my hand alongside it. I got reprimanded immediately for touching the thing. And there was a guy, an armed guard that followed us in and just said, keep your eyes forward in your hands at your side and just walk in the door. So that was the first time I had seen anything that was weird. It was some time later that I was introduced to my, my lab partner, Barry. And we had some of the subcomponents of the craft in the lab. And Barry was very anxious to get a new lab partner. So he was very talkative and couldn't wait to show me different things. And it was in the demonstration of the reactor working where it caught my attention to where this is technology that doesn't even exist. So I mean, that was the first time I knew that this is really something different. What was it? What was it? What was it about this reactor that made you think that it didn't exist technologically? Well, it was that I actually have to back up because there were some briefings that I read it before that that, you know, certainly gave me the impression that this was going to be a weird job. But this was the first hands-on thing. This was a small reactor about the size of a hemisphere, about the size of a basketball on a metal plate. And when it was running, it produced a gravitational field, a gravitational field of its own. Now this is something that we can't do. We can't produce any gravity. The only way we get gravity is from large quantities of mass. But there's no machine we can have that turns on that makes gravity like, you know, you can turn on an electromagnet. And it makes a magnetic field. We can't make a gravitational field. Anyway, this device was producing that. And Barry said, almost like he was bragging, go ahead, try and try and touch the sphere. And I couldn't. It pushed my hands away, just like two light poles of a magnet. So that was... So like when you take two magnets and try to press them together in there, you have that? Yeah, you have that. Yeah, that kind of quick- Christian feeling, but you can't get them together. The closer you put them, the more they push. But you felt that physically you hand. Yeah, now there's nothing, there's nothing that does that. And that immediately caught my attention going, wow, this is something else. What was your thought? Like when you felt that and you knew that there was nothing that you were aware of. That connected me to the briefings that I read on the first day at S4 was that, you know, everything that I had read was apparently accurate. What were you reading? I read... It was kind of an overview. This project was to back engineer the alien craft. And specifically, it was to try and back engineer and see if we can duplicate the technology with available materials. Now, to do this, they split the project into, you know, many different pieces for several reasons. They do this on all classified projects. So nobody has the complete story, but they compartmentalize everything. Now we had the power and propulsion system. So what briefings they gave me were like a one or two page overview of some of the other projects that were going on, you know, on the craft. The only reason they do that is just in case what you're working on is connected intimately in some way that we don't know of to one of the other projects you have to know of their... Excuse me, their existence. So, you know, I... Again, they have everything from metallurgy to, you know, weapon potential of the craft. And these were all, you know, essentially very short briefings, but mine was just power and propulsion. And it made it very clear that what I read was accurate. So when you're reading that before you actually saw the reactor, what were your thoughts on what they were describing? If you knew that something like that didn't exist, and they were describing it in the briefings, what did you think you were going to see? I really... I didn't know at the time. I mean, I was reading... I thought, is this is some kind of test? See if you're crazy? Well, not to see if I'm crazy to... You know, a lot of times they'll take in real high security jobs. I mean, they'll intentionally insert nonsense into them. Whether it's to confuse the fact, or if for someone was to leak it out, they would carry that information along and know where it came from. So I read through the documents, but, you know, I didn't know if this was, you know, part of some kind of test or, you know, or what? Or was it potentially realistic? I mean, I really didn't consider it being all that possible as far as being the actual thing that I was going to work on at the time. They turned it on. The reactor? Yeah. The reactor can be turned on or turned off in a lot of different ways. The way Barry showed me, the hemisphere is removed. There's a small tower in the middle. When you put the hemisphere on, the reactor activates. The reactor shuts down. It's a load sensing. So if there's no load on the reactor at all, it shuts down. When there's a load present on it, it starts up again. You can get centered in an electrical load. So although it doesn't necessarily operate electrically, there's no wiring that connects any of the sub-components together whatsoever. They just have to be in the immediate vicinity. It's, it is, but the stuff is borderline magic. And that's essentially where we left it, you know, when I left the project. So there was no progress made. There was some progress. I mean, we did identify at least we think some processes. And had a rough idea. We think of what was going on. But I think this is a problem that they've had for a long time. And, you know, I was replacing somebody that Barry worked with prior to me. And I think there was some horrific accident that I didn't have a whole lot of information on. But, you know, Barry alluded to that. A horrific accident like where someone died or... Yeah, where somebody died. Because they were trying to tamper with things or figure out how something worked. Yeah, the reactor in particular. But yet he let you touch it. Yeah, I think what they were trying to do was cut into one. Oh, they had more than one there. And that was supposedly there was an unannounced nuclear test. And that's what it was. At the time, remember, they were still doing underground nuclear tests at the test site. But from what I understand, according to Barry, there was an attempt made... Now, this must have been a pretty desperate attempt because it's not a very scientific process to cut, you know, analyze something that way. But it looked like they used a plasma cutter or something I got to cut into an operating reactor. How many of these things did they have? They had nine craft all together. I only got hands-on with one of them. So, I can't really say how the other's operated. Did you see the other ones? Yeah. At one time and only one time, the bay doors between the hangers were all open. And I could see all the way through. And were they all exactly the same? No, they were all different. Different shapes? Yeah. But they were all from somewhere else. Yeah, absolutely. Now, did anyone make any attempt to explain or to tell you where they came from? No. No one is the least bit interested in letting everybody know all the facts. They want to give you the minimum information that's necessary to complete your task. So, you're not getting the story of where they came from. You're not getting the story of how much progress other people are making. You just focus on the small component. But they gave you some indication that they've been working on these for a while. Yeah. When do you think they acquired these? I really couldn't say. I think they've been around for a while. So they bring you into this room. You see this reactor working. You realize this is nothing that as far as like the scientific community at current time has the ability to create. What is your life like from that moment on? Is that where everything changes? Because I would imagine the moment you actually make contact with something that's extraterrestrial, an object or a being, something where you can absolutely be certain. It's not from here. Your whole paradigm, the whole world you live in, is now a different place. Well, this is the only time it became exciting. You know, the rest of the time, it was really an ominous feeling being at work. But at that time, it was exciting. I mean, this was, now I knew we were on the absolute beyond the cutting edge of science. And I was so absolutely excited to be there every single time I was. You know, this was a fantastic opportunity. And however, in short order, it began to concern me. We really have no idea what we're talking about. And the excitement kind of turned to dread at some point. Because the amount of power we're dealing with is astronomical. I mean, to affect gravity to produce the effects like this equipment does, takes huge amounts of power. And I've given the example before of, you know, taking a small portable nuclear reactor and, you know, putting it back into Victorian times, you know, with the scientists at the time. And just dropping it in a room. And they come and look at it and see that it's producing power and wonder how it works. So they start taking it apart. And as soon as they get some of the shielding off, the people are going to drop dead because of the radiation inside. Now, the people have no idea that radiation even exists back then. But anybody that comes into check on them will also drop dead. And, you know, there's no reason that that exact scenario couldn't happen with what we're dealing with. We have no idea how the physics operate within this thing. The power levels are, like I said, astronomical. It's incredibly dangerous to tinker with something like that. And, you know, in some respects, we were guinea pigs. Just try to find out how to make this thing. So they'd had a series as far as you're surmised. They had a series of different scientists try to back engineer this thing, try to figure out what this thing was. And they would bring in new people and like, let's throw Bob at it. Yeah. Yeah. And they'd know. I don't know how many, but I knew there was certainly one before me. And I knew he died during the analysis of the reactor itself. And you don't know how many have worked on it and no one gave me any. That could have been there for 50 years. It could have been there for five years. When they're giving you instructions, what are they saying? Like, when they're giving you direction, they're showing you all this stuff. Like, what are they saying? What are they saying? What specifically what are they asking of you? Essentially what they ask is what I said. We are just together as much information as possible. Find out how it operates and see if we can duplicate it. But the number two issue where it was from, they never let you ask questions about where it's from. Well, if the information I read in the briefings was accurate, now what I do have to say is the information that pertain directly to the reactor was accurate. I read, did I mean, did jive with reality? In terms of how it was made, what we saw, how it operated, the materials, how it turned on and what was discovered about it. I'm sorry, the migraine is really making it hard for me to thank you. Sorry, no, we talked that before the podcast should tell everybody Bob was getting a migraine. I know you're very stressed out by this, which is one of the reasons why I appreciate you doing this. Where was I already? We were talking about it. We explained it. And so there was some paperwork that indicated that this was from the Zader reticulae star system. Now, how they obtained that? I haven't, I haven't a slightest idea, but it wasn't just from the Zader reticulae star system. It was what they called ZR3. So it was a third planet in that star system. So there was no other information about it other than that supposedly where the craft came from. Now, is that true? I don't know, I have no way of verifying that, but that was printed in the same materials that referenced the reactor. Now, I looked that stuff up when I went home. And Zader reticulae is a binary star, two stars at orbit, orbit one another. And it's only visible in the southern hemisphere, and it's about 30 somewhat light years away. So that's literally all the information I have about that. I don't know how they found out it came from there. And you also probably have some suspicions that they give you some disinformation like you were talking about before. Yeah. Yeah. To, I mean, if you ever decided to talk about this, they added a bunch of nonsense to make whatever is factual look ridiculous. Right. Or be able to trace it down. I go, hey, this fax came out and this ZR guy said it came from Zader reticulae, so they knew it was what they made. It was what you read Zader reticulae. We were like, what in the fuck is this? Well, reading all of this stuff, it was what in the fuck is this. You're like, why did I sign up for this? No, no, it went to me. This was cool. This was interesting. I said, I was just excited to be out in a secure area, you know, in the middle of the desert. Right. It was awesome. How old are you at the time? I get, as in my 20s. Yeah, so you probably totally geeked out. Oh, yeah. This was great. I mean, I was excited. So I didn't care. I've read through everything. So you read through all the Zader reticulae thing, but then when you see the actual starship with the little American flag sticker on it. Well, that was that later or before. That was before. So before. So you see the thing before and you say, oh, this is an American. Wait, what's that before? It's hard so many years. Yeah, I can't either way. It doesn't matter. The days have fused together. It's so hard to separate what happened in each visit. Do you remember the thought process when you read that it's from Zader reticulae? Yeah, it didn't hit me like a ton of bricks or anything. It's like, yeah, okay. You think it was bullshit? I don't know. It's weird. Now I don't. I mean, because when I read it, I hadn't verified anything. And this was just a bunch of stuff I was reading. And maybe after this, they're just going to give me a test and see what I can remember in crazy information. Right. But like I said, when I finally went in with Barry and had hands on experience with what they were talking about, it got a completely different meaning. So there's a plate. There's this thing that looks like half a basketball. And when it's on, you can't come anywhere near it. You can't touch it. Right. How is what is gravity about that? Like the concept of gravity. Most people's gravity is bringing something towards it. I guess you would say it's anti-gravity. Its gravity shifted 180 degrees. It's, you know, anti-gravity. And did they have any understanding about what could possibly create this effect? Did they have any areas where they'd like you to look into? No, they, well, they knew there was a fuel source in it. And they were proficient at making it work. And again, my analogy to something like this is you can drop a motorcycle off in the wagon train days and just leave it with the keys parked outside, you know, somebody's place. Everybody will come around it and they'll poke and prod and eventually they'll turn the key to get it to start and become proficient at riding it. Yeah. But they won't be able to understand what the hell's going on. They won't be able to make the plastic fender, much less anything else. And I think that's exactly the state we were at. We played around with the parts long enough before I got there where they could make the reactor operate. Take the fuel out and know that it makes it work. How exactly what was going on in the reactor, main of mystery at the time. I think we made some progress on what was going on inside. But I don't think anybody really knew anything. They could just watch what was going on and make note of it. How long were you there? I'd say about six months or so. And what progress was made while you were there? Well, we came up with a bunch of reasonably good ideas about how the reactor worked. And one of them was the base, the square base of it was essentially like a cycle of a train, which is a small particle accelerator, a circular one. Particle accelerators and linear particle accelerators are just, you know, long tube essentially in the accelerate particles with high-voltage and radio frequencies till they reach high speeds. But a cyclotron does that in a small circular area. And there's this very heavy element fuel element 115, something that wasn't on our periodic charts at the time. But it is now. It is now. Yeah. When did it become on the periodic table now, the way the charts now? Yeah, no, I don't remember. Do you remember when they? 2004, Dermstadt, Germany, I think is where they first fabricated four atoms. They lasted 220 milliseconds with the atoms. It's nothing. And then later it was discovered a couple more times. They could fabricate it. Then they gave it a place then on the periodic chart after that called it Muscovian. So they told you about this stuff in 1982? Yeah. Well, we came. 1982. What year was this? It was 88, and 89. When I was there, 82 is one of the two. I was when it lost alimals. I'm sorry. Yeah. So 88, 89, they told you about this stuff. So this was not like... No, they didn't tell me about it. That's one of the things that this group came up with. The, um, I keep losing my drain of thought with this thing. So this one area, this, this element 115 was the fuel. Yeah. It was the fuel. The world were forgiving for having a migraine. Can I just... It's really hard to think through. Can I just give you more boost? I say, yeah, definitely. As I said, one thing, you know, for the last 30 years, people have just been on the attack on Bob, you know, getting to know him the personal effects on his life. It's really hard to understand unless you meet his family and his wife. I mean, this is the last thing he wanted to fucking do was have to talk. Yeah. We should explain that, Jeremy. You and I had this conversation. I want you to documentary. We had this conversation and I said, I have to talk to him. Yeah. The document, there's been detractors. There's been a bunch of people that called bullshit on many of the things that you've said. But over time, many of the things that you talked about even in the 80s have proven to be true. Things that people said were not true were proven to be true. Element 115 was one of them. Right. Right. Right. Element 115, the fuel they had was stable. In other words, it didn't decay. It wasn't emitting radioactivity. When they synthesized two or three atoms of the 115, it did decay. And it was not a stable element. So they're kind of two different things. But this is kind of typical. Elements always have or pretty much always have stable isotopes and unstable isotopes. Like I think CZM has like 30 unstable isotopes to it. So, well, hydrogen, for example, you're familiar with hydrogen gas. It's stable. It's not radioactive. But there's also two other types of hydrogen. Deuterium and tritium. And deuterium isn't radioactive. It's another stable isotope of hydrogen. But tritium is radioactive. Now they're all hydrogen. But they just have a different amount of neutrons. So it's the same thing with other elements and element 115. Depending on the amount of neutrons it has, designates the isotope. But it's 115. They will continue to take or experiment and try and make 115 at different isotopes. And I'm sure eventually they'll come up with a stable version. But it's the stable version that has the properties that we're talking about. So they somehow or another had acquired a stable version. Did they say that the stable version had come with this craft? Yeah, it absolutely came with the craft. So at the time, you having a firm knowledge of the periodic chart and knowing what was real and what wasn't real. What was your reaction to having this stable element 115 that wasn't even supposed to exist? Well, everything was impossible. Right. Down to the metal, I did get a chance to look inside the craft on only one occasion. And this was important because where the reactor sat might have been critical to how it operated. Since everything operates without any inner connection, so the placement of components might be critical. So they allowed me to go inside and look at it. Again, I forgot where the hell I am. So you're going into this craft and what are you thinking when you're inside of it? Like, what are you seeing? It's... Um, to it again, I forgot where the hell I am. So you're going into this craft and what are you thinking when you're inside of it? Like what are you seeing? It's, um, it's a very ominous feeling because it's, there are no, at first of all, everything is one color. It's like a dark puter color and there are no right angles anywhere. It's as if somebody took, uh, I've said this before, somebody took a model out of, and fashioned it out of wax and then heated it just for a short time. So everything melted. Everything looks like it's fused together. Everything is a radius of curvature or two, uh, items meet. It's, uh, it's a really weird looking thing. But, um, uh, there was almost nothing other than a small foldable hatch way that, um, that looked recognizable. Everything was, uh, was really unworledy to pick on it, waited to describe it. So you, you get inside this thing and it's designed for something that's much smaller than a human being. Yeah, you can't really stand up till you get to the very center of it. And how tall are you? I'm five, 10. And what do you think this was designed for? I'd say something close to half my height. Wow. So these little three foot tallish creatures. Yeah. And the, the seats were small too. I mean, obviously it was made, you know, for something, something small. But there is no, like there's, there's nothing else in there. There's just seats, the reactor and some of the subcomponents. There's no, there's no control panels. There's no bathroom. There's no, no decorative, uh, components or artwork or anything that you would recognize or trim. I mean, it's just a very bare bones thing. You're not seeing any screens. Well, there are archways around it at that a part of the superstructure. And that one of the archways can become transparent. When I was in there, there was another group working on one of the archways and you could call that a screen more or less. So through that archway, it would, it would maintain the solid, whatever metal it was. Yeah. But you could see it just became transparent. Yeah. That happened once or twice before I left. Did you ask any questions about what the fuck was that? No, there's no asking. No, no asking questions. No. But when you watch something become transparent and you realize it's still there, but you could now see through it. Yeah. I mean, no, that's not that impressive. We do have some liquid crystal materials that are like that. You know, they have a smart glass. Yeah, they call it smart glass. So this is just, and I don't know if the craft is made of, you know, an advanced metal or a ceramic, it was cold to the touch. So, you know, I would lean more towards a metal. You're not allowed to ask questions. No, the only, they, they work on the buddy system. So I can only exchange ideas and talk to Barry. Now this really interferes with science because science is based on free discussion. And ideally you get a bunch of guys together exchange ideas, work on problems and that's how things move forward. But they're so over the top concerned about security, they split everything off and everybody becomes stagnant. It, it, it just destroys any of the progress you can make or at least makes it go so slow. Um, they, I think they wound up shooting themselves in the foot, which is probably why they arrived at this bottleneck that they need to get this madman with a jet powered Honda coming and see what he could do. I think that was an active desperation. I think they wanted someone that's thinks out of the box and let's, let's just give this guy a try here because they weren't, and they might have done this four more times since, you know, up to the point in time today. Assuming they're still working on this thing. And when you see this craft and you're inside, was there any indication that there was an area that they would use to control it to pilot, was there a pilot seat, was there, there were three seats, they sat around, uh, the reactor was in the dead center of it. And then equidistant around there were three seats. So that's all the, there was a, a large you would, they're not consoles, they're a large rectangular objects, also spaced equidistant around the center. Um, there's nothing on them. There's no buttons. There's no lights. And they control same color. The same thing. Everything is the same color. This is a different shape. Right. Directly underneath them. There's three levels in the craft. Uh, the main level is what we're talking about. Directly under that. Those are the gravity amplifiers. The big rectangular objects underneath them are the gravity emitters that look like, for lack of a better word, a trash can hanging on a pipe. Three of those. And then the top layer, I, this is just my personal belief. I think that has to do with a, a navigation or their version of a computer, uh, with some planar panels, sensor panels around the craft that we would call port holes, but they're not port holes. They're just black areas. And I think that just determines its, you know, position in space. But I was, I, I physically was in the center section and I stuck my torso in the bottom section and hung upside down so I could see how the gravity amplifiers were positioned. What is the, the roughly the size of this thing? It's a, I think it, I don't remember from being there, but um, after all this stuff was over, I had, uh, John Andrews, a guy from the testers model corporation and, you know, we sat down and tried to figure out from what I saw, um, and known sizes of things. And we came up with 52 feet in diameter. And I think that's a small. Yeah. So I think that's a fair, a, a reasonable guess. And they said there's nine of them and you got a brief glimpse at the other ones. Where the, how are they different? Oh, they looked completely different. One looked like I called a gel o mold and it looked like a classic gel o mold with the rippled sides to it. One was a very flat disc, um, you know, like, uh, oh, I don't like a straw hat or something like that. That was sitting up on its edge and the thin part of it had looked like a projectile had been fired through, um, the edge of it. So I don't know if they were attempting to see if the metal could be penetrated or if something or if that's where the thing came from. Maybe it was shot down. Um, but that was the only one where I saw there was, you know, actual physical damage to it. And that one was roughly the same size. They're all, uh, they were kind of too far away to tell. And did there was several teams that were working on the propulsion systems. There was different teams that were working on these different aircrafts. I, I don't know. I could only assume now when you're sitting in this thing and you're looking at this other worldly craft, you're, your goals to try to figure out how this thing functions, your goals to try to figure out how this reactor, I mean, it would, it would imagine they would give you more time than just one day to check that out. Oh, yeah. It wasn't one day. Right. Yeah. That area was there. I think Barry was sleeping there. I'm sure they had that that that isn't weird. I mean, up at the Tona Paw Test Range where they work on stealth fighters. You know, you go, I think through weeks on one week off and you do stay up there too. So it's not weird to stay up at the test site. Right. So, um, yeah, I think you pretty much acted like he's been up there for a long time. Yeah. Um, but, yeah. You still there? Yeah. Look at those. Do you, do you have contact with this guy? No. I wish I did. I kind of thought he was going to come out after I did. Right. And I think I took so much flack and it's so much shit for what went on. I think I actually wound up helping security there and everybody became afraid of, you know, doing or saying anything after that. So what kind of reports did you have to give? Like, so you're not making much progress, right? You're just trying to figure out what this thing is and it seems impossible. So, well, we didn't personally make them. I mean, we were always, there was never a lot of information that we gained. Um, the guy, you would call him our supervisor, his name was Dennis Mariani and kind of a military looking guy and he would routinely pop in, you know, during the day and, you know, hey, what's going on guys? And he would essentially relay and any information, anything new we came up with. I mean, he was our go between, you know, where we presented him the information and he took it to wherever they were, you know, assembling all the data from everybody. Now, assuming you're working normal days like an eight hour day? No. No. It was really weird that I would be only called in on certain times and certain days and they would be weird hours too. Most of the time was later in the evening. I mean, I can get a call at 11 o'clock at night and they'll say, you know, it's now 11 o'clock by 11 45. You need to be at the McCarrant terminal and, you know, we'll let you know when we have more information. But what did you do while you were there? If you're looking at this object, this reactor and you can't figure out what it is or how it works other than the fact that it works on this element that we don't even know about. Sure. What you do with anything, if you're trying to analyze it, all you can do is perform tests. And all we did is try and come up with every kind of test we possibly could. I mean, we tested, you know, it violated a lot of what we thought was impossible to violate. I mean, one of the first laws of thermodynamics, I mean, essentially any machine, any device that operates always makes extra heat. It doesn't works at 100% efficient. Even the headphones you're wearing, anything that takes power, some of that power is going to be converted to heat and it's just wasted. This didn't. I mean, we looked it back then. We had infrared cameras. They're different today, but back then you had a poor liquid nitrogen into the camera to cool the sensor down and get these infrared images you've seen. But it never got no matter what the load was on the reactor, it never got above the ambient temperature, which is impossible. I mean, you're, you know, pulling out huge amounts of power and nothing ever gets warm. We tried measuring magnetic fields and there was nothing there. So we started playing around with the emission from the emitters, the gravity wave itself and saw what we could do with it and how it was focused. So we really spent all our time just trying to see what the stuff can do and what we can control. So you were seeing what it could do, but you couldn't ever figure out how it was doing it. No, not really. I mean, we really, we really could only use a come up with a best guess. And now I can't say we really that I could absolutely state for certainly or certainly how anything actually worked. How did you know at all how they were piloting it? Because some, they were doing some tests whether having these things fly around in the sky. And this is what gets us deeper into your story. Right. I was out there for one test. Right. In fact, I was in with Barry in the lab and Dennis came in and said, we're about to run the test. Why don't you guys come out or I think he said, Barry, why don't you come out here and bring Bob with you. We went out there and the craft was already outside the hangar and was just preparing to lift off. Now, they were in communication with somebody in the craft. So there's a person in the craft? Yeah. There was certainly a person in there. Now it's not a comfortable place to be in because it's small. So the guy has to be sitting on the floor in the middle of my best guess. And this is the same specific craft that you worked on. Yeah, because you were the, that was the only craft that you were in. The only one that I touched and worked on. And it, it quietly lifted off the ground, which was incredibly impressive to see quietly or silently what's well quietly because it. It produced a little Corona discharge from the bottom. Corona discharge is kind of a high voltage brush, little bluish glow discharge as it was lifting off the ground. You can hear a slight his sound. Now, as soon as it cleared the ground by about five or 10 feet, maybe even less than that, the hissing stopped and the blue go disappeared. So it lifted off quietly and then it hovers silently if you want to be specific. Wow. So then what kind of maneuvers was it doing? It took for that particular time it took off moved a little round to the left and right and then sat back down. The craft itself, they communicated with it with a reg because I saw the guy talking and a regular VHF radio to the person in the craft. And I even saw the frequency that was on the frequency counter of the communication, the transceiver there. But what's weird is he shouldn't be able to communicate with the craft with a radio. The radio wave should bend around the craft. I mean, it shouldn't be possible. Every single thing about the craft and the way they operated didn't make any sense to us. I mean, that's something we talked about for a while after. Why should the frequency bend around the craft? You really have to look at the way the gravity wave comes out of the craft as the reactors in the center and there's a wave guide that goes up to the top. There's actually a small appendage that sticks out at the top of the craft. And it produces a heart-shaped gravitational distortion around the craft. Now if the craft is sitting in the air and you walk underneath it and look up, you actually cannot see the craft. The light bends around it. They're bending gravity with bends light. It bends radio waves. It shouldn't be possible to communicate with a craft that has an envelope around it. That's distorting all forms of energy. But they were apparently in contact with it. Somehow or another threw some unexplained way that they didn't bother explaining to you. So this thing gets up. It just does some very simple maneuvers left, right, left, right, goes down. And did they discuss this with you? I mean, they said they wanted you to see it. No, they just wanted it. No, they didn't discuss anything with me. It sat down. We looked around for a bit and Barry said, let's go back. We went back on the lab. All we got to do is see it. Fast forward to some months later, I did have the test flight schedule of the craft. Now they had times they had designated high performance tests. This obviously wasn't one that was a high performance test. The high performance test went, goes above the mountain range. And they do much more radical moves with the thing. Look, this is a prized item. And they're not doing anything like taking it out of the atmosphere or flying around other countries or anything like that. They just play with this thing right over the test site. But they were doing some radical moves with it. And since I had the test flight schedule, statistically, the amount of traffic in the surrounding areas on the highway was lowest on Wednesdays. And that's why Dennis told us that all the test flights occurred only on Wednesdays because it'd be the least chance that anyone would see what's going on. And this was before the government had expanded the forbidden territory around Area 51 and Papus Lake and all that stuff, right? Yeah, I think that occurred after my story came out. Then people started going up on the mountain tops and trying to look down into there and they kind of freaked out and then did the land grab and pushed everybody back. But yeah, I think all that occurred long after that I came out. So you're working there and while you're working there, you're under this crazy schedule, you're giving me for explaining your story. But you would get these phone calls, you would have to go to the airport at 11 p.m. And your wife started thinking that you were having an affair. Yeah, apparently so. Now I did give my permission to have, as part of the security clearance process, I gave written permission to have the phones monitored and things of that sort. They weren't doing any covert stuff. With any cute clearance or which is civilian top secret clearance or military top secret clearance, they go talk to friends and places you've been. Make sure you're not connected to foreign countries, but monitoring your phone is nothing unusual. However, they insisted that you don't even talk to your loved ones, your partner, to your wife, whatever about what's going on. So she was essentially in the dark and didn't know the phone was being monitored. Well part of the security clearance is that not only do you not have any connections to foreign countries in our in a maniac, but you have to have a stable home life too. Well, she started having an affair with a flight instructor. Now they were monitoring this on the phone and they knew it and I didn't. So they stopped me coming in and their attitude at the time was we need to see how this is going to play out and if Lazar is going to get a little weird or anything. So let's just hold them off from coming in and see what happens. And they explained this to you? What was happening? Well, after the fact, yeah, because time kind of went on and there were guys that were following me around and I started getting a little concerned going, well, chitter, they booting me out of the project and if so, they're not just going to let me hang out at home and go get a new job, no one what I know. So as time went on, I started getting a little concerned and I took my closest friends and just kind of got together and I said, hey, remember that job I told you about? This is what's going on and you don't need to take my word for it. Wednesday night, we need to all go out here. I want to show you what's going on. So I took everybody and we went out to remember since I had the test flight schedule and went outside the base out into the desert and so everybody could see one of the high performance tests and left quite an imprint on everybody. So they knew I wasn't. And this video is of these tests, right? Yeah, but remember, this is in the it's in the dark in the 80s of the big monster size camcorder and you got, you know, a bright light jumping around. But yeah, I mean, we did video of it, but there's no by today's standards. But is your video specifically available, the video that you took? Well, George Knapp has it. Is it on? I have no idea. Jeremy. Yeah, I show clips of it in my film. It's it's online and someone did a deep analysis of it. It was interesting to just take a look at how well this microphone on two face. Can you about a face from your face? All right. You know, to see how his video looks now, but as far as video evidence, I mean, we are talking 80s campers. The most important thing is the human story here. Everybody that he took up there on three separate occasions. They don't all like each other. They don't all talk. They all agree on one thing. They saw something that night at the exact point in time and space that Bob was our said. And remember, this is 17, 15, 17 miles south or 51. No one even knew really about air 51. We're talking Papus Lake and they all agree. They saw something that night they had never seen before and they've never seen sense right when he said it. So that's one of the six things where I'm like, how did he know you can dismiss him. I tried to dismiss it, but some things we can't get around and there's about five or six of them. How did he know about that? Jamie wants to find that video right now. What would he live under? Bob is our UFO S4 Area 51, just kind of like that. So it's like the S4 UFO video Bob is our and a guy doesn't analysis, but you're analyzing these 80s videos. From the very beginning, Bob never said, I have proof of my story and I'm going to tell the world. He said at the very beginning, I cannot prove my story. That's not why I'm telling this. Unfortunately, George Knapp convinced him to tell people and he lived to it and I didn't believe it either until I talked with George. Okay. So you film these, this test flight, one test flight and then you get caught. Actually it was I think of the third time because we went out there the first time. Everybody thought everybody was amazed because it did some radical maneuvers and everybody had a lot of them. that I've seen I've seen the video it doesn't I don't think there's something we have now that does that no in terms of like a human piloted craft and I don't know obviously with the government no it's it's impossible nothing can move like that and remember we didn't start filming from the very beginning you know the course we were waiting for something you know to happen the craft took off and I came flying at a stop you know turned it a triangle flew back and then you know after did some you know amazing stuff you get the camera and then you we started filming so it doesn't have all of it on there just has some the way I describe it to my friends and they said what is like I said take a laser pointer and then have a wall and then move it around the wall like you know how it moves around the wall it doesn't seem like it has anything to do with a nurse show or physics or it's not impeded in any way by the atmosphere yeah that's what it looked you're essentially separated from reality as crazy as that sounds with that being in in case it's own gravitational envelope inertia is not going to affect it and you know this is this is how some of those recent sightings with commander david favor I'm sure you've heard of the tech stack UFO I mean he describes exactly that the thing operates exactly the way I was describing that's why he was interested to talk to me but we saw this and you know on the way home it's like it way we got away with it we should try it again the next test flight day so this became a thing to do and I think it was on the third time that we got caught I mean we started becoming a little careless I think we took a motor home out there you know I mean it was like this stupidest thing you could possibly imagine tailgate and yeah it was ridiculous and again you're in your 20s yeah and you know what was funny was um we went out there and my friend jean huff and I were leaning on the front of a vehicle and just for some reason we just started talking shit like uh well I hope they realized that uh I don't remember what we're saying but you know that something about attacking the base or something along those lines and stealing the craft or something like that so it was crazy and um then about 20 feet in front of us we see a little green light fall on the ground and roll to us and unbeknownst to us now it's pitch black you can't see your hand in front of your face there are a bunch of guards standing right out there and they had a night vision scope where there were like from here to the wall looking at us listening to us and the guy dropped it and the scope rolled over to us and you could see the green screen you know we turned the lights on and all these guys are there so it was uh whoa yeah yeah so we did incredibly stupid stuff and got caught as we should have so when they catch you and they bring you in then what happens well I went in for debriefing the following day I went to indian spring zeraphore space which is kind of a defunct base that they used to use at the nuclear test site and this is when they brought um the transcript of the phone call with my wife and you know they sat me down and we said you know when we meant to keep the secret we meant you can't tell your friends right you know and it just being sarcastic and trying to um and then they got real serious uh but this is where they you know took the transcript out and we're reading me what uh my wife and you know our friend we're talking about and uh I don't know it was a hard time so what happens from there what do they do with you why don't they arrest you I don't know I don't know why I'm not sure they exactly they knew what to do but they did let me go that night and I went home and this is kind of when the most stressful part started because you're realizing you're being monitored yeah now I know not only am I being monitored but now I know I'm in trouble and uh it wasn't a short time after that that I contacted you know at that time the only investigative reporter I had heard of in Las Vegas was George Knapp and um you know told him some of the story because I had no idea what the hell was going to happen at that point so George Knapp tries to dissect your story tries to find holes in it tells it puts it online and makes everybody aware of it and that's how I found out about it yeah to make a long story short what what happens yeah to really make a long story short what happens from there on I mean the contact you and say hey Bob it's probably a good idea if you shut up how they try to label you it's crazy was there there boy there are a lot of things that happened at you know between that point I'm leaving out a lot of stuff to fill in the story we'd have to go back to Los Alamos and and well I really don't want to talk about that the top secret weapons stuff that you were working on no I'm talking about the 115 um well I don't know I have to think about how I what is a problem with this I don't want to get myself into more trouble by admitting something so um I just have to dance around a couple he was rated just during the filming at the movie yeah it was great by the way thanks Joe and it's on Netflix right now if anyone wants to check it out and if you're one of those people like me who um you know I've always loved the idea of UFOs I became extremely weary talking to people who are UFO believers and UFO fanatics because there's so many of them that are full of shit and not just full of shit they're they're childishly delirious like the way they talk about things that mean there's so many people that are that I'm in contact they they reach me in the night and they explain to me what we're doing to the ocean is wrong and like you know okay this is one of the reasons I didn't want to do the show I'm sure well no it's no yeah well it's I mean it's no Joe we've had people literally camp out on our front lawn and uh you know in some ways I can relate to some of these people you know maybe some of them did really have some kind of experience or saw something and all their friends think they're crazy but hey now there's this guy I heard on the radio and uh at least he knows I'm not full of shit so I got to talk to him and so most of the correspondence I get her people trying to get a hold of me go on Bob you you got to listen to me I'm I'm coming to talk to you I'm you know I'm driving from Oklahoma or whatever and and but some of them are just fucking bad shit crazy and they're frightening there's a lot of schizophrenia there's a lot of schizophrenics that are involved in the conspiracy world there's a lot of people that have real issues Joe as it would be a disservice to your audience to not say that we have to look at what's going on now and understand I've heard on your show a bunch of stuff about what's going on now and to not really understand what's going on now you can't see Bob's story in the correct light after 30 years and at some point we should just touch upon that the the biggest being that things like the tiktak UFO case that that came out I've heard people even on the show say oh there's a glitch in the radar that's a data poor perspective you just It's like the TikTok UFO case that came out. I've heard people even on the show say, well, there's a glitch in the radar. That's a data poor perspective. You just don't know yet what's really going on. Commander Freaver, I was able to get the interview with him to talk with him way before it became public. I got that from him. He saw it, other pilot saw it. This is a big thing that's going on right now. They had more settings on the East Coast recently. Cubes with spherical, or these are not aerodynamic and these are the people we trust to defend us on 9-11. Commander Freaver protected Los Angeles on 9-11. So we trust them, but they're not trained observers. Radar, individuals see these things. And the big one, just to throw it down so we can consider a story a little differently. The big one is the United States government has admitted that they have been continuously studying the UFO phenomenon. That program was called A-tip. Advanced, or sorry, was called A-SAP. That's the mother program. George Knapp got that out. They announced it in New York Times about A-tip, but A-SAP, these acronyms. A-SAP, Advanced Aerospace Weapon Systems Applications Program, who cares? That was the mother program. So they've admitted we didn't stop studying UFOs in 1969 with Project Blue Book. We don't think it's crazy. We actually want to reverse engineer the technology. That's why on your other show, you said, what's this AAV thing? It's like they're making up another UFO name. Well, hold on, there's a reason. Because in the documents, the DIA documents that George Knapp released, that everybody said was fake, till now they know Israel, they call them AAVs, which is advanced aerospace vehicles. People are getting the acronym strong. So the reason for the terminology change is so that we can mimic what we're reading and the DIA documents, people can look for that now. So they changed the names to get people away from UFO or UAP, even like Hillary Clinton said, on air, right? So what are you talking about? Hillary Clinton. Hillary Clinton informed the public on Jimmy Kimmel. Oh Jimmy, we don't call them UFOs anymore. We call them UAPs, unidentified aerial phenomenon. So the Clintons are very into the UFO topic, Senator Reid. He's done a lot for the subject, the study of it. So she informed the public so they could look for the right term. So these terms are important because the DIA in those documents, they've been calling them AAVs for quite some time now. And they changed the name to anomalous. No, that's kind of a misnope. So they always mess around with things, but it's actually advanced. Right, but we're describing it in the news, they were calling it anomalous. Totally. Totally. And that's cool. They were also saying anomalous aerospace threats, AAT, because they bought the sense of a threat. So my point is, all of, if people don't know this now and they think this stuff is fantasy, this part of it that we're studying it, that we take it seriously, we're spending money on it, and that we're getting great data from visual pilots to radar. That's why we know it's aerospace. They dropped from 80,000 feet. But guess what? That's the top scope of the Spy 1 radar is 80,000 feet. So the radar system they were using, it was coming from above that. So my point is this, if you don't understand that this is happening, you're just behind the curve because you don't have the information because of the stigma that you're talking about. I saw you get totally upset with UFO topic. I met you first when you go, you're totally upset with UFO topic. It's the people. When you're doing, you're, oh, this mic. I'm sorry, man. When you're doing your show, you know, the drone questions, everything, I could see how, how frustrating is trust me. I have been frustrated to how luckily my mentors, George Knapp, and he's taught me the pitfall, pitfall as I went through it. My whole point in this rant right here is just that we have to now look at Bob's story but knowing the facts, not someone saying it's a bird, it's a plane, it's a glitch, they're not. And so if you don't know that, you just don't have the information. We're not just that knowing the facts as we know them in 2019, not in 1988. Absolutely. And so what is he said that has come true? He's totally unimpressed with it. What has he said this come true? So I was like, Bob, they've announced gravity is a wave. You were right, man. You're vindicated. And he looks at me and he's like, well if you think about it, Jeremy, I had like a 50-50 chance. He was not very impressed, right? But today announced gravity is a wave. So they detected in a sense, they detected gravity waves. And who was they? You might know more, there's two black holes that were colliding and that's how they were able to detect. Yeah, somebody, Bill, I don't know which group it was or what part of the government. That's what Google's for. Yeah, but they, you know, built a gigantic gravity wave detector and pretty much detected. Did there are such things as gravity waves? First observation of gravitational waves. It says it was in 2016. Okay, the first observation of gravitational waves was made on 14th of September 2015. As announced by the LIGO and Virgo collaborators, 11th of February 2016, previously gravitational waves had only been infured indirectly via their effect on the timing of pulsars and binary star systems. Dontontontont. The waveform connected by both LIGO, LIGO observatories, mass to predictions of general relativity for a gravitational wave emanating from the inward spiral and merger of a pair of black holes around 36 and 29 solar masses and the subsequent ringdown of the single resulting black hole. Well, I mean, yes, no, he was in the 80s. The predominant theory was gravity is produced by gravitons. Okay. You know, part of theoretical particles, but they're not their waves. They're not particles. And that's what the thought is that the way we experience gravity, it's based on mass, which is why the moon, which is roughly one quarter the size of the earth has one sixth of the earth's gravity. So there's some sort of a competition you can make based on mass. Right. And remember, we can observe the effects of gravity, but we have no idea what it is. All we can do is observe it. And we can't make it. The only way you can make gravity is just putting more mass together. And it's just a product of gravity. But if you can make a, if you have a machine that makes gravity, you can pretty much do anything. You can affect time. You can have force fields, all that stuff that's in science fiction becomes reality. If you have a machine that can make gravity, and what we worked on in the desert was a machine that makes gravity. I love your analogy of dropping off a small nuclear reactor to the Victorian era. I love that, that analogy. Because back then that was impossible, that was magic. But you're talking about here. The fact that they just discovered this four years ago that this is a wave. But we're as much as we know, and as impressed as we are, as we should be, with how much more technologically advanced we are than every other creature on this planet. We're still in many ways in the adolescence of technological innovation. Absolutely. Absolutely. If even adolescence. And when you're talking about this binary star system, and zeta reticuli, and who knows how much longer these things have been around than us, who knows what their evolutionary cycle's been, who knows what, I mean, we might be talking about something that's a million years more advanced than us. Yeah. Yeah. It could easily be. Now, I'm not in, believe it or not, I'm not into UFOs. I don't follow stories or, you know. Even after your experiences? No, I'm fascinated with the technology. And it really irks me like every night I go to sleep that I don't, that it was my own doing essentially that prevented me from continuing on in the project. I mean, to be on that cutting-edge technology is so alluring to me. But by the same token, I don't really care that there's aliens or where they come from. I mean, the prize is the technology. And that's what I'm fascinated by. But so I don't listen to UFO stories and that sort of thing. But George Anap is, I mean, he's the guy that has the context and tries to thread everything together. And what he recently told me is he found, I don't know, he was either documentation or people that he spoke to. It's at the existence of this project, the project that I was on. It's something that they seem to take out every eight or 10 years. So that's a very specific memo. And this is actually, this is the first time I'll be very clear with people about it. It's a big topic of conversation right now. It's called the Wilson memo. You can look it up. Admiral Wilson met with a scientist who's actually, was featured in one of my films. Everybody has been debating whether or not this document of a conversation with a, with a sitting admiral at the time is a real document. It's an actual conversation that happened and this document is where everybody wants another world that's going crazy right now in the UFO world. I'll tell you straight up right now, I'm in the position to know and it is a real document that it is real. So the conversation you read in that, that conversation was had. I can't attest to every. I don't, well you're not being very clear. Sure, please. No problem. So there was a document that is circulating right now that is really big. It's going around everywhere. People are asking and what is this document? It's called the Wilson memo. Is how you can find it online? The Wilson leak? There it is, Jimmy's got it. The Wilson memorandum. You said human-volving. No, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no. No, no, no, no. So Admiral Wilson meets with this scientist and they have this discussion oddly enough at special projects at E.G.N.G. And if I remember the document is from 2001, I'm telling everybody right now it's real and we'll see my history is pretty good with saying something's real or not, right? So here we go. The document comes out. They meet at E.G.N.G. special projects. In 1989, they stumble into a problem. This happens, they put the technology away and then they bring it back out and see if material science has caught up and if they can make any progress. So this document kind of talks about this process. The big thing I get from it and a lot of it's vindicating to Bob and one of the things it's vindicating besides the E.G.N.G. thing is that private industry, so this guy's an Admiral and he says, I found out about your SAP, your special access program. I need to know about it and he's going to a private part of industry and he is denied access. And he says, I should be running this program and they were able to deny him access. So I think the takeaway here is check it out. I'm telling you that that is an actual correct, that is a leak. Now everything said in that document, I don't know. What is on the phone? What is said in that document? It's between a scientist and an Admiral that are sitting and they're having a meeting and they're talking about the search for the UFO subject, the search to get special access program, access to all of these different things like reverse engineering programs. So in this document they talk about it. I believe that this document, the person that went was employed by Robert Bigelow. You know, one of the guys has a couple of orbiting satellites and all that stuff. Who's the guy on skinwalker ranch? No, he was the guy, the old skinwalker. Yeah, he used to own it. There's a new owner and I interview him from my other film, but there's a new owner and you'll be hearing a lot more about that soon. But like it'll just, there's stuff that you'll be hearing about skinwalker ranching because there's a new owner. Anyway, the whole point of this insertion here is just that that document kind of validates a lot of this idea Bob just said that they make a little progress, then they can't go anywhere, they tuck it away and then they bring it back out 10 years later and start working on it. What is the limiting factor? I think Bob should speak on this, but it's the material science. Yeah, it's really where physics is. So I can see them doing that. I mean, I didn't have any information on that, but I think what, you know, George uncovered is probably accurate that, you know, we try and do what we can. And once we reach a roadblock on, we really can't figure it out. It's just frigging weight, put the thing away, wait for science to catch up. And you know, a decade later, let's take the project out again and see, all right, now where can we go? But there's gotta be someone who remains informed, right? Oh, yeah. You've got your scientists like you and Barry, you got you people that you compartmentalize, you got these people working on the problem. Yeah, there has to be some people that know everything. You've got security and then someone's gonna be in the outside saying, hey, we need people to guard this building, don't let anybody entertain you. I think a lot of that is private industry. And I think that's how they keep it. Yeah, I think that's how they litter, because the government is just so leaky. I think that's kind of what they're doing. That's what the document kind of proves. You just articulated that it isn't control of private industry. What private industry? Some aerospace company, something? I don't know. Yeah, the guy with the Admiral wouldn't name it in the car in the conversation. Right. So they still have these things supposedly. I would guess. I mean, I don't have any information on that. Have you ever asked anyone that has any inkling of any idea of where they got them or how they got them? No, but something must have been said to me from Barry. But it was just too long ago. And I can't quite remember what it was said. But it just left the seat in my mind. I think at least one of them was part of an archaeological dig. So it's old. At least one of them is old. I don't know if it was the one I worked on. But I remember something to do with an archaeological dig. So that means it's not just old, it's ancient. That'd be a great Steven Spielberg movie. Yeah. Right? That's all of it. Yeah. That's true. Yeah. When he said that for the first time. Yeah. That's a freak out right there. Just a couple of dudes with some brushes looking for a Tyrannosaurus rekt bone and hit metal. And when did they find it that they have nine of them? Well, and how could we have not heard about that? What about the guys with the brushes? How could you uncover something like that? Well, Joe's newspaper at home does. I mean, they said it on that first day. Oh, you mean the Roswell. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What does this hear, Jamie? This is the document. But I had to do some digging to find it. Yeah. It's just kind of, yeah. So this is where they meet at E.G. and this is Admiral Wilson. And there's a lot more coming out now. I want to be clear. George didn't put this out. He didn't leak this out to anybody. This is, I can tell you how I recorded this conversation. So this was an employee of, at the time, Robert Bigelow. And this is in 2002. Right. Do you remember when he had that government contract called, Offsap the World All Nosed About Now? And he had nids that studied the ranch. So that 22 million everybody is saying it was for A-tip, Advanced Aerospace Threat Identification Program? The $22 million was for Offsap that was pushed through Congress, three congressmen, right? An astronaut. It was pushed through. And that's what, that $22 million, by the way, they spend more money on Viagra every year than they do studying UFOs. If it was just this program, which I think is funny. It was probably a little more money from Viagra. They probably do. They probably do. So you never know how it sees into population. But anyway, this program, this is what was the mother program. So it got the 22 million. And really it was to study skin walker ranch, oddly enough, that 22 million all was inspired by the phenomenon they were seeing at skin walker ranch. Because the scientists, they're seeing vehicles come through like a space in the sky. Yeah, we went there. I went there and talked to me. Yeah, you interviewed a bunch of people that seemed full of shit but a couple didn't. But this is very, very interesting. Totally. But if you look, I spent a lot of time in the area. I'm not talking about their stories. I'm saying there were scientists hired by the government, through Big Lo to study the ranch because they thought it was important. And whatever, whatever, the point is that 22 million was to study that. Then we have A-tip, which is like an auxiliary kind of program of military settings, like Commander Frevers and that sort of thing. This document is just one of those things that has now come forward that through the Big Lo studies, it was government funded. And then it was personally funded and then government funded. It's just one of those things that kind of shakes you because you got this military guy who can't get access because of the private industry that's holding these non-terrestrial materials, that they can't study it. So that's the claim right now. Give it some time. Let people dig more into this. It's fascinating, man. So you are essentially, you're kicked out, right? You're out of this program. You can't work with these crafts anymore and do they give you any threats? Do they tell you what you have to do from here on out? Yeah, well, I mean, the way it ended was I told George Nap all this stuff. And he said, well, let's just get it on tape. Should something happen? At least we have a record of it. And I don't remember what the impetus was, but at some point George wanted to air it. And he said, you make the call on it. And look, if at any point you change your mind, we won't air it. And it came down to the day where George wants to put it on the five o'clock news. He said, this is important stuff people have to know about it. And I thought it was too. I thought it's kind of a crime. I know you've got to keep the technology secret, but you can't not tell everybody that this stuff is going on, that we have actual hardware from another civilization. It's a big fucking deal. Probably the biggest one there ever was. And George said, today's the day we got to put it on the news. There's something to that effect. And when it came right down to the time to air it, I changed my mind and I said, we're not doing it. And that's what turned into the famous wrestling match between me and George trying to get the tape, but he won because he was a bigger guy. So you actually physically wrestled? Well, I think it was more of a polling match. I don't think we ever hit the ground, but he got the tape, put it in the player, and boom, five o'clock news was on. And then I got a call after that and they said, it was from Dennis. He said, you have any idea what we're going to do to you now, any young up the phone. That was the last communication I had with him. And what has happened to you since then? After that, a lot of people I've known either were audited by the IRS, people had anybody, I know that had clearances that worked in secure programs, had the clearances pulled. One of them, friend, one of mine that Jeremy knows. He's still on camera with me soon. He'll tell the story now that he's out of work up there. He was working up at the Tonopat test range, waiting for his clearance to come through. And they pulled that. It became, it's like if they can't get the person that's involved, they just create a problem for everybody that surrounds them. And so I mean, the way it turns out, it hurt a lot of people's lives that I was connected to. And that's an effective way of shutting someone up. So you feel that by coming forward and going public, there couldn't just snuff you out. That was, I mean, that's what I was told in George and everybody said that. You can't, oh, it's public. There's an all-nail touch you. And I, you know, I fell for it. And I wish you didn't. Yeah, sometimes sometimes when it's just over stress and people are camping on your lawn. Yeah, but this is gonna make things worse doing this. Not to make things better. I was trying to tell them. How is this gonna make things better? Well, because you're getting a real chance to explain yourself in a way that's going to make people who not only work in the government, people that are police officers and firefighters and first responders and doctors and scientists, they're gonna empathize, empathize, empathize and empathize with what it must be like to be a person like you in your 20s who gets thrust into this world unknowingly and confronted with one of the most, if not the most important discovery in the history of human beings. The big question are we alone? It's the number one question. There's two questions, right? What happens when we die and are we alone? Those are the two big questions. Right. And if we're not alone and someone knows we're not alone and these some people who know we're not alone are these bungling sort of... Even if they were, it's a crime that they're not telling rest of us. But I mean, I don't mean bungling in terms they're incompetent. I mean, they can't be competent. It seems to me to what you're describing that no one can be competent with this technology like the Victorian era scholars analyzing some sort of a nuclear reactor. There's no way. Why do you think they're not telling us? Let's just make an assumption that this is true right now. Why do you think that they're not telling us that our government doesn't tell us what's your best? Well, let me put it into what you do. If I'm the president, and I get this information, what do I do with this? What do I do with this? There's something that we don't know. There's something we don't understand. There's something that came from another world. We got it tucked away in the mountains. And I just want you guys to know about it. Hey, sleep tight. Hey, American nautos on tonight. Who do you think is gonna win? Yeah. Who's gonna win America's? That's not gonna win. So what? One is uncertainty and the other one is what Bob and I've talked about a lot. Absolutely not knowing what to tell people because you don't really understand it yourself. Even when you've got... What do you say? You want to run a government? Get people to pay their taxes? There's something else. What do you say? So you have these objects fine with impunity, right? And you have something else? Well, not only that, what can you say? Like how much do you really know? I think it's mainly the technology. That's just wanna keep the technology secret because there's... Yeah. Whoever gets this way, they wait. You control the way you literally become invincible once you master the technology. You cannot penetrate a field like that. So I'll imagine that's... I know it's all science fiction, but science fiction turns into science fact. If you have real force fields around aircraft and battleships, you win. You win. You can force your will upon anybody. And I guess there's so much more to the story when I was first there. There were Russian scientists at S4. That was early on in the project. So this was before Operation Paperclip became public as well, right? I would imagine. I don't know what the date was. Yeah, when was that? When did that was that? 98, I think. 98. Yeah, I don't know the dates on that. So roughly 10 years later, Operation Paperclip becomes freedom of information. We tell that Russia, not Germany. He says Russian scientists. Yeah, but I mean, Russian scientists, a lot of them came from Germany. A lot of those rocket scientists that work with NASA, they all came from Nazi scientists. Got it. So Russians got some of them with us. I just know. And at some point there was intense collaboration with Russia. I mean, even exchanging some ideas on nuclear weapons and EMP tests and some things we would never have discussed with them, but at the same time it was in the late 80s. They were involved in actually in the area at S4 with us. And you got to communicate with these guys? Are you saw them? No, I knew they were there. Barry would talk about the commies that were there. The commies. The commies. And that was back when they were the commies. Yeah, they were real commies. And they were real commies. And at some point it wasn't our group, but at some point there was a big discovery made. And this did not happen when I was there. It happened in between my trips to there. And after that, apparently they decided it was just too cool to share with anybody and the Russians were never allowed back on the base after that. But you don't know what that discovery was. No, no, I guess that it wasn't my group. So one of the other groups really found out something. But the, you know, and typical American fashion is, all right, this is ours. You guys get the hell out here. Was there any inkling that any other government had something similar? No, nothing that I had heard. See, that was the thing that always freaked me out. Was why if something was so superior to human beings, someone's like visiting an ant colony? Like why would you go to the queen? I don't give a fuck who the queen is. I'm a human. I'm so superior to you, ants. I don't care who you have running your hive. I'm just gonna study it. I think it's who got it. Who got it? Look at the, you know, rocket technology in Germany. But they got nine of them. Yeah, that doesn't make sense to me either. So they were either in the same area or, you know, one had clues to where others were, I mean, I don't know. You have to fill that in there, but you're right. I mean, nine of them, that's a big dig if it was archeological. Well, one of the more recent sightings and the discussions that have been coming out recently from Air Force pilots and Navy pilots, they've been talking about things happening in the ocean and that something literally goes into the water or something maybe below the surface. You think about that? 2004 TikTok name it's case. So that's when George Napa and I broke on the radio twice before the New York Times said, no, this one really well. Commander Fraser and those pilots, there was a disturbance on the surface of the water. Commander Fraser visually saw what looked like similar to a cross some object. So it's like, if you have some of the coral under the water and you've got it's breaking over, the TikTok is doing this crazy maneuver that defies its a gravity propel system. They saw it in the sky before they saw it on the water, right? Yeah, so there were, there were radar that was picking these things coming down from 80,000 feet and dropping 50 feet in less than a second. This is a jammy, what is this? This is actually on the news today. There was a briefing. So a lot of people get this confused. They've got this one then either. No, so that is called the gimbal. So there's three videos released by the Pentagon that are all actually. Just play and keep the volume off. I would really just pay attention to the source videos. So you've got the TikTok, which is this object that Commander Fraser saw another pilot filmed it with a FLIR pod and it goes, choop, but this one you see is really important to Bob's story. The gimbal craft, it's been recently analyzed. It's FLIR. Not only does it, it's definitive that it's not a conventional anything by its movements, but there's a pocket of cold air around a propulsion source. So this object, by the way, sat stationary for days, if not weeks, it sat stationary. You've found it 11 hours later. And they were saying there's no way this thing using that kind of energy to go that fast could just hover the amount of time. And by the way, you're seeing a very small part of what happened that day. This object was not alone. And so hopefully that information comes out and I wish we had video of it. I'm sure we'd all wanna see it. But that's called the gimbal. That was East Coast, right? 2015. West Coast, 2004 is the TikTok. The disturbance on the water, Commander Fraser believes there was something under that water. There was causing that disturbance when the TikTok was coming around to doing it. Within side the people that are studying this, they're thinking maybe the TikTok system was causing the disturbance. But the USO, an identified submerged object that he visually saw. The whole interesting thing about that is I would love Bob to describe it is why it doesn't matter if these craft are in space, air or water. Why doesn't it matter? I love when he talks about this shit. Well, first of all, Commander Fraser was the F-18 pilot off the nemets that was sent out to find out what this stuff is. But and it wasn't just, I got a chance to talk to him recently and it wasn't just a radar image. I mean, Commander Fraser had eyes on it for over five minutes watching this thing as four other pilots did. So it wasn't a radar blipper or anything. I mean, these guys were watching this thing. But one of the things I think in the gimbal video, the way the craft that we worked on flies is it doesn't fly like conventional aircraft does. And it doesn't fly like a flying saucer with it in the 1950s movie. It flies belly first. I mean, it may set down conventionally, but it always rotates. It does a roll maneuver, puts its belly towards the target and then moves and what it has to do. So it would be like a car flying with the wheels forward. Right. Right. I mean, it may lift it land on the wheels, but at some point when it won't. target and then moves and what do you like car flying with the wheels forward right right i mean i may lift up land on the wheels but at some point when it wants to leave flip stop points the wheel or once ago and takes off and the gimbal video you can see the craft do the roman over and it's really interesting it behaves exactly like the craft that i worked out so much like we have different shaped air crafts and fighter jets and cars they probably have different shapes of these objects that operate under similar principles right but they all have the same power source they all have the same power source and we're also dealing with if you think about the laws of technological progression you know you think of Moore's law and you think of how things accelerate you've got to think that if this civilization is who knows how many years more advanced than we are if not even years I mean we're thinking of the about in terms of conventional terms right the way the way we look at the world that mean they may they might be just superior in terms of their intellect they've got to be maybe maybe we don't know right well the only reason i say that is because look everyone doesn't necessarily start at a steam engine right and go to an internal combustion engine and then you know electric power nuclear power and go up the ladder that we can't come out you know the binary if the stuff is true about the origin of the the binary star system and they have heavier elements that we don't have and this element stable element 115 is a naturally occurring material maybe that's the first thing they started experimenting with and the version of their steam engine their first product was something that operated like this and actually when they came to earth to look around or you know whatever they were amazed at the stuff we were doing these guys burn stuff and squirt it out the back to go forward so right right you know who says they follow any kind of of normal progression like that my my thought was if you went back to the 1400s and then you went from 1400 to 1500 you're not going to see that much of a difference technologically right if you go from 2000 to 3000 I assume there's going to be a radical change right well the yeah the delta the rate of change is is magnificently higher than it used to be right so if you think about what they had in 1988 and you think about what they're going to be they probably have in 2019 just logically seems like they would advance I would think so the only question is like are they living is that a living thing in terms of like a biological thing or are they some sort of an artificially created creation like we are working on right now I mean we're in the middle of working on artificial reality artificial being sentient beings artificial intelligence there's constant there's silicon they're based life forms that they're essentially trying to create Boston dynamic or was it Boston dynamics of the government. You can make machines at a flash right so a cyborg or cybernetic organism is just that you know that's what a lot of people think there's like gray things are you know that people called the is like they were like their machines printed from flesh. So what you're saying is like not so long. Well, like it just be synthetic light that they don't even need to be, you know, machines. Well, they seem to have no sex organs. We're the described by people that have had interactions with them, assuming these people aren't liars or crazy or whatever. Right. They have no sex organs and that they don't seem to have any muscle that just almost like a frame and they have enormous heads. I mean, if you look at Australia epithecus or depictions of, you know, ancient hominids and then you go to human beings, one of the things you see is bigger heads and weaker bodies. Well, you see some clear progression of evolution too. Where something like that, I would lean towards synthetic organism because it looks like it was made for a specific task. There's no reproductive organs. So I mean, that almost kind of leaves out any kind of, you know, physical evolution. Right. Well, that's also our bottleneck. Right. Our bottleneck is our biological imperative. The need to breed emotions, fear and anxiety, all these different things that exist in order to force us into making sure we reproduce. I mean, that's essentially there's a human reward systems that aren't necessary once they can figure out a way to make some sort of sentient artificial life. Some sort of thing that doesn't have these biological limitations that we have. By the way, these craft, all these different kinds have been reported because it was confusing. I always thought of flyethoshes, what I heard Bob Lazar talk about flyethoser, right? But if you look back in history, people have always reported the weirdest shapes, like none of them are alike. You know, there are other saucers, but you got cigar shaped, you got, you know, the top hat shape, you have orbs. Why? Maybe they're serving different purposes. They're doing different things like we'd use different tools. And I want to be clear. The reason I know that memo is real is because I spend a lot of time with Dr. Edgar Mitchell, a six man to walk on the moon. Last guy to film him before he died, right? That's how I know I don't want any journalists thinking I got if anywhere else. I know because of Dr. Mitchell. And he said the same thing. Maybe these things are performing different tasks, you know? And that's what I mean. If you think about what an alien is in terms of our, sort of iconic image of an alien, like Stephen Spielberg, closing columns are the third time, the third kind alien. They seem like what we'd assume a human being would eventually become. Right. And if these things are tiny, human beings are small than they've ever been before, they're weaker than they've ever been before. And there seems to be a trend in that direction. And this trend seems to be amplified by our technological progression. There are a lack of need for muscle strength and our lack of need for violence. And we're moving in a society to try to get away from all the things that we think are abhorrent about human beings and the terrible behaviors that we have. If we one day do give birth to some sort of an artificial being, like Marshall McLuhan's quote, we are the sex organs of the machine world, you know, that one day we... Okay, I'll buy that. Yeah, McLuhan was brilliant. And that quote has always been one of my favorites because, okay, what are we doing when we're constantly technologically innovating? We're constantly looking for faster cars, better computers, bigger screens, faster, more resolution, more pixels, more this, more that, higher bandwidth, 5G, 10G. Right. What are we doing? We're moving into this, in this, if you just follow it, objectively stand back, don't attach yourself or your civilization or culture to it. And look at what it is. We're moving 100% towards technological innovation. If you looked at this species from afar, and if you weren't a part of it, you would say, what does this species do? Are they make things? They make things better every year. Beehives are the same fucking thing that you see 10 years ago. You go by, you see a beehive, it's amazing, it's cool, but they're the same fucking thing. They figure out how to do it, they make a beehive. We don't do that. We make better things constantly. At some point, I think that technology is going to fuse with us. Yes. And we're going to be coming. It's already happening. Yeah. Eli must talk about it on my podcast that we are sideboards. You just carry it in your pocket. It's a phone. It answers any question you want. You couldn't talk to it. It'll give you the answers, the answers instantaneously. It navigates you. It has all your phone numbers, and it has all your contacts. You can get ahold of people, people listening to you through it. It's connecting us in ways even involuntarily. Haptics, that kind of thing. Yeah. It's also getting on your wrist. How many people have eyewatches? Well, right. Right. And that's only because we can't integrate them yet. But if you know that point is kind of 100%. Yeah. I didn't joke about it last night, but I have a bit about it, but I do. About the integration between humans and technology. What would you do? If you were a hyperintelligence, would you do the work yourself? Or would you create some cool things called like humans to do it for you? Would you create things that are cybernetic organisms to come in with machines and do it for you? If you were a hyperintelligence that has kind of changed like you've described, you'd probably create workers, right? Well, that's a vast conspiracy theory. I'm not talking about conspiracy. But it is a kind of a conspiracy theory. I'm asking you. Well, I mean, I don't think it's necessarily that. I mean, you could look at it that way, but that is the way a conspiracy theorist would look at it. The way I would look at it is like there's obviously a progression going on a biological progression. There's some sort of integration with technology. There's some sort of imperative, this need for technological innovation. It's inescapable. Everyone has it. And I think it's attached to materialism in some sort of a strange way because so many people work so hard to get new things. And like God, that seems so logical and preposterous and it makes people unhappy and depressions on the rise, but nobody seems to be able to stop it. Like why is that? Well, maybe it's because we are the electronic caterpillars that give birth to the butterfly. Maybe that's what we're doing. Maybe we're very well-being. What our job is to do is to make some sort of a cocoon. We don't even know we're doing it while we're doing it. Do you think a caterpillar is well? Hey, caterpillar, what are you doing? Man, just doing my thing. It's my job. I have to make a cocoon. Now I'm going to become a butterfly. This could be a natural part of evolution. It could be. That we're just supposed to do this. Exactly. And make the jump to some sort of mechanized. Right. Yeah. Not in my life. A ringtone that is fishing with a spear. No, they've figured out how to fish with spears. There's primatologists without somebody showing them how to fish. No, they've imitated human beings doing it. And now they do it, but they do it independently. They're not trained orangutans. They're wild orangutans. Look at that. There's a wild orangutans. That's impressive. Well, there's these primatologists. I guess you would call them primatologists. That's a term. That's a great biologist. Biologists that believe that monkeys and chimps and some of the great apes are moving into the Stone Age, that they've currently entered the Stone Age. Like they're not staying what they were a hundred thousand years ago or five hundred thousand years ago. But they're actively using tools and they're experimenting with different ways to use those tools. And then they're making tools out of stone. They're making tools out of sticks and they're using them. Well, this might just be what happens. This might just be what happens. I mean, why are we working so hard? I mean, I was driving to LA this morning. I had a doctor's appointment. So I was on the 405 and eight in the morning. Jesus Christ. Like this is so crazy. When you're on the 405 and LA at eight o'clock in the morning, you see literally a million cars. And it's just everywhere you go, it's people. But and also I'm in a Tesla. So I have it on autopilot. So I'm there sitting. I'm listening to a podcast. I barely have my hand on the wheel. I'm not touching shit. This car's driving me along. I'm not even doing anything. I'm just, I'm just hanging out. It's so much less strapped by the way. Do that that way. So it encourages you to innovate. It encourages you to embrace this new technology. I got this giant screen showing me the navigation in front of me. Oh, be there five minutes early. Excellent. And I'm listening to a podcast wirelessly. It's Bluetooth screen streaming from my phone. And I pulled that podcast, which came out today out of the fucking sky. And I'm listening to it. And I'm all comfortable in my nice little car. I'm just driving on my way to the doctor's office. This is irresistible stuff. Yeah. Yeah. Different than your walk man. Yeah. You know, that can be irresistible. It is irresistible. It's frighteningly irresistible. But is it frightening? I mean, if you were a monkey, right, if you were an Australian pithicus, would you go, man, I don't want to fucking be a person and live in a house. That's bullshit. I like just swinging around on trees. I like running from giant wars. This is life. Guys, life is running from crocodiles. It's not living in a fucking suburban community. Probably something that are like that. Yeah. I don't think so. I think I think when it comes, we're going to embrace it. We're going to embrace it the same way you embrace cell phones, the same way you embrace television. There's going to be a few holdouts. I don't even know any male dress, man. Those are those like there's a few and far between the good luck with that fuck face. Go move to the woods. Ted Kazinsky. Yeah. I was just going to throw Ted Kazinsky was right. This is something that I think about sometimes when I get really high. That Ted Kazinsky was a part of the Harvard LSD studies. This has been proven. Ted Kazinsky, they cooked his fucking brain when he was at Harvard. And then when he went over to Berkeley and became a professor, his goal was to make enough money so that he could implement this program and live in the woods and then write his manifesto and start killing people that were involved in propagating technology. He was expunged from the Harvard logs, by the way. This is something my friend just called me about. So there's like this private library and they used to print people's names whenever they were part of a university. And he was one of the handful of people that were expunged from it. I want to jump back to the one thing Joe. I want to be very careful with that word conspiracy theorist. What I was saying to you was we we terraform our earth, right? We terraform, we change the environment. We do all this innovation. What is stopping us from thinking that that's not being done. I'm not saying is. I'm saying what's stopping us from thinking that that's being done on a much bigger level, on a cosmic level. He made like aliens coming down doing that to humans. Well, I'm telling you that there is something here. There's a fact. There's something, there are craft. They're here. They're not ours. They're here. So the question is, what is that about? And I'm just looking at what we do with what you're describing with technology. I think it's much more likely that the same way we observe chimps and we observe that they are now in the stone age that they're observing us and that they're recognizing that there is a pattern, that there is a there's a steps that happened. I mean, Carl Sagan talked about the different levels of civilization and that you know, that we don't get past certain levels. We're never going to reach this. I mean, we're in this warring polluting, yeah, pillaging. We're awesome. Civilizations. Well, we're awesome in a lot of ways, you know, but in that way we're not. Well, yeah, we're children that have immense power that we didn't really, the other thing is you're using the immense power that other people have created, right? I mean, even when you're driving a car, you stomping on the gas like, whoa, you didn't invent the fucking engine. You didn't invent tires. There's all these things that were involved in the creation of this thing that is really outside of your grasp of understanding. But yet you have the ability to use it, like a person with a gun. I'm just going to bang, bang, bang people. You don't, you didn't invent a gun. So like you've, you've, without the intellect to craft an engineer and manifest these creations, you just have access to them because you have paper or you have Bitcoin or you've got whatever the fuck you're using using a credit card. Now, you have almost no responsibility. You could just flippantly use these things, which is why we, you know, we were very childlike in our actions. We haven't had to earn the responsibility. We haven't had to earn these things that we've been able to have and you've only been able to have them because other people have innovated and spent ungodly amounts of time and effort and focus in the lab to create these things. And then they've all put them together. And then what is the, what's the reason to put them together to profit? Well, what's the reason to prop? Well, why are you doing this? So you can buy more things? Well, what, what are we doing? What are we doing? We're making better things. That's what we do. That's all that we do is make better things. Why the fuck do we need oil? Why do we need oil? Why can't we just burn wood and stay home? Why can't we grow chickens and food in the backyard? Why can't we do? Well, we fucking can. We certainly can. People do do it. But we decide to make that almost impossible. Our preferred way of living is to stuff everyone into a very small area where no one grows anything other than weed. This is what LA is. LA is 20 million people with hard surfaces. Is many hard surfaces as you can. Boy, if you got an acre backyard in LA, holy shit, look at all that grain. This is amazing. Well, no, that's the fucking earth coming through this weird sort of creation that we've put on top of the earth. But the goal is that like New York City, that's, there's none of it. Right? You just got, you got central park and then just got human shit. You stacked up. No one's growing anything. And then constant work. Everyone's up early. Go, go, go, innovate progress. Make that money so you can buy more things. And every year, hey, Apple, where's this fucking new phone? As if your phone isn't good enough. But your phone's taking pictures and videos and people are calling you and you got applications to tell you which way the wind's blowing. It's not going to a blink of an eye. Blink of an eye. It's all gone though that, you know, like 10,000 years and the Hoover Dam goes or whatever. You know, Mount Rushmore disintegrates. So it's amazing because we have created that and everything's trying to spring up through that. We keep it maintenance down. But we're a blink man. Something hits. But we don't think that way. Well, you know, you think in terms of your own life, right? You think in terms of what you want and what you need right now. You know, it's, we are in many ways this combination of this weird primitive ape-like thing with the ability to calculate and manipulate our world and our environment. That makes us whole unique on top of that with existential angst and fear. So what do you do with that? We fucking water it down into antidepressants. Give these fucking people some shit that keeps them moving. Whether worried about the future, they're trying to figure out what reality is. It's just you're on a goddamn convertible spaceship spending a thousand miles an hour hurling through infinity. There's no meaning to this thing. Just keep making shit, keep making stuff. And then one day, they're going to be able to hit that switch and this life will be born out of innovation and thinking and progress and technology and more than likely. It's probably going to be what we're seeing that these things are that you're you're observing. I'm not observing them. But yeah, someone's are you implying that they're us? I don't think they are us. But I think they are what happens when things keep going. It's not us. Just like we're not monkeys, right? I'm not a champ. That's cool. They're from here. Is your idea? No, no, no, this is what happens all over the universe. This is what happened. Look, here's the thing. I went to see Brian Cox's. He has this amazing live show with Robin Ence where they have these LED screens. He's huge screens with high resolution depictions of the cosmos. And one of the most mind-blowing things was he has this large scale image of the universe. And it shows all the individual galaxies, the universe. And it just keeps moving through all these galaxies in three dimensions. And it's fucking incredible. But what's stunning is the relative uniformity of it. Even at, you know, it means you're obviously looking at an incredibly small depiction of something that's immensely large, like a galaxy of hundreds of billions of stars. You're seeing it as this little dot, but this little dot that's flying through space surrounded by other little darts with very similarly spaced distances. Yeah, how much we need to be. So Mike, if we see uniformity in that form in terms of like the distance between galaxies, so many galaxies, it's so similar. They might very slightly. And that slightly might be hundreds of millions of light years. But there's so much uniformity. Why would we not assume that that uniformity exists pretty much everywhere? And that all these things that you're seeing that are so similar, you do see binary star systems, you do see single star systems like star. But there's also some speculation that Earth and that our source system was one time was a binary star system. Right? I mean, that's one of the speculations about that object that they find outside the Kuiper belt that they think is 10 times larger than Earth. They think it might have been at one point in time a star. But this, this uniformity that you see, why wouldn't we think that that has its same implications biologically that there's some sort of a biological uniformity and that this happens given the right sets of circumstances. Yeah, you should be. You should tell them to some of the stuff that you've read that you don't know is true. I mean, if the stuff was true about the propulsion stuff, I mean, anyway, well, what have you read? What do you saw too? And you know, what are you talking about? Spill the beans, Bob. I got to poke the bear here. I get some more liquor in you. Well, I mean, the, again, the only thing I could verify was what I had my hands on. There were, you know, there was talk of weapon systems that there were different projects. Project Galileo project sidekick was supposed to be weapon applications of the craft. Project looking glass had to do with time any effects of time in the craft. Now, I don't think we're not talking about making a time machine like in science fiction, but we're talking about, you know, small distortions, intentional distortions of time and how that can be used you know, as a, not as a, well, it was part of a weapon program. How are you informed in this? These again, were there just the small briefings that I read, but again, I don't really like to talk about those because I don't have any information on them. And it was just, you know, small briefings. We told Commander Freaver that what he saw might have been a time dilation in the gravity because gravity affects time, you know, space time. I'm sure you've heard of that. And, you know, what, what Commander Freaver saw as he was in the F-18 approaching it, he said, he described it as ping pong ball in a cup and shaking it back and forth. It was moving that fast. Now, obviously, there's anything inside there. It's going to be battered to hell. But, you know, my point was, was that well, one of two things, either there's a gravitational envelope in there which negates any inertia effects or you are seeing through a gravity distortion field. So, you know, just like you're looking at a, a hot highway and you see, you know, an optical distortion going through there. Well, the same thing happens in gravity and the craft may not actually be moving like that. It may just look like it because you're seeing you can only see it through the field. So, it may be making much more gentle moves. I'm not saying that's it, but it has to be one of the two. And the thing shows up 60 miles away. They noticed it on radar 60 seconds after left Commander Freaver, but it was at his cap point, which is the next point he was destined to go to 60 miles away. And in 60 seconds on radar, the same object ends up there. So, it's going a mile second. No, they, I think the radar just picked it up in 60 seconds. Yeah, I could have been there instantly, but we don't know. The cycle time. Nobody knows that. That's the whole thing is. Oh, so it cycles like radar cycles? Yeah, it doesn't, it doesn't sweep, but I mean, it turns, it's a planar race. So it just, you know, scans around it, random place. That's a spy one does the really cool. Yeah, doesn't do the whole loop anymore. Right. The point, the point is, though, that the craft moved to his next location before he knew where his next location was going to be. Jesus. And that's, I mean, that's well documented. So that's a, that's a pretty shocking piece of information. What's fascinating to me too is that you were discussing this, um, the, the way this reactor worked and that these things were not really connected. No, nothing is connected. There's no wiring at all. That freaks me the fuck out. Charge your iPhone, you know. Yeah. Well, why? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's the, that's a simple, a little magnetic. Yeah, I know again, but that's just simple electromagnetic induction. Right. But I mean, Tesla, the scientist had this concept of, right. That's what it's, yeah. Yeah. That's what I'm talking about. I mean, for other people, I don't know what I'm saying. He wanted to send wireless electricity through the sky and Westinghouse was like, it's a fuck out of here with that. Like when anybody could just pull electricity. Yeah. The skone meter. Yeah. They couldn't, they couldn't. We just talking the car right over and trying to chill him out. You know, we're talking about Tesla. And how, you know, you couldn't be meter didn't have it all that down. So it's funny ringing it up. Yeah. Yeah. That, that, that, I mean, who knows what would have happened in terms of innovation? How do you been allowed to go forward with that? Well, we probably wouldn't have computers. You think? Yeah. I'm pretty positive. I mean, forget about microelectronics. Well, this is dumping huge amounts of electromagnetic energy in the air. And yeah, we'd be able to wirelessly turn on our lights, but there'd be no radio communication. The interference would be something we could would be overwhelming. It would induce electric currents and anything with a small wire on it. So integrated circuits transistors would be disintegrated before they were even, you know, tested for operation. So it would, it would destroy us up. Yeah. It would have stopped us dead. We'd have it'd be great. You can turn lighters on and heaters from all over the place with no wires, but it would stop modern electronics. And if we became dependent on it, it would almost be like our dependence on fossil fuels, although it's destructive. It's very difficult for us to get off the nipple. It would have changed the course of how we developed, which is so interesting. When you talk about a civilization, other star system didn't even start with fossil fuels. They had one 15 naturally on their planet. And they're like, cool, anti gravity is pretty awesome. Well, the fact that they didn't have it. I think it's important that that actually happened. Yeah. It might have been stopped in its tracks for a reason. Whoa. And it's just, it's, I think it's incredibly difficult for us to imagine technological progression under another timeline other than the one that we've experienced. Yeah. That's difficult. If we imagine what this alien race must have been like. I mean, God, just to be able to see something, like, I mean, obviously we've seen it in different life forms, right? Like we see the life of certain beetles in comparison to the life of certain fish, very, very different existence, very different life cycles octopus. Yeah. Octopus. Yeah. I mean, we see all these different variables in terms of biological entities on earth, but we don't see it in terms of technological innovation as we're the only one that's intelligent that can innovate when we have intelligent creatures, but they're in the ocean. The only other thing that are like us or dolphins and orcas and whales, and they don't have the ability to manipulate their environment and subsequently because they don't have the ability to manipulate their environment, we put them in fish tanks and we're like, get in the tank, do some tricks. Right. You know, the only thing he saw in the craft, if we were considering Bob's story, the only thing that you, he saw in the craft that he related to that looked like a human could make was this honeycomb hatch and I always love that because you're like obsessed with this thing that you could recognize. You know, the right. Yeah. I only focus on that because it was the one thing that I understood how it worked. Well, it was, and it was, it was the access to the level below and it was, well, you know, if you take, you have a six pack of beer and you take out the cardboard dividers, set it on the table, you can put a lot of pressure on the top, but if you push it from the sides, it collapses flat. So it was something like that in a honeycomb shape that was essentially some sort of sheet metal and you could walk on that in the upper layer, but if you took the corner, stuck your finger in and pushed it collapsed and made an entryway. So I thought that that was a really unique. I'd never seen that before and it was the only thing in the craft that made absolute sense to me. I was like, ah, we can make that and all that is is a hatchway. Was there any discussion about the materials that were used to make the craft? I'm sure there was, but that was a metal-ergy division. It had nothing to do with us. So you never got a not even the slightest briefing. I don't even know if it was metal or it was ceramic. It's I think it there's a fine line between the two. Now, one of the things that's happened to you that has allowed people to discredit you was there's obviously been some sort of an effort to erase your past. Yeah. Some sort of an effort, an effort to erase your education history, your employment history at Los Alamos. In fact, the only way your employment history was proven at Los Alamos is someone got a list of directory of the employees from the past and read into it and you were on that list. So it proved that you worked there even though people were trying to deny it and they were trying to use that as a way to discredit you. You never did work at Los Alamos. You weren't really scientists. What was what was that like to experience? I mean, of course, we're talking about the 1980s, the 1990s when you could get away with something like that. Yeah, obviously there are a lot less a lot less records on computers at that time. It was still file cabinets and folders. But yeah, that was frightening. That was one of the first things that happened. I think George Knapp was the first one that uncovered that. I mean, he saw my birth certificate disappear. He disappeared. Yeah, it was no record of your being. There was no record of that. There was no record. His mom tells me about that. It was frightening for her. He's got a real family. He's real person. It's frightening for her. But the Los Alamos thing really surprised me and that they were so adamant that now this guy never worked here. Don't be ridiculous. And George went back and forth for... I got the letters on the word. Months. I mean, it was ridiculous. But fortunately, somebody came up. now this guy never worked here don't be ridiculous and georgia and back and forth you know for i got the letters on the world yeah months i mean it was ridiculous but fortunately somebody came up with a nineteen eighty two phone book directory i mean and also uh... originally i told you uh... you know when i work there i was on the front page of the the paper so they were still able to archive you know bring that back from the archive and go you know bob was our physicist working here at los alam also there was at least something there but uh... somehow george came up with the phone director and then jore didn't bob took georg with cameras into los alamos oh yeah yeah so we flew out there and i said look come on in i'll show you where i worked will go in will make people in georg went with me and you know we need to get a place you know met people and you know and well so also the place where they had the machine that was able to read the the size of your digits no no that was a lot of that was that's for that was that's for and explain that so now this is back in the eighties and this is back in the eighties where when you discuss this people like this doesn't even exist yeah okay what was it it was a way you know this is before fingerprint scanners and anything of anything high resolution scanner that time so what it was was a device that uh... had a little picture of a hand on a glass plate with pins in it so you could jam your hand in there and there was a bright light above it and a sensor underneath and when you put your hand in there the light would turn on and it would measure the bones in your finger because the light shown through your bones and apparently the length of the bones in your fingers are extremely unique and easy to measure and they use that when you put your hands on there the light would turn on and your badge would pop out there's it right there is that's that's it and i tried to describe this uh... to people and they said that is the most ridiculous thing we've ever heard and uh... i said hey that my badge came out of that thing i put my hand on it badge popped out and that's how i could open the doors and get into as for and uh... you know and everybody discredited that they said it was balsa and science fiction and german you found this i i found it through a good friend of mine and tyler rogue away and he had some good sources inside of a very fifty two were they also used these for the stealth program right around that time so now i've got all these people that worked within who you know said only if you're in certain programs would we use this technology is kind of shit actually didn't keep it for very long beginning of biometrics so i was able to reveal it in my film i kept my mouth shut until i showed it to bob you know the movie is the first time he saw it was how you see it in the documentary that says genuine reaction getting goosebumps those are great idea that you did it thank you man because you know i guess what i'm i'm actually trying to see if he's telling the truth that's how i started you know that's how i started so it was really cool to see that you that you get to see it is now actual reaction has that been verified by other people yeah so yes to me it has uh... personally i get emails every day and people are telling me where these are used and how they use in the semi-photos that a lot of photos of identity mats now how they were used right now how they were used but yeah but uh... i don't the most recent one was way more recent than i thought in other country but yeah that technology was used so what so funny is uh... that this technology even in the area fifty two where they'd use him for tone upon one of the guys who will go on camera when he will do an interview with me he was a technician for one of these and he hated them because they were really bad they always broke down and never and he was a technician for him that he won't tell me where if he worked at air fifty two so it's probably ton of pop it's very separated even based but yeah so there was that yet there is your education record that was also like what happened with that that well that disappeared also you know that i i've i've never gone i've never gone anywhere for education i've never gone i never attended a class as a caltech i never attended anything at MIT you did it ten classes in those places i did it ten classes in those places do you know anybody that you went to school with that said you and have they verified that they went to school with you well i gave gerrymee some names but people yet i did reason i don't say these names publicly is because every single time i mentioned a name somebody gets in the world want to be of course yeah yeah of course uh... but what what is that experience like seeing your birth certificate erased seeing your employee well it's frightening it's it's absolutely right it's also the fuel that the debunkers use the so-called air quotes skeptics i don't like the term skeptics and i say this probably because i really want to send this privately i think it's a sloppy lazy way to look at things to just be a skeptic look at this people be objective and i think there's a lot of things you should be skeptical of i think you should be you should look at things and look at things from a hard-line science perspective you have to look at but the idea of skeptics the problem with that is you're always looking for things to be bullshit yeah and i think that's dangerous because i think some things aren't bullshit confirmation bias on the other end you're deciding to take a square thing of putting around holding them at a what and i find a lot of them to be lazy yeah a lot of them to be lazy thinkers sure because they're always putting it into that box instead of going instead of just separating their ego they're trying to play a game and the game is calling bullshit i want to call bullshit and i'm gonna line up all these reasons why it's bullshit and i'm gonna ignore anything that might be contrary to that definition yeah that does every time i'm thinking i'm gonna catch him in something you know all on this process i'm i found dr kangel he came forward and said i was in security briefings with bob was are the physicist at los almost he went on the record with me now the other people i talked with why won't they go on the record with me because it's still working there so that that's the difference right what is that what can the public have or even if they're not working there that you know they want to live their lives what mean obviously people have seen what's happened to you like think pin after thirty years yeah really if you look at all the information on you know concerning my accounts that's that's verifiable it can't possibly be a bullshit story anymore it's really way past that point yeah i mean that was my big pen is i mean how could i was possibly no so my big pen was the guy that did the security clearances to go to the big one of the guys that was a guy that you work with he said he did right and and george napp you know george didn't believe him george put him through four polygraph tests right he tried to see man this is a big risk it sounds interesting but let's see if he's on the truth one of the things was bob said there's a guy that might be pinnied at security clearances for the base and that's a weird name it's very specific for thirty years george found this guy in this weird department he didn't even know it was my big pen the guy when talked to me ghost him totally goes for thirty years used face book and google image match through his children i was able to find him after thirty years and i talked to him three times on the phone he lives on the east coast he almost went on camera with me confirmed that he did security clearances for the base in nineteen eighty nine confirmed he remembers bob lizzare and what you don't know is there's a hand written note the friend of yours has from mike what i don't i don't like to be later i don't but that is real that is actual so hand written out this is what you know like this is new to me so when that i when you're when they do security client to clearances they go through all your friends and they go to friends yeah yeah so this is to bob and i had people come to me for a friend of mine that's serving and they do in a security plans for him and even though i'm like the ufo guy uh... they did you know the f-back come and visit my house and make sure that they talk about my friend and they live a little card and when my wife told me to get away she didn't know who they were they left a little car to super cute now back then it was a hand written note in his friend has it for him that you haven't seen in oh my god two decades so if you're listening i think you're telling me this one i don't know what is this card it's just a little handwritten note with mike think pin signature card like a like a like a post card like a piece of paper that he left on the door saying when bob gets back or whatever it says on it so it's just another little funny thing i found the guy he does the security clearances he admitted to me he did it and he admitted to me he was dodging george napp because when george said his name on the right on the on the news he dropped his fork into his stake earned his potatoes or whatever and he's looking at his wife he was in trouble his name is never supposed to be out there like this is the security clearance guy but you don't want national attention associated with anything bob has to say but anyway this unique name bob said for thirty years and the guy ghosted george napp george could prove he existed he actually talked to me and he talked to me three times he almost what i can remember with me it's just crazy what what do you what happens after thirty years you just get more info well that's one of the reasons why when you and me and Jeremy and george napp had that conversation on the phone i said i think what we can do with this podcast is important i really do i think it's important for people to hear this from you in a very clear just very concise way and if you examine all the information that you've said today if you you look at all the things that the tractors have said if you look at all of the new recent evidence that's coming out all these really high-level people in the military in the government that are discussing this it gives you far more credibility then you would have had in the nineteen years when this came out fakie yes you can't make no worries story just because you don't like it anymore that's why i thought it was important to come out and refresh the world's memory and let people know and like i said i've been i'm not saying i'm a fan of yours but i guess i'm a fan of yours as a human being of a fan of yours but i've been following you for decades i've been following the story for decades i mean i'm getting i have v chest i'd like a lot of the world has yeah it's crazy well anybody that has any sort of uh... vested interest or uh... just uh... even uh... just a fascination with ufo's has followed your story because there's no one else there's no one else that comes for this some guy i've said i worked underground with the aliens they shot my hand off like this is a bunch of wacky dudes that are underground there's bases the shooting lasers through the earth's trust and move them at light speed there's a lot of those guys they seem schizophrenic they seem crazy they might even be disinformation agents they might be people that are designed to muddy the waters which for sure has happened people are coming for the now it it's amazing by doing this what you're doing you're providing an opportunity to survive to tell a story you know believe it or not he can tell a story it's amazing because more people will come forward now that that are involved with these projects they'll come forward to you to me they're coming forward and so what you've done here is provide that opportunity if they need it and it's amazing i just want to say bob just don't come forward to me don't come forward to bob why were you why were you freaking nauseous at the beginning of this like so upset why was your why do you have a migrant because that started off so hard my god i was sitting here like did this why are you asking them why because of this anxiety the guys gone to thirty fucking years of being persecuted i just want to hear his birth certificate i just want to hear from i want to hear him say i want them to say that you don't just get it i step out settle down yeah i i got it you were you're it was hard for you to get him here you know and i've heard for us yeah you you don't want to let it what really annoys me or the people that think you know you guys just came up with the story to make a bunch of money or get a bunch of you know attention and that's a good point so let's please explain that first of all i don't get any money out of this at all and i may i didn't even let you guys buy plane tickets for me to come out here anything i mean anytime like when gerrymee uh pre-pre-viewed i guess uh movie up in michigan i mean they it brought in like a couple thousand dollars i made sure that two thousand dollars went to science programs at the local high schools there i don't dirty money i don't want to touch it i don't take any money from this stuff and as far as attention i hate fucking attention i don't like being on shows i just want to kind of hide in the corner and do my own thing so that's i got enough hugs when i was a kid okay i don't need any attention so no that if you if you if you think somehow we came up with this thing then you got to tell me why we did it well you've done a great job of making sure you have your basis covered in that regard that you haven't profited off of this and like you said that you have donated whatever money that came your way to science programs it's so i mean it it doesn't make any sense any other way i mean what you're but i've got gotten out of here is what i thought i was going to get out of here when i watched the documentary that you what you're saying makes sense it doesn't make sense that it's bullshit that happened exactly like i said it did you know i believe you um in closing is there anything else you'd like to say no i can't think of anything other than really don't come and try to visit me well um i know that you have paid a huge personal cost to get this information out and i mean maybe you didn't understand what that cost would have been when you first initially came forward with the story but over the past 30 years it's been immense it's been great and i just want to thank you for that and thank you for all all these people that would not have gotten this information it would not have really had this story any other way oh thanks joe thank you and thank you jermi and one more time the documentary is available on Netflix right now yeah it's called bob lizzare airy 51 and flying saucers all right that's it folks good night