Hello freak bitches. When did this start? When did the trigger warnings? When did the safe spaces? When did all this emerge? Well, it has its roots in the student radicalism of the 1960s, especially the far left radicalism. It really popped up in the 1990s and the early 90s when I was teaching in the US at that point. Which you know, I taught at Harvard from 93 to 98 and there was a fair push for political correctness, especially in the early part of the 90s. But it got pushed back down and disappeared and went underground. It went underground. It's more accurate. And then it's just come back with a vengeance in the last five years. And I think it's partly because we have all these radical left political activists departments at the universities. Women's studies being at the top of the list that have done nothing for the last 30 years. It's even longer than that now. It's almost 40 years. 30 years let's say. I've done nothing but producing a never ending stream of ideological, you've minded counter-civilization political activists. And that's all subsidized by tuition and by the public purse. And that's another thing we really got to ask ourselves. Is why the hell are we subsidizing revolution? Why are we doing that? It's crazy. And it's dangerous. It's dangerous. What exactly is going on with women's studies that you believe is fostering revolution? Well, you go on their websites and read what they say. I mean, first of all, for the women's studies types and this is what would you call it? False anthropology. There's this idea that way back when there was a feminist paradise. And that would be like noble savage mode of living where everything was egalitarian and women dominated. It was a matriarchal culture. That was put forward by UCLA anthropologist named Gebbutess. I can never pronounce her name properly, but I think I got it. And then that was overthrown by patriarchal institutions, essentially starting at about the time, say, of Judaism. And that was all overthrown. And ever since then we've lived in an oppressive patriarchy. And that's what our culture is. It's an oppressive patriarchy. So they're pointing to one unsuccessful society that they believe existed or did it it ought to exist? No, it didn't exist. There's no evidence for whatsoever. It's complicated, but it's the telling of a kind of psychological myth as if it was history. And anyway, so the basic claim is that Western civilization is a brutish patriarchy in that whatever positive things it might have managed to accomplish, we're all accomplished as a consequence of oppression and theft. And that the appropriate thing to do is to restructure it from the bottom up. And they mean that. They mean that. They mean every single bloody concept. And you can marry that with modern postmodernism and throw in a nice dash of Marxism. And you have the ideological and motivated grounds for social revolution. And just go online and look at a dozen women studies websites. Just read them. You can see what they say. They produce political activists and their goal is to restructure the patriarchy. Well, what's the patriarchy? Well, the patriarchy is Western civilization. And what does restructure mean? That's easy. It means tear it down and destroy it. Why? Because it's a brutish system that's predicated on nothing but oppression. It's nothing but a tyranny in the eyes of the radical women studies types. Hetara's sexuality. That's a tyranny. Capitalism. That's a tyranny. Democracy. Well, that doesn't even exist. And even if it did, it would be a tyranny. Everything's a tyranny. And so you can ask these and what would they replace it with? They replace it with their own ideological utopia. Well, we've already had 100 years of that. We saw what happened. Oh, well, that doesn't matter. That wasn't real Marxism. That's what what the bloody Marxists always say. That wasn't real Marxism. It's like, oh, how many millions of people have to die before you're convinced that it's real Marxism. And I know what they mean by that too. They mean, hey, if I was the Marxist dictator, things would have gone a lot better. It's like, uh, you should think again, sunshine. If you were the Marxist dictator, things wouldn't have gone a lot better. So and if you're the sort of person that thinks that if you you would have been control, things would have gone a lot better than you're exactly the sort of person who should never be in control. So and it's resentment. It's horrible resentment. You know, that's an important point because I think this is something that you've said that I absolutely agree with that. I think a lot of this thinking and the way that people are behaving, it seems based on revenge. It seems based on revenge for awkward upbringings, social uncomfortability. It seems like there's something about the way they view the world where they want to get back at people that have literally done them no wrong. It's resentment for the burden of being. It's deeper. It's deeper. I mean, human existence is characterized by a fair bit of suffering. You know, we're limited creatures and life is very hard. Everyone dies. Everyone you love is going to die. Most of the things you do, all of the things you do will eventually fail. You know, suffering is a certainty and it's very easy for people to become resentful about being, about existence. You know, these kids who shoot up high schools and these mass shooters, they're the perfect examples of people who run on nothing but resentment. They're out to kill the innocent because that's the best marker of, that's the best way of showing just how much contempt they have for existence itself. Why punish the guilty? They deserve to be punished. It's a lot more malevolent and vengeful to punish the innocent. It's like people are motivated to a great degree by resentment of being and a huge chunk of that is manifested in, that's the dark side of the ideological possession. So I get to decide who my enemies are and then I get to go after them and I can go after them for every single thing that's ever been done to me that isn't good. And well, a lot of that's just built into the structure of existence. Then they grew up. They exhibit confirmation bias. They all formed some sort of a group think and then they act accordingly. And this is what you've been warning against and this is why I completely agree with you and this is why I think the subject is so important and I love the way you've outlined all the steps and the problems with Marxism and ideologies in general that we are dealing with this. These are the beginning steps of it and people who look at it now and they say it's social change and social justice. It's not. It's not. It's not. That's right. It's not. And this is not going to improve things. Implementing these policies will make things worse. They've made things worse every single place they've ever been implemented and often they've made things so much worse that you actually can't imagine it and people don't do the reading. I've done the reading. I've done the reading. I know how bad things can get. They can get so bad that no matter how bad you think they are, you're not even in the bloody ballpark. Well, it's just so strange that these sort of courses and these sort of ideologies are thriving in universities and it's really disconcerting to someone that has children. And you know that your children are going to go there and they're going to be in the school. And they're going to be in the school. You know, I think I think that I think that guy is teaching Harvard just to send them to trade school. I think the universities, I think the universities, I think you can make a reasonable case that the universities do more harm than good now. I need to say that.