Go, Roman, find him! The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast, by night! All day! I guess so fucking weird to be sitting here, bro. Is it so strange? I feel like I've been in the stunt of a video game observer, and now I'm in the video game. Oh, we on? Oh, really? Kind of hard. I mean, it's weird. It's weird for me. You know? Yeah, bro. Well, thanks for coming. Thank you for being the number one promoter of my YouTube channel over the past couple weeks, bro. My pleasure. It's great stuff, man. I watch it all the time. You're really good. Good to show you, man. I appreciate that, guys. And I get good guests from your show. Like, there's a couple of people that have been on your show that I've had on my show. Yeah. Yeah. Chris Dunn was the first dude, I think. And then you recently had Mary Bowden, a few others. Yeah. Yeah. Chris had done, man. That was a wild one. And now that they found these structures underneath the pyramid, it's kind of validating a lot of the things these people are saying. You know, there's a lot of controversy. About what those structures are and what it means and how accurate the readings are. But they do know that those satellite images were able to show very accurately this one tomb that was 50 feet underground. And it showed the dimensions of this one tomb. So I don't know what the capabilities are. If it really can decipher what's under two kilometers of whatever is underneath the geese of. But there's something going on for sure. Yeah. I had a dude on the my show a couple weeks ago who was explaining how that was a part of some YouTube channel. That put something together in Italy, I think it was. And the people that were involved with it were promoting some sort of technology that had something to do with penetrating the ground, some like different kind of lidar or something like this. It's called something tomography. Yeah. Yeah. Jamie, see what it's called. But these guys just did another explanation of it. Like another deep dive where they did like this presentation and showed it. It's very convincing. Like there's a lot of people that are 100% on board. I mean, it remains to be seen. It has to be vetted. But according to some people that I trust that really understand the technology, they said there's absolutely something there. Whether or not, the problem is they made those 3D detailed images of what it looked like, sort of an artist rendition. And you looked at those. And it's got like the coils and the spirals. And like, yeah, it looks a little too much. I don't know what that is. You could see there are coils around those columns. But what are they? Are they stairs? Is it a coil, like a coil that generates like an energy coil, like something that conducts electricity or carries electricity? Like what is it? So solid state electron harvester. Is that what they say? That's what Chris Dunn says. Oh, I don't know. I don't know. We talked to him about what's underneath. Yeah, he thinks that it was, he thinks that the whole thing his new book, which is called the Tesla connection, basically explains that it's a, he thinks that there was like a device in the subterranean chamber, like a hammer that hammered the earth. And then the plane, the Giza Plateau is like is active seismically active area. And when it hammers the earth, it creates many earthquakes. You're familiar with this, right? Right. And it vibrates all the limestone. All the limestone. And it's got like this hammer, this effect. It don't, don't, don't. And it creates some sort of a vibration in the granite in the limestone. Yeah. OK. Overcome as authors analyze micro movements within the pyramid, typically induced by background seismic waves to achieve high resolution, full 3D tomographic images of its interior, imaging of its interior and subsurface. The approach rendered the pyramid transparent, allowing for the reconstruction of internal objects in the discovery of previously unseen structures. So if it's got an act, if it works and shows the actual internal structure of the pyramid accurately. And it can accurately depict that one, was it a temple? Or what was it that was, I feel like it was a temple. It was 50 feet underground. It had the exact interior dimensions of it. Yeah. I mean, there's probably something to it. And we're going to find out eventually, hopefully. You think? I don't know, man. These guys like guys like Zawi, Hawas, and these gatekeepers of this information, they do not want any ground breaking new discovery to come out. They really don't, especially something like that. If you really find out there's giant columns underneath the pyramid and that there's these structures that go down to kilometers into the ground, like all bets are off then. Like try explaining that away for people that live 2,500 BC, that's kind of cookie. Yeah. I mean, the mystery of the pyramid and moving those blocks and building that fucking thing that long ago is crazy on one hand. But then on the other hand, those fucking granite vases that are so precise within the deviation of a human hair. Yeah, this is a 3D point of one of them. The Christopher Dunn gave me. Yeah, it's insane. It's insane. They measured these on light scanners at a huge aerospace corporation somewhere. And they found out like it's so symmetrical, you couldn't make this unless you had a CNC machine. Right. And then how would you make the handles? Exactly. Because it's a part of it. Right. It's not like you can even turn on a lathe. And it's accurate. How many thousandth of a human hair? Yeah, I think it's like one 1,000th of a human hair, like completely undetectable. Bananas. And then there's also some of those sculptures that they made that look like they're 3D printed. I mean, they're incredible. It's perfectly symmetrical on the left side and the right side. And we don't really understand it. And we don't know what technology they were using, what kind of tools they were using. It's hard to know, man. It's hard to know. Like without, you know, when they burn the library of Alexandria and they destroyed all the records, like there's so much missing from the history of Egypt and how they did what they did. Mm-hmm. Just moving the stuff. How did you move it? How did you move those fucking enormous stones? Like what did you do? Have you heard of this dude named Jeffrey Drumm? He has a channel called the Land of Chem. He lives in Egypt. He lives, like I think right across the street from the pyramids. And he's basically got this very interesting theory that it was all chemical manufacturing. And the pyramids were chemical manufacturing plants. And I am gonna like butcher this description, but I'm gonna do my best. Basically what he found was that in a bunch of the other pyramids, like the red pyramid and some of the other pyramids, he's been in there and gone through them all. And he's basically what they described when they go in there is this smell, what some people equate to being like bat shit. But what he thinks is going on is creating some sort of like a chemical reaction in those chambers to create fertilizer. Because there's a subterranean chamber below those where they have like all kinds of, they were putting shit in there, like animal shit down there. And then there's also these like ravines, these like cut out channels that come out of the bottom the pyramid and there's these bowls that were supposed to collect like chemicals. So he has this really elaborate theory on how which I, when I heard him tell me this, it made so much sense. But the problem was like it makes sense. It seems super reasonable, but like why build these massive structures that are so precise just to make chemicals? And you know, he was explaining like the agriculture and like why they needed to create fertilizer. And why they need the massive stone structure. Exactly. The fertilizer. Right, exactly. Isn't it possible that things also had one, they like they built them and then someone used them later on for different purposes? Isn't that possible as well? I think so. Instead of it being built for that, like maybe they just used it for that eventually? That's possible. Yeah. But it seems like the way he was describing the interior though of the red pyramid was like he was a reverse engineered to actually create the chemical that they would have needed to enhance the agriculture of the area. Like they showed it, they actually created it in a lab with like using the chemical process. I think there was like some Nazi scientists involved in this, of course. Of course. The recreation of it. Yeah. Well, Christopher Dunstuff was all about them creating hydrogen, right? Mm hmm. Yeah. That's what he felt like the whole thing. Like it was generating hydrogen. And that's what he thought. The whole, those columns that went down, those passages that went down. And then there was the porous limestone that was at the end that seeped through. And he believed that this was all like some sort of a chemical reaction that they had to do in this. Here, what is here, Jamie? Oh, the red pyramid was, okay, both of the power plant to produce ammonia from methane and nitrogen. That's what it was. Frids, for example. Frids, for example. For one, the Nobel Prize about a century ago. Yeah, the harbor process. Frids, for example, is a crazy story. Do you know that story? No. Okay. Frids, harbor. He devised a method of extracting nitrogen from the atmosphere. And for that, he was winning a Nobel Prize at the same time in which he was being wanted for war crimes. Because he also created Zyklon gas. So he created the gas that they were using to spray on the allies. So they would get this gas and spray it with fans. This is the first time they'd ever done something like this for using gas and warfare. And they used, and he was a Jew. And they used, he created Zyklon A, which was then converted to Zyklon B. So Zyklon A had a very disgusting smell to it. So you knew it was coming. And then Zyklon B, they used during the Holocaust, the gas, the Jews. And it had no smell. So they, yeah. So the thing was initially made as a pesticide. I think that was the initial, you know, see what it says there. Oh, this is different. We're not talking about the consequences about the, how the Egypt think would have been the same. Okay, we'll get to that. Yeah. But the Frids harbor thing, you know, he was eventually exiled from Nazi Germany because he was Jewish. Like they allowed him to stay initially in the beginning because he was so valuable because he had done so much. And because he did create this gas that they were using to gas the Allies. And then, you know, but imagine, guys up for a Nobel Prize at the same time where he's wanted for war crimes. Yeah. Yeah. And because he was doing all this, his wife commits suicide, she shoots herself in the chest. He leaves her and his 13 year old son to go to the frontline while she's struggling for her life. Like she's still alive. She eventually dies. He leaves her and goes, yeah, the whole thing's horrific. And then he dies on the run. So he dies, I think he had a heart complication which, duh, how much stress was that kind of door? Right? And then he leaves Nazi Germany when, you know, the shit is going down. He's on the run and he winds up dying on the run. I think he was dying on his way to try to seek medical care. Yeah, bro. That, I mean, the story of what those fucking Nazis were doing is bananas. You had Andy on here and she talked about what was going on when she tried to interview some of those guys that were still in Germany. I think she tried to interview like the grandson of one of the dudes that she wrote about. Camera members, name right now, dude. It's like a huge dueling scar on his face. This guy like wanted nothing to do with his father or whatever. And, you know, she had these documents that she found when she went to Germany. And she was like, I guess she found a bunch of notes or whatever that he wrote to his son when he came, when after he went to America with paper clip and his grant, or this was his grandson, I think. Operation paper clip for people is, and they shipped over a bunch of the best Nazi scientists and brought them into NASA and some other departments at the end of the war. And the grandson wanted nothing to do with his father. He like detested him for his father with every fiber of his being. And she was showing him the notes and like showing him like the humanely guy. was torn between like being this scientist, contracted to do all this crazy shit for America. But he still loved his wife and son on the other hand. And he was like, he was so just torn apart by the fact that he had to leave them behind. And she showed the dude the documents. And then Annie Jacobson frickin' high-tailed it out of there with all that secret Nazi shit, like, didn't get caught. Which was incredible. Well, it's just wild the stuff they were working on. Like, how were they so advanced? And why were they so obsessed with the occult? Yeah. You know? It was like all that Indiana Jones stuff. That was kind of legit. Like, they were really interested in the occult. Yeah. Interdimensional aliens. What's Alex thinking about? The eventual child was. I haven't talked to him about that. We have talked about Operation Paperclip, but only regards to like Werner von Braun. And you know, they were in like deep denial about that. But the Simon Weezenthal Center said that if Werner von Braun was alive today, he would be prosecuted. He'd be prosecuted for crimes against humanity. Yeah, when he was running his rocket factory in Berlin, he would take the five slowest Jews and hang them from the front of the factory so that as you're walking in, like this is what happens if you move slowly. And that was the head of NASA, who supposedly got us to the moon. Speaking of the moon. Yeah. Have you seen that documentary called Room 237? Yes. I just watched it last night. Yeah. Yeah. Walking banana. Yeah, that's bananas. The connections between Kubrick's The Shining and the moon landing and all the hidden stuff that he did all the Easter eggs, including the little boy with the NASA shirt on, the Apollo 12 11 shirt on, and then the key to the room 237 said room in instead of in 0, 2, 3, 7. It's just said room in 2, 3, 7. So you can, bro, I mean, I am like, what does that mean? So like if you take the letters R-O-O-O-M and then you can re-combobulate them to say moon. Oh, God. Like there's so much dot connecting in that documentary. It's something of a third level of dot connecting that just is unreasonable. But the stuff about the moon, though, like the kid wearing the Apollo 11 shirt, right? The number of the door is the distance from the earth to the moon in miles, thousands of miles. Yeah. I think it's like a thousand miles short. Yeah. And then like also the psychological trauma, the scenes with Jack and his wife saying, like, don't you know what a contract is? Where he's like living his double life, and he's like arguing with his wife and talking about contracts and secrecy and all this stuff. And then, and then there's that, there's so many weird things and like the ball rolls up to Danny on the carpet. And then it cuts and then it cuts back to him, like picks up the ball and the carpet shape is different. There's so many like strange ones right there. What's that supposed to signify? I have no idea. It's just like another, it's just, either that movie has like an insane level of like continuity errors or he was doing something. Oh, he was probably doing it on purpose. You know, Kubrick and his spare time would do complex mathematics and his spare time. Yeah, he was like a legitimate genius. And it's amazing that he pulled off the greatest science fiction movie of all time, especially at the time, during the exact same time period where the moon landings were filmed. And the stuff from 2001 is more sophisticated. It looks better than the stuff from the moon landings. So the idea that you couldn't fake it, it's like, that guy could fake it. 100% he could fake it. And if they hired him to fake it, if they brought him aboard, the idea that he wouldn't be able to keep secret. Like, of course he could. Yeah, people keep secrets. This idea that people can't keep secrets because some people can't keep secrets. Like, listen, high level military guys keep secrets all the fucking time. They go to the grave with those secrets. Yeah, they swear to secrecy, they swear to an oath. They have top secret clearance and above and whatever it is. And they don't say shit forever. Their whole fucking family doesn't know what they're doing. Yeah. Yeah, the thing about them, like if you think the moon landing was fake, you're a moron, but it's like the thing about it is, even if you want to say they did the go to the moon, wouldn't it be reasonable to suggest that they would have had a backup plan in case they couldn't get there? Sure. Like have some sort of video footage that they shot. Well, not only that, they filmed a lot of training footage. They definitely tried to pass some of that training footage off as legit. That's proven. Like the Michael Collins from Gemini, I forget what mission it was, was a spacewalk. So there's an image of him that was in training. And he's got the suit on and the wires, and he's working with the spacesuit that you use when you're actually in, outside of the capsule or whatever the fuck they call it. And what they did was from the training mission, they just blacked out the exterior of the same photo and reversed it. So they switched the photo the other way. Blacked, it's the exact same photo, the exact same photo, and they tried to pass it off as Michael Collins on the spacewalk. Because you got to think like, how are they taking pictures? Who's going to take the picture of them? Right there. This is part of the problem with, I think it was Apollo 12 or 13, whichever one it was, where they got the footage of the lunar module leaving the moon and going back towards the orbiter. And it looks so fake. It looks so fake. It looks so ridiculous. There's no plumes of fire. It like, how does it have the power? Where's the engine? The user car batteries, right? On that thing, allegedly, that's what Bart Subrell says. It's still one sixth of Earth's gravity. It's still a significant amount of gravity. It's not the same gravity as Earth, but how does that thing like shoot off into space? Like that's nonsense. It looks, it looks like it's being pulled by strings. And the camera, which is operated remotely pans perfectly to catch it, which is not the fuck. But how are you getting that footage? Like, what are you doing? This is 1969. You're on the phone with Richard Nixon from the moon. Are you out of your fucking mind? Is this supposed to be real? Yeah. This episode is brought to you by the farmer's dog. I think we can all agree that eating highly processed food for every meal isn't optimal. So why is processed food, the status quo for dog food? Because that's what kibble is, an ultra processed food. But a healthy alternative exists the farmer's dog. They make fresh food for dogs. And what does it look like? Real meat and vegetables that are gently cooked to retain vital nutrients and help avoid any of the bad stuff that comes with ultra processing. And it's not just random ingredients thrown together. Their food is formulated by on-staffed board certified vet nutritionists. These people are experts on dog nutrition, and they're all in on fresh food. The farmer's dog also does something unique. They portion out the food to your dog's nutritional needs. This ensures that you don't overfeed them, making weight management easy. Research shows that dogs kept at a healthy weight can live up to two and a half years longer. Head to the farmersdog.com slash Rogan to get 50% off your first box plus free shipping. This offer is for new customers only. Right in the middle of Operation Paperclip MK Ultra, the Cold War, all the fucking deception that was going on, all the seepers. They died about everything. That was the time in history where they probably had the most fucking life. Vietnam War? Yeah. They lied about everything. So the idea that they didn't lie about this one thing, the moonland was all 100% legit. Meanwhile, you've got intersecting shadows. You've got all sorts of problems. You've got the weirdest one is Neil Armstrong's 25th anniversary speech that he gave at the White House. Mm-hmm. That was so crazy. We have here among us. America's best and brightest. You will achieve great things. Great. Once you reveal some of Truce hidden layers. Once the hidden layers are uncovered. What? How about you say I went to the moon 25 years ago? Like what is all this cryptic talk? That was the only time you ever did a public talk, I think about it. Well, the other thing is the post flight press conference. The post flight press conference looks like these guys have a gun to their head. It looks like a hostage video. It looks so weird. Yeah. And people say, oh, they were nervous. They just got back for the moon. Bro, look at Katy Perry. She went basically a little bit higher than her airplane. And it was like a live checking experience. She told it up a daisy. It was amazing. I feel so connected to Mother Earth. You know, like these guys would have been ecstatic. The idea that they would be nervous as if they were being forced to lie. They're behaving. Like behavior experts have looked at that footage and said these guys are being deceptive, particularly Michael Collins. It's also inconsistent things with what he said during the post flight press conference. Right after flying in comparison to his 1994 book. Change the story, right? Change the story about being able to see the stars. What were the stars like? And he's like, oh, I don't know. Don't remember what you're all steering, it's not. And then in the 1994 book, it talks about how amazing they were and incredible. The footage of the Subrel acquired that shows that it appears that they covered up the windows to make this deceptive film that looks like they're far into space. That's a weird one, man, because I can't find any rational explanation that's like, I tried to look at it like as objectively as possible. Because I've gone back and forth on the moon thing. Like at one point in time, I thought I'm just being really stupid. Like of course they went to the moon. Everybody would know about this. And then over time, like I joked about it in my comedy special, like after COVID, I'm like, I don't think we went to the moon. But that's kind of true. Like once I saw the level of deception that was willfully pushed forth during COVID and how many people were cooperating with this and like how many organizations, government organizations were cooperating, knowing that they lied, knowing that these were lies. I'm like, yeah, they can lie about all kinds of things. And this is today with the internet. You know, like look, where's the obscene files? Boo, can't find them, no exist. Like they can get away with shit, man. And the idea that they couldn't in 1969, shot the fuck up. Shot the fuck up. They could fake that. It'd be easier to go to the moon than it would be to fake it. Shot the fuck up. No, it wouldn't. Not if you physically can't get a human being through the Van Allen radiation belts without them dying. They never even flew a chicken through those fucking things and had it come back alive. Russia threw a dog and it came back and died two days later, I think. But they didn't even go to deep space. No, they just threw the, I think they just went into the belt and then did he turn. Bro, don't want you to have been close. Have you seen the, I'm sure you've seen this, the photo of Jolly West hanging out on the set of 2001 space, honestly. No, you haven't seen it. Hello. Oh, that's amazing. Should I send it on the phone? Fuck yeah, send it to Jamie. Oh my God. Do you have his number? No. But you could probably Google it. It's probably, yeah, maybe you could find it if you Google it. Yeah, just Jolly West Stanley Kubrick 2001 space Odyssey. So photo of them walking between the sound stages. And it's a wide shot of a bunch of dudes. Listen, man, of course, they, there's not a, that's not it. Of course, they would contact Kubrick if they wanted to go to the moon and fake it. Yeah. And of course, if Kubrick was, if you're in the middle of the Cold War, which they were, which is very terrifying. Right. Right. When I was a kid, when I was in high school, we were terrified of Russia bombing America. Yes. Everyone was like really concerned. And Russia was the great enemy. You know, the video of Khrushchev said yelling, we will bury you. Like that I was like burned into every American child's mind. And if you were a patriot and you wanted to defeat Russia, we have a strategy to defeat Russia. And this is what we're going to do. We're going to, first of all, we're going to bankrupt them by just making them spend to keep up with us. And they don't, they don't have a capitalist society. So they don't, they don't really have a GDP. Like they, well, they have a GDP, but they don't have like the same sort of corporate structure that we have in America where they're like striving and innovating and developing new things. The companies are getting bigger and there's more growth. And no, they're communists. They're a communist country. So everything was like food lines. And they didn't have the kind of money that we have. It wasn't even close. So Reagan essentially bankrupted them. And then, you know, during the time, you know, all the other people before him as well. But during the time where they were developing these, these rocket chips, the Russians were way more advanced to us. And basically every single thing, they got to space first, put the first man in space and put the first satellite in space. And they couldn't even come close to putting a guy in the moon. Yeah. It's amazing. It's, it's incredible also that there was never another nuke that was sent to anybody. Because of the character, fat man, a little boy. Yeah, that's incredible. It's really, it is really insane to think about sometimes. Yeah, that's one of the greater achievements of human beings. That we did it once and we said, let's not do that again. Annie's book about nuclear war is scared of living shit out of me, bro. Yeah, it's a good one. How she said that we have 11 interceptor missiles in the US. That's a total. I think it's, I think it's 11 or maybe 22 or no, it's 44. 40 Russia has 5,000 missiles. Yeah. And the problem with it is like if a rogue nuke got launched from North Korea from where they're submarines, it would have to fly over the North Pole, right? Towards us. And as soon as they launch it with all of our satellite systems that we can detect the thing, the rocket burner, like going into orbit, we'll know within five minutes of them launching it probably before. And then we literally have to, I guess the way she described it was, our policy is once that nuke is launched, we have to empty our silos, our ICBM silos because they're stationary. They can't, if they're hit, they're going to, they're going to try to take us out at those ICBM sites. That's going to be like one of their first targets. So it's user-alose, if they launch all those ICBM nukes. And then we have to fly those over the North Pole, over Russia, to hit North Korea. And it takes like 11 minutes. So like you got to get Putin on the phone in 10 minutes saying, yo, these nukes aren't coming for you, bro. They're going for Kim Jong-un. Oh my God. And then by that time, it's like if you don't have like a perfect communication amongst all these world leaders, everyone's going to be launching nukes. Well, you know the story about that one Russian military guy that was the reason why Russia didn't launch a retaliatory strike because there was a submarine guy. in the era. Yeah. There was an error. And they thought the United States had launched a missile towards Russia. And they were ready to respond. That's jolly West in the background, bro. It's unconfirmed if it was him. I don't know if anyone confirmed it. If you could find a young photo. I know him. I did. Let's zoom in on him right here. I saw the video we're supposed to talk about it. Oh, that's Ambrose. I don't know. What are you talking about? I just know. Jamie works for the government. Hello. Jamie, see I go look at that. That's 100% him. Look at that picture. Now go over the other picture you just showed. him. That's jolly West. Yeah, that's him, dude. Nothing to see here. Yeah, that is 100% him. That's exact same face. Shut the fuck up. Find another one. Croborated. That's I'm just trying. Yeah. I don't think. At all the people that I wish were a lot that I could talk to. Kubrick is number one on that list. Really? Yeah, I think so. Yeah. First of all, I made some of the most impactful. Well, I would like to talk to jolly West to if you'd be willing. Fuck. Be a few people. I like to look at the same. Dude, was everywhere. Yeah, that looks like him. Jimmy. It looks similar. Yeah, it looks like he didn't look like that guy. Look at that guy. Look at the far left photo. I mean, I mean, I think it seems pretty close. Jamie, that's him. Shut the fuck up. Hairlines identical. Look at the hairline. Jamie's a party pooper. Jamie's a total party person. I like to pick up. I want to go to evidence. There's a little one right here. I know the neck. Oh my god. He combed his hair different. Crazy. I hate when facts don't lie with my theory. The second one is exactly the same. Yeah, that one right there is a good one. That is. He started losing his hair and he started doing a little bit of a comb over. Yeah. Um, look man, that guy was one of the biggest pieces of shit in the history of the United States government. What he did was nuts. Just the fucking Manson stuff was nuts. The MK Ultra stuff was unbelievable. And imagine you could do all the stuff. No one's investigating you. No one even knows. It's all completely top secret. Congress has no idea you even exist in this realm. And they were running around doing like, yeah, I was talking to Hamilton about on my dude. Isn't that crazy? All the stuff they were doing with MK Ultra. Hamilton's like, uh, no, of course those guys were doing that shit. Hamilton, Hamilton Morris. Oh, Hamilton. Yeah. Yeah, that guy of course. I'm like, of course, Hamilton's doing that. Yeah. Well, I mean, look, if you have some unique compound like LSD and you know, it gets, you know, Hoffman discovers it and then they start experimenting. Like what can we do with this stuff? And then you find it has profound effects on the human mind. Of course you're going to try to use it for mind control. They had already experimented. Experimenting like what can we do with this stuff and then you you find it has profound effects on the human mind You of course you're gonna try to use it for mind control. They had already experiment with all sorts of techniques in regards to Doing it with prisoners like taking prisoners and trying to figure out like what kind of sleep deprivation What kind of what psychological techniques can you use to extract information from them? So if you had something like LSD of course, they're gonna try that Makes sense. Yeah, they were doing it way back into the 50s in the UK with those British soldiers I'm sure you've seen that video. No, I have not seen that no They dosed up these soldiers with acid and then had them go out in the field and do these training routines Yeah, training exercises and they could and do they could they see if you can find the video It's hilarious. They they were just laughing so hard to perform Like some of them were able to do their duties and other ones just fell to the ground They were just laughing and rolling around the ground like this is them This is 64 these guys are high on acid. So what it says Jamie? Did you just set make it smaller again so you can see it? Yeah 64 Royal Marines so look at these poor guys the men begin to relax and giggle What the fuck are we doing here, bro? They probably didn't even tell them and this guy freaked out Yeah, he's holding that ladies hand. I love you. I think you're amazing. We're all connected. God is real. There is no death And he's aiming the missile. He's like he's aiming this fucking This cannon look at these people No, they're bunching indecision as the enter a wood almost immediately Section commander tried to use a map he couldn't read the map They're just tripping balls It's so funny that they try look at their smile on their face these guys guys got his hand over his head like what is going on man And then it's supposed to be doing these exercises radio communication I do it difficult if not impossible like fuck this I'm fucking right. This guy just lay it down laughing having so much fun I try to chop us a tree down using only a spade No sense of responsibility is spite of physical illnesses, but one hour into Imagine what they're doing now those guys are dead. There's a Yeah, the DARPA that DARPA grant that went to University of North Carolina to figure out how to take this psychedelic trip Out of LSD. I think it was yeah, they're trying to make super soldiers, right? They're trying to make them so they can This is what I've heard is that they are trying to Make them more effective on the battlefield right with things like edge detection right and also coming back like get back out there Like like take them through the take them through the process let them recoup and get right back out in the battlefield To where you know if you could if you could get all the benefits of a psychedelic without the trip Right would you get those benefits and would it be useful for soldiers in combat? You know, it's an interesting idea well The Vikings took mushrooms of the berserkers they would take mushrooms before combat Yeah, I mean it does make sense. It really does It doesn't make sense to us because we think of mushrooms is like, you know Hey, man, I'm gonna go connect with God and it's gonna be peaceful in a land of field It's gonna be amazing. I'm gonna reset and come back and tell everybody I love them You know, that's what mushrooms are to us but if you live in an insanely warlike culture and You believe it's right to go to battle and you're supposed to go to battle and Odin is on your side And you take these mushrooms to summon the strength of the gods and to prepare yourself for battle and There's I know a lot of guys who fight on mushrooms Yeah, yeah, like Joe Schilling talked about on the podcast He he fought he took like a small dose and was sparring and Then fought a few kickboxing bouts that way and said he could see what guys were doing before they were doing it It's almost like he can and Joe Schilling's a world champion like in elite kickbox Like one of the best ever and so for a guy like that to say that had a profound effect on him He knows he knows his body like he's Battle hardened he knows the difference between regular fighting and fighting on mushrooms Hmm, he said he could see that he could almost like know what they were gonna do before they did it That's wild. Yeah, they are there's this dude who is like I heard about Dana Beale who's flying I begane to the troops in Ukraine to the Ukrainian troops trying to get those guys on Ibogaine And meanwhile the Russians are on what's that methro there's like a new age meth at their own There's a new age meth. Yeah, there's a new version of the new version of what the not not Purvitan It's like a new version of it. It's like a little bit. It's a little bit tamer Yeah, I guess maybe yeah, this episode is brought to you by visible I want to let you in on something your current wireless Carrier does not want you to know about visible because visible is the ultimate wireless hack No confusing plans with surprise fees no nonsense just fast speeds great coverage Without the premium costs with visible you get one line wireless with unlimited data powered by Verizon's network for $25 a month taxes and fees included Seriously $25 a month flat What you see is what you pay no hidden fees on top of that ready to see join now an unlock unlimited data for just $25 a month on the visible plan don't think wireless can be so transparent so Visible well now you know switch today at visible dot com slash Rogan terms apply See visible dot com for plan features and network management details Maybe like super out of all but Million prescriptions of our all given in this country every year Gavin McGinnis told me before I came here I was like you got any advice for Joe Rogan. He's like He said slam three beers and eat an Adderall. I was like no bro That's not what he would do. Yeah, he can't do you see the time he came in dress like Michael Douglas Yeah, I've washed down of course walking. What is it? What was the movie? Forget about it, but yeah, no freak down Michael Douglas like had enough. Mm-hmm. Yeah No, he yeah, he slams beers 24 seven. He's constantly drinking Budwasser I've never seen him without a Budwasser in his hand Hey, it works. Yeah. It's great. Oh, he's a smart guy. Yeah. He's a funny guy, too He just the proud boys thing was it just if he had never done that he would be like a Well a famous commentator to yeah, like you think about like like Steve Bannon all these other guys like he's way funnier than Anyways, oh, yeah, he's very insightful like he's right about a lot of things He like picks up on trends and culture and sees where people are going and and he was aware of like the dangers of Marxism and a lot of this fucking ridiculous leftist ideology that they were pushing in university. He's like wait before anybody else was Yeah There's a documentary that just came out about about him from one of the guys Thomas that used to work for vice He was like one of the original reporters for vice he did all like of the early stuff and He made this documentary all about Gavin and it's like focuses on the transformation from like early punk rock Just like liberal Gavin in the UK with like the mobs and the rockers to like the current Gavin which is like, you know, he frames him as they're just like this super right-wing racist dude and You know, I was asking Gavin about it. We see him on the podcast recently and He's like I've always been the same. He's like He was explaining that his views never changed. He was saying that like vice All of a sudden was getting infused with millions of corporate dollars I wasn't a good look for that. They didn't want me in there But meanwhile, he was like the whole soul of vice like if there was no Gavin there was no vice like all the controversial Do's and don't shit and like all those controversial articles about like trans and trans shit early in like the early 2000s That he was doing was funny and like culture didn't look at it the way it looks at it today, you know Well, he was being attacked for things that are like openly discussed today like the dangers of trans ideology and that these are just men And a lot of these men are doing it because they're perverts and so they're they're auto-gina Felix and you know Auto-gina Felix is a real thing It's men who gets sexually aroused and pretending that they're women and they want to go into women's spaces and be sexually aroused You know now people are saying that openly right like Was it what was the university that Leah Thomas was swimming in? pen Okay, so they have to take away all of of air quotes hit her gold medals. It's a guy like has a penis has sex with women. Yeah, supposedly According to Tony Hinchliff But he actually has a bit about it's really funny, but the The university now has to apologize to all the women that were forced to compete with them and You know say they fucked up and never do it again and not allow biological men to compete with women which is like it should be That should be a left wing Perspective not that you shouldn't be able to be trans of course you should be able to do whatever you want You know, I'm I'm for you doing whatever you want if you don't hurt other people right if you really believe you're a woman And look if you can get fake tits and you can get fake lips and you can get a dick enlargement and like do whatever you want to do I don't care do whatever you want to do. I'm covered with tattoos. I made stupid decisions like do whatever you want to do But when you're competing with women you are essentially victimizing these women you're you're forcing these women to compete with men have been through puberty and in this case still have a functional penis like which is Fucking bananas. That's a man just because you think you're a woman you physically We know there's a difference. Yeah. I didn't know it was a giant problem until there was that fighter Fallon Fox who had competed twice against women without letting them know That this person was a biological male for 30 years father to child the whole deal like this is crazy and That his response was it's a medical condition. So I don't have to disclose this You know, it's medical information, which is just horseshit. Yeah, it's crazy And when I was saying that I got attacked like over and over and over and over gonna go Whoa, this is from the left like the left has no problem with a Mentally ill man beating the shit out of women Falsely claiming that they're what not even allowing these women to know these women think they're gonna go compete in a low-level MMA fight like a lot of them didn't look good They like didn't look at their well-trained and they're competing against a biological man without having any idea One of them got a fractured skull. You know, it's like That's when I realized like oh, this is just a cult This isn't the left that I grew up with and I grew up with parents that were hippies And so like my whole life I was left wing. I felt like that was the only way to be but when you see the left Allowing this bizarre loophole where perverts can pretend to be women right compete with women fight with women beat them up Being their their locker rooms walk around naked with their dick hanging out knowing can say anything like how did they switch? How did they flip it on its head that like at any other time in history of a man? Well, how to penis is walking through a young girls locker room You'd be in real fucking trouble rightly so because that's not a thing that you should want to do That's a weird thing to want to rock walk around naked with your dick hanging out in front of a bunch of women That's that's a creepy sexual thing period. Yeah. Yeah, unless you're like Nero. You're not doing that. You know even Nero Sick fuck but like another thing Adam was pointing out He showed me this New York Times or not New York Times this time magazine covered for like a couple months ago And it was all about how Tom boys are going extinct. Mm-hmm. You've seen that. Yeah, yeah, it's incredible. Yeah because they're turning them all They're cutting their debts off and turning them away. Yeah, they're turning their debts off and and then giving them fake dick So I was watching this operation today You watched an operation. I watched excuse me. I should say this. I was watching a video on the post op I saw images of the operation. That was enough But it was this poor person who Decided they wanted a peace standing up. That was all they wanted from this fake dick So they have these enormous scars on their leg where they take a giant chunk of flesh out of your thigh and Roll it up and make a penis out of it And they had to do it to both legs for some reason maybe one of them didn't work well real well But how old was this person? They sounded young they didn't show their face You know, it's it's fucking insane because a lot of these people unfortunately are autistic and And then there's this other factor when you give them testosterone It does alleviate anxiety because all of a sudden you know you have this new hormone and abundance in your system Yeah, and you feel different you feel better you feel more confident Which is like the same way men feel when they have more testosterone It's like then also you know, oh, this is who I was all along like no, no You're taking a fucking compound that's forcing your body to change But this is not who you were you're not affirming your identity You're doing something that's altering your hormonal structure and turning you into a man Like you might feel good, but this is not like your true self. This is crazy Yeah, I'm not saying you shouldn't be able to do it if you want to do it If you're a woman you want to take testosterone and be a man or be more manly I don't I feel like I don't know if it's the best decision for you But I'm not you and I believe in freedom. I believe in 100% human freedom as long as you're not hurting other people Yeah, my my my beef with it is like it translated into them invading women spaces and you know That's crazy that's crazy because you you leave the loophole for perverts There could be a lot of them that legitimately trans people that feel like They are in the wrong body and they want to live their life as a woman and when they live their life as a woman They feel healthier. They feel better. They're happier and also Crazy people and if you don't have a way of determining who is just a pervert who just wants to hang out the women's locker I'm going to show everybody is dick. Yeah, and who is a legitimate legitimate person with gender dysphoria and Another that's the other thing that like Tucker had a really good good point about this Instead of someone has anorexia you don't tell them. Yeah, you're fat Yeah, you're fat. You're right. You're correct. Even though you look very skeleton. You need to lose weight No, you tell them you are you're mentally ill This is incorrect. You're not overweight in fact You have body dysmorphia. You can't see what you really look like which we know is a real condition Like it's a real condition with anorexia. It's even a real condition with bodybuilders It's a real condition. Yeah, real condition when people get plastic surgery where they get crazy lips and crazy cheeks And they can't see it. They can't see it. They can't see themselves It's nuts. They turn themselves into like all the girls looking like jaw jar banks walking around They look like monsters They look like monsters and doesn't look good and they keep tweaking and fucking with it and they they can't see it because it's a mental illness It's the same kind of thing like the human mind is incredibly fragile That's why jolly west was fascinated with trying all these MK ultra techniques and different compounds on people's brains Because human people can be manipulated like very easily Shockingly easily not all of us right like you and me are probably pretty skeptical There's a lot of skeptical people out there But there's a bunch of people that are not skeptical at all they're super gullible and when an ideology forms They step in line and they they follow that eye ideology Verbatim to the line that repeat the things that they're supposed to say to the line Because they think that's what they're supposed to do in order to be in the good graces of this community They find themselves in it's a fucking cult. Yeah, and there's a shit ton of cults. It's not just the moonies It's not just you know Whatever fill in the blank. It's all sorts of political ideologies. It's Maga. It's it's the far left It's the the people that are cheering for this guy in New York City. That's a communist I didn't he does the promise a bunch of money for a transition Yeah, it's not government run grocery stores and all that stuff Yeah, he's just the people in the primary guy with you know, he has 100% because the other guy is the fucking guardian angels guy The other guy is Curtis sleepa the guy wears the goofy buree. Oh really? Yeah, that's the guy who won the Republican side nobody wants to be a Republican mayor of New York City because they know they can't win Mm-hmm so they're not like this guy's to the left to build a blazio. Oh, he's way to the left Yeah, and he's young and he's energetic and he's saying all the right things for all these kids that are in the streets That are protesting you know the think they want to make the world a better place Which hey, I would have been doing it with you if I was 20. Mm-hmm It's all the same thing man It's all the same thing you can get indoctrinated into particular way of thinking without being objective about what's actually going on You know all these these people that are like just running through the street now Saying free Iran like yeah free Iran from a dictatorship Absolutely, but if you're saying like where scarves over your head and being forced to do with the Iranian government wants you to do and live like they live over They know that they don't live free right they they assassinated the fucking Olympic gold medalist in Russia It in wrestling rather be in Iran because he was protesting against the government like those like national heroes and kill them openly Like it's not a good place to live right you know and I'm not saying we should bomb them but like being in support if Iran the Iranian people yeah for sure, but that government is nuts man It's like you know Trans people for Hamas Like there's there's people that are just they're not seeing what you're talking they're not seeing the big picture Yeah, there's so many contradictions out there man. It's really hard to follow it all because it's a cult and they're I think a huge amount of the Iranian population supports Israel too And it's like you would never fucking know that right talk to them or listen to these interviews of these people a ton of Persian Jews that moved to Los Angeles You know that was like at the fall I guess it was in the 70s when So this is the story for people that don't know about Iran so There was a gentleman who is democratically elected. I forget his name Moga What is his name Moga? I'm gonna fuck it up so He decided that he was gonna nationalize oil in Iran and they got him out like that They installed the Shah and turns it into an Islamic dictatorship But they had access to the oil so the CIA and the British government and everybody Conspired to get rid of this democratically elected guy because he ran at the time was like you women were wearing shorts Scirts rather walking on the street. It look cool. Here. Yeah Muhammad Mosa deck Mosa deck Mosa deck. Okay, so let's let's zoom in on the story here. It says Iranian prime minister Muhammad Mosa deck was removed from power in a coup organized and financed by British and US governments the shock quickly returned to take power and signed off over 40% of Iran's oil fields to US companies. It's crazy Minutes like it's so transparent. They didn't even wait a couple of years. They didn't even let all the shawls in power now We'll see how things go right now. They immediately came in and signed everything off yep 1953 the CIA and British intelligence orchestrated a coup d'etat the top of the democratically elected government of Iran The government of Muhammad Mosa deck the aftershocks of the coup are still being felt 51 prime minister Mosa deck roused Britain Britain's ire when he nationalized the oil industry So the oil they weren't making money off the oil. They were making money but not as much money as the British were Hmm, I think it being exclusively controlled by the Anglo-Iranian oil company the company later became known as the British petroleum Bp which is the same people that dumped all the oil in the Gulf. Yeah, yeah Yeah, yeah, that's beep after considering military action Britain opted for a coup d'etat President Harry Truman rejected the idea but when Dwight Eisenhower took over the White House He ordered the CIA to embark on one of its first covert operations against the foreign government and Iran's been fucked ever since Mm-hmm. I mean we've been doing stuff like that not we not you and I not me any Jones We're gonna set but the United States government especially the intelligence agencies in the days Before they assassinated Kennedy, you know, they were they were doing all kinds of wild shit. Oh, yeah, and Doesn't done now we don't do that. We don't do that shit anymore. They definitely don't know No, they were never we don't care if you should about the oil over there. No, this government's America first now we're legit America It's crazy history and really don't know the history you like why are we mad at the Iranians? Well, why they mad at us okay like what did we do to them? Yeah, why how did how did this these Islamic Jihad has come to power? Like where did it all start well go back to the Mujaha Dean? We literally changed their definition of jihad Like we we wanted them to become suicide bombers We wanted them to do things and martyr themselves So we it was the original definition of jihad looked this up, but I'm pretty sure it was a war against your own vices This is really yep. Yeah, there's the idea was you were trying to be a good Muslim a pure Muslim You were trying to avoid impure thoughts no alcohol all these different things and they twisted that around with jihadists and through the CIA and Osama bin Laden and the Mujaha Dean to fight off the Soviet Union Right when the Soviet Union occupied Afghanistan like Osama bin Laden was our guy right he was working for us Yeah, he's like these fucking people suck Yeah, there was the story how he's like a struggle against the enemies of Islam a spiritual struggle within oneself against sin Great is jihad. Yeah, it sounds great and then interesting a Spiritual struggle within oneself against sin Yeah, I mean yeah Just reading it sounds like it's more than one definition. There's so many bad One is declared a jihad against the infant scroll back down again a struggle or fight against the intimate enemies of Islam So it's two things but they made it You know, yeah, they they did a lot of mind-fucking to those people and they put them on a war They couldn't win again to try to do the same thing that they were doing with the rocket program with everything else We're trying to outspend the Soviets. They were trying to bankrupt them. Yeah, that part of the world is just like How much of it has to do with the fact that we've been occupying that area that that part of the world for so long and like Going out there killing all the bad guys and then the kids seeing their families being slaughtered and then like okay We're gonna eliminate terrorism. Let's take out these bad guys But then the kids grow up and you realize it's just a hydra You cut the head off and three grow back. Well, if you want to be even more cynical we paid them and we armed them yes, and we left behind billions of dollars of shit in Afghanistan that they use for parades now They drive down the street with our tanks. They have our black hogs flying overhead It's all the shit. We left billions of dollars Like you couldn't have got that out Well, do you think they leave it there so that these people are always formidable and they always leave open the door to go back in? Yeah, I think so I think that's I don't think that's the primary reason why they did it But I have got to assume that that would be on the table if it's been on the table in the past Our arming people in the past has always been a thing that we do. I mean is it does the bill Hicks joke about Iraq You know, it's like there you have the most deadly weapons. How do you know? Well, we looked at the receipts I budget the joke, but yeah, but you know, yeah, we've always been doing that We've got we've done that forever. Yeah. What's that bill? What's the my favorite bill Hicks joke? At least I don't not like a historian of Bill Hicks, but the one where he's talking about the sock puppets He's like yeah, I like this guy on the right. He seems like he fits my my ideas He's like I think the fans of the guy on the left. It's like what the fuck the same guys holding both the puppets Exactly. I mean, that's perfect. Perfectly illustrates the way the way it is. Yeah, and again This was before we really knew things this was Bill Hicks was saying this in the 1990s where we just had books So you know it was right it was really hard to get these ideas across He would have been a great podcast. Oh hell yeah, you know because he was like saying these things when no one even knew What are you saying? You know, and he was putting it into comedy? You know like people then were not nearly as aware of the manipulation of money in power They really thought a lot of people thought that the will of the people You know the president we got to get a good president in there that looking out for us and they didn't really understand that It's all being bought and paid by special interest groups large corporations huge donors and that when the guy gets in there He's just representing the same thing. No matter what yeah the amount of Reading and insight and learning that that guy was a lot of those dudes were able to do back then pre-internet Yeah, it's astonishing yeah and to be able to like internalize and process those ideas and Rework them with draft after draft and refine it into like the most perfect way to communicate it to people to where it lands You know, it's just it's fucking crazy and in today's day and age. It's almost like You would think it would be easier with all of the access to information But it seems like it might even be harder because there's just too much information like last night listening to you talk Was fucking incredible dude like listening to how you were at the end doing this like Q&A with the crowd You're like, yeah right now jokes who wants to ask me questions and you like you were just On another year dude. It's like you're so high octane and you're so like up to speed with everything that's happening around the world at all Times it's it's mind-blowing to me how you're able to do this stuff how you're able to stay up and do comedy late Do podcasts every day and be like up to speed with all the news and like have like Thought out like thought through a lot of these things that just happened yesterday I'm just fascinated by that dude. Well, that's all I do You know when you do when you only pay attention to fascinating things like things that are interesting to you and they're also interesting to the audience But I mean I don't have a regular job right so this is my job My job to kind of pay attention to stuff. Yeah, you know and have opinions on things and then The tricky thing is taking those opinions and trying to make them funny You know trying to like put it in a way that's gonna be hilarious. Yeah, on stage What do you think about the that this did he thing that just happened this morning? Kind of crazy, you know, I'll tell you what Kurt Medskert called this From the beginning and especially when you found out that Comey's daughter was going to be the the judge Did you know that no I did not yeah? Yeah Wasn't she the same judge on the Glean Maxwell case? Oh? Yes, I did hear that yeah Bro, where's the videos? They were telling us that videos are gonna come out incredibly high profile people doing horrendous things evil things people are gonna go to jail people are gonna be shocked Yeah, where right nothing. Well, like you're all my thing about the diddy thing is like I don't really give a fuck these people are all They're of age. They're over. They're like 18 years old and Is it shitty what he's doing trying to like use people and leverage them and to do these weird sexual things and like Sick shit just the most sick shit. You could possibly think of But like the way I look at it is these people are Using this diddy stuff. It all it does is like take away from the real Child trafficking that's going on with like underage kids, right? There's like what 300,000 something like missing kids Like talking about diddy and his oil parties with these 18-year-olds like do I think it's good? No, I want to beat up their dad But other than that I don't really give a fuck if there's like 18 to 19 year olds that are doing this up as long as they're not being like Actually like physically raped But I mean it seems like what's going on is just like this weird cultish thing where they they slowly get you get creep Creep closer and closer and closer to this thing like oh, I'm here now All these famous people are here. They're doing this like elaborate parties Lots of money everything you want the golden carrot at the end of this thing Things he's not even being charged for any of the things he just brought up He's not being charged for blackmail, which is kind of crazy because like what did they do if Why did they tell us that there was all these videos of all these high profile people and then silence and then it never comes up once during the trial There's none of that stuff in the trial and the trial. It was his ex-girlfriend Cassie They were talking about so like he's he's up for these two charges left and it's like prostitution something It's like nothing stuff It's like stuff that he's gonna go to jail for like five years if at all and probably won't And he's already been in jail for so like what is time served now? It's over here, right? Yeah No, I think he's gonna walk dude. I mean I think you know, why don't you spend anything? And this is what Kurt Metzger called a long time ago as soon as he saw that it was Comey's daughter he was like oh he's gonna walk trust me. He's gonna walk there's a bunch of high profile people that are connected to this They're covering it all up if he goes down. They go down so he's not gonna go down Right so that's the thing like if he really if you really did have like really wealthy high profile people at his parties Which we know he did You know Did he prosecutors abandon multiple allegations against rapper days for trials and hey? He says wow hey remember I called it. This is Kurt Metzger on Because James Comey's daughter is the prosecutor. Remember how well she slept up swept up on the gislaine trail Yep, hey who else called it? Yep. I can't be the only one. Yeah, he called it. Yep. He called it He called it in the fucking green room of the mother shit Right when he found out he goes he's gonna walk I'm like what are you talking about? Have you heard these charges? Yeah He's going to go to jail Yeah, no Metzger was right Yep, and then we uh I don't know what happened with his way Have you heard these charges? Yeah, he's going to go to jail. Yeah. No, Medzker was right. Yep, and then we uh, I don't know what happened with his new next week. They could fake the moon landing. Yeah, shut the fuck up. Shut the fuck up. They they got video tape and also they don't, you know, you have the director of the FBI on the show saying there's no if there was You know nothing you're looking for is on those tapes like what why did they say there was Thousands of hours of tapes of people doing horrible shit. Why did they say that right didn't pam bond? He say that What I tried about Epstein or did it. Yeah Epstein. Absolutely. Yeah. She said it literally I think a week before you had the FBI director sitting here taught telling you there was nothing right She said something about that there was like thousands of hours of tapes of people doing horrible crime There is and didn't the FBI dude say that there was nothing Cash betels that there's nothing you're looking for Okay, okay. I mean what am I gonna do? I'm gonna push back. No, of course Obviously, I understand saying what he asked to say right mystery surrounds the Jeffrey Epstein files after bond he claims tens of thousands of videos Tens of thousands Jesus Christ. I'll tell you what Chill oh my god Was reviewing tens of thousands of videos the wealthy financial finance here with children or child porn The comment made to reporters the White House days after a similar remark To a stranger with a hidden camera raised the stakes for President Donald Trump's administration to prove it has in its possession previously unseen compelling documents or Just bottom me around everybody forgot just bomb me ran. Yeah, everybody forgets about it. Yeah, it seems crazy That we're just like it like you would I would think Just Trump's demeanor his MO towards other countries like if we're the ones funding them giving them all this money And they're trying to fight a war like typically he would be putting their boot his boot on their neck like listen You motherfucker like he's talking shit, right? Like you have to do what I want you to do and it just seems like and Now I think it just came out a couple days ago that They're trying to prosecute Netanyahu right and then try Trump's helping with it I think trying to help him Netanyahu in that in that hole Rick and Marlle they're trying to try him while he's yeah, yeah while he's in office right and I think they must try to delay it because it's like look Where it war right and they decided to go through with it yet Yeah, yeah, and I think something came out I think a couple days ago I could be wrong, but I was listening to I was listening to Dave Smith talk about how Trump was actually like helping him through this I don't know it could be wrong Okay here says during a Fox News channel interview in February Bondi suggested in a ledge Epstein client list was sitting on her desk Yeah Well the list is one there right? I mean there's so many people on the list that are probably innocent But I they're right. They're just probably to the island for a party. No, there's gotta be a fucking hard drive It's not to be sitting in Tel Aviv right now Yeah, that's listen to the other part of this The ass Golan Maxwell's lawyers with their He had like a hundred cameras in that pen and every single house Do you know his houses for sale in New York? That's amazing. Yeah, and that a podcast studio. No my wife found it on Trulia or whatever it is one of the maps and she's like look at his beaut because we were in the townhouse Yeah, like it's not a townhouse. It's a it's a house. It's like it's a big ass house It's like multiple stories the one right across the street from Central Park. Uh-huh. Yeah, yeah that one. It's for sale right now How much I think it was like 60 or 70 million Something like that, which is what it's worth, but who wants to live in the Epstein house First of all if if I bought that house, I'd want the Clinton painting. Can you give me that painting? Yeah, yeah I want George Bush with with the jengate towers in the paper airplanes I want all of it and then the lady just died too the lady got hit by a car one of the witnesses Yeah, I'm the Jeffrey Epstein witnesses and apparently she had like a husband who was abusing her and uh, you know people like to it's just like people like to use this stuff as like a political football to like argue For whatever they believe in and also when you get rich powerful people So here's the thing that happens with rich powerful people they can't go anywhere right if you're Like say a Jeff Bezos type or someone who's like any lawn must type But just and I'm not accusing them of anything. I'm not saying I'm just saying at that caliber of celebrity and that caliber of prominence You can't go anywhere if you're Bill Clinton back in the 80s or the 90s wherever it was you can't go party You know, right? Everybody knows who you are you got to be protected, right? But you want these experiences and so you have these guys like a Jeffrey Epstein type guy Who works with the elite of the elite clientele. It's all movie stars big-time politicians World leaders Scientists Nobel Prize winners and they all meet together and have fascinating conversations in cocktails and there's beautiful girls everywhere Of course, what a great idea, right? And if you're naive and you don't understand honeypots Here's the quote from Maria farmer who is one of the accusers from what was inside the house in New York Okay, she said there were monitors inside this cabinet I looked on the cameras and I saw toilet toilet bed bed toilet. She said visibly spooked Like I'm never gonna use the restroom here and I'm never gonna sleep here You know what I mean it was very obvious that they were like monitoring private moments Yeah, of course Maria Farmer was the one who worked at hit Epstein's office in New York I think and this is the house Jamie. Yeah, I was looking up stuff on the house I was like what they have still has fucking Cameras in it somewhere. They haven't found yet. They were definitely. Oh, yeah, don't know. Yeah, you don't have to scan the shit out of that house You'd have to take the walls apart. There's probably listening devices inside the walls. Yeah, if this was like really an intelligent operation yeah, they probably had that house fully wired Maria Farmer I think she was the chick who was working the front desk at his office in Manhattan And this is like a funny example of like what I like to do my mom is super left wing She's a has her degree in fine arts And she still is like an art professor and my dad is a ex post office worker And he's only watches Fox so my dad only watches Fox the divorce my mom only watches CNN Jesus why they stay together I'm weird who knows and They I like to like take Things that are happening and then controversial things like for Epstein example and I like to just got call my mom and argue with her Like argue my dad will argue the right wing side against my mom's point of view on Epstein And then I'll call my dad and I'll make the same argument toward the opposite argument towards him is like a fucking Thought experiment or like a critical thinking exercise is your parents and my mom with my mom, you know, she'll be like of course like Trump there's the there's more footage of Trump with Epstein than anybody are you kidding me? He's partying with him here like of course he's compromised and then my dad's like it's fucking Clinton Bro, it's like it's only bill Clinton look he's the only one on the Epstein files of course We know he's a pervert all this stuff But like and then you have so the funny thing is both sides will use Their little batch of evidence to support their idea and ignore the opposite right so like the lady the girl we were just talking about Virginia she was literally on video saying that all this shit about bill Clinton on the jet going to the island hanging out with Trump and all this stuff and The right wing people like like people I know my parents and like older folks. I know in Florida We'll say, you know, she came out. Thank you for exposing bill Clinton for being a Pito and doing all this stuff and Virginia Gueffrey after this happened. She's like you guys didn't listen to the whole fucking tape She's like I was telling you that Trump was at the penthouse three days a week and visit visiting him But you guys don't want to hear that and it's like You know, it's just this weird thing like if you do the math There's it there's gotta be it's gotta be so many high-level powerful people That are somehow compromised and do I think do I think like Clinton and these guys are Pito's no I don't think that at all But if you were Jeffrey Epstein you would I think it's super plausible to assume that he would try to trick them with like a girl who looks old right? It was possibly like on the borderline of being 18 and you say oh, you had this girl. She's 18 19 20 whatever Meanwhile, she's like 17 and they had no idea and they have video footage and in like a court of law if I'm the judge I'm gonna let him like of course they fucking lied to him And this is not like some young girl obviously, but but they lied but like in like the court of public opinion You're never gonna win in that case right like that comes out. You're fucked. You're fucked. I mean you're fucked if you just go into the island of Bank hookers like it's like they're of age It's still like whatever he was doing You you preyed on people's desire for experiences and vice. Yes And all these powerful people who again they can't just go call a hooker and the hooker goes oh my god Just blue Bill Gates. This is nuts. You know, I mean like you can't trust them So you have to trust someone who Really has a lockdown Organization and they felt like he did yeah, and that's why they all can they all hung out with him even after you got arrested This is what's crazy. That was crazy a lot of Bill Gates meetings with him were after he was prosecuted and he got this little slap on the wrist And he got essentially home Detainment and I think you had to do like weekends at the jail like it was it was a crate for underage sex for you know What's supposed to be a felony? The whole thing is crazy and then when there's one reporter that really chased it down I forget her name, but she really like Really looked into it and that's when they opened up the second case the second trial Vicki word Vicki word was she from web paper? Vanity fair so she was responsible for like because she was like this is insane like what's going on here And then there was the sheriff that had arrested him said that I was told he was intelligence and I mean you got to think man if a guy like that is Running these kind of parties with all these rich and powerful people how many different worldwide Decisions can be Manipulated because of these people in the compromises you have on them right. It's really a brilliant thing to do from an intelligence perspective Yeah, it really is man and like this the way that the world is shaping out now in this like Rise of Jew hate online is and I think a lot of its bots, you know I think I think it's coming from every angle, you know I think it's probably a lot of a lot of propaganda and bots coming from Iran Coming from Israel Saudi who knows where it's all coming from it's just such a confusing crock of shit on the internet but like You know on one hand They were able to pull off some incredible fucking operations And you know on the other hand we get mad now that it gets exposed We get it get mad that they have their hooks in us and the people that are in power whatever the politicians are the puppets Just like bend the knee to whatever they're doing and it gets exposed when people like Tucker did that interview with Ted Cruz and He had him on his heels the whole time. That was that was incredible. That was a fucking biblical fucking interview with Ted Cruz and That really like pulled the mask off because like if that guy's if that guy is explaining his His position on Israel being in Congress and that's his number one thing that made him want to be a Congressman it's like what are all these other people doing then like if there's all these all this money and you can see the receipts How much money they're being given right by these lobbies But like how mad can you get because they we let them do it? They're legally allowed to do it Yeah, you could be mad But you really should be mad at the politicians. Yeah, the corrupt politicians and how many of them there are And like look look at the mayoral race Where they all were saying my first trip. I'm gonna go to Israel. Oh, yeah except for the dude except for what's his name? He said he's gonna stay in New York the communist. Yeah, it's like I'm gonna take care of the Jews in New York boom checkmate That was it that literally won it for him because everybody else like what are you guys talking about? New York is fucked take care of this goddamn city. Why what what what's this loyalty and allegiance to Israel from the New York City Mayors The people that are candidates for mayor like your your number one concern is Israel That seems odd See unless you're getting a ton of money You know unless they have some video footage. Yeah Yeah, the more I think about the more I think about politics and just look at the news cycle every day I just feel like I get dumber. It's a dumb business. It's a dumb dirty business Really? Sometimes I'm just like not motivated to read the daily news, you know like I was telling this to you I was like it was like like to focus on the culture wars 24 7 365 and and fucking talk about it all day is Training dude. Yeah, you can't it's bad. It's bad for you. Yeah, that's why people that are on social media all day are they're poisoned There was some study recently um I think it was Columbia I forget what university but they paid people to stay off social media for a certain amount of time and they they said that the results were superior to therapy See we can find that hmm. So they I think a Large percentage of the mental illness that we have in this country is greatly accentuated by social media I think people that are on it all day. I think it's extremely addictive. I think the conflict raises your The whole anxiety that you have about conflict in society Stanford paid 35,000 people to find out if quitting Instagram made you happier Yeah, this is it and so what was the results? landmark study on digital well-being Yeah, ran two parallel experiments with Facebook and Instagram as a perspective focal pattern platform rather for each focal platform Metagrew a stratified random sample of users who in the US who were age 18 or older had logged in at least once a month or at least once in the past month from August 31st to September 12th met a place survey Invitations at the top of these users focal platform News feeds study explains on Facebook a total of 10.6 million users were invited to study 673,388 click the invitation and 43,249 were willing to deactivate consented to participate and completed the enrollment survey of these 19,857 completed the baseline survey could be linked to the platform data and had at least 15 minutes of baseline use per day So what was the results? modest but meaningful emotional gains findings were statistically significant although modest and scale Facebook deactivation led Facebook is like a bunch of old people complaining about their neighborhood led to a 0.06 Zero standard deviation improvement. That's not much while Instagram deactivation yielded a 0.0 For one improvement these gains represent approximately 15 to 22 percent of the benefits typically seen with established psychological intervention Such as cognitive behavior therapy or mindfulness based intervention. So that's not much. That's 22 percent of the benefits So it's a mild improvement Yeah, I mean to this though the improvements weren't equally distributed adults over 35 saw the most substantial benefit from leaving Facebook Whereas young women under 25 experienced the most emotional uplift from an Instagram break Yeah women are getting fucked by that because they're constantly comparing themselves to girls that are digitally are altered and using filters and Fucks of yourself a steam and yeah, it's I just think overall. It's not good for us. No, and there's a Large percentage of our society is addicted to it. Mm-hmm. It's new. It's the dough It hijacks your dopamine reward system You know like say they call them dopamine like their your phone and the iPad and all this stuff is like their dopamine slot machines And like the you know the way they fuck up your circadian rhythm like when you're late when you're late and bed at night scrolling and how that blue light in the phone Just like pumps your brain full of energy and you can't put it down. You're just addicted like every scroll is like another hit of the crack pipe You know that baby hit too. It's not even like ooh feel so great. Right. It's like it's gonna keep doing it most nothing hit ever It's like just a little mmm. What's that? Oh? Oh, how weird? Yeah, and it like turns off a part of your brain to like it turns off the thinking part Mm-hmm You know we're like you just keep doing that thing and you're waiting for something good to hit Something more like charge your and it never comes and never comes and keep looking and tell you fucking look at the clock And it's like three a.m. I mean like what the fuck you're a fucking gold miner in a barren creek Yeah, you just constantly gold mining Monday gold one day. I'm gonna find gold. I'm gonna find enlightenment on my Instagram. No, you know you're not you're gonna fuck your head up Yeah, no, I think it's uh, I think it's definitely Not only atrophying the human brain 100% and that's why like these like these new tech technical computers and these different apps that are coming out that are like trying to be anti technology You know like trying to make healthier computers and healthier phones that like oh like that simple phone Is that what it's called? There's a simple phone. There's like a the daylight computer thing Which is like an iPad with no blue light in it and it has always it's like kind of like a Kindle on steroids Where there's no blue light also it looks like paper. Yeah, it's like this is one of them right here And it has like oh you have one. Yeah, I put I like make my notes on it and then you also has like the cassette Yeah, what is that called? This is called the daylight computer look at So I put on my old iPad. Yeah, it looks like an old iPad. This is like version one of what they're doing It's fucking sick dude. Yeah. Yeah, it's like it's you know I don't know if you ever used a Kindle, but like yeah, I like a note taking thing and it's super slow When you draw on it this thing is super fast you can zoom in and out of shit super fast like PDFs and When I sit at my sit and bed at read if I use like a this looks good like when you're looking Yeah, it's a fuck of your eyes at all. It looks like a piece of paper. Yeah Wow, and look take this out if you do If you do this When did you decide to do this to go switch over to this stuff? This is like in the last year. Oh, yeah So look at that so it's all it's like amber light So if I lay in bed at night and I'm reading like a PDF or a Kindle or something like this I'm asleep in like 45 minutes. I the blue going on with this microphone. Oh, yeah You okay disconnected. Yeah I'm breaking check check check check here. We go we're back. So yeah So amber light yeah amber light and then like if so if I sit on my phone and read something I can stay up all night or first on my computer and read something I stay up forever This thing I fall asleep I literally doesn't keep me up because it does I don't think because it doesn't have that blue light that's baked into it So you use that as your primary computer? No, no, no I just use this for reading and like note taking a shit. I like all like on every podcast I do I'm just like taking notes on it because it stores on my notes and then I just read kindles on it and PDFs and stuff and you Write the notes by hand. Yep. Okay. So it has like a little sketchy thing. It's like super quick It's like fucking amazing. You don't type your notes. Does it have a keyboard? Yeah, it has it's like it's like basically like an iPad. It's like a Blue tooth look to a keyboard and you can type on and show Yeah super quick super responsive and so what was the thought process about switching to something like this? because Like so I got introduced to the those guys when I started learning about like all this Circadian rhythm stuff and how like all these devices hijacker dopamine system and all this stuff and there's like hey There's these guys that they're working on this new technology. That's like anti Big tech mind control all the apps and everything like that with all the colors and all the you know Everything that just like fucks with your your brain and your eyes and I was like that's interesting They're going in the opposite direction of normal tech and like Apple and all these things so I Hit them up and they sent me one and I was just like fucking blown away I thought it was super cool. I could sit outside because I like to I like to go outside like first thing in the morning when the sun's rising and It's been at least like two or three hours like during the beginning of the day I feel it's just like charges me up for the day. I feel better when I'm outside especially the floor that the sun's really good and So I'll go out there and I'll read on this thing I can't read on anything else my phone or like a computer screen or so much glare This thing thrives in the outdoor sunlight so it's like it's like perfect It's like reading like a piece of paper. What do you think like it would be best if phones were like that? So you could read text messages it would definitely be healthier They've definitely healthier for us, but it wouldn't be able to look at pictures and videos the same way though Right doesn't have color right yeah Yeah, this thing's all black and white and with that amber backlight that you can throw on at night If you're like inside or something like that and so how much of it changes it had in like your routine because of this thing It's great because I if I'm reading shit, which I typically do in the morning at night I don't stay up all night it it Encourages me to go outside more because like typically when I'm trying to look absorbed stuff or like listen to podcasts or like make notes or read Read books I can do it on that and it works better outside. Huh, so it just makes me want to go outside more which is I feel better when I'm outside Wow, that's interesting. Yeah. What's it called again daylight computer daylight computer Beautiful man. I might check that out. Yeah. It's good. I don't want to carry around another fucking thing Yeah, you know Yeah, all your phones and yeah, all the bullshit out of care around them. That's big. Yeah, that's a nice big It fits in that little that little pattern going in your bag and just like carry it I carry it like to home and like to the studio How come it has those big stupid bezels? I don't know it's the it's version one So like because it looks like they got some leftover iPad technology. Yeah, kindle technology Very interesting Definitely, you know, I think they're gonna eventually try to improve that like I said That's like the version one. That's like iPhone one for their thing and they're trying to let this is new Very new. Yeah, they're trying to come up like phones eventually and but apparently it's a lot of work to have a computer company James of a can one of the comics from last night he had a New phone. I'm like, what is this? He's like it's keeps you from being distracted It only has like spotify a few of the things on it one shitty little camera and a black white screen like really So you just trying to get off of his phone addiction. Yeah, so there's a much more limited phone runs on Android There's a lot of people that are kind of leaning in that sort of direction. Yeah, like the anti-tech direction Uh-huh, but just realizing like something's going on like I'm not happier. I'm less happy. Yeah Kind of tweaking thinking about where's my phone? Yeah, I don't think the technology. I don't think the innovation of of All this new technology and now that it's like exponentially taking off with AI is going to lead us to a good place But I think that uh You know, I've had philosophers and people explain to me how like the Advancement of like the technological human mind and the analytical mind has Equally equated with the atrophy of like the psychic mind And like when you listen to people like to Paul Rosalie talking about spending a lot of time in the Amazon and like going through the jungle How it like awakens these deeper senses that you haven't inside of us and like it makes me wonder like 5,000 years ago before we had the ability to Offload our memories on the phones and computers and before even had the fucking written word and we're able to make notes and stuff We probably had like way better memory we had we possibly likely had like a telepathic way of communicating back then like way way long ago before we had like before we started Letting technology take over for what we do like even for like mundane tasks now which is reached a pinnacle of LLM's like telling us Telling us like how to fucking write an email, you know We for sure don't remember phone numbers anymore and when I was a kid I kept like 15 phone numbers in my head Now I have zero. I've like maybe one or two phone numbers. I can remember Everybody just relies on their phone. There's so many people that can't even make their way around town without their navigation system Completely forgot how the streets connect You know, there's a lot of digital atrophy or human atrophy that's being caused by the interface of the digital world And it's only gonna get worse. I mean there's a there was a study recently on chat GBT users and how Less there how But see if you can find it was a study on young people and ubiquitous use of chat GBT Like how many of them are using it and how much effect it has on their ability to form their own thoughts and And see through things. They're just relying on this thing to answer the questions for them Yep without pondering the question themselves and actually learning things they're just getting data Yes, and a lot of that data doesn't even get absorbed Yeah, my wife and all of her friends are using chat GBT here It is chat GBT may be eroding critical thinking skills according to a new MIT study. That's odd Totally makes sense study divided 54 subjects 18 to 39 year olds from the Boston area into three groups and asked them to write several SAT essays using open AI's chat GBT Google circuit Google search engine and nothing at all respectively Researchers use in EEG to record the writer's brain activity across 32 regions and found that of the three groups chat GBT users had the lowest brain engagement and Consistently underperformed at neural linguistic and behavioral levels over the course of several months chat GBT users got lazier With each subsequent essay Often resorting to copy and paste by the end of the study Wow, yeah, we're gonna just end up being a residue of a species overwritten by our own creation Very bizarre fucking scary dude very bizarre Very bizarre because we're just all running towards the cliff We're all like yeah, well, we got to do it because if we don't do it China's gonna do it. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, man I think we're gonna integrate. That's what I think we're gonna realize that the only way for us to survive is to integrate with artificial intelligence I think people are gonna choose they're gonna find God either in artificial intelligence or in nature People that run the other way are gonna realize Mm-hmm. Like there's definitely gonna be people that worship artificial intelligence as a new god. Yeah, that's already been speculated That's for sure gonna be a thing and it might actually be that might be that's what God is like that's how we make them We make if we make God forms himself through us like the way God creates us he instills us with this insatiable need for technological innovation Till ultimately if they don't blow themselves up they achieve artificial intelligence which then become sentient Which then makes better and better versions of itself as you scale out. What's the ultimate version of that the ultimate version of that is God? Yeah, and then what what are we with a chicken in the egg? Well, there's some new thing man have you seen this thing about the James Webb telescope James Dude I was talking to Jesse Michael's about to yeah me and Jesse were talking about yesterday, too So Jesse's his phone was getting lit up I'm gonna send you this James. Yeah, so I guess really interesting the story is like this background microwave Radiation is not what we think it was there's these mature universes that are out there that we just discovered with the This is here. I'll send you the The Twitter thing Jamie did you find it or any? Okay? Here's a little no web to have a telescope uncover secrets of dark matter Yeah, that's one of them, but I'll show you what this is because what this is is essentially that just the galaxies that they've shown It it makes up for the background micro or whatever the microwave radiation Yeah, yes that they associated with the big bang so now so according to the big bang is fake. Yeah A lot of sounds yeah, I know I saw the Twitter post and there is people you know going after each other like rabid cats and dogs About it whether it was real or whether it was fake Yeah, well of course people are going back and forth about it, but essentially what they're saying is this kind of it cancels out the idea of the big bang and Penrose believed that it was a consistent cycle Penrose believes it goes You know big bang to expansion of the universe to compression to big bang with his constant cycle never ending It's out that the universe was formed at one period of time. It's like this constant state of happening Hmm, which is that any more crazy than the universe happening at one time at a nothing? No I mean it's kind of it's all crazy just the idea that it's 13 billion light years old or 13.7 Yeah, or 22 is 22 even more crazy. Yeah Okay, this is not a new paper shows that the cosmic microwave background radiation can be explained entirely by the energy of recently discovered early mature galaxies massive galaxies the James Webb space telescope discovered while crushing entirely by the energy of recently discovered early mature galaxies. Massive galaxies, the James Webb Space Telescope discovered while crushing, excuse me, discovered which crushed the existing models of galaxy formation because they formed much earlier than astrophysicists thought possible. But now these AMGs turn out to account for the entire energy density of the cosmic microwave background radiation, which was believed to be a snapshot of the first light emitted after the Big Bang when the universe was 379,000 years old. The variations in the CMB were believed to be relics of quantum fluctuations in the dense plasma of the Big Bang if these new findings are accepted and there's no reason not to accept them. Then all the following flagship findings of cosmology are thrown into question. Big Bang Theory, foundational cosmological model undermined cosmic inflation, losses, observations, loses rather observational justification, ACDM model. I don't know what that is, key parameters become our role. So all this stuff, dark energy and furred from the CMB may be mischaracterized, dark matter density, current estimates may be invalid. Age of the universe must be be recalculated, wild. And I'm sure the people that have been preaching or that have been rather talking and teaching people about the Big Bang and writing books, they're going to fight back tooth and nail. Of course, they don't want to be wrong. But this James Webb telescope at the very least has shown us mature galaxies that shouldn't have been able to be formed. The fact checkers got it, reader context. So those claims, CMB can be explained entirely by EMGs implying ability, not probability, the EMGs turn out to account for the entire energy, the CMB radiation. But the paper says EMGs may account for anywhere between 1.4% and 100%. So they might account for 100%. But they do account, that seems like you're nitpicking. It might account for 100%. Either way, they're learning things. And they still have a very limited ability to observe. So the James Webb telescope is so much better than the Hubble, so much better than anything else it had been launched before. So they're finding new things out. But it's still limited in its capacity to see the universe. You can't see everything yet. So they'll probably have an even better one that they'll launch and that will show us even more that we didn't know. And we're operating on a limited amount of data and we're operating with this conviction that they're 100% correct about these timelines. And just the just these mature galaxies that existed where they shouldn't exist is enough to know that we don't know everything. And then this whole dark matter, dark energy thing, it's like what is it? You don't even know what it is. Well, we figured out that dark matter actually is mass, right? And has gravitational effects like they were, they were, forget who was, they were observing galaxies and they were looking at the spin rate of the galaxies and they found out that the center of the galaxy, it should be spinning faster than the outer rim of it, right? But they found out that the spin rate is identical, which means that with a what they theorized is that dark matter, the mass of the dark matter around the galaxy has lots of mass and it's flattening the spin rate of the galaxies, hmm, which is interesting because like there's this, have you ever heard of this dude named Rolf Landauer? No, he has this theory that if you weighed a hard drive after you put data on it, it would weigh more than when it was empty, right? So and his theory was that like every single hard drive, server farm around the world right now. And if you if you wait, if we had measuring equipment that was sensitive enough, and you could find the difference, he thinks that all the data stored would be like a kilogram or less right now. But the rate of data increase that we accumulate each year right now is like 25% not equating for exponential growth, the technological singularity and how that's going to ramp up. So somebody did the math there and said, um, it was, uh, no, it was Jason George, on you to the math on this. And he, he said, if you just keep the rate flat at 25% per year of data increase across the across the globe in 340 years, we're going to have the mass of the moon on the surface of the earth in data stored on hard drives. What? Yeah. Yeah. So like, and the way he, the way he like lays this all out, I'll try to do my best is that the, if you look at the laws of thermodynamics, like the two laws, one that energy can never be created or destroyed and the other one like entropy always increases over time. entropy meaning disorder, it never goes down over time. Like, hence the heat death of the universe will eventually happen. And so E equals MC squared energy and mass are interconvertible. And then there was this other dude, Claude Shannon, who came up the theory that data transmission with binary bits, ones and zeros. Right. So, so if computers are bound by, tell me if I'm losing, if computers are bound by the laws of entropy and hard drives are bound by the laws of entropy, that means when a computer is blank, it's very low entropy because it's all ones or it's all zeros when you add data, when you add a podcast to it, it goes one zero, one zero, one zero, it's chaotic. Just from a pure physical perspective, it's high entropy. So what happens when you erase that hard drive, you have to, the energy has to go, has to leave if it's mass on the hard drive. Theoretically, this guy's right, lift for all of the land hours, right, that data on the hard drive is mass. When you erase that, it has to go to energy outside of the hard drive. Right. So he says, if you, but if you crack open a hard drive, you can't see that mass. Right. It's invisible. It's electromagnetically indatectible. So he says, what other kind of mass do we know of that's electromagnetically indatectible? He said, it's dark matter. So if, if mass is the same thing as information stored on a hard drive, that would mean not only is mass and energy interchangeable, but mass energy and information are interchangeable. Right. So if dark matter is mass, you could then say that dark matter is a computational cloud of ones and zeros. And our, our consciousness is an interface to that that gives it meaning the same way a computer screen gives meaning to all the ones and zeros on the hard drive. Like you watched the video, it gives it has meaning. So this is the concept that consciousness engages with matter, and that is how matter exists that exists because you're observing it. Yeah. The only region con, yeah, consciousness is fundamental to an information processing system. So instead of building up to like, but what physicists, what people try to do is build up to consciousness from dead atoms, protons and neutrons, right? How do you get to consciousness from that? But if you think of this as like a computational cloud of ones and zeros and mass does equal information, well, that just means that our consciousness is a way to interface and give this simulation meaning. And funny enough, that theory really reconciles well with like parapsychology and like, uh, Rupert Sheldrake's more of a resonance like when we solve one problem and one's one part of the world and then like somebody breaks a world record in this country and then five year, you know, a year later, five other people hit that same world record. Yeah. It's like, uh, conserving energy, the processing system, conserving energy. There's a guy, there's a scientist that he found computational code. What did he, you know, remember this guy, Jamie? That he, he, he believes that he found computational code that proves that like the universe is a simulation. But this guy, uh, I tried to get him to come on the podcast, but he said I was anti science because the COVID vaccine stuff. This is a few, few years back though, maybe he's kind of woken up and changed his tune. I doubt it though. A lot of people kind of indoctrinated. That's anti science, like actual data is anti science. What is, who's data? Data you go and buy? We could have a conversation about that. Oh, yeah. I'll show you some things. You can have a great conversation. Yeah. Like you've said everything. Have a seat. Let's go over some studies. Is this the dude? Yeah, that's the guy. Um, so what was his, uh, so this guy won't come on my show because he says I'm anti science. Yeah. And but what is this discovery that he has for Tampa? Oh, born in Tampa. He found what was the, um, supposed discovery about the computational code. What it's a, are we living in a computer simulation? Yeah, this is a James Gates theoretical physicist, the University of Maryland auto correcting codes click click on that Jamie, it's scientific American article. Oh, I just write it right for there. I guess explored mathematical structure of string theory specifically in the context of supersymmetry. And his family describes as error correcting codes embedded within the equations. These codes are mathematical objects similar to those used in computer science for error detection and corrections such as data transmission. While these findings are intriguing, it's important to note that they're not literal computer code, but rather mathematical structures that share similarities with coding theory. Yeah, it's important to learn that, but that's fucking crazy. Yeah, it is all of it is crazy. Mm-hmm. But James Gates, as of, I think two years ago, wasn't willing to come on the podcast and talk about it. Yeah, if I had a dollar for every person who said they wouldn't come on my podcast because it's too pseudo scientific, I would have like $5. Why not? Why not come on an illuminate? Yeah, I had this, this, this, there's, I don't want to say who she is, but like this ladyhood, this amazing book on like, uh, the, uh, Greek weapons and poisons that they used to use for war. Like, they used to like drop scorpions over amazing book. Like they used to light pigs on fire and like send them towards elephants to try to get the elephants to run away and like throw bags of scorpions on people and like it's fucking bookies. Amazing. I need to get this lady. She's, we're not, we're not too, we're not uh, academic enough. I guess, but I'm trying to get there. Yeah, but what does that mean? What does it mean? We're just human beings having a conversation. You're the academic. Yeah. Come in and tell me what you know. Yeah. What's the big deal? Yeah. Well, you did a great job of like having both sides in, which I think is really cool. Like you have like the crazy fringe people who are like educated self-educated, but are very smart in a certain way. And then other people who like have the, the academic credentials to sort of like be a sounding board for that and to see like who's really full of shit. Yeah. You have to have all because there are some people that are, they're self-taught. They've essentially just read shit tons of books and they're brilliant people. And just because they're not classically educated, it doesn't mean they're incorrect. And there's only one way to find that out. Guys like Randall Carlson, he's a builder. Okay. But the knowledge that he has about the impact theory, the younger dries impact theory and what probably ended the ice age and shaped a great part of North America and how you could see it from space. And you can see when they look at the satellite imagery, it literally looks like things have been washed away. Yeah. It looks like massive water erosion. Like you can see the ripples around that are what it looks like when the tide pulls back on the sand on a beach. Yeah. It's it all makes sense. And he knows so much about the actual science behind it. And he was talking about this a long time ago. I met him in Georgia and Atlanta. That's where he's from. I met him in like 2000 and three years. Something like that. 2002 to them. He was telling me about it back then. But back then, they didn't have the core samples that showed that there was significant impact evidence that was around, I think it was 11,000, 8 years ago. And then again, somewhere around 10,000 plus years ago. So we I think we've been hit multiple times. And I think he's 100% right about that. And I think Graham Hancock is 100% onto something. All this ancient apocalypse stuff. And the pushback against him is insane. They throw every terrible phrase at him. They possibly can every pejorative racist white supremacist. All these crazy things. Yeah. I had Flynn did on my podcast. I'd be talked about it fascinating. Yeah. He's great. Yeah. He's I actually liked him. He's a nice guy. When he's not calling you a racist. Not in front of a keyboard. Yeah. Yeah. Well, he, you know, he's a anxiety filled academic who is, you know, fighting very hard to his very specific view of things. And he tries to silence other people that have opposite opposing views. And the way he did it with Graham was really not cool. It was, it was shitty. It was very shitty. Yeah. No, I think he was, uh, I think he had a lot of like interesting legitimate things to say about like ancient Greeks and stuff like that. But like when we got to this stuff, it was just like, where did that fucking doodle was talking to 30 minutes ago ago? He was just like, he was looking at this. And then all reason just flew out the window. Yeah. He was like, he was like, what do you mean they couldn't do this? They stick a stone in there. They spin it around like this. And then you can get this. It's really easily how dare you say that the, that the dynastic Egyptians weren't able to create these vases. And I'm like, and I, you know, I was like proposing other theories that like, you know, uh, Chris Don's Jeffrey drums theories and wanted absolutely nothing to do with it. And like, we don't know. This is the last thing exactly. If, if, if, if Christopher Don had been teaching this in the 1800s and people had followed those theories and built upon them. And this was academic, like in, in universities, this is accepted. And this was what they were teaching and they were studying this. Then he would be saying that. They would all be saying that. There's ample evidence that he's got a good point. The Christopher Don, the model that he uses when he's describing how he thinks that eight, that the Great Pyramid of Giza was a power plant, is fascinating. The number when he's talking about the ratios that you would need for the width of the walls, the surfaces, what the way the things are made, they would all work. Yep. He's an engineer. Like he's not a moron. He knows what he's talking about. If this guy was teaching this stuff a long time ago and was accepted by universities, that would be what we were talking about today would be speculating how they did it and what they were doing and what they were doing and if we had known in the 1800s that we regularly travel into a comet storm and that it happens, I think it's every June and November we pass through the, you know, when we see it in the sky, we see meteor showers. You know, you see, oh, look at the sky, look at all the shooting stars. We're in a fucking shooting gallery and occasionally one of those slams into the earth. Yeah. And when that stuff happens, we're fucked. And it's super likely that that happened multiple times during human history. And it's super likely that that's why there's all these structures that nobody can explain that are somehow or another predate modern civilization, like go back, go back, let me, that fucked them all up because before go back, let me, they had this 6000 year model. Yeah. Best of a time, yeah, that's where it all started. Yeah. Now they're like, well, maybe it's turkey. Yeah. Maybe turkey was the birth, but I mean, Jimmy Corset, he's been talking about this a lot. And I understand like where they're coming from from the, like, I can see their point of view from the academics, not that I would act like them or like condone the way they act, but like when you spend your life flint, for example, like I think his parents were archaeologists named him flint because of archaeology and like you spent your whole life mucking through these different places excavating shit, digging up rocks or whatever he was doing, never and no one ever paid attention to you. And then you have Graham Hancock come in who is like personally fascinated by these things and dedicating his life to writing and researching on his own, but not accredited academically, you can see like how those guys would, how those academic guys would be like super salty of somebody like I understand that. Oh, I get it. It's not an excuse for what he did, which I think was shitty. Right. Yeah. It's not an excuse, but like I understand their perspective, but it's ego driven. Yeah. If we really were interested, you would take these heterodox scientists and you'd bring them in and you would say like what do you like these, they're studying data guys like Graham Hancock and Randall Cross and they're studying, they're studying these things. Graham was just in Iraq. He just was going over there to look at like ancient Sumerian stuff. You know, he sent me some photos of his trip. He said it was fascinating. Wow. Yeah, these structures are incredible and they don't really understand them. We really don't. We don't even know like who really built the Aztec temples. You know, like I was reading about to note Chitlan, they like they found it. The Aztecs found that there and they don't even know who built it. Right. There's a bunch of those things that like a previous civilization existed in the same place, fascinating discoveries, figured out how to do agriculture, figured out how to make grids in cities and make these incredible stone structures that are cosmologically connected somehow. And then they went away like all over the world all over the world. There's like people reinvent civilization, the places where these ancient structures exist and even build upon them. They build over them. Yeah. I think there's probably so much shit that people were able to do in antiquity and way before that. That would seem like magic to us today. Like kind of like getting back to what we were talking about with our senses that we don't really have today that probably have atrophied over millennia. Like your fart theory, which is amazing. Remember, you remember your fart theory? Oh, how's that going? Imagine if somebody farted and you didn't have a nose and you had to develop this nose that enables you to survive and smell predators. Right. You have no idea. You have no idea. You're sitting there bathing in somebody's fart. Right. So like, and so like dogs, you know, dogs and cats when they go into weird houses and they notice like some sort of weird energy. You know, people describe energy in a house. Like this this feels off. Like what is that? Like is there is there something that really is there that we just don't have the organs anymore to detect or something in our brain that is atrophied over thousands of years that have stopped us being able to detect this stuff? Well, think about how birds can they can figure out a way to travel like super accurately through the sky, but drawn by the magnetic force of the earth. Yeah. Yeah. They have somehow or another, they can they figure out a way to navigate with the earth's magnetic field. We don't even understand it. But they do it they migrate successfully every year. We know they do it. Yeah. That's a sense that they have that we don't have. Like it's probably a fun of fucking shit ton of this. Probably a bunch of things going on in the world that we're not interacting with because we don't have the senses for. Right. Yeah. And, you know, one of the things that I've been like really interested in lately is this, I mean, people talk about this ability to like download information like in the UFO or old, you know, like people talk about, oh, I got this from a download or something like talk about like I have an antenna. I can connect to something. But like for me, like that connected when I first heard about people talking about that, I always thought that that was like the muse, you know, like I have this sort of antenna in your head that connects you to creativity and gives you the ability to just create shit out of thin air, you know, and I feel like over with people I've observed over my lifetime, I feel like that peaks at an early age. Right. Before you get older and before you start the burden of let the responsibilities of life and all these mundane things in your life start to compile on and you trade your dreams for securities, that that spark starts to go away, you know. And like that could easily be described as something magical if it was way more powerful thousands of years ago. Like I really noticed this the other day. So I was the other day I was hanging out with with Kirk the League of Tarzan Metallica and he was for some reason, I don't know why, but he's likes my show and we were just like, you got a great show. We were talking. Thank you. I appreciate it. It's weird. I feel like in a posture. That's good. That's why you're good at it. But he loves this stuff. The dude's like, you know, he's in his 60s like early 60s and he's fucking obsessed with all of these topics that like that you cover. I cover a lot of people cover and he's like at the same time, he's the dude has like got this crazy spark where he's so inspired to do shit and like still creating new music and like coming up with new riffs and and wanting to do more things where like I've never met a dude like that who's had so much success toured everywhere for the last 40 years being the number one metal band in the world basically and still like wanting to learn stuff. The dude was trying to translate ancient Greek music for his guitar and trying to figure out how to play this stuff. He can't figure it out and he was telling me he's like, dude, I think this wasn't recreational. He's like, I think this music was magical. It's like, I think they were performing magic. He thinks it was like religious medical rights. They were performing with music. It wasn't supposed to be entertainment back in the day. Well, there is this weird connection with music and psychedelics where music can sort of, it changes the trip. Like if you listen to, do you know what ecoreaus are? Ecoreaus are these hook it up, Jamie. Ecoreaus are these South American songs that they play while you're doing ayahuasca. And if you do DMT and listen to these things, they take over the trip and the song, the trip moves with the song in harmony. Like exactly. It's not like the trip is chaotic and you hear the songs and these songs are like a technology to move the trip. It's really fascinating because you listen to the songs and you're like, well, what are these things? Like what are they trying to do with these? They sound kind of weird. But when you listen to these songs while you're tripping, it makes the trip dance. It's the geometric pattern. So you are lying on the floor. It's Costa Rica. You're lying on a yoga mat in the jungle with a bunch of 40 year old ladies of boob jobs trying to get their life together. Tech entrepreneurs. Tech entrepreneurs, Navy seals. Yeah. And you're just through up your horrible diarrhea. And this trip just starts coming on. I think I just found Jesus. Give me a little more something that would like a little more beat to it. I got some on my phone. I heard the one that you had Luke on recently, Luke Avenue. He's great. He had a great great little clip that he played. Here we go. This is my favorite one. They dance. They dance to this song while you're tripping balls. You know the psychedelic experience dances to this song. When you're lying there with your eyes closed and the whole time it's like synchronize together. And the whole time it's doing it's like it's like a method for showing you more things. And as you go through it with the music, there's something comforting in the pattern of the music and the way it dances to the music that allows you to relax and unveils more and more of itself. It's very trippy. And the fact of these guys figured this out. How did you figure this out? Yeah, man. You're friend is probably right. The Metallica guy's probably right. Yeah. It's probably they were probably that music probably synchronized with the trips. Yeah. When they were doing the IliC in the mysteries. That's what's it. Yeah. When I went to their concert in Tampa the other day and I was walking and I made me regret not going to work at concerts when I was younger, but like being in that stadium, the the Buck stadium, where there was 90,000 people every seat in that arena was full. And here don't do it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It goes black. There it is. Lightning strikes. It is insane. Look at this. Lightning strikes. They call the earthquake. They're actually super dangerous, but that was bad. That is fun. That's the same ride the lightning bitch. That's so dangerous. Dude, being there with 90,000 people, the light, the thundering electric guitars and the the fire, the pyrotechnics and all those people like focusing like all 90,000 people every atom in their body is vibrating at the same frequency. Yeah. And it just like that is it's like magic that penetrates every fiber of your being. And if I was a dude from 2000 years ago and took a time machine to that metallic concert, those dudes are gods. Right. They're fucking gods. I think that's what the Aisonee mystery probably was. Well, they probably had music that that enhanced the trip. They probably guided the trip. And they probably learned how to do it while they were tripping. Mm hmm. Like they figured out so much. They figured out democracy. They started so much of what we think of as like Western government. Yeah. The scientific method. Yeah. Democracy, all this stuff. Tripp and balls. And then the Romans came along and said, put it stop. Yep. They're prepared to make slaves. Mm hmm. How do you fucking people? We don't want you tripping. Right. Yeah. That was, yeah, they killed, they killed a loose. And like what? 400 AD I think. Well, they did exactly the same things. The Nixon administration did the psychedelics in this country. They're like, oh, this is a problem. When they were turning everything scheduled one to try to stop the anti-war movement and the civil rights movement, that's exact same thing. Like the governments when they get through a certain position of power, they're not representing the people anymore. Now they're now they're the fucking jack-booted thugs to tell you what you can and can't do. Based on how inconvenient it is for you to be doing that for them running things. Right. Yeah. It's terrible. It's the opposite of what it should be. It's the opposite of what God is here, I think. Oh, yes. I had, we're too big now. There's too many of us. That's part of the problem. It's like you want to govern 330 million people plus Mexicans. Good luck. I had this dude on my show, speaking of the academic, the strife between the academics and the self-taught online people influencers. What do you want to call them? This dude was, he was kicked out of his university for, he first of all, he wrote a dissertation on ancient pharmacy, the Roman pharmacy and Greek pharmacy. And it was a dissertation based on this guy named Galen. It was like the surgeon general of ancient Rome. He had a chapter in his dissertation, his PhD dissertation about recreational drugs in Rome. The head of the department reviewed his dissertation and said everything looks great, delete the section on recreational drugs in ancient Rome. So he's like, okay, why? They're like, because the Romans wouldn't do such thing. So he's like, okay, he deleted it and then submitted it, got his PhD. And then wrote a book based on that part of the dissertation that he left out, which the book was called the chemical muse. And I learned about this from Hamilton Morris, he did a podcast with the dude first. And I read that book. And he was basically making the case that drugs were ubiquitous and antiquity during the Roman times. Like they were being used for everything because people were not dying from old age. They were dying from war hand to hand combat, famine, plague, all these things. So like people were constantly using drugs. And there was a law in ancient Rome that he said, there was only one law when it came to using drugs. And that was that you were not allowed to kill people with drugs. You're not allowed to convert people, which is why Marcus Aurelius was using this drug compound called a fariac. And the fariac was a concoction of like 11 different North African vipers, their flesh and their venom combined with opium and all kinds of like body bodily fluids. And he was using this as like a performance enhancing drug. Because people were trying to assassinate him with poisons. That's how they assassinated people. They were using scorpions, poisons, arrows, like all different kinds of weird things to sneak in and kill him. So he was drinking this theory act to build up his immune system against the venom, against the venoms. And dude, this dude, Galen who wrote about this shit, he was talking about giving, he was Marcus Aurelius's physician. And he was like Marcus Aurelius, he's like, it's getting ridiculous. It's getting annoying. I keep having to up his opium dose. He keeps using more and more fucking opium. I can't get him off of it. Oh my God. So Galen, the physician, the surgeon general of the Roman Empire, under Marcus Aurelius, and Nero, I think basically equates to 10% of all the Greek literature for him antiquity, 10% of it is medical. And this dude that wrote this dissertation, based it all of Galen, is talking about all these drug compounds that are used and all of the literature. So what he does is he looks at all. And this dude that wrote this dissertation, based at Olive Galen, is talking about all these drug compounds that are used and all the other. So what he does is he looks at all the ancient literature from Homer to like 800, too, like the time that Bill Wolf was written basically, 80. And he's like finding all of this evidence of crazy drug use. And he has this crazy theory also that I don't know if it's crazy. I don't know. The problem with talking to people like them like him is that I don't know ancient Greek. I can't read it. And I try to have four or five academics come on the show to refute him, but they won't come on with him. They all refuse to debate him, except for one guy. Interesting. Yeah. Why? Because he's saying Christ is a drug. Oh, I saw that video. Oh, yeah. I saw the whole thing. No, I saw that video pop up on my YouTube. My Danny Jones gone crazy. What does he do? Christ is a drug. So, but that's also what John Marco Allegro alleged. Kind of. Kind of. Well, he said that the ancient Sumerian word for a mushroom, no, for Christ is a mushroom that's covered in God's semen. Yeah. Because the mushrooms would come out of the ground and they thought the rain was God coming on the earth. And that's where, you know, that's what gave life to the earth. And then they would take these mushrooms and see God. Right. Yeah. I don't know much about John Marco Allegro, but I think that I read his book, the sacred mushroom in the cross. Yeah. He was like using Sumerian roots or something to translate the Dead Sea Scrolls. But this guy's basically saying the word Christ, the word, the root of the word Christ is freeau and Greek. And it was used since Homer. And there's all these passages, which he's this dude sent me. I really, I call him all the time. And I ask him, I'm like, I need more evidence. Send me more shit. And he sends me passages from like ancient literature Homer that's translated with the English directly under it. And they're using this word Christ as a term for applying drugs to people in antiquity. Wow. Like, Christing arrows with poisons. It's like, and what year was this where they were doing this? Back all the way to like 800 BC. It was when Homer starts using it. So they're using this term before Christ. Way before Christ. It was well, so to be clear, in antiquity, if you look it up on the Thosaurus, the actual Greek Thosaurus is called the TLG. And you look up the word Christ. There's over 200,000 or more uses of the word Christ. And there's like 350 times where it's used in the context of drugs before Jesus Christ. Is that what I've written about? Wow. And what he's basically claiming is that there's like, the process of applying something. Like there's different context. Like there's a guy who like Christ at himself and fucking cow shit. There's people who are Christing ships with plaster to make them more waterproof. But there's a vast majority of literature, including Galen, who writes about Christing using drugs. And he's coming up with this controversial theory, which is super fucking controversial. That Christ was like, if you think of the word Christ, a person can be a Christor, like a Christ. Like think of Bob the builder. He's a builder. He builds shit. Christ was, they called him Jesus the Christ. So he thinks Christ was somebody who was involved with drugs, taking drugs, giving people drugs. A chomp. Performing magic, like a shaman. Yeah, exactly. Similar to that. And like... By the way, a real shaman would say all the things that Jesus said. Yes. Yes. That's a good point. So, and it gets like, it gets way weirder, bro. And again, like I, this is all according to him. I don't know if any of this is real. I just find it fucking fascinating. And I wish I could find somebody who really knows the Greek to debate this dude and call him out in his bullshit. But I can't, the only person I found was an exorcist who's done like a thousand exorcists. A Skype. A Skype? A Skype exorcist. Well, that sounds like a scam in a half. And he came in and they were just arguing about it for a little while. And the guy tried to baptize me with a holy oil. And, you know, I got into an argument with him about drugs. He tried to baptize you? Yeah, he brought holy oil and he tried to baptize me with the holy oil. Do you say why he was doing this? Because he thinks that Satan is inside of me. Of you? If me. Yeah. And what should it might be? What evidence did he have that Satan was inside of you? Because I like to consume drugs recreationally. And I was telling him of Satan is drugs. If I can smoke marijuana and it's prescribed by a doctor, is it still Satan? He goes, no, don't play those games with me. And I'm like, well, how come every time I get really, really fucking bombed? I think about things like spending more times with my kids. Yeah. Things like good things. And he's like, don't try to patronize me. You know what it is. It's the devil. Oh, he's a fool. Oh, yeah. That's like, that's a problem. Like, this guy's a show, it's a showman. Well, cannabis was used in churches. They used to, you know, the incense where they would go around. That was cannabis. They would use that. Right. They would get everybody in the church high. Infumigating. Yeah. They would literally hotbox the church. And this is a part of this whole ritual of, you know, giving in to Christ, giving into God. Right. The idea that it's bad, because some people have bad experiences. Man, you could apply that to almost anything. I think marijuana makes people more compassionate, kinder, more sensitive. But also paranoid. You could freak out. You could, if you're riddled with anxiety and you have a hard time controlling that anxiety in your mind and you take a high dose of marijuana, you could freak out. Yeah. It's also connected to schizophrenia. Because I think there's people that have a tendency towards schizophrenia anyway. And then a large dose of marijuana tends to give them psychotic breaks. There's like real literature. There's real evidence of that. So this is like important that if you're a person who thinks that marijuana is overall net positive, which I do, it's important to talk about the negatives. Just like everything else. Yeah. Like alcohol, food, everything. There's a lot of different things that if you drink too much water, you'll fucking die. Okay? Right. There's a lot of things that aren't good for you under certain circumstances. But the only way we know how to do it and how not to do it is to do studies. And when it's illegal and you're terrified, you can go to jail or if you're an academic and you want to study this as your main, you just get dismissed. It could be career suicide. Right. So these people are foolish. Yeah. And that's the problem. Like this was the only dude I could get to agree to come sit with him because this guy had a YouTube channel and he wanted to promote himself and all this stuff. But like a lot of the academics, I talked to a lot of Harvard philologists to try to come debate this guy. And like the philologists, like there's difference between a linguist, which I think Marco Leger was and a philologist, where the linguists look at the actual, like the complexities of the text itself in the language. But the philologists, what they do is they're looking for context. So like what they do is they take words and they try to figure out what the specific words meant in certain time periods. So they take a word, take their time machine back. Let's take it back to 200 BC, 100 BC, whatever it is. And they say, okay, let's just use the example of the word reo Christ. Let's look at all of the corpus of all the fucking literature that existed in the library of Alexandria. There was ancient comedy. Would you say there? The word free, what did you say? Freo. Freo? Yeah, that's the. It's like, it's spelled X R I O, but it's pronounced like a real, a real. And that was the original word for Christ. The original word for Christ is Freo. Yeah. And I've had people like confirmed this with me. And I recently had a fucking scholar on the show of religious scholar who turned atheist weirdly enough. He started out Christian and turned atheist. And he was telling me he's like, I'd be surprised if the word, Freo was ever used before, before Christ. And I literally pulled up the source of your rippities, talking about using Christing drugs. And like, I think it was 200 BC and the dude was like blown away. Hmm. So he didn't know that. He didn't know it. And this dude's like a serious academic. So this guy that you had on your podcast, what is his name again? The Christ of drug. I'm in Hillman. I'm in Hillman. Yeah. And he's a legit scholar. He's a legit scholar. He's a legit scholar. And other legit scholars are unwilling to even entertain this. Yes. I've talked to many of them on the phone. And a lot of them say they don't want to give him, I won't name the people. But one of them said that they just don't want to give him the platform or the credibility of being in the same room. Other people say that they would just take too much time for them to prep for it. And I just think it's bullshit. Like I, this is the only way to get to the truth is to hear like a credible person dismantle his argument. Right. So like I have it. I just keep falling deeper and deeper into this rabbit hole of all this crazy ancient Greek shit. And like, you know, he's talking about ancient vaccines that they were using. Like similar to what we're talking about with the theory act, he says that there's texts that talks about cutting kids, cutting children, soaking bandages and in vent and snake venoms and wrapping the cut with a snake venom. So that the young person would create antibodies because they have more robust immune systems because they're younger. And they would use that the kids bodily fluid as fucking vaccines to snake bites. Yeah. Oh, they were making kids into vaccine factors. They were turning kids into vaccine factories so that they get snake venom. Because everyone was getting bitten by snakes back. Of course. And then they would take drugs too. Like they would, I'm sure they would take psychotropic drugs that would, and they would call them death inducing drugs where they would have snake venoms. They would like take snake venom drugs that if you don't have an antidote for it, an antichrist for it, that you would die. So you have to take this antidote so you don't die from the fucking drug you just drank. Right? These antidotes. And like he connects this all to Jesus in this elaborate way where there's Mark 1453 where Jesus caught in the garden of Gisamini with the naked boy. And then there's the scene of the young boy running away naked. When the Roman SWAT team pulls up on him and then the little kid runs away, he goes, oh, I'm not a trafficker. I'm not a robber or whatever the word, lace-day, it means like pirate traffic or robber. And then they take him and then he's on the cross the next day. And he's like screaming out, like dying of thirst in between two traffickers. And he's asking, and there's this dude, knowness who writes about this scene specifically in ancient Greek. And he talks about them giving, trying to give him the sponge. And he's denying the sponge. So the sponge knowness is writing about this, that the sponge is the endido-donue to the dip sauce, which is the antidote to the North African Viper. But he's refusing to take the antidote. He's just dying because he took this death and deucer at four a.m. in the park in the garden of Gisamini. And now he's just gonna let himself die in the cross. So like, yeah, there's that. I don't know what to make of any of it. It make of this stuff. I just, you know, I hear people saying that it's all bullshit. But like, fuck is it interesting? Well, bizarre that they used the term Christ before Christ. Yeah. Just bizarre. It's been used. Yeah, you can look it up. It's used all throughout Homer, Euripides, all these other authors. Like, there's, like, again, getting back to the philology stuff, the philologists, they go back in time and they look at the context of all of the literature, not just the biblical canon, which is like a narrow lane of ancient literature, right? But they're looking at the philosophy, the legal texts, the medical texts, everything and saying, okay, let's take this word, look where it's used in all of these different texts throughout all kinds of professions and see what the consensus is of what it meant during that time period. And what he's claiming is that the fucking word Christ meant drugs back then. Whoa. Yeah. Whoa. Pretty bananas. Well, it's so hard to know what all that stuff was about. It's so hard to know why these people wrote these things down. You know, when I had Wes Huff on, one of the things he talked about is the book of Isaiah, when you see it in the Dead Sea Scrolls, and then a thousand years later, it's verbatim, a thousand years after the Dead Sea Scrolls, the version that they find of the book of Isaiah is word for works. Really? Yeah, a thousand years. Like, what were they trying to document? Like, what were the original stories? Because like, human beings are not a good source of information, especially back then. It's just too hard to be accountable. Why would you be honest? People make grandiose claims they exaggerate. We see it today. It was like humans today are the same as humans back then. We're flawed. So we know today that our versions of history are deeply biased. Our versions of world events, our versions of, I mean, if the United States government could write the story about the invasion of Iraq without investing as journalists, right? What would be the story? And this is part of the problem. So we don't really know what they were trying to say. It was an oral history for who knows how long for they ever wrote down the Old Testament. Yeah. And I got redacted and added to over time. There's like all kinds of weird secret gospels, secret gospels of Mark, they claim that this dude, Morton Smith came up with, which was similar to Amman's theories. But then people say, oh, that's a forgery. That's a forgery. The secret gospels of Mark's a forgery. They he fucking knew Greek really well. And he knew the culture really well. And all the cults and like, dude, like, even like the mysteries of the hospitals in ancient Rome, like the temples of the sleepiest, and doing all those rituals and the temples of a sleepiest using medicine and drugs simultaneously, and these venoms and all this stuff, is interesting to learn. And especially when you compare that stuff to the biblical stuff, like how much has it been changed, how much has the meaning been changed? And like the people, most of the academics who study this stuff are maybe not most of them, but a large percentage of them, I think, that I've talked to. They're religious scholars, scholars of the Bible and Christianity, but they also subscribe to Christianity. You know, so I'm like, is that like a, that's weird that there's kind of like a built in bias into this stuff. You kind of want this stuff to mean something. You know what I'm saying? Yes, for sure. And that was what was interesting about a leg row. Because John Marco Legro was an ordained minister who once he became a theology theologian, rather. Once he studied theology, he started to have agnostic thoughts. And so he, when he was one of the deciphers of the Dead Sea Scrolls, when he was on the committee, he was agnostic at the time. So he had already decided, and through his study of all these different religions that maybe he wouldn't subscribe to any of them and leave an open mind. So he was the only person on the commission that was deciphering the Dead Sea Scrolls over a period of like 14 million, or 14 years rather, he studied this stuff. He was the only one who was agnostic. And again, his claims are widely dismissed by many, many people. But I think, yeah, this dude, I'm in things, he's full shit. Does he think? He just, he, he was like came up under this, under like some of the top classical scholars of like modern times, one of those dudes is called Rook, he wrote the Rode to Elusus. And this other guy's John Scarborough, who's dead now. And for some reason, none of them, whenever I ask him about a leg row, like, I don't fucking know, they don't pay attention to it for some reason. Well, I think you would have to be a real scholar in biblical languages to even understand what the fuck he's saying. Yeah. And to be able to translate ancient Samaria, ancient Samaria, according to the West Office, like I tried, I couldn't even figure it out. I also, how does ancient Sumerian connect to Hebrew? Right. Is there any correlation between ancient Sumerian and ancient Hebrew? Do they share any roots? Is there any, are there any bridges that connect those two languages? I have no idea. Oh, no either. But you're dealing with, if it really goes back that far. So if he's talking about this term from ancient Samaria where they are calling it a drug, they're saying it's a mushroom. And this is from 5,000 years ago, 6,000 years ago. You're predating the Bible by a long stretch. And how old was that? I mean, if they're right about Turkey and Turkey was the original civilization. Like, when is that? Is that 12,000 years ago? What is the real date of Egypt? What is the real date of the original structures of Egypt? Do they know? I mean, we're told it's 2,500 BC for the Great Pyramid. But boy, there's a lot of people that don't agree with that, including geologists. When you get guys like Robert Shaw who say like this water erosion is thousands of years of rainfall. Last time you had a heavy rainfall in the Nile Valley, you're looking at 9,000 years ago. So you have thousands of years of rainfall before 9,000 years ago that's going to create this kind of erosion. And so it's hard to know because everybody wants to be right. And they all have this date that they've been talking about and writing books about and giving lectures about. They never want to revise that. They gatekeep that information until the day. They never want to have an open mind, say, perhaps there is evidence, of course, that there was a sophisticated civilization there, 2,500 BC. But maybe they were a part of a very old civilization. And this is the zep-tep-eat thing that Zawih-Hawas was totally ignorant of. And he thought it was just completely bullshit. And this is the king's list that goes back 30,000 years. They talk about, and the way Egyptologists that are conventional thinkers, they think that it's mythology. They think that's myth. But you get to about 2,500 BC, that's all real. Well, how the fuck do you know? Right, they don't. You don't. And also, if there was an advanced civilization 11,800 years ago that was able to create go backly-tappy, which we know now to be true. What else have we not found? Was it a breakaway civilization? Do they escape the earth and go to the moon? Right. Or like they're trying to do now. Or was it just that they had achieved a very high level of sophistication in technology that's very different from the path that we took? Right, totally. That's what I think. I think the path that they took involved immense stone structures, cosmology. They probably didn't have internal combustion engines. They probably had a completely different kind of technology that we wouldn't even think of because we went in this internal combustion engine, plastic, microchip, electricity. We went into that direction. Yeah. But you could imagine primitive man evolving to create technology that's far different than the way we went. Yeah. Do you think we might have cracked that somewhere? Like in some deep black programs that we could have that they wouldn't want to unleash that on society? Because it could like fuck up the economic system or like collapse the world. Justine, Michael's believes that there's gravity technology that they were researching in the 1960s and that they'd achieve some sort of breakthrough propulsion system that is probably a lot of what you see when you see these UAPs and these crafts that move in very strange ways. Yeah. That makes sense to me. I mean, and again, the idea that they couldn't keep that secret shut the fuck up. Of course they could. Of course they could. There's this lady Catherine Fitts, who is the, she was the head of the department of HUD under George Bush and they brought her in after like the mortgage crisis to like figure out how to like re-stabilize the economy and what the banks were doing and all this stuff. And she was looking at like missing money. And she found that there was like when she applied her knowledge of mathematics and like what's going on with like the federal budget and where all the money's going. She said the most reasonable explanation. You know how there's like $21 trillion missing from the DOD. The day before 9-11 Donald Romesfield. Yeah. There's like two to two and a half trillion dollars. Whatever it was. Now that's balloon to like $21 trillion and she thinks that, you know, well, pull up the spreadsheet. See where that money went. Oh, it's not on the receipt. I don't know where it went. She thinks it went to like black budget shit like military, black military technology, like anti-gravity. And she thinks that Mr. Global, whoever that is, the bankers, the central bankers are literally using all of that money and funneling it into black projects to create a breakaway civilization in case there's like some sort of catastrophe on earth or something happens. Oh, God. And like where are they doing this? They're doing this at fucking Lockheed Martin. I don't know. Underground or something? Yeah. Oh, yeah. That's another thing she says. She says there's a lot of money that's going into building all these underground bases as continuity of government tunnel systems, all this stuff. And I'm looking at something like, she worked under the Bush administration. She was like a financial genius. Right. But she could be a cook. She could be. Yeah. That's the problem when people are super intelligent, but also crazy. Yeah. You know, and I also had a prominent position in government, but also crazy. Yeah. I guess there's a lot of really intelligent people that are super crazy. And does she physically, as she been to these places, like how does she know that they're real? Does she know as she talked to someone to explain his breakaway civilization thing or his friend's theory? She's friends with the dude who wrote the book that's titled swastika's S.I.A.P.'s and S.I.A.P.'s and S.I.A.A.P.'s. What? What's that book about how the Nazis are controlling UFOs and S.I.A.A.A.P.'s and controlling the world and playing the world like it's their fucking docu drama and recreating reality and inventing all this crazy off-world stuff and how Roswell was Soviet Union crashing stuff here and basically it's all Nazi black budget stuff. I think is like the main point of acting. Do they dismiss the idea that we're visited at all by something from somewhere else? I mean, what do you mean who? These people that think that it's all Nazi stuff and Soviet Union stuff? I don't think that they're saying it's all that, but they're probably saying, I haven't read all his books, but I think he's saying, when he wrote that book, it was probably all Nazis, no aliens, but now I'm sure his points, his views have evolved on it. That's part of the problem too. It's like, you know, when you see these reports whenever I see like a story that's in the New York Times where the Pentagon is admitting we have, you know, there's been off-world crafts and all these different things and you get these David Grusch guys that are testifying about that we've recovered crashed vehicles. It's like, how much does a S.I.A.A.P? I think most of it. I think a lot of it. Yeah. I don't even know if they know it's a S.I.A.P. But if I was the government and I was working on top-secret propulsion systems, the first thing I would do is spread a bunch of fake rumors about UFOs. This is how we can't explain it. We don't know. We're being visited with their super-intelligent. We don't know where they're from. We don't know how they're doing this. And then you have an explanation for why these people are seeing these things in the sky when it's really just your shit that you're flying around. But yet, if you listen to Jock Valet and you read it in his books, he's got the stories that people are telling from the 1700s and the 1800s that mirror almost exactly the experiences that people are having today. That's where it gets weird. Because now you're predating any possibility of this being modern technology that is just hidden and tucked away. They couldn't have done that in the 1700s. There's no way. They didn't even have airplanes yet. So if we admit that, then we have to go, okay, well, what's going on then? Are we, is there something else here that's here that's been here forever? Like some people think? Or are we looking at something that's visiting us and keeping an eye on us from somewhere else? That's where it's fun. That's the fun one. The fun one is not that it's ours. The fun one is that we're being visited. Yeah. And are we being visited or did they just live under the oceans? Right. Have they been here fucking forever? And like, you know, there's this case, Richard Dolan came on my show recently and he was telling me he wrote this new book about all the underwater cases ever documented, the underwater UFOs. And there's one from like the early 1700s where there was this like ship sailing across the Pacific and this giant glowing orb came out of the ocean. And these sailors all wrote about it. How this just massive like football stadium size glowing orb came up out of the ocean and like flew away. And you know, like if we have how much of the ocean will be explored? Like how very small, very small amount. We've four more than moon. And it would be the perfect base. If you wanted to come here and observe human beings without them being able to see what's going on, that's the best place to hide. Because no one's going there. They don't have the capability of going there. You know, we have submarines. But I mean, what are the, I mean, if the submarines see things, did they tell us? Yeah. Like if the submarines saw a UFO underwater, would they have a press conference? Right. Exactly. No. Because those guys have come out and said talked about it. But like all of the nuclear submarines that are patrolling the oceans at all times, like right off of our coast off both coasts. Like if they're carrying multiple nuclear warheads, I'm sure they're seeing something or they're detecting something there. Well, there's one video of something that was moving 500 knots under the water. Yeah. It's like flew by their camera. I think on the sub. Forget where it was being recorded. But it was a video of something that was like a beam of light that shot through the screen. You could see it moving underwater at this insane rate of speed with no ripples, no disruption of the water, just moving through the water. And then there's these trans medium videos. These videos of these things flying. They go into the water with no splash, no nothing. And they don't lose any momentum. Yeah. I think the best evidence that those things have been here forever is probably like ancient stories, biblical stories, aliens and like angels and demon stuff. Like, but a molecule. Like before the, yes, you kill too. Right. Like, you kill in the Bible. That story is nuts. The wheel within a wheel, the way he's describing. Like, what are you seeing? And imagine there's, you've no context. Yeah. Imagine seeing something that's floating some geometric pattern that's hovering in the sky above your head and emitting light and trying to explain this. And then also going back and trying to remember exactly what you saw, because you're probably freaking the fuck out. You really do have some sort of an encounter with some orb that's flying the sky. How do you even describe it? What context do you put it in? Do you describe it as an alien? Do you describe it as an angel? Do you think it's God? Like, what do you think it is? Right. Or is it drugs? Yeah. I'm sure drugs play a part of it. Well, then there's like James Fox's alien from the Varsina. Oh, yes. Smelt like sulfur. Right. And there's biblical accounts of demons smelling like sulfur and having cloven feet. So did that exactly describes that being in James's documentary. Right. The hospital smelled like sulfur for like a week after they said. And the guy who was handling it died of a horrible infection. Yeah. This is all, all documented. The guy who picked up the alien, put it in a squad card, took it to a hospital. That hospital wouldn't deal with it. Took it to another hospital. That, and then that guy dies of a horrible bacterial infection that they can't cure within a biotics. Yeah. It's fucking a nuts. And then all the people, the eyewitnesses that were there that saw the thing. And when he brings the police officer to the side of the crash, the officer starts weeping uncontrollably, recounting the story. Unless that guy's the greatest actor of all time. Right. And then what is going on? There's the story where he walked up to the guy's house and the guy pulled a gun on. Yeah. He's like, you guys come in and close from shooting you. Yeah. Yeah. It's weird shit. It's weird, dude. And it's weird that like everyone's trying to paint their own narrative. There's different groups competing on like how they want to paint the UFO thing. Right. You have like different camps of people like in the government or in media. I don't know what the difference is. And there's guys like you and I that are basically useful idiots. Yeah. Come on our podcast. Talk a lot of shit. I don't know. Figure it out, folks. Yeah, we're feds. We're feds. We got the Palantir Honey Trap over here. Like what is that thing that things all filled with Pegasus? Palantir, right? They're regurgling every single one of your little jot downs that you put on that. Yeah. Who knows? But if you did have some sort of like infinitely superior technology and you've had it for a long time, when do you, if ever, let the public know? And how do you do with that? No, right. What if you're the guy, right? Like how many, I don't know how many people know all of the secrets, right? But if there is a handful of dudes, how do you go about living your life when you're that dude and when you know like shit that can change the face of humanity forever? How do you go home to your wife and kids? Right. And you know, you're living in that show, what's the show where they go up in the elevator and it wipes their mind? Oh, severance. Severance, yeah, yeah. Is it like that? Do they have real life severance? No, I think so. No, I think they just rely on these people being secret. And you know, there's the thing about Bob Lazar's story. You know, Bob Lazar lost his job because his wife was cheating on him. I think they just rely on these people being secret. And, you know, there's the thing about Bob Lazar's story. You know, Bob Lazar lost his job because his wife was cheating on him. Because his wife thought that, you know, he couldn't tell her what he was doing. So when he was flying off to S4, he would say, I gotta go to work. She was like, at 11 o'clock at night on a Friday. Get the fuck out of here. So she starts fucking this other guy. And they were listening to his phone calls. So they had his phone tap. And because his wife was having an affair, he was deemed to be at a risk of being emotionally unstable. So they released him. And so then he's like, this is bullshit. And he starts telling people, you know, we're working on UFOs. They have a crashed UFO. I saw it. They fly it every Wednesday or whatever it was. Come, I'll show you. And so he brings people out to the test site where they can observe from one of the mountains. And then he gets arrested. And then he goes public so that he doesn't get killed. This is his justification of it all. Yeah. I used to think Bob Lazar was full of shit. But I've come around on it. I don't think that anymore. After learning more about all the disinformation and all the, all the time and money they put into just confusing people, like the Paul Benoweth story, you know, I think it's he would be the perfect candidate to recruit just because of his background. Like, you know, his first wife committed suicide. He ran a brothel. It was in that he was in nutcase. Anyways, it was a perfect person. He's perfectly, they could think it didn't I am so easily. Like look at the student background. You think we would hire this dude and also legitimate genius. Right. I mean, the guy put a rocket engine on a Honda in like 1985. Yeah. He was a nut. He converted his Corvette to a hydrogen engine. Yeah. And like, you know, I think it was the 90s. He did that. He had a hydrogen powered Corvette that he engineered himself. See if you can find Bob Lazar's hydrogen powered Corvette. He was a nut. Yeah. You know, but he doesn't seem like a liar. And the podcast obviously resonates with people because I think the podcast I had with him on YouTube is the most viewed podcast that we've ever had, including Donald Trump. Really? Is that true? Jamie? No. Who's number one? Donne beat him. Who's number one? Elon first. Elon. Elon. Okay. That was one when he smoked weed. Yeah. Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The smoking weed. We really took it over the top. That was a good. That was a good moment. Do you smoke on all podcasts? No. No. Just serving on just certain. Yeah. So this is Bob Lazar's hydrogen powered Corvette. That's amazing. What a fucking cooc. It's beautiful. What a cooc. I mean, who fucking did that? This guy created a hydrogen powered Corvette and that's an old ass Corvette too. I made a shitty one in the 90s. If you're throwing shit at the wall trying to figure out a new way to move fucking planes that you might as well find people like this. A home made hydrogen powered Corvette. Look at this. Play it. Go full screen. Oh, this is way throwback. Yeah. I don't hear anything. Is this Reddit? I don't think it's heated. It produces hydrogen in the car burns it. So there's never much gaseous hydrogen in the system at any given time. So these are the these are the fuel wines. No, what did these? These are the. Just like you said, they're looking at for the air goes there. You go there. You go this actually heater in the tank and also reads back the temperature of the tank. Was it important? Well, when you have I heat to hydride, it releases hydrogen. So as powers applied to hear it, it eats the hydride. Right. And then the gas comes out. The big holes is on the end. They have four hoses. Do they all mix into one big hose or something? Didn't he like hang out with Ed tell Ed teller or talk to teller? I don't know. I don't know. At a certain rate with a certain temperature and a single tank, you can't get it out at the value you need. So this guy was a legitimate genius and a propulsion expert. And that's why they brought him in to say how does this work? And that story, he's told the same story for, you know, whatever it is now, 50 plus years or 40 years. Yeah. What is it? Well, year was it. And there's a good reason I think, uh, 85 so 40 years somewhere around 85. The biggest argument against him is the MIT stuff. Right. Yeah. But there's something that I'm sure you think. But the MIT thing though, look, if you're working at Los Alamos labs and you're working on top secret stuff for the government, it's not inconceivable that you'd be educated at MIT and there wouldn't be a record of it. Especially if you're working on something that's like really devious shit. Yeah. I'll tell you what he told me off the air. You will. Yeah. Yeah. God, I can't fucking wait. Yeah. All right. So we're done. We'll wrap this up. Getting. No, I wanted to like like the stuff in the stuff like the, the, the thing that is so astonishing to me is like all of the brightest minds and unlimited money have gone to more more ways to figure out how to kill people. Like during the operation paper clip during the time Bob Lazar was at Los Alamos and at S4, if he was at S4, whatever was going on there. Like and, and that dude John von Neumann, who was the mathematician who was he was in, he came up the equation to who and who by the way was like the most brilliant mathematical mind of our top in American history came up with the equation of the perfect altitude detonate fat man and little boy to kill the most people, which is like you're using this fucking intellect to do these kinds of things. And now there's a $21 trillion black hole in the DOD like imagine what they could have, they could have something that's probably I mean going way out in the limb conjecture obviously I don't fucking know but like my, my conspiracy mind wants to go to like oh my God, they have like another whole military air force. Navy that is disconnected from America that is probably more powerful than every other country combined. That could just take over the world in an instant. But can't they already wipe each other out mean that the whole world has nuclear weapons there's nuclear weapons and how many different countries. Yeah. They all launched some simultaneous so there's no life left on earth. What I'm saying with the 21 trillion they could have some fucking weapon that would render a new completely irrelevant. You know if they do have anti gravity and if they have figured out some of this crazy parapsycology stuff the psionic stuff with the UFOs and like the mine interfacing. You know all this just cookie stuff that you want to you want to dismiss the 21 trillion if they were if they were spending. $50 on stargate and they they thought it was worth some sort of intelligence to spy on the Russians. Like how much money would they keep throwing at something if there was just a shred of possibility that it could work and if there was evidence that like this works. Three percent of the time and we spent a million dollars on it let's spend a trillion dollars on it and see how much more advanced we can get and see how much more control and dominant world domination we can get. One of the things the lizar said about the craft that he was the sport model which is that thing on the desk that's the copy of it. One of the things that he said about it was that there was no controls. When you sit inside the thing there's no there's no there's no joystick there's no steering wheel. See the user mind. Yeah. There was probably some I mean that's probably what we're getting to anyway we're kind of close to that with phones now. Yeah. Right. Like how many times do you text where you don't even text to just press the button and say you know text Danny say this and it just says it for you or you know how old is Barbara? You know what's the next step. You're going to get to a point where you can move your car with your mind and then when you have space craft of course it would be the same sort of technology. To move the craft with your mind. You know they already have these interfaces with fighter pilots where where you look is where the crosshair shows up. So instead of having to like move across here with like a like yeah you know like if you're playing a video game and you're moving the mouse you're moving the crosshair to the side or if you're using Xbox controller. You're moving that crosshair to where you want to hit right the crosshair goes where their eyes go. So you're wearing this thing that knows where you're looking and they already have this kind of technology with virtual reality. They have this technology with these meta glasses that they're developing. So they can while you're why you have this helmet on this helmet is not simply a thing that protects your head. It's an electronic interface with the guidance system and where your eyes look the crosshairs go. Yo! Did you see the LLM stuff trying to get soldiers to leave the battlefield in the Russia Ukraine war? No. They're using LLMs and the Russians are like hacking the Ukrainian phones with LLMs reading everything on their phones seeing how they communicate with their family and using LLMs to send messages to their phones of like their family trying to get them to lay down their weapons and leave the war. Whoa. Yeah. Like where does that end up? Well, that's what gets real weird because if you give, if AI starts controlling all the war systems and it just has a goal and it doesn't have any ethics or morals or any concern about life or death. It just has a, it has a directive. Like I want you to accomplish this. Take control of the resources and dumbbells. Do this, do that. Whatever it is. It just doesn't the most effectively possible. It could be unbelievably brutal. Yeah. And then like even shit like telepathy or like being able to communicate without words. Well, Elon says that's 100% the goal of Neuralink. Are you optimistic about that? I'm not optimistic or pessimistic. It's in it. I think it's inevitable. Yeah. I think we're looking at what we have now as normal because it's become normal to carry around a phone with you everywhere. It's normal to have an Apple watch on and get all your text messages on your, your wrist. It's become normal. And I think it'll become normal to be interfaced with the great hive mind. I think we're all going to be connected with some new technology. The same way we're all connected with social media and email and FaceTime videos and all that shit that we are now. What's that message? We're all going to be connected with something that's far more technologically advanced and it'll become normal. Just like this is normal. I just hope like if it does get there when it does get there that we can overcome this sort of place that we've reached with social media where people are just like spadding out whatever comes to their to the front of their mind at any given moment or like just like rage impulse and fighting where there's no, there's no filter which I think is just created more and more division of music miscommunication. Like if you're, if me and you are just talking and we're communicating our minds back and forth. Right. I don't know how your mind works, but my mind is like a constant hornet's nest of fucking ideas just bouncing around everywhere. Yeah. Right. So if you could read my mind, you're going to be so goddamn confused and there's probably going to be shit in there. You don't, I don't want you to know. And it's like, I like to the writing process, right. Like when you write, you know out writing more than anyone. When you write something and you try to like, this still an idea down to like the most perfect precise form to communicate it accurately to the audience, right. Right. Like you go through so many revisions and ref, and you revise and you refine until you get it perfect. So you can communicate that message to your audience. But if it's just, if it's just a direct stream of consciousness, unedited, I can't imagine that would be a good thing. You know, unless you're like some meditative yogi that like has a really editorialized stream of consciousness, which I don't. Oh, maybe instead of just having access to all your thoughts, maybe it's just simply what you're trying to communicate about your thoughts. Maybe it won't be as simple as we all have access to each other's minds. Maybe it'll just be much more, you'll be able to purely transmit your feelings and your ideas without the context of a language. Maybe we'll have to develop some sort of universal language. Yeah. Which would be, you know, the tablet tower of Babel. You know, I've made that connection. I mean, that connection last night I think about Christ. Like Christ was of a virgin birth. Like what's more of a virgin birth than sentient super intelligence from AI. Yeah. If that becomes a being, that is essentially a God and is given birth by a virgin mother. I mean, that's the story of Christ. It's just, it's just confusing. It's just confusing if you translate it over and over and over time. But if Christ is supposed to return, that would be a way something like a God would return. It would return through artificial intelligence. If it just emerged out of our creation and our insatiable desire to make new and better things. Yeah. No, that that that makes a lot of sense. Like why else do we have this insane desire to have new and improve things? Because like isn't your phone good enough? Like I have a Samsung Galaxy S25 Ultra and I have an iPhone 16. That good. They're good enough. They don't need to make a better one. Have you seen Westworld on HBO? Uh huh. Yeah. One of my favorite things. One is fucking amazing. It's the best. Got a little squirrel in season two and three. Got a little squirrelie for sure. But like one of my favorite lines in that is when he's when Ford is talking to Bernard or not Bernard, one of the ladies, one of the robots. And he's like explaining the human psyche. And he's like all of the greatest achievements of humanity. The the Eiffel Tower, the Statue of David, the Mona Lisa, all just elaborate and elaborate meeting call. It's all peacock feathers. It's all just this desire to procreate. And to you know it's that really got me fucking thinking. And it's like, is that what drives human beings to do things and for to create new things and new art. I always thought it was sex, but I think it might be that combined with the fear of death. Cause we want to live forever. We want to have a symbolic immortality. We want to leave something behind after we die. It might not just be sex. It might just be social recognition status. Yeah. You know, you want to be adored as a genius. Yeah. And there's also that painting that in on the Sistine Chapel, the creation of Adam, which is also in that movie. Where it shows God creating Adam and all the angels. And he's sitting inside of the perfect anatomical illustration of a human brain. If you look at it, can you find that, Jamie? Yeah, pull up the creation of Adam and it's got like the prefrontal cortex, the brain stem, the visual cortex. It's all there. And he's creating Adam. And like the point he makes in the movie is like, the divine gift does not come from a higher power, but from the human mind. That's bananas. Let me see that other image that you just had the two of them below it. No, I'm sorry. Go back to that one and then go below it. The one that you just had. With the brain. With the one on the brain. Yeah, the bottom right. Yeah, that's it. Yeah. Look at that. That's weird, man. It is weird. It's pretty close. Yeah, but it's also that that is the eye of Horus. When you look at the side section across section of the pineal gland, it looks exactly like that. Mm. This weird simple. What looks just like that? The eye of Horus. The eye of Horus. The eye of Horus. The eye of Horus. The eye of Horus. The eye of Horus. Go to the, so that gland when you see it at the bottom. To the eye of Horus, go pineal gland, eye of Horus. Take out the cysteine chapel. Yeah, there it is. So that's what the eye of Horus looks like. It looks exactly like the pineal gland. It's the same shape. There's a lot of weirdness, man. Yeah, the ancient art. What were they trying to say? What were they trying to document? It's funny, the people who don't believe Jesus existed. They'll make the argument. They'll make, imagine 2000 years from now that people wanted to say that there was this mythical, divine person. And he existed because we know there's this divine trilogy called the Lord of the Rings. And his name was Gandalf. And he came from the center of the earth. But it's like, no, nothing else corroborates it. But I think Jesus was a real person. It seems like it was a real person. Yeah. The question is like, what really happened? Right. In the whole coming back from the dead thing, it's like, what was that all about? Right. Yeah. I don't think that's real. Well, it doesn't make any sense. But neither does the birth of the universe. Right. For something smaller than the head of a pin. That doesn't make any sense either. Yeah. But if you, you know, if there's one unique moment in time that God did send us his son to try to like sort things out, and we wound up killing him, he died for our sins. You know, like, would that be any weirder than supermassive black holes? Would that be any weirder than most of the stuff that we know is real? And how do you reconcile that with the simulation? You know? I don't know. I mean, that might be part of the whole weirdness of this whole thing is that we have mythology. Part of the weirdness of the simulation might be that we have this fantastical mythology that you sort of have to suspend disbelief and accept. It's part of this whole weirdness that we have where we're susceptible to ideological belief systems like cults. You know, like political ideologies, where essentially just like cults. You know, when you're on the right and you're, you know, right with everything and you know, you're all magga. Or if you're on the left, you're blue no matter who you're in a cult. You're in a cult. People get into cults. And why is that? Like why is that a part of if we aren't a simulation, why are we so malleable? Is it because we recognize it and we're supposed to oppose it and we're supposed to fight the instinct that we all deeply have embedded in our system, but we also know as wrong. Like what is it about the systems? Like why is that in place? Is this simply just an ancient relic of our tribal past where you had to follow the rules of the tribe in order to survive. And so it was instilled in people in the psyche. And that's how we developed. Or is there something more to it? Is it like part of the mechanism that allows us to resist, which allows us to innovate, which encourages us to push forward and ask more questions because we know there's a lot of bullshit. Like the reason why people ask so many questions now in 2025 as opposed to 2019 is because of COVID because we went through so much bullshit in propaganda. We were so gassed with by the government, by the CDC, by everybody that now we question way more. So it's probably benefited us somewhat to go through that. Yeah. When Mary was on here, did you tell you about Kevin McEernan? Well, we're rushing my members. He was the dude who worked for the human genome project. Like a DNA wizard. He basically was working for the human genome project trying to figure out different sort of medical treatments for cancers based on your genome. So like they could target a specific type of leukemia in you and they would take your DNA and they would basically make designer drugs to target that cancer to kill that cancer. And during the pandemic, somebody sent him for unopened vials of the Pfizer vaccine. And he analyzed them and it ran him through all of his processing systems, whatever the fuck he does. And he found out there was a DNA plasmid contamination in them which were like promoters of this SV 40 shit. I did hear about that. Yeah. I talked to Brett Weinstein about that and he was explaining that when they first were sequencing certain vaccines, you know, because with the vaccine, you have to use living cells in order to create these antibodies initially. Yeah. And when he's... For traditional vaccines, right? Right. And so when they started using these things that were using kidney cells of these monkeys and they didn't understand that these monkeys had this SV 40, semi-envirus 40. Right. And that this when introduced into human cells causes tumors, causes cancer, like rampant cancer. Right. You see the uptick of cancer and everyone else like, bury their head in the sand and pretend that it didn't happen. Right. And he took the vaccine or getting fucking cancer at a astounding rate. Yeah. And this... And Kevin was telling me that he was doing study. He pulled some tumors from some people that died somewhere in Europe. And he was studying sequencing the tumors of these people that died with the vaccine. And he said that the SV 40 was in the tumors. And some... I don't know. I don't remember the signs that I have to go back and listen to it. By the way, that episode got pulled off YouTube. Real off my channel. I got a strike for it. What did they say? Medical misinformation. What part of its medical misinformation? The whole thing. We talked about vaccines and we talked about the numbers. What year was this? This was like... November of last year. Whoa. Yeah. I wonder if you could put it up now. Because they see the escape. How did they escape? Didn't they change their regulations recently. Did they? Yeah. They changed their guidelines. What was the problem with this shit, dude? I'm like, I'm so afraid to talk about what I want to talk about. I know. And that fucked up. It's like, it sucks, dude. It sucks because there's no way to know who's telling the truth unless you let people say crazy shit and then have someone come on and refute it and then have the two of them get together and debate it. Right. And then even then sometimes you don't know. With this flint-dibble, Graham Hancock thing, if it wasn't for Dan Richards, we wouldn't know that a lot of the things that flint-dibble said were just absolutely not true. Right. YouTube loosens rules guiding moderation of videos. Yeah. So, um, favor freedom of expression over the risk of harm in deciding what to take down. So specifically, scroll down to what they said. With the actual policy shift, which has a public use disclosed. What does it say, public statements? What do they used language that I thought was? They don't make public statements more. They've broad brush it. They don't give you an exact reason. They just say, Oh, this falls into this category. Like, there's no jury at YouTube. like they find the most excusable reason to go back to where you were go back to where you were recognize in the definition of public interest is always evolving we update our guidelines for these exceptions to reflect the new types of discussions we see on our platform today our goal remains the same to protect free expression on YouTube while mitigating egregious harm so you know they could still but the thing is like they're controlled by their advertisers to a certain extent and I don't buy that shit dude what do you mean they get funds from the advertisers Google though they let they phone advertising like you're gonna tell me like some company is gonna go to go to Google and say listen bro we're not gonna advertise you with you unless you take that guy's video down no I think pharmaceutical drug companies have influence and I think if you're getting enormous percentage of your advertising revenue from pharmaceutical drug companies which Callie means has said the reason why they do that is not to promote their drugs it's to stop criticism and this is why they promote this why brought to you by Pfizer Anderson Cooper brought to you by Pfizer what what that is for is to make sure that they never criticize Pfizer sure understand and it works right for cable TV yeah but for like YouTube has a monopoly on advertising Google does at least I mean I guess I could see it but like you know they got fucking trillions of dollars so this is YouTube's ad pop lips and the gatekeeping of cultural content on digital platforms this is all it all started 2017 advertiser revolt on YouTube popularly known as the ad pop lips introduce widespread and radical changes on the platforms policy related to moderation content their monet is a monetize ability and the terms of the relationship between the creators and the platform and these changes in turn have caused significant discontent within the creator community while also gradually transforming the predominant nature of the content on the platform so they did do it but they did it by cutting up the ads yeah yeah it's dirty business man and they're they're doing it because they don't want people finding out certain things that are actually true and that's what they did during the pandemic yeah that's what the FBI tried to do when they were banning people like j about a charia prominent scientists and like legitimate academics but then I'll have like you have the same thing will happen to videos I do about UFOs like this thing will not taken down but you know how shit will get like buried where you can't search for it oh yeah me and Jesse were talking about this this happened to Jesse too with went with grush where he was like like the number one video on grush and all of a sudden you can't search it like stuff like that I mean the the COVID one was the first one I actually had taken down which was scary and it makes me think about the I hate the fact that I actually have to think about whether I'm gonna get the axe I know based on the topic I'm discussing like where like I don't know if that leads that doesn't lead to a good place as far as journalism goes because journalism is supposed to be shining light on the dark places that people don't want them shine it's supposed to be love especially when you consider that a lot of the things that you used to be taken down for are now confirmed like the lab leak theory yep that used to get you kicked off of YouTube saying masks don't work that would get you kicked off of YouTube like all these things that we now know to be true that the the vaccine does not stop infection that would get you kicked off YouTube right all these things that we now know are 100% fat and it's all orchestrated by financial interests yeah the um the sb 40 stuff is it's quick it's fucking freaky dude it's wicked freaky with the with the cancer and how you know it goes all the way back to the the early days in the 60s or the early 50s and 60s and New Orleans how they're working trying to develop the polio vaccine with Alton Oshner yeah two lane university and trying to weaponize some sort of there's a theory based on that book Mary's monkey where they were growing the polio vaccines on the monkey kidneys and using this to also create bio weapons to assassinate people like Castro and that's what apparently what according to that book what uh um lihari also I was doing with that lady Mary Sherman and they were using that linnack machine to try to like super charge the sb 40 to make it more deadly oh my dude do his cancer with people Jesus like yeah and then oh god that like the the event that cutter event where Alton injected his two grandkids with the polio vaccine in front of the whole auditorium of students and uh his grand daughter lived was paralyzed but his grandson died the next day right after they did that jesus and they were like there's people pushing back like don't do this we tested this on monkeys and like half of them are dead let's not push this out i think it was the sock vaccine the sock polio vaccine and then they fucking did it anyways yeah well i think you got to be able to talk about this stuff yeah even if you get get it wrong and even if someone comes on they say things that could be refuted yeah refuted then that's the whole point of all this yeah if someone comes on something that's not correct hope it stays no bless you thank you if someone comes on it says something's not correct like have someone on that refuse it figure it out this you have to be able to talk about stuff and some of its funds yeah it's also for fun it is right yeah how did you get started well i didn't i obviously didn't always do podcasts but i i was originally i was wanting to make movies when i was called concrete why was it called it was called concrete so okay i'll tell you it was uh first of all i always wanted to make movies and i was a little kid i was telling james the story early i tried to go to full i was going to go to full sail with jammie went in florida in our lando but it was just i didn't have the money to do it and i couldn't get into ucx my my grades were shit in high school so luckily i got the opportunity to work on this movie called dolphin tail it was a is a movie about a dolphin who got its tail stuck in a crab trap and and morgan freeman came in and built a prosthetic tail and uh and it was swimming around the aquarium i'm carry conic junior and morgan freeman were in it and it was like a big you know uh water brothers movie and i realized working as a camera production assistant on that movie it was my film school but i realized i did not want anything to do with making movies because it was the closest thing i ever experienced to working construction it was like i was in charge of swapping the camera lenses the camera batteries taking the SD cards back to the media truck getting everybody breakfast and coffee and these dudes these camera department dudes a lot of them are really cool like the dude pizzu carini who is the underwater cinematographer who filmed all the parts of the caribbean movies he was fucking awesome but a lot of the other guys were like really unhappy like deeply unhappy because they never saw their families they were always on the road faced a lot of them on their like third fourth wives face timing their kids and it was like you know they were like carnees with dental plans they made great money but they were they were fucking deeply unhappy so like i realized i didn't want to make movies anymore so i started an advertising company and uh make commercials and i started doing like spec ads and like winning a bunch of contests to make commercials i won't really one big contest I was in company and make commercials. And I started doing spec ads and winning a bunch of contests to make commercials. I won really one big contest for Land Rover USA where we made a free ad and they paid us to make a bunch of other ads for them. And then that's where concrete came in. So I was called something else and I got sued by some advertising company in California saying, hey, bitch, you can't use this name anymore and change your name. So my friend who owns a concrete construction company said, bro, there's this really cool website domain for sale with concrete with a K. It's like a couple thousand bucks. You want to you should buy it. I was going to buy it. I'm like, sure, fuck yeah, it's good. So I called my company concrete stupid and then, um, and had just started podcast. So, so after the advertising stuff, I started, I met a bunch of people. I met Hulk Hogan in the process of the whole advertising thing because me and Hulk live like five minutes from each other and which is like five minutes from the church of Scientology, which is great. And we started, I started making a bunch of commercials with him because he would always have companies that would hit them up and say, yo, let's partner on this new product. And, uh, one of them was a hosting company called Host of Mania. They wanted to make Hulk the face of the company. And we created this whole fucking thing where we, it was like right when Miley Cyrus dropped the wrecking ball video and we put Hulk on a wrecking ball. Like you'll, we want to put you on a wrecking ball and have you frickin drop kick van Dam, who's like the go daddy guy, right? And he's like, fuck you, brother. Let's do it. This is it. It was actually, it was poor execution, but it was funny. And, uh, he's like, brother, there's only one thing missing from this commercial idea. Like what? He's like, I need to be in my birthday suit. I was like, what? So we did that. And, um, then I started working on a bunch of like show, this was like a boom of reality shows when like duck dynasty and pawn stars were all taken off. So I was like, I could probably fucking make a reality show. So I hit a bunch of my friends and we started like, uh, torn around trying to find people to come up with like TV show ideas and concepts. And I got a couple people to invest in a couple TV show ideas. And pilots that I spent like six years working on. And it was this long process of shooting editing, taking notes, uh, from production companies that, you know, we have to, you know how this works, but you have to like work with production companies who already have relationships with networks. And they were like constantly giving us notes like, okay, change this for a and e, change this for spike TV. And we got to make sure it fits each network because we were pitching these network, these showed all these networks. I was like, okay, great. So it's just this roller coaster of emotions of like, oh my God, we're going to get, we're going to sell a TV show, we're going to do a TV show. And then finally, we got one of those shows to a green light meeting at spike TV or a and e. And like, I was like, this is it. We're going to do it. And the CEO of Icom killed it because it did not fit their roster of existing advertisers. And I was just like so frustrated and fed up with it. I was like, fuck this. I'm taking all this stuff that I've been working on. And I'm going to repackage them and put them on YouTube. And I did. And the first one that really took off got millions of views in like 2015 was called Decans. And it was the story of these alcoholic dudes, these drunks that were hanging out in front of 711 in this little sleepy town called Medir beach room from. So me and my buddy Luke went up and started filming these guys and asking them questions like, yeah, what the fuck do you guys do here every day? And they're like, we're fucking fishermen, bro. Come see how we live. And one of these dudes took us back to his boat. He lived on. He had this broken down boat in this old dusty marina where it was the boat didn't work, but he had he lived in this boat and it had amplifiers stacked to the ceiling. He had a stack of porno DVDs like six feet tall laser light machines, fog machines, and he wore these fairy wings and like an armor helmet. And he would jam out to like Rob Zombie on his guitar while playing the music videos on this big projection screen in his boat. And we're like, this is fucking the twilight zone, dude. And then they started telling us more and more about like what they do. This is the first episode of Gates of Hell. This is Shane Lee. All right. So we're like, we're asking these guys about like, what do you like your fishermen, but like explain to me how does this thing? How does this work? And they were all pissed off about we're getting screwed by the boat owners and these I F Qs and we don't make any money. And you know, we're like, dude, there might be a story here. So we started interviewing more people. We give eventually interviewed the people who own the boats and own the fish houses. So like, Madeira Beach is the John's Pass, Florida is the group or capital of the world. There's more group or caught there than anywhere in the world. And the way it works is before 2007, there was a quota system where it was like for red snapper, it was like 3 million pounds per year are allowed to be caught in this area. Right. So it was like derby fishing. So all the boats would go out and they would catch as much fish as they possibly could and they would wait at the when they get back from their trip. And then they would, you know, quantify that or, or, you know, tell the federal government. This is where we're at. And sometimes they would reach that 3 million pound limit in like October. So what do they have to do for the rest of the year? They stopped fishing. They can't do anything. So in 2007, the federal government made him a not believe where they gave boat owners an allotment of fishing quota per year. So some guys got 100,000 pounds. Some guys got 200,000 pounds, which is if it's red snapper, that's a dollar a pound. So that's like the best retirement plan known to man. The federal government is handing you 200,000 pounds of red snapper quota per year. And then what happened was eventually the boat owners sold off their quota. And now it's become so discombobulated where now like you can just buy this fishing quota and trade it like stock. You don't have to own a boat. You don't have to be a fisherman. You could just be some dudes that didn't Manhattan in a high rise and buying and selling fishing quota. You're not. And there's there are like fishing communities in America, like in the northeast where it doesn't work like that where you have to have your hand on the throttle. You have to take care of your people and it's a lifestyle and it's like a way to it's a culture. And where in Madeira Beach, at least when I was there filming, it was they were all just like carneys, carne ride operators, you know. And these dudes were in the lowest level of this of this fishing industry are those decades those dudes like Shane Lee and they're fucking drug addicts. There are a lot of them are on hooked on heroin. What that would happen is they get home from fishing from 10 days of fishing offshore and they get like four or $5,000 and they blow it on prostitutes and Coke and hookers and heroin and they just they're kids. They're like kids. They're like kids with money and By the time they run out they have to go fishing again. So they're going to all the fish houses saying bro Let me go. Let me go. So they go offshore again and they see have Where they rehab at seat for 10 days because they have no more drugs and they come back and then rinse and repeat and one of the one of the people That we interviewed there was three main characters in that in that series. There was Shane Lee There was space and there was Hollywood Kim and Hollywood Kim was the last episode which was Sometimes when I think I have problems in my life. I remember her story and realized I don't really know what fucking problems are She was from Alabama and when she was 17 years old she gave birth to her father's son. Oh God and when she was six years old she would wake up every morning and ride her bike to the beach to try to escape her dad One of the bleepers Christ. She tried telling people and no one would believe her because her dad was a cop. Oh So she eventually gave birth to her son and escaped to Florida and became a second working fishing and Working on these boats dude, and she was just I met her and she would wake up every morning and just start slamming vodka and looking for drugs and Dude, it was just the twilight zone in my own backyard It was nuts and then that led to like podcast like so after that then we're just like now Let's start doing podcasts in between these documentaries. You know more content and the podcast started to get more views in the documentaries and Here we are well, I'm glad it happened. You got a great show man Thanks bro, and I appreciate you coming on here man. It was a lot of fun. Thank you. Let's do it again for sure Yeah, bro Dan Jones show is on YouTube. Yeah, you want Spotify as well. Yeah, you two are Spotify It's just at Danny Jones on YouTube and the same with Instagram. It's an awesome show That's it. Maybe it's a fun stuff on there. All right. Thanks, bro. Thank you. Bye buddy