All right, here we go. Hello Shannon. What's happening? I'm doing well. How are you? I appreciate it. This is an incredible opportunity I'm glad you you're interested in the subject of American Indian history and I'm glad to be here to talk about it Yeah, I'm glad you were willing to come here. Yeah, I became fascinated when I well I've always been sort of peripherally interested but never really delved into it until I read Empire of the summer moon and then you know Have you read that? S. G. G. G. G. G. N. Book about the cemanchis and about the Texas Rangers and it's such a crazy story that I just became obsessed and then I read Son of the Morning Star and then I read black elk the black elk almost particularly fascinating to me because it details life before Like before they killed custer to living on reservations to the desperation. I want you before we get started Tell people what you are who you are and what you do. So my name is Shannon O'Loughlin I'm citizen of the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma. I've been a practicing attorney since about 2001 and I'm currently the executive director and attorney for the association on American Indian affairs where the oldest Non-profit serving Indian country would been around since 1922 All right, and We should tell people if you ever listen to this in the future This is all going on right now when the United States is going through one of the craziest times ever in terms of dealing with a virus We're on sort of on lockdown all gyms are closed all comedy shows are closed all concerts are closed clubs bars everything's closed and some places are restricting travel and it it It's it's interesting to me that This is all going on and we've never had to experience this before But it makes me think of what happens when what happened when the Europeans first came to North America and Encounter the Native Americans and they didn't have any immunity to all these diseases that the Europeans are bringing over and in Some cases wiped out as much as 90% of the people that were living here Mm-hmm, but we're still here. Yeah, we would have only shut the borders about 550 years ago. We would Yeah, if you had a Trump Trump Indian back then Want to build walls around everywhere. Oh, God. Let's not get there. Yeah. It's not it's it be it is I mean really it's though I mean it's one of the biggest times in human history where if you talk about the Europeans Coming to North America and what what happened to the Native Americans just from diseases I mean it's it's one of the biggest genocides in history Not not when you talk about 90% of a population wiped out by disease. I mean that's almost Almost impossible to say it didn't happen because of the disease The disease did what the diseases did but the genocide happened through colonization The genocide happened through us Indian policy that continues today the genocide is ongoing So this is not something from the past. This is something that continues today that we still are Working to fight against that's why the my organization is here. Right. Um, that's that's absolutely true I just was getting into the Is no it's fine. It's like I want you to talk about everything you want to talk about but um So let's let's go to that then since this is The United States has a very strange situation with Native Americans where Native Americans have reservations and on those reservations They have sovereignty they can they have different rules. They can do what they want. It's very strange. It's like there's nations inside of our nation Like how do you feel about that? So it's a system that's been imposed by Maybe the best way to start is kind of start With the beginning like how did how did how did we get to where we are today? there And there's a lot of information and so you got to stop me if I start getting too carried away. All right No, we have plenty of time and a lot of interests. It's a worry about that So there are three supreme court cases that happened in the 1800s and there was a justice named John Marshall who was actually buying in D. L. An from from us the US government through US grants and So he was interest he was an interested party but he was making decisions that That set forward the kind of watershed principles that continue to fact Who uh native Americans and Indian nation governments are today And so those three cases the first one was called Johnson v. MacIntosh and it was in 1823 And it didn't involve any Indians it was a non-Indians coming to court to try to determine who owned a piece of land in Indiana and There was one guy Johnson who was a plaintiff Who had purchased the land directly from the Pianca Shaw Indians who were related to the Miami tribe today and Then the defendant was MacIntosh and he purchased land from the US government and so the case of course was who had the proper rights and Through that case through the narrative that John that justice Marshall created He brought forward a piece of international law that affects us today and that's the doctrine of discovery have you ever heard of the doctrine of discovery? so that's that's any Christian civilized European nation has the right to conquer Indigenous heathen peoples so this was the principle that this case was based on and it set forward this weird Relationship that tribes in the US government have today so if the US if the Christian European peoples had the rights to Take land away from tribes because they were an inferior race which is this this is language from the case They're inferior race. They're savages. They're unable to govern themselves And they only have a right of occupancy so that was the first of three cases that justice Marshall decided and of course He was an interested party in the whole thing because he had purchased land from the United States And he wanted to make sure his land was secure The second case was Cherokee nation be Georgia and this was a time during the Indian removal act that Andrew Jackson had gotten through Congress to remove the eastern Indians west of the Mississippi River into Indian territory which is of course now Oklahoma, Kansas, Texas area and Again, this is a case that actually the Cherokee nation tried to bring before the Supreme Court and before the Supreme Court could even make a decision On the and I just realized I didn't even tell you the facts of the case. So There was I'm getting ahead of myself. I apologize. No worries. This is this is Incredible experience to be here. So I'm a little bit nervous So in Cherokee nation versus Georgia Georgia Georgia was trying to assert its Laws over the Cherokee nation And so the Cherokee nation brought this case before the Supreme Court to say you know the This the state does not have any right to assert any of its laws against us And what justice Marshall did is said well You're not a foreign nation so you can't bring a case before the Supreme Court and determined that tribes were a pseudo sovereign nation that they were still under tutelage and They needed to be civilized again the same kind of inferior Savage language in this case and held that the federal government had plenary power over tribal affairs And that the Cherokee nation couldn't bring this case to court So what ended up happen is some missionaries who were serving the Cherokee nation actually developed a case and violated Georgia laws So they could bring a case before the Supreme Court and that case was called Wooster v. Georgia And I think that was about 1832 1831 And in that case It was ruled that the United States had a guardian and word type relationship with tribes And so we were the wards They were our guardian and that set up this weird dynamic that still exists today The Supreme Courts and other case other courts cite In decisions today to basically take away more and more rights So that was that's the watershed basis for this weird relationship that we have And it's based on racism. It's based on tribes being an inferior people's they not be civilized And and so here we are so help help direct me into another question here Well, that's a fascinating thing the idea that the United States government is They're like the big daddy Look over the tribes and the only way the tribes can exist is if they exist the European way right the great white father Yeah, and so all this was happening While they were trying to conquer the west so all this was happening around the gold rush time This was happening before then so this was happening in the 1830s the gold rush was 1850s 1849 1850 or that and they were trying to They're basically trying to take over land right? Oh absolutely absolutely so Georgia wanted that land for themselves They wanted to remove the Cherokee and of course the other quote-unquote civilized tribes that were in the southeast at that time and that's what's so interesting is because you see throughout time And so this is a little bit why I have a problem with Some of the books that you've read is because they've taken Small pictures of what was going on and kind of removed The context of what was really happening. There are so many tribes across the United States that Tried everything to resist or comply or assimilate so that they could maintain their way of life maintain their lands and continue to prosper as they had been but the United States was obviously for a formidable opponent and regardless of of For example the five civilized tribes and their their their tactic was to Assimilate was to go to school and educate themselves and learn English and even though they did that and they did everything That the United States wanted them to do they were forced off their land to the west into Indian territory the command sheet who you've learned about through the book They that those events happened during a point of time and that was their effort at resistance They saw how disease wiped out Their brethren from other nations. They knew that Folks were coming to get them and so that was their way of resisting Being assimilated and having everything taken away from them In the defense of the authors of those books. They did cover a lot of that. They these books are in no way Taking the side of the United States government. You know most of them the most amazing thing about empire the summer moon was just how special the relationship that the command cheese had to the land and about how when Just can parkers that would know Cynthia Cynthia and Parker who's uh, she's the photo out there The woman that's breastfeeding her child. She was kidnapped when she was nine and assimilated with the command cheese And then was a rechidnab by the United States government when she was in her 30s and didn't want to go back She missed the command sheet life and through her and through her Depictions and her descriptions of the way they lived and understanding of it They got a better sense of like what she missed about that life and that they had an incredible relationship with the land They lived basically just in tps. They were very nomadic. They just followed around the buffalo and they had You know in her way of looking at it almost a magical existence in comparison to this Really boring life that these settlers had and when You know she looked at it. It was interesting because she was a girl who was born You know us You know how it just described a white settler and then from the age of nine on lived as a command sheet so she had like sort of a view of both worlds and You know, she very much took the side of the command cheese And she wanted to go back like she had spoken command sheet in the book There's an encounter where they bring in someone who was a command sheet to speak to her And she grabs him. She's like take me back. We're gonna leave. Let's get out of here now Like her thought was like we got to get out of here like this way of life as bullshit Like I want to go back to the command cheese But she just didn't understand that that way of life was slowly going away and her son Quantum Parker who is that photograph over there that's on bullets that somebody made for me. I don't even know where that came from somebody sent me that But that he was the last command sheet chief and they by the during her lifetime and her son's lifetime was the last of it and it's a very sad story But you know the command sheet still live today, right? Sure in Oklahoma Yes, there's quite a few of them. I've actually been in contact with some of those guys. Oh, that's awesome Yes, it's very cool But they do but they don't live the way they did right? I mean their way of life was removed I mean they were wiped out in that in that in that sense But cultures aren't static right and we're not static and I think one of the the the major issues that American Indians have Is that we are often stereotyped into this This picture and if we don't fit that then we're not Legitimately Indian when you when you first met me. What did you think? She think well? Or brown skin where is where's the feathers? I mean this is no, I don't think you did But I guess it's a rhetorical question. Oh, hell yes. So are you 100% native American? No absolutely not And that's that's Let's talk about that. Let's talk about that. What other So blood quantum is an imposition from the federal government that is that has been used to weed out native american So the whole the whole idea of US federal policy has been to assimilate Indians to rid themselves of the Indian problem so that land and resources could be obtained right And so blood quantum was one way that the US government could do that So if you if you didn't meet what they thought was some kind of purity test then they could write you off right But that is not how many Indian nations view Tribal citizenship or membership. It's through other types of cultural continuity Family relationships and it's not about race That's been an imposition on us. So I'm Polish and Chakta Sort of half and half Something like that. Cynthia and Parker is probably a good example of that right because she was zero percent Native American but was purely Right right absolutely absolutely Italians are very similar. I'm Italian, but I have a last name that's Irish because I'm one quarter Irish So growing up around Italians. It was always like a way they made fun of me You know, it was like it was always a funny thing like are you sure you're Italian? You know like this this it's a you know It's like it's a purity test like Italians like a nice last name with a lot of vowels You know, it's a that's what they like And it's really interesting. So as executive director of the association on American Indian affairs We get tons of inquiries probably the top inquiry We get our people wanting to do DNA test to determine what tribe they belong to So everyone seems to want to be Indian and even some people are Embolden enough to say you know, hey, I did my DNA test. It says I'm native American Where's my Indian check? Really? So there's so many misconceptions about what it means to be native American. That's a real issue Yes That doesn't exist, but there's some kind of fantasy or myth that Many people in the US Kind of believe about Indians because we don't know. It's not like it's taught well in school It's it's not like this is part of A normal dialogue and can you correct me from wrong, but I don't believe that it can really clearly identify what nation you're from? No DNA test can it cannot identify whether you have certain genetic traits that might be from North America like Canada or might be from South America as well, right? Right. Yeah, so if you really want to learn about your history Inherited you have to do that genealogical research and if you weren't aware there's 574 federally recognized tribes and about 300 other tribal groups in the United States and Alaska Other on top of the 400 yeah that aren't recognized by the United States for many reasons And so each one of those tribes have their own laws. They have their own systems of governance their own Whether it's a more a traditional form of government or a written constitutional government and each one of them have their own eligibility requirements for citizenship So you have to do your own genealogy and then if you do find who you may be affiliated with then you go to that Nation and you talk to them about what their eligibility requirements are some of them are residency some of them are familial relations And some of them are blood quantum The term Indian is that okay to use that's actually a legal term of art So Indian is a defined legal term in federal law of art. It's a legal term of art. That's what is it was that sorry? I'm a lawyer That just means that um It's a defined federal term That has a specific definition in in us code We tend to like to be called the nation that we belong to right who are people so for you to be talked to talk to right and for others Whatever charity. Yeah, a lot of people use Native American and that's That's more that's a broad term because that really can define Folks from south of the invisible border or north of the invisible border and In the western hemisphere. So it's a much broader term Indigenous peoples is a great great term Yeah, a lot of people in Canada they use First Nation First Nation. Yeah, they have a Very interesting relationship with First Nation people up there. It's similar but different You know they they have very different rules In terms of like hunting and fishing and they basically could do whatever they want whereas The people that live I have friends living Alberta. Yeah, and First Nation people can you know They they don't have hunting seasons. They just do whatever they want. They basically say look Let's just pretend like we never invaded and you just live how you would normally But with modern equipment. Yeah, so it's it's a little odd But there's no way getting around it being odd. I mean I think One of the things that I got out of this recent obsession with American Indian culture And these stories was realizing how little I knew about the history of this country, you know you you might know you might have a Basic understanding of what happened that you learned in school. That's real peripheral You know, it's very surface and then upon reading these books and maybe realize like what happened here Like this is what happened here over the course of a couple hundred years is almost unprecedented in history like that this Nation was conquered by all these invaders that just kept coming in kept changing the rules kept breaking trees making treaties Breaking treaties wiping people out calling things battles when they were really just massacres of women and children. I mean there's some horrendous horrendous stories of the justification of these massacres that were No, no different than any other horrific Barbarian slaughter that you might have heard about in history that's looked down upon but for years in this country They were taught as if they were actual battles I mean the history of this country with in regards to The tribes and the American settlers and the soldiers is terrifying It's terrifying that this just happened a couple of hundred years ago and that people Are capable of these things and that the ancestors of these people are just roaming around today And that's what this country was found on this country was founded on massacres right and and and that policy has been studied by folks like Adolf Hitler and it was even included he talked about studying how The US treated American Indians in his book mine comp really yes, so And But it wasn't just the battles There have been many different types of battles That we consider warfare though. It hasn't been done with you know guns and legal right legal battles exactly I mean since the 1600s um Europeans have been trying to educate us and assimilate us and civilized us and have passed laws once the United States Became a new country in the 1800s past laws to take our children and move them far away and and punish them if they spoke their language Cut their hair put them in these schools that were military based and they studied academics in the morning and then they did trade in the afternoon and in those trades were to Help pay for the schools so they were basically indentured servants slave labor um Making sure that the school could have enough funds to pay for their own education and The boarding school History in the United States and Canada has horrendous horrendous stories and These schools were funded by the US federal government and The association and other groups are trying to get um the United States to release Records of Who were the children in these schools? We think there's there were about 500 boarding schools across the United States and about at least 20,000 children that we can Figure out were were killed were died in these schools Um, yeah, so there's the carlyle Some of this work has been done at the Carlisle Indian School in in Pennsylvania, which is now owned by the army corps army corps of engineers and There are some tribes that are trying to repatriate their Children that are in graves there and bring them back home So this has been a process all over the country trying to figure out You know who these children were Where they belong and to bring them home and it's it's been a really difficult process for the organization disease um Not being fed working too much All those things that could kill a child and all these things there's records of all these different children and the places They still know we haven't been able to Folks that are doing this work have not been able to find all the records and like I said the federal government Probably doesn't have the records. It probably has mismanaged a lot of the records regarding um, these boarding schools and and there were different times there've been different eras of Indian policy where the federal government was like Oh wait, this isn't working. Let's let's get out of this Business of teaching Indians. Let's give it to the churches and let them do it for a while And then it would come back into the federal government and but the churches would have it and of course We've heard all of the horrible things that that different churches have done to children and there are still many boarding school Survivors today that can tell those stories of abuse sexual and physical And who still live with that today There's a organization called the Native American boarding school healing coalition that is really working on these kind of issues and have Are pulling together the stories and are also working with survivors to try to heal from that that trauma That's not just theirs, but it's it's this intergenerational historic trauma that has been with our communities For a couple hundred years now So there there are a lot of stories like that and this again. This is you ask federal policy You know they would while they were while the US was building the reservation system and and putting tribes Kind of in these blockades if you did not send your child to school you weren't given rations You weren't given your food if you practiced your culture You you could be killed for practicing your culture using your language Because and because this was the assimilation policy of the day and this happened I would say 1850 1870s through the 1920s there was this horrific period of federal Indian policy of doing trying to do away with language communal type living Cultural practices and religion So this isn't just you know Gun warfare. This has been Continuing policy that even affects us today So it was gun warfare until they got the Indians to move into the reservation and then it was basically an annihilation of the culture Right and it meets all the definitions of genocide from the From international law One of the things that they talked about in black elk was the practice of the ghost dance This is the idea that they were going to somehow or another bring back the old ways and it's a sad sad story When you hear them talk about it especially because it's coming from the words of black elk who was a guy that was there ways. And it's a sad, sad story. When you hear them talk about it, especially because it's coming from the words of Black Al-Ku was a guy that was there with the battle at Little Big Horn. And then from then, now is an older man talking about what his experiences have been like, having had seen his people move to reservations. And I've seen basically every single treaty broken. I mean, was there a single treaty that the United States had with the Indians that it didn't break? That's insane. I mean, every single one. And most treaties had some similar language. A lot of them talked about they had bad man provisions. So bad man provisions were basically, if R-Men, the US, if R-Men come in and to your jurisdiction and do something bad, we'll take care of it for you. You know, just some simple provisions like that. But that never was enforced. The US let their people come in and take over what were supposed to be protective areas of land. That was just constant. That happened everywhere. So there were bad man provisions. There were a lot of provisions. A lot of beautiful provisions that tribes still talk about today, you know, as long as the grass grows and, you know, we'll have our lands. And none of these provisions were ever upheld. And a lot of the East Coast tribes, their boundaries were changed and new treaties were made and accepted. And removal happened and then there were new treaties. And nothing was ever maintained. Where did you grow up? Did you grow up in Oklahoma? Yeah. Did you grow up in a reservation? So Oklahoma is an interesting case. So Oklahoma did have set aside lands. So talk to I had their area, Chickasaw, and the other tribes that were removed to Oklahoma. And by the way, because of that removal there, tribes that were already there were removed. So there were already tribes there, the Caddo and Comanche and other other tribes that this was already their land. So new tribes moved in and land during the, I'm forgetting my dates now, but there was a DAWS commission around 1906 or so where there was a census and individual Indians were allotted about 160 acres apiece. And this was an effort to decrease the amount of land base that tribes held in common. Right? And this happened all across the country, not just in Oklahoma where there allotment policies. And I believe there were about, heck, I'm not good with numbers. I think there were like 19 million acres that were removed this way of land. But what happened today, there is a criminal case before the Supreme Court that is actually addressing these issues because even though our lands were allotted, the exterior boundaries of our reservations, the area that we had agreed to live in, they've never been extinguished. They've never been diminished. And so the Supreme Court is actually looking at this issue now as to whether we still have jurisdiction within the exterior boundaries of our reservations in Oklahoma. What would that extend to cities? Is there other cities in Oklahoma that are in those areas now? Oh yeah. So if you think of like Tulsa? Yeah. So that's Creek Nation. So Tulsa would be owned. Well, so, so not necessarily. So it's raised a lot of fear with with non-Indians about it. Why? Yeah. The Indians are taken back the land. Oh my God. But what would actually happen, places in Indian country where there's allotment and there's non-Indian individuals who have fee land within the exterior boundaries of reservations and then individual Indians own only in fee land within the exterior boundaries of reservation. You said fee land. Fee land. So just how you would be? No, no. So how you own land. It's called, it's not restricted, it's in fee. You own the title to that land, right? A lot of land held by tribes is in trust or in restricted fee. So a common area land like, like let's look at the on and dogination in New York State. They have the exterior boundaries of the reservation. They own restricted fee land. So they own it, but they can't sell it without US permission, right? Trust land is similar and it's treated the same as restricted fee, but it's held in trust. So the US has more control of of what happens on that land or has been seen to have a little more control than it would in just restricted fee. But within the exterior boundaries of the reservation, you can have this checkerboarded ownership of land of non Indians and Indians. But that doesn't necessarily mean that the tribe has jurisdiction over the non Indian fee land. And the civil and criminal jurisdiction issues on an area of land like that is extremely complex and continues to be argued in the courts. And most of the time, our jurisdiction, most of the time we lose those cases, especially since the 80s and 90s and up until today, there was really a change in kind of how the court decided Indian law cases. So if we go back into the history of federal Indian policy, you see this kind of weird schizophrenic, you know, those those those marshal cases that I talked about, they really set forward kind of schizophrenic principles that Indians are sovereign, but they're just award and they're uncivilized. So we have to take care of them, but they're sovereign. And so you have at different areas of time, policymakers who support tribal sovereignty and will use those cases to help support that sovereignty. And then there are other administrations that come around not talking about any current administration, but that that used those cases against us. And in degrade policy and degrade any kind of rights that we may have gained in other eras. So it's it's really been, you know, Indians today live in this, live in such an insecure world, you know, our statistics are horrible. You know, the suicide rate for our youth, our high school graduates, everything that you could possibly think of that there's a statistic on, we're usually the lowest, we're the worst. And it's because we live in a society that is constantly changing. We can never depend on whether or not our rights are secured, whether or not we're going to have land jobs, being able to practice our culture. We're still trying to, you know, there were periods of time in our history where people would steal our religious objects and our sacred items. They still do. And loot our graves. There's a law called the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act that was meant to repatriate those stolen items and those stolen ancestors back to tribes so that we could help with our cultural revitalization as well as put our ancestors back to rest. There are still at least 200,000 ancestors in boxes and museums. That's just in the US. 200,000 museums in the US. Just in the US. So our ancestors and our cultural items and religious objects have also been taken all around the world. Imagine if it was French people. There was 200,000 French people in boxes and museums in the US. And France is one of the worst. So there was just a case recently. French love to auction our sacred objects for some reason. There was a sacred shield of the Pueblo of Akama in about 2016 that was being sold at auction in France. And the tribe, the Pueblo fought and even went to court in France to try to stop that auction and get that item back because there was evidence that it had been stolen in contemporary times. And France said you don't have standing in our courts. So even though they're considered sovereign or a pseudo-sovereign nation here in the United States, we didn't have standing in the French court and couldn't protect that item this way. So we had to use other means of negotiation and arm-twisting. That item has finally been repatriated but it took about four years for that to happen. So it's finally been brought back? Yeah, but that's just one case. This happens. Where's it now? It's back home at the Akama Pueblo. And did they have it on display or is it? No, this is a sacred object. The can't be on display. Right. These are items that are used for religious purposes. They're protected sacred items. And the association we were fighting with the Metropolitan Museum of Art last year and the year before because they were displaying items from a private collection that were sacred. One item was even a funerary object. It was an item that is never supposed to be seen because it's buried with the ancestor. And it was on display. And without any kind of consultation with the tribes affected, it's horrendous the way we still look at Indian people and our cultures and our practices today. We're still being called heathens. There was an article I think just last week there was a religious man saying that we're heathens because we the sage that I gave you because we burned sage as one of our medicinal and spiritual practices. That was the reason why they were calling the heathens. Yeah, and this was just an article last week from a what from a Christian group. Oh, well, yeah, well, I'm a heathen too. We're all heathens. Yes. It seems like the issue of what we're talking about, but you suicide, high school graduation, drug addiction, all those problems. Those are the most massive ones. And what could be done to try to mitigate these problems? Like if you had a magic wand. And I mean, it's been, I mean, if you talk about Native American reservations in this country, people talk about poverty, they talk about drug addiction and alcoholism, they talk about despair. I mean, this is something that was also brought up in the book Black Elk. So this seems to be something that started when they were forced into reservations in the first place. And then we're ashamed of their heritage because the fact they were subjugated by these, these, I mean, whatever you want to call them, the soldiers, the military, what could be done? What if you had a magic wand? And he said, and I said, Shannon, what can, what can be done to give you, you have all the money at your disposal? What would you do? Well, there's, there's no quick fix to issues like that. And people have been trying to to work with tribes regarding poverty and addiction and there's no quick fix. And there's no quick fix. But I think what, what there is and what we're working to do, see my organization is almost 100 years old. And we're looking forward to the next 100 years. What are we going to do? And there is really important work done being done regarding healing from historic trauma. And it's community work. It's work that engages the entire community. So it's not just directed at, at young people. It's not just directed at a segment. It's really involves a whole community coming together and healing. But what also really needs to happen is we need to bring people like you along with us. So we need, if we can't clear away the myths that Euro America or white America, whatever you want to call it. If we can't clear away those myths that we continually face every day, every time I go into Washington DC, every time I go into the wegments, there's a big Washington football team, uh, uh, toostitos potato chips with the Washington football team name on there and, and, uh, the Redskins. And um, Is that a offensive word? That's an offensive? I mean, even saying that like right there, is that offensive? Yes. Yes. Not to everybody. Um, but the majority of Native American groups tribes, they've all, uh, let the team know that that, uh, that that name is offensive. Uh, and they still won't change it. They don't, uh, they say it's honoring, it's honoring Native Americans. Uh, that term is used, um, uh, and you see it in historic records, uh, to count, um, Indian skins or scalps that have been, uh, taken from, uh, Indian people. Um, it's an offensive, it's not just derogatory, um, or demeaning, but it's, which would be really clear what you're saying when you're saying skins and styles from in dead people. Yeah. Yeah. Um, yeah. Um, yeah. And sorry. Um, no, no worries. Uh, this is the number one reason why I wanted to have you here. Yeah. I want to, I want it from your perspective. Cause for us, we get, oh, yeah, that's an offensive word. That's offensive. I heard that's offensive. The majority of people are not talking to someone who's deeply ingrained in Native American issues and culture like you are. So you get explained to us that, you know, it made it make sense. Right. If we, if it was, it was, you know, think of some derogatory term for someone, somewhere, I mean, even if it was like kind of derogatory, like if they were called the Washington crowds and it was all based on Germans, like a lot of German people probably be really pissed off at that. Like, Hey, you know, that's kind of shitty. Like, why you calling us that? But it's the chiefs Kansas City chiefs are like, what other Native American names? There's been a ton of them, right? Yeah, the braids. There's a lot of big games. Uh, are the braves still around? Yeah. Yes. And they still have that name. So all, has anybody given in and changed their name? Uh, I'm, I, I, yes, there has. And there's been really a movement with high school colleges. And I don't know the status of any, um, uh, you know, as far as NFL or national teams. Syracuse, Syracuse University had a derogatory mascot that they changed some years back because of the tribes there. Um, they're now in the state of New York. Um, fought for that. What was that mascot? I can't remember, but now they're, they're, there's some kind of like orange. It's an orange. All right. Super orange. Yeah, but, um, that's not hurting anybody's feeling like orange. Exactly. Um, but, but, but if, if we're ever going to fix these issues, I think we really need to start with our public education system. We need to teach people, um, that Indians are still here. We're still alive. Um, uh, it's amazing how many people don't even realize that, that Indian people exist outside of casinos. It is kind of crazy if you think about it. There's not another culture that gets named, it gets teams named after them. We're, we have Indians all around us all the time. Just go to the grocery store and buy some butter or some baking soda. Um, look, look at different. Um, yeah, it pop culture, um, tomahawk missile, uh, uh, the Indian motorcycle and, and, uh, the, the, the Pontiac, Hata, um, I think an Indian head on its, uh, car, um, back in the day. I think, yeah, I was an old, old Pontiac. Yeah, I had, um, uh, it's, it's all over our, our culture. It's all around us. But yet we don't even realize that that, uh, what that means. And so it really, um, uh, to many of us, you would think it would open up a dialogue about, about Indian people and, and, um, whether we're going to choose to do something different with this history because it is our history. It, it's our collective history. And we have throughout time changed the narrative and stories of our history. You know, when, when we've all realized that Columbus wasn't such a great guy, um, uh, that took a long time. Yeah, yeah. Well, what do you think about that? You're Italian. Crazy. It's crazy that it took so long to figure out that he was associate path and a murderer. I mean, what, when you read the, um, accounts of, um, the, the different religious people that were traveling with Columbus that wrote, I forget what, what, what, what their designation was. But there was, uh, one journal that detailed what they did to, uh, Native American babies, um, chatted their heads on rocks and cut people's arms off of, they didn't bring their weight and gold to them. I mean, horrific, horrific tales of torture and murder. And it's like, how is this the guy that we have a day off for? How is this Columbus thing? You realize what Columbus was a conqueror. I mean, he was just a symbol of the times. Mrs. 1492 was a brutal time in human history. And when they arrived in what, I mean, they really didn't even arrive here. But when they arrived wherever they did arrive, it was the worst thing that could have ever possibly happened to the people that were already living there. And that this guy is somehow or another, you know, a part of our folklore, you know, 1492 Columbus, the ocean blue and all that nonsense. And meanwhile, he's a fucking murderer. And it's, it's kind of crazy that it, they knew this, but it took until now, I mean, didn't he change it to Indigenous Peoples Day? Well, there are still cities, county, states that are still in the process of changing that. I'm not sure. I think there are some cities in in California that have already done that in and celebrate Indigenous Peoples Day. Columbus is not named after Columbus though, right? Is it named after another dude? No, what's it named after Columbus? It is. Giant statue of the infront of city hall. Change that shit. Talk to your people. It's a little late. You got a Columbus hat on bro. Oh, I was trying to ignore that. I'm sorry. I felt thanks a lot. I feel really welcome. That's right. The Cleveland Indians, another one. I forgot about the Atlanta Braves, the Washington Redskins. It is nuts when you stop and think about how many American teams are named after Indians. Animals and Indians. Columbus, man. Fuck you Columbus. Change your name. What would they change it to? It's named after a lake or something. What's the name after a cool Native American? That'd be okay. Yeah, that would be right. I would consult with Native Americans before. Right. They would have to be someone from Ohio. Like what, what nation is in Ohio? Well, there's not any now. There are Indigenous Peoples there, but there are no federally recognized tribes in Ohio. Wow. So who are the Indigenous Peoples that are not federally recognized? I'm not sure. But I know that there was Indiana, Ohio. That was my ami tribe. They're in Oklahoma. But there are. You mean Miami, Miami, the city? No, they're a tribe of people. Okay, because you were saying that earlier. And I was going to correct you. Or it's going to ask you rather, if you you meant the city? No, no. I mean, so Miami is did Miami get named after Native Americans? I don't know. I don't know. But I would I would think so. There's a lot of place names that are named after Indigenous Peoples. Right. So Miami is a type of it's a tribe. Yes. Yes. And they're in Oklahoma. How confusing. They're in Northern Oklahoma. They probably said to Miami people you can keep it crazy. Yeah, so. But what's interesting in these states like Indiana and Ohio where Indigenous Peoples have just been removed allheartedly is that tons of archaeologists and other people that like to loot. They have taken so many things out of the ground. There was a case that the FBI actually got a hold of in Indiana. Gentlemen by the name of Don Miller who had huge ranch house and farm. And it was just full of Native American artifacts including human remains. And there were even items from other countries that he had had looted and taken. And the FBI actually investigated that and because the man was like 90 years old they didn't prosecute him. But they were able to take back those items and through that Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act they've been consulting with tribes to repatriate those items back. But that looting and collecting in areas like Indiana and Ohio and the FBI. Jimmy actually has it up on the screen. Oh yeah. Here he is. Two thousand human bones among antiquity sees from man's home. So where this gentleman get all this stuff. His collection was Native American including the bone Tim Carpenter of the FBI told media outlets. Yeah, there is. The report Miller reportedly admitted he conducted illegal digging expeditions that he never faced criminal charges before his death in 2015. So this guy was just digging stuff up and just showing it around his house. And there were rules against this. Oh absolutely. Absolutely. And it's on land that say if he owns a ranch, how does that work? Like if you're... So it's dependent. And a lot of the things that he had it wasn't clear where he had got it from. He didn't even know or remember keep any records of where he got a lot of the items. So our laws are really screwy with this too. So federal and tribal lands are protected. So public lands, parks and tribal lands are protected lands. You can't go and dig in federal or tribal lands without a permit among other things. But just in state private lands, it's really dependent on what the state laws are and it's really inconsistent whether those whether looting is protected or not. And so that's where it's interesting because there's a lot of gigantic branches in Texas that are privately owned that were originally Native American hunting grounds. There's ones that a friend of mine has hunted on that they have these pictographs. You go inside these caves and this is on private land. Someone owns this. You go inside these caves and these ancient artwork all over the walls of the cave and signs of fire, like you know, soot on the ceiling of the cave where they lit campfires. Like this should probably be some sort of a historical site. Right and it's usually not protected and people get real angry when Indians try to get involved in where there may be development that will have an effect on burial site, a sacred site or other type of site. People really get angry. And so it's really hard for tribes to work to protect these areas, work to learn about what the areas are even about. There's been so much amateur archaeology. In this whole country was founded on amateur archaeology. To go up, well look at what we found in this grave. Everyone was looking for gold and other special things and oftentimes they just took whatever was in the grave and created the antiquities art market which still is all over the world today. So the association is constantly looking at auctions and trying to return items that private collectors have attained improperly. We just got a human vertebra removed from a US auction just a couple of weeks ago. They were selling it because they said it had an arrow point still in, you know, so that has value in some markets. And the D&A on this to prove that it was... No, it was, they were selling it as a Native American vertebra. It was from a collector in Massachusetts. Well how could they prove that it wasn't just a settler that was killed by an arrow? Right, I don't know. And that's the thing about, that's the thing about trying to work with auctions and private collectors is they often don't want to work with us because they're trying to make money. So oftentimes items, whether they're religious objects or human remains, they have a story or what's called a provenance associated with them that is often made up to drive the price of the item. So whether that was a legitimate vertebra, Native American, we don't know because we can't get that collector to talk to us. So the collectors under no obligation by law to talk to you? No, that's why we try to send the FBI and our friend Tim Carpenter to them. So how would they determine? I mean, wouldn't they have to do a DNA analysis of the bones and try to figure out where who the person was? Well, the DNA analysis isn't necessarily going to tell you where it came from. It could tell you that it was Native American. Would they even be able to get that out of bones? I don't know. And I'm not a scientist, but you know, there was a case really not that long ago called the Kennewick Man case. I don't know if maybe you heard of it, but it was an ancestor was uncovered in the state of Washington. And he was old, old, old, old, old. And the universities involved in the Army Corps who had possession of it were going to repatriate it to appropriate tribes and what ended up happening is and the Army Corps who had possession of it were going to repatriate it to appropriate tribes and what ended up happening is that academia stepped up and said, wait, this isn't Native American. We think he's something else. And for years, Native Americans fought to get that ancestor, ancient one back. And finally, after a court case that deemed the item wasn't that the ancestor wasn't Native American, DNA test was done and it was indeed Native American and the ancestor was finally repatriated. To ask you how that works. So listen, you said there's 500 recognized tribes, many more that are unrecognized. Who would that go to? Right. So like I say, if you won and it's brought back and given to Native Americans to who and to where? Right. So let's look at the best case scenario. And in a lot of museums have maintained records that may have human remains and associated funerary objects and have enough information to know where that came from, what side it was located at, what county, what state. And we know from tribal histories as well as federal U.S. documentation that that area was likely affiliated with with this tribe or that tribe or maybe several tribes. And so consultation occurs under that law about those ancestral remains and funerary objects and it's determined where those items should go back. In the worst case scenario where there's not any information, oftentimes evidence of well, who were the collectors that were giving to that institution? What has been the history of the institution and where has it obtained different collections? And through that, it's deduced who may be affiliated with those items or the ancestors. So it can be a pretty long drawn out process. But what's interesting about it is museums and other institutions fought this law for a long time. And they said, well, you know, all of our collections will, you know, we won't be able to fulfill our purposes at a museum or an academic institution to study these things. It's like, well, hell, you haven't studied it in 100 years. Yeah, no, most of these, when people work to consult with museums, most of these items are in boxes and often poorly managed and maintained so they're just sitting somewhere in storage. Right. Right. So the museum owns it and they're kind of hoarding it. Yeah. Interesting. Yeah. So this Kennewick man, can you pull up some information about that? Sorry about it right now. Yeah, great. Because I'm forgetting my dates when they have them. I'm very curious about what the dates would be. Now, when we're talking about Native Americans, do you agree with the idea? Okay, let's see here. Kennewick man finally is free. What they did so much that he's killed in Everfound in North America. He's a handsome fellow. Let me see that picture. Looks normal. Imagine you just ran into that guy at 711. Like what's up, bro? Let's see. So like a modern American, a modern human. That's the bones, Ferris bones. Wow, his rib bones. So what is it? Does it give give us a date on his, uh, what they have car, go to that picture that teething in. That's crazy. So, so just let me tell you that looking at human remains for many tribal peoples is difficult. It's like looking at a naked body. I mean, it's the essence of someone that, you know, we shouldn't be seeing. Oh, so you should be seeing even these images? That that should have been in the ground. That should have gone and disappeared. It had a journey. It got interrupted. And, um, you know, some tribes and cultures believe that that's harmful to interact or look at or just a little bit humiliating. It's exposed, right? So seeing them on display in a museum is particularly Oh, God. Yeah. And, and, and, at least in the United States, you won't find that in any kind of public museum. Now you might in some kind of private institution or private collection. What you do with mummies, right? You, you, but with Native American people, they've decided that that's offensive to the culture. So they've removed it as well. That's also happening. Uh, you're finding another, uh, in other countries who, uh, in Egypt, for example, and in other cultures that, um, they're trying to get those, um, back to a magic museum. We can go and look at Ronald Reagan's head. Yeah. Right. Some people would probably enjoy that for sure I go. But, but it is one of those things where it's like, okay, I kind of get it. Right. So if you have the bones of sitting bull on display in some sort of, uh, you know, Plexiglas case in the museum, and people are like, Oh, wow, that's cool. Okay. Would, would that be cool if that was Ronald Reagan, you know, would that be cool if that was someone from our, you know, our lifetime that died with had Janice Joplin's head, you know, in a box somewhere and you can go stare at it. Wouldn't that weird you out? Or how about Amy Winehouse? How about someone to die? Yeah. See what I'm saying? Yeah. Someone who died really recently. It'd be like, what are you doing? Well, and that's the thing is that we don't seem to look at native people in that way. We don't seem to, to go, oh, that's not okay. Oh, it's not okay to outlaw their religion. Well, how would I feel if someone did that to me, right? Right. It's, it's, it's, uh, double standard, or, I don't know what you call it, but it's just racism. Yeah. In a way, yeah, racism's the right word. Can you go to the Kennewick man again and find out what the date is? I'm just curious as to what the date date is of, uh, his demise, like when, what they date his skeleton back to. Because this is something that, um, someone actually had brought up to me that there are many Native American cultures that don't believe the story of people coming across the bearing land bridge, Asia. Is that something that's just one story? So that's just one theory about how the Western hemisphere was populated. There are many of those stories. And what's interesting is that something it's a lot of indigenous peoples have, have stories that go back hundreds and hundreds of years. And there's a great book. So if you really want some good books, uh, we've got to get you into some indigenous authors, uh, one of which is Vine, Deloria, who's passed on, but he, um, he was an attorney and a scholar and wrote a book in the late 60s, early 70s called Custer Died for your sins. And it was, it's known as the Indian Manifesto, right? Um, but he also wrote Custer Died for your sins, uh, Vine, Deloria. Uh, he also wrote a book called Red Earth White Lies. And he talks about Western science and, and it's arrogance of, of, of creating these theories like the bearing straight land bridge and never really, um, considering, uh, never going and asking indigenous peoples, um, who, who lived on the land and whose place was the land, how they got there because they do have those stories of how they got there. And, and, um, and- What is the story that most Native Americans accept? Is it the idea that they came from a bunch of different places? It's, it's their own origin stories. For example, um, the Chalktonation has a few origin stories. Um, one of it, which includes, um, coming out of the ground at a certain, certain area in the southeast. Coming out of the ground. Coming out of the ground. So being birthed out of the ground, um, in a certain area. And then there's another migration story. So a lot of, um, I have one elder, um, uh, said, okay, uh, you want to hear an origin story. Do you want the 5,000 year version, the 20,000 year version, the 40,000 year version. And he would go into the story about how, um, uh, many people in the southwest and southeast and up into the northeast actually came from the south. And were slaves of Aztec and other, um, civilizations down south that had been released and began migrating up, up through the north. Um, and, uh, there are other stories that, that have us come from other places, um, by boat. I mean, that there were also, um, great canoe and, and, and water fairs. And, um, so, uh, I think there's a lot, uh, a lot to unpack there that science really has ignored. Um, and, um, vine to lori is, is great though when he talks about, um, uh, these things in red or white lies because he has a sense of humor about it. And he talks about, oh, yeah, here we are in, in, in Asia. Wow, there's a big sheet of ice up there. That looks like a good place to go. Let's go. And, uh, he talks about how, um, uh, there's theories of, of, of trees and horses that are at a certain period of time that, that migrated, um, back and forth among the land bridge and how that could have occurred and how, how sometimes it doesn't seem quite logical, um, what science has put together there. So, um, um, uh, do you know the full story about the land bridge though? Like the scientific version. Yeah, I mean, it really was a country. I mean, it was, it was not just like a thin bridge. Like we, we're trying to look at it. It was a big sheet of ice that may have had little areas of, uh, uh, that where you could survive. Um, but from what I understand about it, um, um, yeah, maybe I, I probably don't, uh, know it well enough, but, um, find out. I mean, it's, it's, it's the way they're changing the way they look at it on, on a, on almost the daily basis. But the way that they're right, but the way the theory began, it was just a very small group of, of scientists to, who, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, made a determination that this was the way that the Western Hemisphere was populated and, and what a lot of Indigenous scholars, um, contemplated was that was an easy way to basically devalue our place in the Western Hemisphere. We came from somewhere else. Yes. That's the resistance. Um, the, the science behind it was that the oceans were lower. The oceans were lower during the ice age. Right. And, um, they believe that that area between Asia and North America was not just, uh, like a land bridge, but was a land mass that was populated with animals and that this, it would have been a natural progression for human beings to make their way across that. In fact, it's a funny story. There was a guy who was a Mormon who was trying to prove that Native Americans were the lost tribe of Israel. Right. And do you know the story behind that? Oh, yes. Yeah. So he did DNA tests on Native Americans and find out that they actually came from Siberia. It's one of the scientific substantiations of, um, the land mass theory. But there are other, there are other migrations that are still, like 100% convinced that people have been traveling the world. I mean, just like the Polynesians land right Hawaii. You know, I mean, people have done wild shit from the beginning of time. I mean, there's so many confusing artifacts and things in North American, South America, particularly the old comics that believe are somewhere in the neighborhood of 6,000 years old that have very African looking faces in their carvings or at least, you know, like very thick lips and thick faces. I mean, it's really interesting. And then they don't know where they came from. They don't, they don't know much about their culture at all. And there's many myths of people arriving places and boats and traveling around and boats. So there's more likely to me is that just people have had wander less since the beginning of time. And we travel all over the world. And some people came to North America and they're like, holy shit, this spot's awesome. Right. But, but we have a tendency to take a few facts that we understand from science or a few, few sites that we're able to find. This happens a lot in North America and then base a theory on it without really critical investigation and not getting all the facts. And so that's a Indigenous people's if it's been left out of those stories have been left out of haven't been at the table to have those discussions about what they understand to be true about missionaries. What are more questions coming from? Is it offensive because the insinuation is that Native American people aren't really American anyway? They came from somewhere else as well that everybody came from somewhere else. They just were here a little bit earlier. So it's not theirs. Right. Right. That's that's that's one idea. But yeah. But if you know, we've always been considered an inferior race. Right. And the fact that we're still left out of decision making about our own lands and our own rights and our own sacred spaces, we're still left out of decision making or our ideas are not even considered in science. They're not considered in journalism. They're not considered in medicine or they're not considered in what way? What way they're not considered in science? There there's traditional environmental knowledge that a lot of people who who deal in it environmental protection have utilized to help protect large areas and it has to do with how different environments, how different flora and fauna work together as a collective versus oftentimes in our our Western way of thinking we kind of you know, we kill all the wolves or we kill all the predators. We get rid of all these plants and animals that used to all work together symbolically in order to create a healthy environment and and and there's really important traditional environmental knowledge by many wisdom keepers across Native America that are trying to re implement the things that have gone wrong in their environments and trying to replace what has been screwed up. When you hear an origin story like the one you were talking about people coming out of the earth, how do you decipher that? Well, I've actually been to that origin site um and it it looks like a female. It's a place where we were birthed. It looks like a female. It looks like a place where we were we were birthed out of mother earth. It's a beautiful amazing and almost shocking place. Where is this place? This is in Mississippi. So you think that might be true? That's that's our origin story or that's one of our origin stories. Right, but you understand how scientifically that would be a real problem. Right, people coming out of the ground like like puppies. Maybe, maybe not. Maybe not. I think there are um there are stories and narratives that we're no longer connected with and it our lives today are so out of context with the natural world that we don't know what's possible anymore. We've been so separated from that. We have even some magic. Yeah, but we have a clear line from ancient hominids to modern human beings that science has been able to piece together. That's one story. That's one story. That's us story. Another story is we came out of the ground like roses. You think that's possible though? That seems highly unlikely. Look, if I gave you if you had money to bet, I gave you a thousand bucks and you could put it on this or that. You could put it on well. We probably people got here by all sorts of means the way people got everywhere by all sorts of means or they came out of the ground like flowers. Or Adam and Eve and all that other jazz. Well, yeah, that all that of the shows as well. So we all the nutts. But these stories, whether there are orids and stories that they create our identity, they create who we are at the center of our being. And they have lessons to teach us. And they also remind us what we're responsible for. And that's what I'm saying that we've been so separated from that part of us and our connection to the natural world and to the earth. Right. So we're a part of the earth. We're a part of the earth. Whether or not we actually born on the ground is not really responsible for it. So we were put in certain places to be responsible and caretake for that area. So a lot of these stories, what they're essentially trying to connect people with the idea that they are a part of this great earth. They're a part of this beautiful ecosystem. And maybe this origin story is devised to sort of explain to them in a way that makes a clear connection. Does that make sense? Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. But it's part of many tribal nations are. This is our place. This is our homeland. This is what we're responsible and we haven't been able to do what we were put here to do. Our purpose has been ripped away from us. So a lot of the work we do is to try to work towards environmental healing and try to bring lands back into our land holding so that we can caretake for that land. That's not all over Indian country. There are some places in Indian country that extract oil and do things that could be harmful for the environment. We do what we can with what we got. Nations are sovereign. The tribes are sovereign. So they get to decide what's best for them and whether they're going to be sustainable or not. What do you think would be best case scenario for Native Americans in the United States? Like I'll sort of give you the magic wand again. What would be best case scenario? Because the strange thing that we have in front of us here is that there is one country, the United States, but there's not just the United States, North American citizens here. There's also Native Americans of various different tribes that have their own reservations. And as you said, they're sovereign and they can kind of make their own decisions. What would be what's the magic wand? How do you clear up all these problems associated with the, I mean, the horrific treatment, the everything from alcoholism to the problems with schools to self-esteem issues, all these problems in North America, while also not the Native Americans, the way I'm looking at it, they want to stay a member of their tribe and they don't necessarily want to be just Americans. They want to keep their heritage, right? University. How does that, how do those two things work together? How do we all live together in America and yet have these tribes and do it in a way that works best for everybody? Right. Well, that's a freaking complicated-ask question. He's just freaking hats. Even with a magic wand, I'm not quite, but it's a process. And part of it is these myths that we have to correct and that we have to, we have to find a new way to be able to tell our stories and not rely on non-Indian authors to tell our stories, but you need to hear our stories from us. We need to be able to tell our stories and to re-teach the general public about who Native Americans are, where we've been and where we want to go. We've had this kind of pretend fantasy world about Indians, Pocahontas, Columbus stories, Custer. They've all been stories that have fed into the American politics in a certain way, at certain periods of time. And what I want is that this is the time now where tribal nations have a lot to lose. And we're in a current administration that is trying to terminate us once again. What are they doing differently than other administrations? Well, they just, they are taking land out of trust status. They would, there are groups that are attacking the basis of federal Indian law and the rights that we do have. So there's an act called the Indian Child Welfare Act. It was passed in 1978 and it's an act that the association was heavily involved in to get passed. And it started with some work with the Spirit Lake Sioux tribe. And a woman came to the people back then and said they took my kids. They stole my children. And after investigation, it was found that it wasn't just happening at Spirit Lake, but it was happening all over Indian country where state welfare workers were taking Indian children in a disproportionate rate. Quarter of all Indian children during that period of time were taken away from their own families and adopted out to white families. And so the Indian Child Welfare Act required state courts to do things before a child was taken away from its tribal their groups now that are working to dismantle that act. And that's being support because they think it's racist. So they, so it's like they've taken it and are looking through a backwards merit. Yes. So instead of it being an act that was passed to protect our children and to make sure that that children had ties to their culture and their families. They're saying that that's not in the best interest of children. So they're still looking at Indian tribes as we can't take care of our own kids. That our way of life is is not acceptable. And other adopted families would be better. And what's interesting is that the Indian Child Welfare Act doesn't prevent non-Indian families from adopting children. It just requires a certain process to make sure that the affiliated tribal nation is involved in that placement and adoption process. And so that the child can maintain those connections or that they try to find a family that's more culturally appropriate for the child. So there's just been actually came out of the Goldwater Institute, which is a Goldwater when he was a what was the a senator. He actually voted for the Indian Child Welfare Act. But today the Goldwater Institute is is actually funding cases around the nation to tack the Indian Child Welfare Act. What is the what is the reason behind it? I mean what are they trying to achieve? They say it's not in the best interest of Indian children. And even though there are child welfare organizations around the country that say the Indian Child Welfare Act is actually the gold standard in child welfare. And that we should be utilizing those principles that are used in the Indian Child Welfare Act to protect all children to maintain familial connections. When I'm asking this in terms of like if you had a magic wand, what you do? The reason why I'm asking you this is because I've thought about it. I've sat down and tried to go over it myself. And I don't see a solution. That's what's so strange to me is that we have nations inside of our nation. And I don't I don't want to end it and I don't want to continue it. Neither neither one makes sense to me. Like to to end it would be to say you're forced to assimilate. You no longer have sovereignty. We're going to break the last treaty and disband the reservations and make everybody just be a new United States citizen. That seems crazy. Well everyone is a US citizen. So citizenship was forced on us in 1924 I believe. But I mean a US citizen like I'm a US citizen where I can't start my own casino and I can't just do whatever I want to do. But do you understand what why that is? I mean I guess I guess we know I do. No I'm just the reason why I'm saying it this way is because I'm just trying to look at it like from an overhead view like if I was an alien and I was trying to sort this out. I had no no ties to either culture. I'd be like what do you do with that? Like what do you do with that? Like I understand that these people have been massively fucked over that genocide was perpetrated on their their their race that they were wiped out both with disease and by military actions and soldiers and treaties were broken. I get it. But the state they're in right now when you look at what we're talking about with these reservations the horrific conditions and the problems with drug abuse and alcoholism and suicide and despair and self-esteem and all these issues. Like what is the solution? What would be I mean if there was an unlimited budget? Like what would you do? If you were like if it's President Shannon if you got elected you could win right? You could be president. Anybody could be president. Yeah I think so. Right. So if you won and you became the president and you you ran on the part of what your platform was was fixing this gigantic soar that we have in this country our relationship with the tribes. What would you do? Unlimited resources you do whatever you want. Well I don't know if it has anything to do with the tribes. I think it has more to do with the general public. Okay well that's about changing perspective. I think if we're properly educated about about history I think if we really understand who native people are and and their importance here and their importance to continue as sovereign tribal nations and it has to start it has to start with with public education we have to recreate what's important to us here. It has to start with public education. We have to recreate what's important to us here. I think Indian nations have been here. I think they're a symbol of amazing prosperity that the country could have and we've just never tapped into it. And I'm talking about just principles and values that we don't seem to hold anymore in this country. Appreciation of nature. Are symbiotic relationship with it? I feel like you're kind of being sarcastic. No, not at all. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, not at all. I think that's one of the major problems we have in this country is we don't have a appreciation of nature. We really don't. It's not just an appreciation of it. I think it's a connection to us. We can't survive without it. And we're so interrelated to everything that happens on this earth. And we don't look seven generations ahead of us to see what our decisions today are going to do to us in the future. We're constantly looking for the dollar today and how that's going to reward our efforts today. And we're not looking how, you know, what the lives of our children are going to look like, what the lives of our great, great, grand children are going to look like. And I think those are the kind of values that we need in our country now. And I think that's what's being debated in the Democratic campaign right now. There are our values. Are we going to, you know, continue to support corporate society and corporate sponsored everything? Are we going to start looking at what we want, you know, 100 years from now? Well, that's certainly what's going on right now with the Democratic debates. Yeah. Yeah. And it seems like corporate's winning, even though there's spokesperson to barely talk, which is hilarious. I mean, it just shows you how strong money and media and the influence of the DNC is. What would all this education do, though, and explaining to people to the American citizens that are outside the tribes? How is that going to help the tribes themselves? What could be done to help these problems that we've already detailed, the problems with alcoholism, the problems with suicide and despair and self-esteem, all these horrific conditions that exist on many, many tribes? Well, part of that is not anyone's problem but ours. We have to deal with is sovereign nations within our own communities and how we choose to fix those issues. But I think looking outside how we can really affect change is there's something called a prior and informed consent. And it's contained within the UN Declaration of Indigenous Peoples. And it requires a state or a government to include tribal nations in the decision-making processes that affect them. So this administration has been horrible at it. Absolutely horrible at it. The Obama administration was much better. But we need to be part. We need to be the decision-makers in the things that affect us. So if you are going to bulldoze and blow up our sacred sites to build your border wall, it seems like the proper thing to do first would be to have a conversation with us and for us to make a decision about how we may can do that a little bit better to protect those sacred sites and natural springs and other things along the border instead of just blowing up everything. Where was the situation that was happening during the Obama administration where they were trying to put a pipeline through and they were hosing people down and it was on private land and they were going through private land and people were protesting it but they were forcing it through anyway. Where was that? That was Standing Rock in North Dakota. That's still going on today. In fact, I think this week there's a hearing. Well, the Fort Laramie Treaty, I think, is affected by that. There are some land-right issues there but we're talking about burials and sacred areas, to mention water quality and the tribes Obama stopped it but as soon as Trump got into office he pushed it forward and did not consult with tribes and it's been a fight ever since. Same thing happened with it. Obama was going through it initially and they put a stop to it right before he left office. Right. Right. Right. Yeah. I'm so cynical. That's horseshit. How much of that is there? What a stop to it. It's going through a don't worry, boys. Well, you know, the Obama administration was probably one of the more favorable administrations to Indian country. There were many presidents that had never even gone to a reservation like the majority of presidents. And he did. Actually he was adopted into the coronation, I think. So he's an adopted tribal member. That's pretty cool. Do you think he's visited since then? I don't know. No, but that's, but that administration really did a lot of work in Indian country that had never been done before and they actually were looking to tribes and building a government to government relationship that no one had ever really done as well. Every year they would hold a big tribal consultation in DC or tribal leaders would come from everywhere and consult with Obama and his administration. It was really unprecedented and it was a really happy time. I mean, as soon as Trump got into office, the doors closed. The doors closed. So even though he appointed Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs, Teris Weaney, who's Alaska native, that administration and the Department of Interior and under the president has just been so closed, it's been hard to get anything done or to get heard or even actually have that government to government relationship anymore. We've been left out of a lot of the decision making process that's going on all over Indian country. Well, that's a very good thing to hear about Obama that he did that. It's sad to hear that the Trump administration is abandoned that, but it's nice to hear that someone was making an attempt to do that. So what I'm getting is that there really is no long term solution. There's no solution. You're saying that the Trump has to deal with it. I think there's a lot of solutions and a lot of moving parts. I think Indian nations need to determine for themselves how best to handle the problems within their communities, but outward facing to have a strong government to government relationship that takes into account, not just takes into account, but actually requires the prior and informed consent of those tribal nations before affecting their rights or at least some diplomacy or negotiation with varying interest before decisions are made. I think that's the heart of what needs to happen outward facing. And also we need to take a new look at our curriculum in schools. We really need to most of our curriculum in public schools is about looking at Native American pre-1900. So not carrying that into today and who contemporary Native American tribes are and what they're doing to help their people. And what's so wonderful about Indian country today is that there are some places that are still there are some anti-Indian hate groups out there that fight tooth and nail against anything a tribe and their area tries to do to develop economically. There are other communities where tribes have been able to bring in economic development, whether that's through gaming or otherwise. And by the way, Indian gaming is like no other type of corporate gaming. And I think a lot of people don't understand this. So if you're a gambler, go to Indian casinos because that money goes towards Indian nation governance. It's not like a private business. It is legislated that that money from those casinos go back into Indian nation governance and are used for jobs and employment and social services. And all of that relieves the state and other government agencies from having that responsibility. So are those the success stories of modern Indian success stories? I mean if you look at so Oklahoma, the state of Oklahoma is fighting Indian nations in Oklahoma about gaming, trying to get more money out of gaming. But that Oklahoma tribes that brought in tons of money, 100,000 jobs have been created in casino and other economic development. So who's fighting it and why? The governor is fighting it. Governor Stitt, I think is his name. And he's trying to renegotiate gaming compacts in order to bring more money into the state. So essentially trying to attack that for state purposes. Even though it's on native land. Right. Right. Interesting. So it's almost in a way another attempt at violating a treaty. Absolutely. So denying the sovereign nation. Right. Well, in the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act, which was passed and there's so much federal legislation, it's insane. Federal Indian law, I mean it has its own 25 USC, this huge code of stuff, man. But the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act was passed because Indians were finding success doing gaming in states were getting pissed off because they were doing it without any interference, which is their inherent sovereignty to do so. That's what I'm talking about. So this this act came which was kind of a compromise where tribes can do what's called class two gaming, which is based on bingo. And there's electronic bingo games that are kind of like slot machines. So tribes can do class two gaming without any interference with the state. But if they do class three gaming, that's card games and other types. Then the state they have to work with the state in order to develop some kind of compact and in revenue sharing for class three gaming. So the state the federal government again allowed state to interfere with that inherent tribal sovereignty to regulate their own economic development. Yeah, that's an issue with all of these Native American casinos, isn't it? They don't get the full Vegas treatment. They can't have all the games that Vegas can have. They can, that's the class three gaming. But they have to do it through the state versus through their sovereign government. It's so strange, right? It's like for in one hand they get no help at all. And then when something comes along that allows them to economically thrive, then the government's like, hold on, where's our peace? So why do you think this is? So so much and so much legislation looks at tribes as if they're inferior. So back again to those watershed cases of justice marshal, they're inferior. Even being able to assert jurisdiction over non-Indians who come into our territory and do something wrong. We can't. So someone breaks the law in a Native American reservation. They're under the federal government's guidelines or the state government's laws. The tribe does not have criminal jurisdiction over non-Indians. So someone comes in and robs a casino. Then the state has to take care of it. Right, state or the federal government, depending on what type of crime. Ideally, would it be that the Native Americans would take care of it? Yeah, why not? Yeah, it'd be funny if they brought back like hanging capital punishment, shall we? Let's just hang people in the streets. See how that works. Look, no more robberies. Do you think that's what we did back in the day? No, no, I'm just saying. Imagine if they just came with their own rules like arbitrarily, like out completely outside of the state's laws and the federal government's laws. I don't think that's what they did. That's not what I'm saying. I'm just saying wouldn't it be crazy if they just went like, let's pretend this is our own country. We do whatever we want. We're going to hang people. I don't know these would I. Yeah, I'm saying it would be pretty quick. Yeah, I don't think that. It is strange that there's this, there's this, uh, push and pull here, right? There's, they're sovereign. They can do what they want. They have these casinos, but hold on, hold on, hold on with this, do what they want. Now you're under the guidelines of the federal government and the state government and we want a piece. We want a little bit of this and regulations and this and that. It is. It's essentially not accepting the fact that they're sovereign. It's a fake acceptance. It's like, hey, you're on your own until you start doing really well. And then it's like, hold on there. Now you're not on your own. Yeah, it's a really weird triangle of power state federal and tribal jurisdiction. It's completely confusing. When I was a student, I was in a fellow with a program called Udall fellowship that was named after Stuart Udall. Who was he? He was a very strong environmentalist who did a lot of work to protect Indian lands in the environment. And so in his name, there is a fellowship created and it's funded through congressional appropriations every year. And so now you're making me forget my story here. I'm sorry. So when I was an intern back in the day and I was in the Clinton White House, that's a whole other story. I completely lost. I completely lost my story. I'm sorry. No worries. I need more tumor coffee. We could build it back. So what we were talking about was the federal government not allowing the Native Americans to have real sovereignty over over their land. And then we went from there to you having a story that I interrupted by trying to ask what that guy's name was. Damn. Or what he did. What was his name again? Stuart Udall. What did he do again? He was a Senator of Congressman and he did a lot of good things for Indians. But that's it. Yeah. I remember it's gone. It's gone. It's forever gone. No worries. It sucked into my brain somewhere. So when you look at that situation, the casino situation where now all of a sudden economically these tribes can thrive and the reservation that owns that casino can thrive. And as you're saying, the money goes straight back to the reservation and to the people that run it. And it legitimately helps the people that live on that reservation, correct? Absolutely. What other things like that can be done to also take advantage of the fact that there are sovereign nation and allow them to economically thrive without things like fracking and shit that's bad for the environment. Are there other things that are being implemented that could also help? Oh, yeah. Absolutely. There are all different types of economic development going on in Indian country. They can be very successful for external businesses too because there are certain benefits that an outside business would get if they did, for example, manufacturing within Indian country. They could benefit from certain tax exemptions and rebates that they wouldn't get in a state. So if corporations would go into Indian country instead of going across the border or going somewhere else, there would be great opportunities. And some tribes are taking advantage of those business opportunities, not just gaming. But out of gaming has grown a lot of investment, a lot of entrepreneurial ship in tribes. And a lot of the money has gone back to help educate and teach language and bring items back that are religious items and ancestors and the things that are important for that tribal nation. So there's many different ways of investment that tribal nations look at. And it's not necessarily economic, but it's about healing their people and helping us survive and live better than we have in the past. So investment takes many forms in Indian country. Are there any good documentaries that can educate people on the reality of what happened to the Native American tribes? Because it seems like it's one of the best ways for people to absorb information and give people excited about things because it kind of entertains them as well as educates them. Is there anything that you can recommend? How much has been produced? I think PBS has put on some really good, I mean if you look at PBS even now, there are some great stories that are being told. Yeah, no. It seems like something that someone should do. Right, but it's got to be done in Indian country and it's got to be done with Indian country because so much has been done without us. Yes. And without our even input, so much research and kind of one-sided storytelling that just doesn't make sense. It doesn't have the cultural competency. It doesn't have the real life lived experience and the flavor, I guess, for lack of a better word to tell these stories properly. Ideally when you look at the future of Native American tribes in the United States and again as you said, Native Americans that are in these reservations are United States citizens. But it's such an unusual situation that really really have a comparison to Canada with their first nations. What do you think happens in the future? When you go from 1900, you were talking about the past of 1900 to today. It's a bizmo 120 years other than the economic success of the casinos. What do you anticipate happening in the next 100 years? It's hard to tell. I know a lot of tribes have been diversifying their economic development. Without our culture as we won't survive. In fact, many elders and you may have read it in black elk speaks that we're no longer who we are without our culture, without our languages. And likely we'll no longer be recognized by the federal government unless we are Indian enough. So those things are really important to who we are in the next 100 years. And I think it's those things that we will be rebuilding over the next 100 years, healing from the last and moving forward with a newfound understanding of who we are and a stronger identity and self. What that actually looks like and what's important, I think that we are still so dependent on the great white father and what happens with the U.S. politics. And whether we have a voice there or not, we've got great organizations that help advocate for Indian country in general. There's a national Congress of American Indians which has been around for about 75 years and it helps lobby and educate Congress and keeps tribes informed about what's going on in politics and advocate for many of those interests. There are groups like ours that are advocating for more cultural revitalization and strengthening identity and protecting our youth. So I think part of what we've been building is really a coalition of organizations and tribes to strengthen who we are and kind of correct the misfortunes of our history. I know we still have tribal nations out there that are living with egregious poverty and issues that still seems so far away from being corrected. But like my grandma always said where there's hope, where there's life, there's hope. So I think we just continue to, I mean we've freaking survived for this long and this coronavirus isn't going to take us out either. I mean we're going to continue to push forward and try to have better future for our kids just like anybody else, just like anybody else. And I think that's what's important is that we're not on the stage with everyone else. We're not at the table where decisions are being, we're not in the room where it happens. The Native Americans are not being treated with the same respect as other people from other countries. So like the culture of Mexico or the culture of Guatemala or in the country. Oh hell they're not being treated well. We respect them as a culture. Like they're thought of as, I mean we're not invading Mexico. And I'm saying, whether you're not, you're not. Probably would if we could. Border walls. We're not looking at them as something. We're looking at them as another country. We don't look at Native Americans the same way we look at. And maybe it's because you are also United States citizens. We don't look at them the same way. We have the same like the respect for people that live in a sovereign nation, another sovereign nation. Even though this is a sovereign nation inside of our nation, it doesn't, I think you would agree, doesn't get the same respect that other sovereign nations do. Right. Oh absolutely. Is there a great record, like a written record of all of the origin stories like you were talking to me about and all of the various languages. I mean is all this documented to make sure that we don't lose this? Some better than others and a lot of that is done. There's no big text that I can, I can give you and share with you that here's all, all what you ever needed to know about Indians. That doesn't exist. I think. Probably should, huh? No. No. To the tribal nation decide whether they want to share that and how to best educate people about who they are. And that's what so many other people have told our stories and have taken down those histories and those people are telling the stories from a Western perspective and not having the cultural competency and having lived and implemented that way of life. So it's really dependent on the tribes to determine for themselves how they want to put that forward. There are many tribes that actually have research protocols that if you want to do, you want to study, you want to research, you have to get authority from the tribal nation to do that. And they have to have a say and whether it was done appropriately. So again, it's back to us telling our own stories, us being part of our own narratives and us being part of the decision making that affects us. I respect and appreciate that 100%. What I meant was inside the tribe. Is there a documented version of all these stories and of the language so that can be passed down? The real concern seems to be when you're talking about these incredibly impoverished communities, the real concern is that some of these stories may be lost or some of the language may even be lost. There are, I think it varies. Like I said, there's 574 federally recognized tribes and 300 other tribal groups. Let me tell you the story about the Chidamacha who are in Louisiana, like just surrounded by marshes right there in the Gulf of Mexico. There are last language speaker died in the 1940s. Even though they had language speakers around them, none of those languages were related to theirs. Their language was more closely connected with peoples in Mesoamerica. So obviously there was a trade that was a relationship between who the Chidamacha are and were with people from Meso and South America. There's amazing histories and stories out there, but what happened with their languages is in the 80s and 90s, the Smithsonian had all these wax cylinders of tribal languages and songs and dances. They started repatriating those back to different tribal nations. When the Chidamacha got these wax cylinders, they're like, oh, we have a responsibility here. We have to do something with this. And so they pulled their community together. And everyone got their grandmas and their aunties and everyone to pull together words that they knew, the stories that they knew, different cultural practices and building and crafting and all of those things. Pulled all that together with the wax cylinders. They got some money from Rosetta Stone and recreated their language that had been lost. And today in their schools, in their tribally run schools, they speak their language. Those children are speaking their language from kindergarten up. So an incredible success story in that they were... speak their language. Those children are speaking their language from kindergarten up. So an incredible success story and now they were able to do that because they had gaming revenue to help support that. And when you go to the school and when you hear the story about how that happened, it's incredible. So there are stories like that among all tribes of how they've been to recover from what was lost. And so it's a long process to correct what has happened. But there are warriors all over Indian country and that's what they're doing. Every day is trying to recover what was lost. Well that's a great success story and it's beautiful to hear. I just hope that that can continue with all the different stories. It's just when you read books about Native American culture and you just get sort of the most surface taste of what it must have been like, it seems like there's this incredibly rich history that could be lost in time. And that would be a horrible, horrible shame. It's right here in front of us and it's here right now. And the fact that someone like you worked so hard to get this message out here and to let people know what is actually happening and the plight of these American Indians and the tribes and what they're still going through today and that this is not a battle that happened in the 1800s. This is a battle that's happening today. Right, every day. Every day. Yeah. What is currently a major focus for you? Mmm. Well the repatriation and sacred sites issue so returning cultural items and ancestors back to their affiliated tribes. And there's a lot of that out there. So like I said there's that law, the Native American Grace Protection and Repatriation Act that requires any institution that received federal funding or federal agencies to work towards a repatriation of items that they've received over time back to their tribes. But there are also tons of ancestors and items in international museums. So we're working on developing strategies to go after those because a lot of countries there has been kind of a rethinking about the purpose of museums and public education regarding indigenous peoples and how do we decolonize these institutions. And so we're trying to work in some countries are easier than others because if you have sacred religious items from American indigenous societies in some museums across the waters, their country considers it their cultural property. So you need an act of their country's government in order to deaccession those items and return them home. So there are some countries that are much more difficult to work with than others. But we're in the process of developing strategy to help internet within our national repatriation. We're also trying to watch private collectors and educate people about the importance of returning cultural patrimony and other sacred items that they've received over time whether or not there's a legal obligation to do, there's definitely an ethical and moral obligation to return these items so that cultures can be revitalized and that those items can be put back to use. So that's one area. We have a repatriation conference every year that we work together with tribes and institutions and foreign governments to work on these issues. Sacred sites. I just was before the indigenous people subcommittees in the house a few weeks ago talking about what's going on at the border and that Tohana Atam Chairman was there as well to talk about those issues. And as he spoke he was telling the Congress representatives that he just found out that they were blowing up another section. So that is happening because there was a law in 2005 that allowed a Department of Homeland Security to waive all these environmental laws and if there was an emergency to do so. And so the administration is saying that the border wall is an emergency that allows them to waive all these environmental laws. And so it's not just about protecting sacred sites but all the other environmental concerns all the the animal migrations, birds, plants, and water quality that are being affected by this border wall because people strongly think we need 30 foot tall border. So we're working we continue to work to protect sacred sites. So along the border wall where they're doing this and putting in the wall many of these areas have been designated as sacred sites. And so is that what's what you're saying? Yeah are known sacred sites. And there's artifacts there and all sorts of different things that can be destroyed by the construction. They blew up an area in found human remains. Oh Jesus. Yeah. No, do they stop when they do that? They were pay-traded those bones and they kept going. Yeah. So this this is how that's it. That's it. That's it. They're just moving forward. They don't identify the bones. Do you know for the rest of the culture that might have existed there and I'm moving forward. And you know what they're saying. And so and the rhetoric around this is so detrimental because during during that hearing it was clearly about how do we protect sacred sites and how do we make sure that the tribal consultation and other options can be presented so that that environment and other areas are protected. And the Republican congressman that was there who was really quite seems like not a nice guy. Basically said there is more damage caused by a migrant traffic, trash and defecating than there is by blowing up the ground. And so that is the Department of Interior, Homeland Security and Republicans in Congress are saying about that border. Just stop and think about how that's unchallenged. How ridiculous the thing that is to say. You could pick up trash. You could pick up shit. You can't pick up once you blow up sacred sites. Yeah. It's forever and it's irreplaceable. These are irreplaceable resources. But the fact that nobody challenged them on that. Like that's such a ridiculous thing to say. Oh we we challenged them and Deb Holland who is Native American Congresswoman definitely challenged him about that. But you know it's I think the law is on their side. Is it safe to say that there's many areas that you're talking about along the border that are probably undiscovered because you're dealing with things that are potentially thousands of years old? So remember undiscovered has different meanings. So tribes may have understandings about certain areas that other people do not that they try to protect. And so that's why consultation is so important. And working with tribes so you can understand what's going on on the ground. But usually they do some kind of minor investigation. And supposedly that was done. That is being done. But nothing's being done to protect it. So it's known. But so even if they consult with the tribes and the tribes say this is this area is essentially a burial ground from a thousand years ago and our ancestors used this. Yeah. Like all that's cool story we're going to put a wall here. Yeah. But that happens. That's not just happening at the border. That's happening all over the United States. Yeah. Yeah. So and that's nothing new. What's new here is that all of those environmental laws and those opportunities for public comment. So it's not just tribal consultation but even public comment have been completely waived. Those stories always weird me out when someone's building an apartment building and they stop construction because they found some sort of a burial site underneath it. And you're like, wow, right. Like how many of those are out there? I mean, how many areas where people are digging into the ground, they are going to find some incredible archaeological discovery. And it's getting, you know, smashed by a bulldozer. Yeah. It happens all the time. And so a lot of our, a lot of the context for what was happening here before Europeans came is gone because we've just destroyed all the evidence of it. You know, so that's why often the way archaeological investigations have moved forward as they look at discrete sites without connecting the dots in a more holistic way about what's happened in a certain area. So all most of our archaeological context and all that evidence is gone. And it continues to be looted by amateur archaeologists. And of course, you know, I've worked on many different developments across the country where, you know, the bulldozers come, oh, they see there's human remains there and they just dump it into the fill. Really. Yeah, because because they don't want to stop. They don't want to stop. Cost of money to stop. Yeah. Yeah. Cross the shell on a mountain. Yeah. All right. It's amazing to me that there's some sites that you could just visit like Buffalo jumps where they ran buffos off the cliff. Like a friend of mine was telling me about this as a site that you could go to. And I'm like, you could just go there. And he's like, yeah, you find Indian points there. I'm like, really, you find arrow points. So you find laying around what should be these priceless archaeological record of Native Americans. And you just pick them up. Yeah. Just go to any little little town across the country and you'll see a little antique shop somewhere and you go look on their walls and there's going to be archaeological evidence there without any context, without any understanding of where it came from, whether it's pieces of funerary object, arrowheads or what have you. The arrowheads are unbelievably common. Oh, yeah. I found one. I found one in Nevada. I was on a hunt and we were in the mountains and I found this little tiny chip. You were non-federal land, were you? I don't know what land we're on. It's public land. We was a public land hunt. You had a draw tag for it. But we found this little and it was crazy to look at. You know, I'm looking at this little tiny piece. It was like a white, I don't know what type of rock it was made out of. But it just, it was stunning. Like to hold that and to think, like this was someone's weapon that they were using the hunt with, who knows how long ago, who knows how many hundreds of years ago and I just stumbled upon it. And I think that's why we're so fascinated. Americans are so fascinated with Indians because they're all around us. I mean, you know, we're standing and that's one thing I forgot to do when we started this interview is to recognize the land where we're standing now, which is original land of the two mass and Tongva people. We're still here today. Yes, right here in Cleveland. Yes, yes. These are indigenous lands. Everywhere where we stand are indigenous lands. And what's interesting is that we don't recognize that here. There are other countries, like for example in Australia, they have any kind of public event or governmental gathering or whatever and they they recognize who were there before them. You know, there's an acknowledgement, there's a recognition. We've forgotten all that history. We've forgotten what was here before, even though the people are down the street, the two masses is north of here, the Tongva or south, those people still exist. And do they have a reservation out here? So Tongva are not federally recognized, the two masses. Right. Right. And in California, I think there's a hundred and four federally recognized tribes in California. California history and I'm you're aware of the mission system, right? In California. The mission system means religious missions. Yeah, the Spanish missions that were built up the coast in California and the effect that those missions had on the indigenous peoples that were here. I know about the effort to convert them to Catholicism. Right. Right. There was a huge issue at the turn of the 20th century, right? Right. And there are, you know, mass grave sites at every one of those missions of indigenous peoples. You know, thousands of indigenous peoples died, you know, building those missions and from disease and otherwise. I mean, I mean, think about it if there are some teachers and professors that do different kind of work with their students and there's this one kind of exercise of giving everyone in the class a role that you have in your society, you know, so whether you're, you know, tending agriculture or you're making clothes or you're protecting the children or you're getting food or whatever it is. And then 96% of you are gone. What do you do? I mean, can you I can't imagine what so many of our ancestors must have lived through and I know for myself personally, what's driven me in my life is my grandmother telling me those stories of what she and her family had to go through to be here and saying, we did that. We went through all that so you could be here and you could do something better for us. I mean, that's what drives us all is the pain that our ancestors went through and trying to make a life for ourselves that are better. Hey, we want to we want a piece of that manifest destiny too and we want it back, right? You know, so these issues, you know, we should take you to Indian country sometimes. I would love that. Where should I go? Oh, heck, where do you want to go? I'm gonna go where you were telling me to go. So I think it would be important if you or anyone else would be interested. You know, most tribal nations have websites where you can learn about who they are, what their history is, and different policies and things that are important to them. I think it would be important to go to a more affluent tribe and also to go to a tribe that maybe doesn't have that same level of economic development. And you can find that anywhere. You can find that here in California in Nevada, in Washington State, in New York. There are many places we could go. You tell me and I'll tell you where you can go. Well, let's work something out. I would really like to do that. I have my friend Cam Haines went to an Apache reservation in Arizona, I believe last year. And he said that there is actually a cave that they wind up putting bars on to keep people from stealing the artifacts. But there's arrows in there and human remains. Yeah. And they've left them in there. I mean, just something like that is unbelievably fascinating that this exists. And it just exists on this reservation, just sitting there. And that most people aren't not even aware of. And this is like an unbelievably sacred part of history that's right there. Right. Right. And those places are constantly being looted. There was a time in American history, 50s, 60s, 70s where you could get these beautiful cross-country maps. Right. And many of those maps would have places where there were Indian artifacts and places that you could go and live for stuff and get stuff. So a lot of things like that have been published throughout time. And so folks that are interested in doing that and make their living doing that, you know, they rely on those old documents and stories of where things are and are still looting and selling those items today. I think we in the West have this idea that if something is historic, we should be able to look at it. You know, we should be able to go to a place. This Smithsonian or the this or the that and go see it. I think what you're saying is we have to kind of of re look at that and that it's not ours to look at and that this is a part of the tribes in the part of your culture. And this is not something you could just gawk at. Even, I mean, I never even thought about looking at bones that looking at bones would be disrespectful until I thought about like Amy Winehouse's head sitting there at a museum and I'm like, yeah, that'd be kind of fucked up. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's that is a it requires a shift in perspective. Right. And I think that's all tribal nations are asking people to do is to think differently about these issues and recreate a new and more appropriate myth about our collective history and let us decide for ourselves what we want to share and what we don't want to share. And I think what you'll find is is that Indian nations have shared a lot. So this this work on Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act where those museums thought they were going to lose all their collections and their shelves would be cleaned out and no exhibits anymore. What they found instead was that they actually figured out what the hell they've been holding onto this whole time because now they're actually talking to the people who have experienced expertise and cultural knowledge about these items that are in their collections. So all of a sudden information that they never had before. And so the relationships that have been built between museums and those institutions and tribal nations has built something completely different than nobody had contemplated before just from talking to Native people and understanding what those things are and where they come from and what should be shared and what shouldn't be. There's still a lot of museums holding out though and usually those are the big well-funded institutions. What is their what's their argument? They don't have an argument. What's interesting is I wrote somewhere once that you know we're just waiting for a lot of old white people to die. I mean that's that's really the case that there's just this old perspective this old philosophy, this hoarding philosophy, not wanting to give things back. And so in their defense could it be that they're really concerned that that stuff would be lost and that it is important historical. Right and so the mission of many museums is to educate the public and there is this kind of arrogant what I would consider an arrogant way of thinking about about the world like everyone should have access to knowledge and tribes don't necessarily feel that same way. So there is that kind of that philosophy and so those institutions will often use the law to work against their repatriation situation and delay. Mostly delay. Most tribes that want to fight against institutions like that because for one thing they don't have the capacity to fight that because there are so many things on their table already and another reason to bring that kind of discord around these sacred items or around ancestral remains is difficult. So you don't want to bring you know bad energy around something that you need to care for and respect and put back in the ground. So you know there's a lot of reasons why these bigger institutions are getting away with not following the law and they take advantage of it. And so that's why my my organization is important because we try to help bridge that. It seems like some sort of cooperative effort could be reached where the things that the tribes would like people to see and would like to educate people on could be displayed in maybe some sort of a national museum of Native American history. Really that is an awesome idea. So there is this is how it exists. It's called the National Museum of the American Indian. Where is it? In Washington DC. It's also yes it's also in and it's it's got a I'm the best at coming up with ideas that are really it's got a pretty screwed up story though of how the National Museum of the American Indian got started. But I also want to mention before I forget there's wonderful tribal museums. So there are tribes out there that have their own museum in archive. To lay lip in Washington. Washington state. Where's that at? That is to lay lip. It's outside of Seattle. Okay. Hebob Cultural Center. A Saginaw Chippewa tribe in Michigan. I hope I always get my M states wrong. In Michigan they have the Zibuang Center of Anishinaabe, Lifeways and Cultures. Amazing museum. I think they're one of my favorite. Chocton Nation. My nation in Oklahoma are building a new cultural center in museum. So those are all. That's in outside of Duhrant. Is there a timeline on that when they believe that's going to be done? I know. Very soon. Very soon. I'm in Oklahoma in a couple months. Supposedly. Well yeah. If you can travel. It doesn't end. Yeah. Yeah. I'll tell you exactly when I'm supposed to be there. I'm doing gigs in Oklahoma. I'm supposed to be there. I think some time in July. Do you know where in Oklahoma? I'll tell you when I know. You know where I'm at? September. September? So you don't even know what month it is. September 12th. Okay. Right. Yeah. September 11th. I'm in Lincoln, Nebraska. And then September 12th. I'm in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Yeah. So Tulsa is up north. I know talk to that's southeastern Oklahoma. So it's a bit away. What is the name of that place? The box center? Is that what it is? And Tulsa? Well, I think it'll be done by then. Oh yeah. If not, the Chickasaw Nation has an amazing cultural center. So that's in sulfur, Oklahoma, I believe. They've got a great museum there. And really, that's a great nation to talk to. I often consider defecting to be Chickasaw. Really? Can you do that? I don't have to be adopted in, I think. Chickasaw are kind of like our little brothers. But they have, see our nations were heavily affected by Christianity. And so the talk to nation of Oklahoma is very proud of the fact that it's been able to maintain its languages through Christian hymnals in singing Christian music. So my nation really is Christian. But there are many other nations in Oklahoma that I've spent more time with than my own. And that's Chickasaw and Creek and Seminole nations that are also in Oklahoma that still maintain their stomped dances and other traditional pagan rituals. So I tend to favor those. Yeah. Yeah. It makes sense. Yeah. It's, it really is an amazing story and a sad story, but a fantastic story as well. The story of the Native American culture and life in this country and what it's become. And I don't think it's told enough. I don't think, I don't think, I mean, I think I'm, you know, a barely scratches surface of it. You did. I mean, I could keep you here all day. I'm sure. And it's been, it's been a very interesting dialogue because part of this is trying to figure out what is it that you want to know and you think that your listeners want to know about this because the last thing I want to do is is to offend your listeners because I, I really want everyone to come away with learning about Native American history and what's going on in Indian country. Not offended and not with any kind of distaste because I think this is our history that we share together. And I think the only way we're going to change things is if we change, you know, the general public and how the general public sees, sees any incontinence. Well, I don't think you have to worry at all about offend. I don't think you offended anybody. And, you know, I've been being nice. Well, listen, my answer to this. Bring me back and I'll be offensive. I would love me to. My answers is of my ancestors are, I'm third generation. So my answers is of nothing to do with the anis. We came over from Europe. We don't know anything. You're like, what the fuck was going on here before we got here? You know, my answers is all Italian and Irish. Right. Right. And they had to give a up a lot of their culture when they came into this. Most of it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I remember talking. It's interesting too, because so much has changed. I remember when I was a boy talking to my grandfather, my grandfather would talk to me about what it was like to immigrate here from Italy and how horribly they were treated. And the racism against Italians was just so prevalent and common and horrific. The things that you would tell me were terrible. And I've never experienced racism against Italians. It doesn't exist anymore. And in just the three generations of the tree and my grandparents, my parents and me, it's gone. It's essentially this being an Italian in this country. I mean, there's some people that have prejudice about all sorts of different cultures. But that's just rare. It's weird. You know, whereas Mexican prejudice is super common. Right. Prejudice against Mexicans dealing with this all this wall bullshit and what's going on between those are indigenous peoples. Sure. Yeah. Well, not only that, they own fucking California up until the 1800s. Right. I mean, that's part of some of the morning star. Part of that book is talking about Mexicans and the US troops fighting over California. That's a big part of it. Does that ignore Native Americans? No. I mean, it kind of does. But I mean, it's look in some ways Mexicans are Native Americans. Does that ignore Native Americans? No. I mean, it kind of does. But I mean, it's look in some ways, Mexicans are Native Americans, right? The Mexicans are here. They are. Yes, they are absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. So, and now that I'm sure they share a lot of DNA, I mean, there's a lot of Mexicans and I'm friends with it. Look, like, they could be, you know, complete Native Americans. Where do you say, yeah, 100%. Yes. Well, that's why they speak Spanish, right? Spaniards came and met with Mexicans, the original Mexicans, and introduced their land. Well, they weren't Mexicans. They were indigenous peoples. Right. Exactly. And just like, you know, what's painted to everyone, you know, they sent their, they actually trained dogs to rip people apart. I mean, that maybe I'm getting off the subject now, but, you know, Catholicism came over here and they had this thing called a papal bull and it was basically the Catholic law. And so these Spaniards would hammer the papal bull into a tree and speak in Spanish to the indigenous world saying, if you don't convert, we will slaughter you. Right? That's what you're a heathen. You must convert or, you know, we're going to kill you. And of course, nobody knew what the hell they were saying because they didn't speak Spanish. And they would sick these dogs on them. I mean, there's these horrendous stories that are told by the missionaries that were there with the Spanish, you know, to bring their salvation. And it's just horrendous some of the accounts of this. And that's just. And recent. That's what you're talking about. That was 15 hundreds. It's not that long ago. No, it's it seems like it is. It's five lifetimes. Five human beings living to a hundred five lives ago. People were doing that. We still carry this with us. I mean, these stories are still a part of the narrative that we told. And I guess we're still telling them, telling it because people haven't listened or there's still, these stories haven't been taught. Yeah. It's they have them and taught. There's almost too much to teach. And it's very convenient since, you know, we air quotes are the victors. So we kind of can rewrite history. Or at least make that part of history not important. You know, I had a bit that I didn't my act about presidents, about electing presidents. And I was like, you just got to realize the United States was founded in 1776. And that people lived to be a hundred. And that's three people ago. Like we literally just got here. We just got here. And now in the course of three people's lives, we have skyscrapers and planes and pollution. And we're sucking all the fish out of the ocean. And we've wiped out most of the history of the indigenous people. And it's crazy. I mean, it really is a very strange fact that is so often overlooked. If on a day to day basis, how often do we discuss Native American history? How often do we discuss the battles that took place, the lives that were lost, the people that died from disease, the trail of tears. How often does that discuss in this country? I think there's five or six million of us that talk about it every day. But that's indigenous people. I think that's true. Yeah, so we're keeping that alive. And like I said, there's a lot of, there's not many of us comparatively. But we're out there and we're all doing double time to work, to push this out into the public narrative. And it's been really, really hard. Well, I really appreciate your efforts and I really appreciate you, you, you, me and coming here and teaching us and educating me about what's, you know, how you feel about things and the stories that you came here to tell. And I think what you're doing is very, very important. I'm very happy that you're out there. I'm happy that you took the time in this calamity and chaos and pandemic to, to risk your health and come and make this trip. Yeah, I'm going to be isolated when I get home. My family's put me in the basement for two weeks. Jamie doesn't have the kudos. He told me he's fine. I'm clean as a whistle. So you're good. I hate healthy. Is there anything else we could talk about before you leave? We can talk about tons of stuff. But I think what I need to tell you is that the association on American Indian Affairs has been around for a long time. And we are rebuilding our capacity to look into the next hundred years of how we want to move forward. I would love to have input from your listeners about what they think they need. And or what their questions are about Indian country. And what they think. No, I'm not. It'll be fun. We have a website. Oh, God. Yeah, only good enlightened people can watch out. But that's a wonderful theory. There's so much we can do together and people who are interested in getting to know more about what's going on in Indian country or getting involved in helping out. What's the only people where they can go? Indian-affairs.org. Indian-affairs.org. OK. We will send people to there. And thank you so much, Shannon. Thank you very much for being here. I really appreciate it. Bye, everybody. Stay safe or not. Or stay happy. Do what you gotta do.