The Joe Rogan experience speaking of that they've just released all those documents JFK documents anything come out of that this I'm gonna. Oh One thing that come out was the they were saying that Lee Harvey Oswald was a Russian asset and that he had been Honeypotted by his wife and he lived in Russia in the 1950s and they think that in this I think what Russia is trying to say in this is that they were responsible for making Lee Harvey Oswald Try to kill the president. There was so much shit going on with that story for anybody that thinks in 2022 that you know what happened in 1963 You're crazy. What does it say? What does Tucker Carlson say? What does he say they spoke with someone who let's play it so we can hear seven minutes long. It's long. Oh Just let me hear a little bit of it Murders the president of the United States. It's then less than 48 hours later That loan gunman is himself murdered by another loan gunman What are the odds of that? It's one thing if you get struck by lightning rare but possible But if every member of your family also gets struck by lightning all in different days You might begin to suspect these are not entirely natural events But oh replied the US government they are this bizarre chain of killings was all entirely natural So listen to your after the JFK assassination that Johnson White House released something called the Warren Commission report and the report Concluded that while their motives remained unclear Both Lee Oswald and Jack Ruby had acted alone. No one helped them. There was no conspiracy of any kind Case closed time to move on and many many Americans did move on at the time They had no idea how shoddy and corrupt the Warren Commission was it would be nearly 50 years before the CIA admitted under Address that in fact it withheld information from investigators about its relationship with Lee Harvey Oswald But even then at the time before that was known the government's explanation didn't seem entirely plausible and some people started asking obvious questions about it It was at that point as Americans started to doubt the official story that the term conspiracy theory entered our lexicon as Professor Lance Daheven Smith points out in his book on the subject The term conspiracy theory did not exist as a phrase in everyday American conversation before 1964 in 1964 the year the Warren Commission issued its report the New York Times published five stories in which the Spiracy theory appeared Now today of course the term conspiracy theory appears in pretty much every New York Times story about American politics It's wielded now as then as a weapon against anyone who asks questions the government doesn't feel like answering But despite 60 years of name calling those questions have not disappeared in fact They have multiplied with time and here's one of them in April of 1964 a psychiatrist called Lewis Joiling West visited Jack Ruby in his isolation cell in his case According to West's written assessment He found that Jack Ruby was quote technically insane and a need of immediate psychiatric hospitalization Those are conclusions that poslingly no one who had spoken to Jack Ruby previously had reached Ruby had seen perfectly same to the people who knew him Lewis Joiling West pronounced him crazy But what what West did not say was that he was working for the CIA at the time Lewis Joiling West was a contract psychiatrist for the spy agency He was also an expert on mind control and a prominent player in the now infamous MK ultra program in which the CIA gave powerful psychiatric drugs to Americans without their knowledge So of all the psychiatrists in the world What in the world was this guy doing in Jack Ruby's prison cell? The media did not seem interested in finding out in fact the New York Times in an extensive 1999 obituary of West never mentioned the fact that he had worked for the CIA much less his time in Jack Ruby's cell Which seems relevant? So you can see why non crazy people would wonder about what really happened and of course many have wondered in 1976 long forgotten the House of Representatives Impaneled a special committee to reinvestigate the JFK assassination their bipartisan conclusion Jack Kennedy was almost certainly murdered as the result of a conspiracy But the question is a conspiracy by whom? Well, the obvious suspect would be the CIA Why else would the agency withhold critical evidence for investigators? Is there a benign explanation for that for maintaining this level of secrecy for this many years? Not the world aware of and it is illegal in 1992 Congress passed the president John F Kennedy assassination records collection act that act mandated full disclosure of all documents by 2017 54 years after JFK was killed The last administration promised to comply fully with that law but under intense pressure from CIA director Mike Pompeo With held in the end thousands of pages of CIA documents Today this afternoon the Biden administration did exactly the same thing that would be thousands of pages of documents after nearly 60 years after the death of every single person involved But we still can't see them Clueless not to protect any person. They're all dead It's to protect an institution, but why? Well today we decided to find out We spoke to someone who had access to the still hidden CIA documents person was deeply familiar with what they contain We asked this person directly Did the CIA have a hand in the murder of John F Kennedy an American president and here's the reply we received verbatim quote The answer is yes. I believe they were involved. It's a whole different country from what we thought it was. It's all fake It's hard to imagine a more jarring response than that again This is not a quote conspiracy theorist that we spoke to not even close This is someone with direct knowledge of the information that once again is being withheld from the American public and the answer We received was unequivocal. Yes, the CIA was involved in the assassination of the president. Wow No Wow, Jesus Christ 97% of the documents that have now been released. I think As of this to like whatever yesterday or something and people are starting to look through those They don't expect to find anything in those because they're still Yeah, they've kept out of the documents. Well, I would definitely not let people read the ones that would be looking bad I mean, that's the only explanation. Why can't we read them? They must be bad They can't be good. Well, they say a lot of great things about the CIA. We're pretty humble That's gonna cause chaos. That's why the whole place of the country is gonna fucking riot How will they ever find out if they're able to keep shit from us? How will they ever find out even though there's been laws passed and you know Rulings that they're supposed to release it in 2017 like But but why not like what are you doing? What's happening? You