Go to my truck. The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night all day. These are some of my all time favorite podcasts. I just have to tell you, I'm so excited to have you guys in today. I really was, all weekend, I was giddy. I was giddy thinking about today. So congratulations on the Netflix series. I am super excited to, first of all, to have that on a mainstream platform is such a huge victory for you. Thank you. Congratulations, Drew. It's all turned it into all of your way. I mean, there was so much skepticism just years ago. But now it seems like with an even Michael Schurmer, you were showing me something that he tweeted today. Oh, no, he tweeted it a while ago. But he walked back on some of his criticisms of our work. It was in light of new evidence of the younger drives impact here. Exactly. Exactly. No, it's been a major challenge getting this show done. But it's the first time, I think, that these radical ideas have got onto a major platform. And the whole focus of the thing is summed up in the title of the show, Agent Apocalypse, because we had an incredible apocalypse that hit this planet. And it wasn't just one moment. It was 1,200 years of hell on earth. Between roughly 1,811,600 years ago. And that is not taken into account by mainstream historians and archaeologists. Something that really changed the world needs to be taken into account if we're claiming to have a full knowledge of the past of humanity. And so I'm just really glad that Netflix have taken this show on and they're gonna blast it out to a worldwide audience. And hopefully that will begin to put more pressure on the academics who, frankly, I'm not a conspiracist, but they do act as gatekeepers as to what may be allowed out in front of the public and what may be not allowed. Yes. Like that seems to be because of the books they've written, the lectures they've given, that they've given all these lectures and they've written all these books that have theories that are outdated. And they don't wanna let those theories go in light of the new evidence. They do wanna push back as much as possible because, frankly, we can, they're credibility as the arbiters of the truth. Yeah, I think that's the issue. But it's really some quite sinister things have happened. Because of this show, I got banned from Egypt. That's the very clever way for archaeologists to make sure that no criticism can come in of their sites is just to take on things. It's just a ban the critic from coming there. I got banned from serpent mound in Ohio. Can you imagine that? I mean, serpent mound is national landmark. People should not get banned from going back. When you see banned meaning you tried to go to film or just to visit them. When we approached them to make an episode of my Netflix series at Serpent mound, initially they were welcoming and then they heard that Graham Hankert was presenting the series. And immediately they turned around and said, no, filming permission is refused because Hankert's views differ from our own. Well, I was able to make a virtue of that in the sense that I stood at the gates of serpent mound, which were closed. And I read out their letter where they say that just because I don't agree with them, they want to allow me access to the site. Fortunately, we have masses of footage drones and other things and we were able to do the show. But it shows again the limited mentality and people must be very insecure in their ideas if they actually have to ban critics from expressing alternative ideas. And what is the significance of serpent mound? Well, the first and foremost thing is it's an incredible, beautiful, amazing site which everybody who can get to a high hour should go and see. It's just a most incredible place. But secondly, there are indications that it's much older than it's supposed to be. And that has particularly to do with the way that the jaws of the serpent line up to the setting sun and because the changing positions of the sunset due to changes in the earth's moment. So this is it here? That's it there. We're looking at the head of the serpent and is looking straight at the setting sun. And this alignment was perfect about 12 and 1-1-1-1-1-1-1-1-2 years ago. It's slightly off today and that's because of changes in the rising point of the sun over thousands and thousands of years. And that's what they don't like. They don't want serpent mound to be older. There's a one group of archaeologists think it's just 1,000 years old, another group think, well, it may be it's two and a half or 3,000 years old. But the notion that it might be 12,000 years old is something they don't want anybody to hear, really. And is the evidence that it's 12,000 years old just based with the alignment of the sun or is there other evidence? No, there's other evidence as well. There's material from that time that have been found at serpent mound but archaeologists consider it to be irrelevant to the date of serpent mound. Yeah, material, like what kind of material? Carbon-dateable material, objects, bits of wood that were buried, people were there, people were doing stuff. It's clear that that site has been constructed and reconstructed multiple times, over thousands and thousands of years. And this is a theme that I've found throughout making ancient apocalypse. That when you look at a particular site, what you're looking at is the latest incarnation of that site. But the site itself has been sacred for millennia and it needs repair, it needs renovation. And particularly if it's an earth and mound, like serpent mound. And so that is a theme that does seem to be repeated even under modern accepted archaeological understandings of ancient sites, like the Parthenon and the Acropolis. Well, less so in terms of the timeline. Less so in terms of the timeline. I mean, one of the sites we visited for this series is an incredible pyramid in Mexico at a place called Cholula. And it is in fact the largest pyramid in the world. Very few people have even heard of it, but it's a much bigger pyramid than the great pyramid of Giza in Egypt. It's not as high, but his footprint is massive. So it's a huge humongous thing sitting there on the ground and it turns out that the inside it are four other pyramids that were built on top of what we see and what we see now. What we see now was built on top of those old pyramids and then at the very heart of it is a sort of sacred spring that seems to have been the reason for the creation of that. And we again explore the possibility that the origins of this site may be much older than the archaeological dating. So how long did it take you guys to do this series? Well, to be clear, it was the series is me and it's me making it, but Randall plays an incredibly important role in the series. Randall and I are comrades in arms. We're working together against the mainstream to bring an alternative point of view. And Randall is the star of episode eight. And episode eight is the episode where we bring the whole story of the ancient apocalypse together, the terrible things that happened to this world, the terrible things. That was the time when all the great megafauna went extinct, the saber tooth tigers, the woolly rhinos and so on and so forth. They all went extinct between 12,811,600 years ago and there's evidence of just utterly cataclysmic flooding in North America, particularly in the channel's scablands in the Pacific Northwest. And that flooding came off the ice cap and something made it come off the ice cap really, really fast. And Randall has just devoted years of his life to studying this mystery, what really went on there. And let's not underestimate it. Let's just not talk about lakes bursting their banks. Let's talk about something huge that took place and the landscape speaks to that huge event. And Randall, you've discussed this on the podcast before, but in the interest of making this a standalone show, we should probably get into it before. You came up with this idea. And what year was it when you first, when that idea first came to your mind that, remember you were telling me you were on acid, and you were looking at how that, well that, that was 1960, not that. Yeah, it can't. I didn't quite formulate a specific theory at that point, but you thought I had an impression. I called it an impression. I was looking at an underfit river. You know what that is? No. Jamie, can we do a map? And I'm going to show you exactly what we're talking about here. I'm going to zoom in on, OK, well, oh, here you go. OK, nice. Well, HDMI action. Yeah. OK. All right, you're going to learn a new term, Joe. It's underfit river. OK, so it was a little different back in 1969, but even prairie was a location of an airport. Let me put this on to terrain. All right, here we go. And let me say, here we go. So this is the Minnesota River Valley. And I was standing. I actually went back and found the few years ago, I found the spot I was standing. And it was right here on this bluff looking into this valley. Now, if you go here, you can see there's another side to it over here. And if you look back here, you're going to see, this is what's an underfit river. An underfit river is where the modern river is diminutive relative to the channel that it's flowing in. And the channel was part of what they called the spillway of Lake Agazi, which was a gigantic meltwater lake that formed in that interval that we were going with just talking about. So this is the modern Minnesota River, which is a fairly substantial river, probably close to the Colorado here that runs through Austin. But you can see the channel. The channel is huge relative to the river. A few geologists have worked on it and concluded that the meltwater flow here through here was 4,000 times greater than the modern flow of the Minnesota River. So anyways, I was standing here looking out into this. And what I saw was the modern river with an entrenched within a couple of banks. And then I'm looking at this huge channel. And I just had this impression that was this a huge river channel. You know how? Because see what I was looking three miles across. There's another set of 200-foot high bluffs, matching the ones that I was standing on. And then below me was the modern Minnesota River with its banks, which were like miniature versions of the bluffs. Now it was a full decade before I actually came back to the idea as I was beginning to learn more about catastrophism, which was still very much in the seminal stages back in the, say, the 70s. We've learned so much more about the catastrophic history in this planet since then. But then I began to think, well, and this was before I even knew about glacial river warren. It was called, which was the flow through here. And you can actually, I took great. We went there if we chased. We did indeed. We did right up here by Ortonville, is Big Stone, C. Big Stone City. So this is the southern outlet of Lake Agazi. And this was one of the outburst floods, many outburst floods of gigantic flows of meltwater coming off the ice sheet. Big Stone City. Now when you look at names of lakes and towns and places, often times there's clues, like big stone city and big stone lake. If you go there, there's big stones laying all over the landscape that were flushed out in this catastrophic draining of Lake Agazi. Because these drainings would have involved not just water, but icebergs. Yes, turbulent flows of water filled with icebergs, the size of oil tankers. And inside those icebergs, locked up a huge chunks of rock. And eventually the iceberg melts and it releases the rock. And that's how you get the big stone. Yeah. And then the last place we went, Graham, was the potholes at St. Croix Falls. I'll zoom in here. And this is an interesting place. There's a constriction in the bedrock. This is hard, basalt bedrock. When you have water flow coming along, it's got a conservation of volume. So that if you have a narrow part of the channel, the water coming in is it's going into that constricted channel speeds up. Because if you take measure of the water flow at any two points along the channel, it's going to be the same. Whether it's a wide channel with shallow or water, moving slower or a narrow channel with deeper water, moving faster, the discharge through that channel is going to be the same. Well, what happens is if it comes into a constriction, it has to speed up then. When it speeds up, it becomes more erosive. And that's exactly what happened right here at Taylor's Falls. And right here at Interstate Park is a series of gigantic potholes. Now these potholes are evidence of intense turbulence within swiftly moving deep water. And the minute here, I'll pull up. I've got a great shot. When Graham and I were there, I was in the bottom of one of these potholes and Graham is peering over the rim. And it's a great shot because you can really get the sense of the scale. I'll pull it up here in a second. But if we go where did this water come from? This water came from right up here, Lake Nippagon. That was the source of this water. And when you go south of Lake Nippagon, the whole landscape is channel scabland, just like Graham and I were seeing out in Washington. And this is very convincing evidence of really catastrophic water flows. And I've always thought it's interesting, or at least for the last decade or so, that if you look at the elevation of the land here, you look at the elevation of the land over here. It's the same. But if you go in the middle here, it's 500 to a thousand feet lower. What happened here, there was a major discharge south out of Lake Nippagon, came down through... And I think we should add that Lake Nippagon was discharging because it was filled up with water that came out of the ice cap and the ice cap and the ice cap filled it up. Yes. What is the conventional explanation for these massive bluffs that are very far apart from each other with a relatively small river running through there? Right. As I might, I've never found an explanation. But you can look here at this. And this is pure what you call scab land, which is the result of major, erosional intense erosion, cutting out this as a cool lee. And it looks like somebody's just been picking scabs off the skin of the land. And that was these water flows rushing through it, filled with icebergs and whole forest rips ripped up by their roots. Naturally, it looks like torn up scabs. And so it's your assertion that this all came out of the cataclysm. If this all came out of the impacts or yeah, comedy impact James, James Taylor, geologist has dated these flows. 12,800 to 12,900 years ago. And how has he done that? Radio carbon dating primarily by finding if you have a flood and it's picking up anything organic bone, wood, whatever. And you look in that in those deposits and you sample in the samples. Let's say because it's a flood, what it's going to do, it's going to pick up younger and older material because it's washing away, it's excavating other land. And so what you do is you get enough, uh, dataable material. And if it keeps coming up that the maximum age is a given age, that's probably when the flood happened or a minimum age rather, not a maximum age. In other words, a flood might pick up stuff that's 15,000 years old and 12,000. Well, when did the flood happen at 15,000 or 12,000? So what you do is you look for the youngest dataable material. And that should usually give you a pretty good idea of when the flood happens. So James Taylor has dated this overflow here. And again, it comes out perfectly consistent with the younger driest. I think it's important to add at that point that there's a reason for all of this. And this is a huge controversy in science at the moment. We know that there was enormous flooding 12,800 years ago. The question is what caused it? Why did it, why did it happen then? And, and there's a very powerful theory, which is now back by more than a hundred mainstream scientists that the earth passed through the debris stream of a disintegrating comet. And that theory is called the younger driest impact hypothesis. And those several bits of that disintegrating comet might have been pretty big, maybe up to a kilometer in diameter. And they landed on the North American ice cap generating huge amounts of heat tremendous shockwave hits hits the ice cap. And it turns that ice into water and it rushes down southwards, fills up these lakes, overflows these lakes and tears up the landscape underneath it. And this younger driest impact hypothesis is by far in my view the best explanation of what's going on. I'm very happy to say that the comet research group, the hundred scientists who are behind this, they've been funding their own research for nearly two decades because no big mainstream institution would get behind them. But just in the last couple of years, some big funding has come into the comet research group. And they're now in a position to go look at Antarctic ice, to go look at all the evidence from all over the world that shows that this cataclysm did happen 12,800 years ago and that we're dealing with something really that is almost unimaginable in its scope and which should change the way that we look at the history of the human species if it were not for this resistance. I wonder if we could just show a short clip which has got a rattle in it, the rattle clip which is from the edge of Apocalypse show. And where rattle makes the point at the end of it, once we take this into account, the whole story of history is going to change completely. And that's what we're fighting for. We're fighting for some recognition that something really important is missing. Here we go. Ancient structures built with surprising sophistication. It's the most amazing archaeostrony site in North America. Revealing the fingerprints of an advanced prehistoric civilization. This pillar is like our risetto stone. The possibility of civilization emerging earlier than we think it gets much stronger. It's going to absolutely demand a rewrite of history as we know it. Ooh. And this is the point. This is the point. This is why I've made this series because that idea has to get out there. That we've got to stop being so complacent about how we look at our past. And for the very same reason we need to stop being so complacent about how we look at our future as well. We live in a hazardous cosmic environment. It just happens that we live at a time in the human story where if we chose to do so, we could actually do something about it. What motivated you to get involved in this? I know fingerprints of the gods you released in the 1990s. 1995. That's when I first read it, became obsessed. What motivated you to put that out? It was a process, really. I used to be a current affairs journalist. I was the East Africa correspondent for the economist. I had no interest in history whatsoever, but I began to come across things, particularly traveling initially in Ethiopia and then in Egypt, which made me wonder about the past. And standing in front of the great pyramid of Egypt is an awe-inspiring experience, especially when you've never seen it before. And in 1989, when I first saw it, I had never seen it before. Six million tons, 481 foot high, 13 acre footprint. This massive thing, an archaeologist, is saying it's just the tomb of a pharaoh. yet no pharaoh's body was ever found inside it or indeed inside any ancient Egyptian pyramid. There had to be another explanation. And I started to, I've always been a contrarian. I've always tried to give an opposite point of view. I hate it when there's just a single narrative that says, this is the truth and there is no other truth. And so I felt it was important to start giving an alternative point of view. And I started to look into it in depth. Could there be something missing from the story of our past? And that's why I ended up writing fingerprints of the gods to put that information before the public to allow people access to information that they had not had access to before and to begin to think for themselves instead of just accepting the word of the so-called experts. The experts know a great deal. I couldn't do anything I do without the work that our kill just do, but they shouldn't be given a monopoly over the story of the human past. Our past belongs to us. It belongs to all of us. And everybody, whether they're in academic or whether they're man in the street, they've got something to contribute to the idea of our past. And the younger dry-ass impact theory, when was that first brought out? 2007. That was when it first brought out an immediately caught my eye because when I wrote fingerprints of the gods, I proposed that there had been a gigantic global cataclysm about 12,500 years ago. But I didn't really know what had caused it. I suggested a number of possibilities. And then suddenly in 2007, outcomes this hypothesis with mainstream backing by mainstream scientists saying that it looks like there was a series that's not just one impact, but multiple impacts all over the earth around 12,800 years ago that caused this cataclysm. And I began to follow that theory. And by about 2013, it became clear to me that these scientists were onto something really big. And I had to dive back into it and ended up writing another couple of books, magicians of the gods and America before, which we talked about on your show back in 2019, just to try to put that information out there. And it's fascinating, really, very lazy, the way that archaeologists react to an alternative point of view. In my case, they almost never get to grips with the material that I've put out there in the books. They just say, oh, Hank O'Keeza pseudo scientist. He's a fraud. He's a liar. But they never say why I'm a pseudo scientist, why I'm a fraud or why I'm a liar. They just throw those words out and they go to Wikipedia and that's what you see. And the point about Wikipedia is that's the first place. If somebody hears my name or hears about my ideas, first place they're going to go have a look is Wikipedia. And immediately they're going to get turned off and you can't edit my Wikipedia page. They've locked it and it's controlled by a group of academics. So I do find this incredibly irritating, but the only thing to do is to keep on going. And this is why Frankly Joe, your show has been so important because you're one of the very few people who's allowed this information to get out to the general public. This contrary information which the mainstream doesn't want to hear. You're a powerful platform that's allowed this information to reach so many more people than they otherwise would have reached. And I'm grateful to you for that. Well, I'm grateful to you guys. I'm really grateful because this is such an exciting notion. It's such an exciting idea. And it makes sense when you look at these incredible structures that we don't really have an explanation for. And when we think about the conventional dating of modern history and modern civilization, they want to put it at around 6,000 years ago. That's right. That's right. And then, that was the view really for decades that civilization began about 6,000 years ago. For that, there was no such thing as civilization. And they say that the first big, megalithic structures were created by societies that were already agricultural societies. So they were generating surpluses which allowed specialists to have the time to learn how to be architects and engineers and builders. But then suddenly out of the blue, and we've got an episode on this in the series, comes go backly, teppy in Turkey, which is 11,600 years old. And it's 5,000 years old, then the supposed oldest megalithic structures. And it's a fucking enormous megalithic structure, probably the biggest megalithic structure on earth because so much of it is still underground, although we know what's there because of grand penetrating radar. Highly sophisticated, 20-ton pillars, beautiful astronomical alignments, buried, deliberately buried by the people who created, they ran it for about a thousand years and then they deliberately buried it. And archaeology is still struggling to explain this. We've now had to say, well, okay, somehow megalithic architecture began thousands of years before we thought it began. How are we going to explain this? And they have to accept, this is one of the mysteries of Gobekli Teppy, that the archaeology does show this quite clearly, that when the work began on Gobekli Teppy 11,600 years ago, the entire population there were hunter-gatherers. They were not agriculturalists, generating those supposed surpluses that would allow experts in architecture to emerge. They were hunter-gatherers. And how in God's name do a group of hunter-gatherers wake up one morning and create something like this, this enormous scale, and then the mystery deepens because at the same time that they're building the megalithic site, they're also suddenly doing agriculture. And I look at that as a contrarian. And I say, I actually don't think that this was something that was just dreamed up overnight by a group of hunter-gatherers. I think I'm looking at a transfer of technology. I think people came to that site who already knew how to do this stuff. And maybe they used that site to mobilize the local population, to push them into a new direction. And that was truly the beginnings of civilization as we know it. But I think it was a restarting of civilization, a reboot, not the actual beginnings. I think there was an earlier loss civilization. That's the whole point of the show I've made. One should mention about that particular date, 11,600. Well, it's incredibly important. It's incredibly important day because the younger dry-ass begins 12,800 years ago with a cataclysm, with a puzzling, mysterious rise in sea level at the same point. Thousand years of freezing temperatures, mass extinctions of animal species all over the world. And then 11,600 years ago, global temperatures shoots up. The last of the ice caps collapsed into the sea. Sea level rises enormously. That is the date that works at Gabeccly-Tepi. And that's a point I've made many times, but it's really worth making because archaeologists roll their eyes every time you say the word Atlantis. But that is precisely the date, the Plato, which is the earliest surviving reference to Atlantis. That's precisely the date he gives for the destruction of Atlantis. 11,600 years before our time. He puts it this way that his ancestor Solon visited Egypt. And we know about that visit. It's historically recorded. That visit to Egypt was in 600 BC. And their Solon claimed to have been told by Egyptian priests about this great advanced civilization that once existed, but that angered the gods and was destroyed in an enormous flood. And Solon asked those Egyptian priests, when did this happen? And they said, oh, 9,000 years ago. Well, do the math. That's in 600 BC. That's 9,000 years before 600 BC. We call that 9,600 BC. That's 11,600 years ago. That's exactly the date of the end of the younger driest. And it's exactly the date of what is called meltwater pulse 1B. One of the biggest single rises overnight in sea level that ever occurred. So if Plato made it up, it's really weird that he picked a date that is precisely a date that coincides with the latest geological evidence on cataclysmic sea level rise at the end of the ice age. Could be a coincidence, but pretty good one. I will mention I did a two-part two-parter on all of the deep, what Graham's just talking about, and the geological evidence that confirms or refutes Plato's account. And it's available on my website for download. And it's like seven hours of detailed, unpacker. You go deep. And you say the academics are never bothered to do this because they're in their pride and in their arrogance. They just say, oh, we know that Plato just made it up, but it's just a fantasy. They don't know that. And there's people like Randall coming from the outside who are actually doing the leg work that makes us think about all this again. And there's plenty of evidence that there were many sites like this that were thought to be just legend. who are actually doing the legwork that makes us think about all this again. And there's plenty of evidence that there were many sites like this that were thought to be just legend and myth, like Troy, for instance, that has now been proven to be an actual real city that mimics the initial descriptions of it. The historical history is never dismissed myths. We should always listen to them. They're the memory, they're the memory bank of our species, and they may be expressed in symbolic language. There may be wonderful stories built around them, but that the core is factual information. And what better way to ensure that factual information is passed down to the future than to record it in a fantastic story that people will pass on. People love telling stories. And they don't even need to understand what the heart of the story is. As long as it's a great story, they're going to keep on passing it down to the future. So I think myth is very important, and that's something that we do in my Netflix series is we look at the myths the story of Atlantis is not alone. There are thousands of traditions from all around the world speaking of a global flood that destroyed a former civilization that brought to an end to Golden Age. With all this physical evidence and with all these myths, are there more and more people that are accepting this or exploring this with curiosity and open-minded us now? I would say yes, and one of the things that makes me confident that that's happening is because I am getting a lot of emails and communications from people, young people going, you know what? I was watching your stuff and Graham stuff. I've decided I'm going to go into geology. I mean, I've gotten dozens or I'm going to go into paleontology, or archaeose, drama, or archaeology. So just the fact that I'm getting those kinds of communications from people, that's every time I get one that's encouraging to me. Because I think it's the old axiom that sometimes, in order to evolve past an entrenched theory, the gatekeepers have to pass away in a new generation as to come along who's a little more willing to look outside that dogmatic framework. And also if you are a young archaeologist and you're trying to carve your way in the world, what better way than to explore this with tons of evidence that's very controversial theory that's been dismissed. It takes courage, though. It takes courage on the part of those archaeologists because they can lose any hope of promotion if they touch ideas like this. Archaeology is a very restricted discipline. If you don't copy what your professor says, if you go off an attention, they'll cut you off. There's so many people who've done such great work in archaeology that doesn't fit with the mainstream and they just get isolated by their colleagues. I'm hopeful. I really am. And one of the things that gives me hope is Breimer Erescoos, the reception of his material, that book The Mortality Key, which is fantastic, which points to reach out the forward to. Yes. And you did that podcast with us remotely. When we did that and he expressed all this information, we talked about these ancient clay vessels that show clear evidence of some sort of psychedelic that was mixed in with wine that was probably the origins of a lot of these, even democracy, like the Enlightenment. A lot of it came from these meetings and people came from all over the world to participate in these rituals. This is now being widely accepted and it's a field of study at Harvard. Yeah. And let's think about it. If you're a log, this is one of the reasons why psychedelics are being so successful in healing people with profound depression. Because what is profound depression? Otherwise that you're locked in a very narrow frame that you just can't escape from. And what psychedelics seem to do is they break that log and they allow a kind of openness to come in and new thoughts to come in. So it's not surprising that psychedelics revolutionized the ancient world. And I'm absolutely convinced that there isn't a religion in the world. And this has got to annoy a lot of people. But there isn't a religion in the world that didn't begin with experiences in altered states of consciousness. And when we talk about a lost civilization, I believe that that was a civilization that grew out of shamanism and to which for which altered states of consciousness were fundamental. We've been taught to despise altered states of consciousness in our society today. We're supposed to just be alert problem solvers and not doing anything else. But it's out of altered states of consciousness that the real creativity comes and that changes in mindset come and that people can break free from previous restrictions and move in new directions. I have mentioned to you a friend of mine, Ben Johnson. He's a former Navy CEO, 11 years as a Navy CEO suffering from PTSD, discovered psilocybin mushrooms. This is maybe 12 years ago, 13 years ago. And he began to a lot of his brothers and arms also were having same issues with PTSD, discovered that psilocybin mushrooms were in a very effective treatment for it. So he began looking into, he became a grower. And he's perfected an over over like 11 or 12 years. He's perfected the growing technique. And he has now been granted the first federal license to legally grow psilocybin. And they're building a laboratory in Norjorjo. And it'll probably be where we eventually will get all of our shrooms from. It would be very interesting discussion for you to talk to him. I love talked about what he's got going on. And I've asked, I said, would you ever think about going on JoJo and see and talked about what you're doing? He said, I'd love to. He's a very interesting man. But yeah, 11 years is a Navy seal and he saw it all. And mushrooms is what saved his life. And now he's building a laboratory. He's got funding. He's building a multimillion-dollar laboratory in Norjorjo. I've seen this operation. It's mind-blowingly impressive what he's got going on. Well, that connects us with Dennis McKenna and Terence McKenna's ideas, human beings literally evolving from lower hominids, experimenting with psilocybin mushrooms. It's a very powerful idea. And you know, cute us to Terence McKenna. And I never knew Terence personally, but I do know Dennis very, very well. And he's a fantastic researcher in this field. cute us to them for realizing Terence's book was called Food of the Gods. Encounters with psychedelics with ancient psychedelics were what put humanity on a huge leap forward. And then unfortunately we have repressive forces in society that have tried to shut that down and demonize it. But we are missing in a very, very important part of our heritage with the attitude that we have to psychedelics right now. And that's why I'm so happy to see that mainstream research is finally getting involved in this. They're realizing that these are real healing vehicles, that they can do things that no other big pharma medicine can do. My only concern is that big pharma takes it over and that they start putting in, you know, synthetic psilocybin and patenting it in various ways. This again, it's like our past. This is a birthright of all humanity, which we should have a right to. Governments should not have a right to tell adults what they may or may not put in their bodies. Governments should not have that right to hold the keys to our consciousness. These should be matters of personal decision. And for the same reason, looking into the issue of a lost civilization, we should not look for ourselves in the past. We should not look for 21st century civilization with all its particular kinds of tech and all its attitudes. We should be open to something very different in the past, which would nevertheless capable of doing extraordinary, extraordinary things. Is there any evidence that the ancient Egyptians utilize psychedelics? Definitely. The ancient Egyptians definitely use psychedelics. There are works about, their psychedelic of choice was the blue water lily, which was tinctured in wine. And models of this were found in the tomb of Tutankhamun as a matter of fact. And apparently, I've not experienced blue water lily myself, but apparently it induces a deeply altered state of consciousness and opens up visions and possibilities. We shouldn't despise these things. Do we know what the psychedelic compound in blue water lily is? I'm not sure. I'm not sure what it is. It's all I know is that it induces a dreamlike visionary state. So we know for a fact that they utilize this based on... Yes, we do. Based on those bottles that were found in Tutankhamun. Spirit is blue water lilies hold the key to stunning different high. Besides being stunningly beautiful, the blue water lily has some surprising additional qualities ranging from being an aphrodisiac to alleviating pain, depression, even upset stomachs, the blue water lily also has a dark underbelly. It's got dark underbelly. It's got psychedelic properties that can catapult you into a super high. How's that dark? Also called... That's the propaganda, I guess. The blue lotus, the blue water lilies believed to have originated in Egypt's Nile River and was used by ancient Egyptians as a sacred substance to attain higher levels of consciousness. In fact, it's common to find symbols representing the blue lotus in Egyptian pillars and scrolls. That's a fact. That's all over ancient Egyptian art. And Egypt told us to tell you that they're holding those just to sniff the perfume. No, they're not. They're venerating them for their effects on consciousness. And to which we should add that the ancient Egyptian tree of life was an acacia tree and its bark contains dimethyl trip to me. The most powerful hallucinogen known to man, I don't like the word hallucinogen, but for one field years. In the other hand, whatever we want the most powerful known to science. And again, fortunately, there is now very interesting research going on into these things. So there are so many forbidden areas of our past which have been forbidden by the experts, by the so-called authorities, which gradually in the new mindset of the 21st century we are breaking through to... I think what's special about our time in war. By goodness, it's a time of turbulence and a time of difficulty. We are living through a paradigm shift. And that paradigm shift has to do with our attitude to so-called experts. Yes, there is a place for experts. Of course, there is. But they shouldn't be given sole control over any area of the human story. And what's happening now is that people distrust experts and they rightly and properly distrust experts. Because again and again, the experts have misled us. And this is true with psychedelics and it's true with the study of the ancient past of the human species as well. It's observed that a small group of academics called archaeologists should literally hold the keys to the whole human past and tell us, let's you're us, instruct us on how human beings were in the past. There's so much more room for deep exploration on this. And for people who aren't academically to roll their sleeves up and get some work done. And Randall is a prime example of that, a man who doesn't come from the field, the background of geology or archaeology. But you've rolled up your sleeves, you've walked the walk. You've still rolled out right now. And you've got up there and you've brought new information to the table. And that's one of the things I'd like to say that everybody can do this. This is our heart past, our heritage. It should not be controlled by a tiny specialist group. We had dinner together in London and you were speaking about research that's being done on Diamathol trip. Can you talk about that? Well, that's happening at Imperial College. And I recently attended an event just a few weeks ago with several of the volunteers in that project. And what's happening is they are legally being given DMT at Imperial College, which one of the leading research institutes in the UK. And for the first time ever, they're not looking to find out what are the possible therapeutic outcomes of this. They're actually looking at the experience itself. It's very well known, anybody who's used DMT, I've used DMT multiple times, is going to have entity encounters. They're going to meet entities who may sometimes look very weird. They may be part animal, part human, inform. They may be almost formless, but yet they speak to you. They communicate with you. And of course, the mainstream attitude, this is just rubbish. This is just your brain on drugs. Well, Imperial College, they're now testing that view. And what they're finding is that these volunteers and something else, DMT, as I'm sure you know, Joe, is a very short acting experience when you smoke it. It's about 12 minutes, maybe less. You're in there, you're plunged into a completely convincing, sometimes terrifying parallel reality. It's so confusing. You hardly know what's going on. And then you're out again. But you come out with a feeling that something's been downloaded to you. In Imperial College, they found a way to keep people in the peak state of DMT for a hour. They're delivering it through drip, through time-to-release, and they're keeping the volunteers in an hour in that state. So they have time to find their way around the DMT realm that they find themselves in. And the astonishing thing is that these volunteers, both men and women, are all coming back with accounts of meeting the same entities and the same world. And it has to raise the question, and I know Rick Strasman has been on your show. And it acute us to Rick Strasman because he was really the first scientist to work with DMT. And human volunteers at the University of New Mexico, Rick Strasman is open to the idea that what happens with DMT is that it alters the receiver wavelength of the brain. And that it allows us to gain access to other realities. That these encounters are not unreal. That they're real, but they're real on a level that we can't experience in a day-to-day state of consciousness. We have to be in an altered state of consciousness in order to experience them. And ultimately, the aim of this project is to map the DMT realm. You know, we talk a lot about extraterrestrials and ETs and making contact. And I'm sure the universe is filled with life, and it would be a very good thing to have the tech to make contact. Or perhaps not a good thing with all those other life forms in the universe. But right there in the DMT experience inside our own heads, we have the opportunity to encounter another world, another realm, entities who are very different from ourselves, and who have teachings to give us. And I think we should be spending a lot more research funds on exploring those experiences and finding out what's going on, rather than zooming off to other planets. Let's do both. But let's make sure that we understand that the consciousness is an enormous mystery. And at the level of consciousness, DMT opens up literally a parallel world. And this is a nexus here with quantum physics and with the notion of parallel realms and parallel realities, maybe we can actually access them. Well, the work at Imperial College ultimately is going to come up with some answers on that. And so much more cost-effective. So much more cost-effective to other galaxies. Yeah. I mean, let's do that first. Let's understand what we are. Let's understand what our consciousness is. Let's not just keep locked in this. We're here to produce, we're here to consume, we're here to buy cars. Sure, we're here. Those are all part of our life today. But it's not all of us. We're much more mysterious, much deeper creatures than that. And psychedelics offer a doorway into another way of exploring human consciousness. And when we do that, we find that there are unseen realities all around us that can be made visible in a deeply altered state of consciousness. And yes, in terms of research funds, it's so much cheaper than trying to fly off to Mars or wherever. I'm not saying we shouldn't do that. I'm just saying that if we're going to do that, we need to explore the mystery of consciousness. And if we're going to have it, we're seriously going to engage with the ET abduction phenomenon, with extraterrestrial, so-called extraterrestrials encounters. We must recognize that fundamental to this is consciousness. It's not just physical contact. There's consciousness involved. I wrote a book back in 2005 called Supernatural Meetings with the Ancient Teachers of Mankind. And it is astonishing, Joe. How encounters that were described as encounters with elves and fairies in the Middle Ages, encounters that shamans to this day describe as encounters with spirits, that all the characteristics of those encounters apply to encounters with so-called extraterrestrials today. It's as though in each generation, each civilization, we constru experiences according to our cultural background. So they call them fairies and elves in the Middle Ages. Shamans call them spirits. We call them ETs today. But if we're really going to crack this problem and it is a problem and it is a mystery, I'm not dismissing it. It's a very important mystery. If we're going to crack it, we're going to have to use psychedelics to explore the mysteries of consciousness. Yeah, I am very excited that the attitudes about this stuff from the general public, people are much more open-minded now than ever before. I mean, ever in my lifetime, I remember discussing with people doing DMT in the early 2000s and people like what is wrong with you. Exactly. And now almost everybody in their cousin has a story about trying ayahuasca or doing cilasai ben or having some sort of an experience with peyote. Yeah. Yeah. It's very widespread. And I would say it's part of an overall change in our society, which is extremely healthy, which is the change of just accepting what the experts tell us. Oh, aside to said this, so it must be true. We're starting to think for ourselves and we're not willing any longer to be told what to think. We're wanting to find out for ourselves. And that attitude has very much affected the way that people relate to psychedelics. And when people explore the psychedelic experience in a responsible way, and it's psychedelics, a very serious business, you and I both know this, they're very, very serious business. I would not encourage children to take psychedelics. But actually, if we want to keep children away from psychedelics, we'd be far better to make them legal than leave them illegal and available on the black market. I think it's something for the mature mind. But I regard it as a fundamental human right of adults to be able to explore our unconsciousness so long as we do no harm to others. And I see this attitude spreading much more widely in society. What the hell is that guy in a suit? What writers he got to tell me how I treat my own health or how I treat my own consciousness? So long as I do no harm to others, that is entirely my business and nobody else's agreed. And if this is the source of civilization or one of the reasons why people were able to think so creatively and create these incredible structures thousands and thousands and thousands of years ago, this all does coincide with this work about these apocalyptic scenarios that you guys are talking about because if we don't have an understanding of how we got to where we were and we also don't have an understanding that this can happen to us again. It's very possible for us to happen again. Indeed possible for it to happen again. And in the eighth episode of Ancient Apocalypse, one of the scientists from the comet research group makes that point. The comet that disintegrated, that caused so much damage on Earth 12,800 years ago. Its debris stream is still in orbit. The Earth passes through it twice a year. And in the next 30 years we're going to be passing through a very lumpy bit of this 30 million kilometer wide debris stream that's called the Torrid Meteor stream. We should be paying much more attention to that because it's not doom and gloom because we can do something about it. Should we choose to do so? And let's stop focusing all our efforts on fighting one another and hating one another and filling the world with anger and fury. And let's work together as a human species to make life on this planet better for everybody. That's what's going on now. There's a new mindset which is coming into force. And I celebrate the youth of our society today because they are refusing to be bound by the orders that are given to them by the powers that be. There's a new spirit of thinking for ourselves. And that new spirit is in my view going to change everything. It seems like a dark time right now. A lot of stuff is going on. That's always the case when you're in the middle of a paradigm shift. It seems like a dark time where we're privileged to live at this time because two, three hundred years from now, this time is going to be looked back on as a turning point in the human story. We might mention that speaking to a toward meteor shower, we are passing through the toward meteor stream right now as we speak. As we speak, yeah, late October to about the second weekend, November, up to about the 15th or 17th of November, earth is passing through that stream. And it probably is the most important meteor stream in terms of the history of recent life on this planet. And this goes to people like Bill Napier and even all of those guys who've major astronomers are very aware of this. And it's almost like something is trying to shut them down and stop the word getting out there. Yes, NASA has a search for near-air asteroids, but weirdly they're not paying any attention to the torrid meteor stream. We know that there's 200 objects in the torrid meteor stream that are a kilometer or more in diameter. Combat Enki, which is at the heart of the stream, is almost five kilometers in diameter. It's all part of it's all of these are all fragments of that original giant comet that began to disintegrate 12,800 years ago and that the earth ran into. So is this what do you show me, Jeremy? This is our video on Twitter of the toward meteor stream. Great time to see shooting fireballs pop up. Yeah, there they go. That's exactly what happens. We're in that time period now. Unfortunately, most of those fireballs are caused by little objects. Maybe the size of your fist. Maybe just the size of a fingertip. Maybe just a speck of dust burning up into the atmosphere. But they are shrouding very large objects that are on that same orbital trajectory which the earth crosses twice a year. And we should be paying attention to those large objects because we can actually do something about them. And the evidence shows that they did something terrible to the earth 12,800 years ago and they changed everything, changed everything. And that is what this Netflix series is all about. That's what ancient apocalypse is all about. It's why it's called ancient apocalypse because that's what it ultimately comes down to. Now there's masses of material in the series about the possibility of a lost civilization and presenting the evidence for a lost civilization. But ultimately when you talk of a lost civilization, how did it become lost? What happened that took it away that obliterated it from human memory? And this apocalyptic episode called The Younger Dryas is the answer to that. A point I often make, which I think is worth making again and again, is how different the world was during the Ice Age. The Sahara Desert was green. It was a fertile nobody's doing much archaeology in the Sahara Desert today. The Amazon rainforest, five million plus square kilometers under deep canopy. Hardly any archaeology has been done there. And yet we know from light our surveys that there are enormous structures under that canopy. And then what about sea level rise? 400 feet sea level rise at the end of the Ice Age. The prime real estate on earth, 27 million square kilometers. It's about 10 million square miles were submerged by rising sea levels at the end of the Ice Age. And again, archaeology, there is marine archaeology but they're not really looking very closely at that. I wonder, Jamie, would it be possible to pull up the diving clip? Is this from Japan? No, this one's actually from Bimini. We have an episode on Bimini and on the very controversial structure called the Bimini Road. Oh, right. And this is just a little clip from that. My suspicion is humans are a species with amnesia. We have forgotten something incredibly important in our own past. And I think that that incredibly important forgotten thing is a lost advanced civilization of the Ice Age. I've spent decades searching for proof of this lost civilization that sites around the globe. Oh, wow. Now, my aim is to piece together these clues. And that seems extremely strange to show you evidence that challenges the view of human history. See that Bimini Road, the Bimini Road is not even very deep. It's only about 20 feet deep. It was one of the last things to be covered by Ice Age sea level rise. And that's why we show a graphic reconstruction of it above water. It's made of extremely regular blocks, megalithic blocks, on a very large scale more than a thousand feet in length. And when you dive on it, and I've dived on it multiple times, and I went back to diving in order to dive on it again in this series, it's impossible to believe that it's entirely a work of nature. And I took a marine biologist there with me who's dived all over the world and he agreed with me that there's just no way that this thing can be explained as a totally natural phenomenon. Can we see it, Jamie? And what is the conventional reasoning for this? The conventional reasoning is that it's just beach rock fractured into natural patterns. But when you get there and get underneath those rocks, you see that they're propped up there, levelled out with rocks underneath them. The whole thing has been very carefully structured by human beings. And the point is, and another point I'd like to make is Bimini today is a tiny, tiny island. But Bimini, during the ice age, was part of an enormous island. The whole Grand Bahama Bank was above water, an enormous island, and weirdly that island turns up on an ancient map. It turns up, that's not the Bimini road. But that is on the left. That's the Bimini road. You got the cursor on there. Yeah, those are shots of Bimini road. Yeah, it's hard to believe that these uniform stones occurred naturally. Yeah. How long is this? About a thousand feet in length. And it's not just a straight line, it's got a j-shaped curve at one end of it as well. And we know that it's been underwater for about six or seven thousand years. But the question is, how long before that was it made? How long did it stand there above water at a very prominent point on this ancient island that we now call the Grand Bahama Bank? And one of the mysteries I look into is that on an ancient map, the famous periodi resmap drawn by a Turkish admiral in 1513, that Grand Bahama Bank as an above water island is shown. It is featured on the periodi resmap. And what do you see running down it? But an image of the Bimini road above water. Now, how could periodi res whose drew his map in 1513 have known this? He tells us the answer that he based his map on more than 20 older source maps, all of which are now lost. And he suggests that those maps had come out of the famous library of Alexandria and that they'd been taken to Constantinople and that's where he got access to them. Somebody, I believe, was mapping the world, was exploring the earth during the ice age and left us ancient maps that show features that only existed during the ice age. That's the erroneous theme here. No, no, this is periodi resmap. It's on its side at the moment. But down there in the lower left, if you bring the cursor down, that big island down there in the lower left, that island is exactly where the Grand Bahama Banks would. And above water, version of the Grand Bahama Banks during the ice age, and that feature running down the middle of it looks very like the bimini road to me. So again, it suggests not only do we have At feature running down the middle of it looks very like the Bimini Road to me. Here we have it down. Mmm. Wow. So again, it suggests not only do we have a cataclysmic event that changes the face of the earth, but also we have evidence that somebody, as yet unrecognized by archaeology, had the capacity to explore the world and to map the world during the last ice age. One of the things I find most striking is the presence of Antarctica on ancient maps, because we didn't discover it until 1820. And yet it's on maps drawn in the 1500s with great detail, which again were based on much older source maps that have now been lost to us. The astonishing thing is the so-called Pinkerton World Map. I don't know if you can find it, Jamie. Draw and I think in 1813 or 1818, based on the latest exploration data at that time. And where Antarctica is? Yeah, that one keep going right. That one, that one you've got up at the top there. It just shows a hole where Antarctica is. Mmm. Because it was a nonished map. Nobody found it by then. But if you go back to, for example, the Walsy-Muller World Map drawn in 1530 or thereabouts, you find Antarctica is present. If you can find Walsy-Muller World Map, it would be worth taking a look at. Orantias Finneas, go for Orantias, O-R-O-N-T-E-U-S, Finneas, F-I-N-N-A-E-U-S, the Orantias Finneas map. That map shows Antarctica exactly where it should be. And it shows it, there we go. Right-hand side. There's Antarctica at the tip of South America, just south of South Africa. Would it be called back then? Well, they call it the southern land. And it's larger than it is today, but it was larger than it is today, during the Ice Age. Antarctica was a much bigger- Now what the fuck is it doing on a map? Drawn in the 1500s, which we know was based on older source maps when nobody knew it existed in the 1500s. To me, the obvious answer is we are dealing with the fingerprints of the loss of ization that mapped the world and that left evidence of that mapping, which ancient map makers found and used and incorporated into their maps. These maps can be very confusing because they were trying to mix exploration data from their own period with data from the older maps. But when you look at these maps in depth, they're very, very intriguing. When you go back to the, what you think or the origins of sophisticated civilization, how far back are we talking? I think that we really, you see the T-Shit I'm wearing? Stuff just keeps getting older. Yeah, this is my, this is my motto. My kids gave this to me for one of my birthdays. It's partly an ironic comment on myself because, fuck it, I'm getting older. I'm 72 now. It's partly an ironic comment on myself, but it's partly a comment on something else as well. Is that as science progresses, we are finding evidence that the human species is much older than we thought. Go back 25, 30 years. You'll find people telling you that anatomically modern humans didn't exist until 50,000 years ago. Then they found evidence of anatomically modern humans 196,000 years ago. Then in Morocco, they found evidence of anatomically modern humans 300,000 years ago. Humans just like us with the same brains, the same capacities, the same abilities, then us. Once you start extending that timeline back, you're leaving much more room for an advanced civilization to emerge. A civilization that was ultimately destroyed. If you just got 50,000 years to do it in, it doesn't leave you much space. But if you've got 300,000 years to play with, there's plenty of space. Bottom line, I think this was a civilization that flourished during the Ice Age. That occupied the prime real estate during the Ice Age, along coastlines, and that was obliterated almost completely in the cataclysm of the Younger Dryas. There were survivors. Those survivors left their fingerprints in places like Gobekli Tepe. After the Younger Dryas was over, they then sought to initiate hunter-gatherers into their system of knowledge. When you're talking about the Nile and we're talking about ancient Egypt, how far back do you think that goes? I think the Nile goes back a very, very, very long way. The Nile River system 12, 12, and a half thousand years ago looked much the same as it does today. Actually, Africa suffered much less from sea level rise than many other continents. The place that was most dramatically affected by sea level rise was around Indonesia and Malaysia, geologists call it the Sunda Shelf. And again, it shows up on ancient maps as it looked during the Ice Age, not as it looks today. There was a continent-sized land mass that went underwater there. If your continental Shelfs are very shallow and very, very limited and very deep, then you don't lose a lot of land. But if they're slow and gradual, you lose a great deal of land. Africa didn't suffer so much. The Nile River system was pretty much 12,000, a half thousand years ago, the way that it is today. The big difference was that the Sahara Desert was green and fertile. And this coincides with Dr. Robert Chocks. Absolutely. The assertion that when you look at the temple, the Sphinx are dealing with thousands of years of water erosion. Yes. And the last time there was water like that in the Nile Valley was when. The last time you had the water erosion like that in the Nile Valley was precisely during the younger dryest. The younger dryest was a period of extremely heavy rains in Africa. And its rainfall, its erosion caused by heavy rains, that is the enigma on the Great Sphinx. It's not, we're not saying that there was a flood came over the Great Sphinx. What Robert Chocks is saying and what his evidence clearly demonstrates is that we're looking at what's called precipitation-induced weathering. Weathering that was caused by exposure to about a thousand years of extremely heavy rainfall. And Dr. Robert Chock puts that thousand years precisely in the younger dryest period. That's the last time that rains of that magnitude fell on Egypt. And it's why we cannot sensibly accept the insistence of Egyptologists that the Sphinx is just four and a half thousand years old. By all means, yes, 2,500 BC, the ancient Egyptians were there. But I believe they found the Sphinx already created and already heavily eroded. And that they then recarved its head into the head of a pharaoh. And that head, as Robert Chock and others have pointed out, is way too small in relation to the body. That makes sense if it was a heavily eroded lion head, which was then later cut down into the head of a pharaoh. The geology speaks to the original Sphinx being more than 12,000 years old. And that's the funny thing because when Robert Chock, and let's not forget John Anthony West, John Anthony West, and I know you had him on his show before he passed. John Anthony West was the first person to suggest that there should be a huge question mark over the Sphinx, that the erosion patterns on the Sphinx suggest it was much older than Egypt told just said. And maybe 12,000 years old. And at that time, the response of Egyptology was, oh, rubbish. The Sphinx can't possibly be 12,000 years old because there's no other megalithic monument anywhere in the world that's anywhere like 12,000 years old. Well, that got blown out of the water completely forever by the discovery of Gobekli Tepe in Turkey, which isn't even that far from Egypt. Gobekli Tepe, 11,600 years old, a giant megalithic site, my goodness, if you can make Gobekli Tepe, you can make the Sphinx. It adds hugely to the credibility of Robert Chock's argument. And I want to pay tribute to Robert Chock because there's a mainstream academic who's been willing to stick his neck out. Despite taking all sorts of slings and arrows from his colleagues, he sticks with the data. And what the data says, regardless of what Egyptologists say, is that the Sphinx is 12,000 plus years old. And Jamie, can you pull up some of the images of that because it is really compelling. When you look at the water erosion evidence that is all around the temple of the Sphinx, it's really fascinating stuff, even for someone who doesn't know much about erosion. But when you when you look at it through his descriptions and his understanding of the various levels of stone, how some of it is harder, and this is the reason why some of is eroded less. You see it most clearly in the trench surrounding the Sphinx. You see it there. Those deep vertical fissures are classic precipitation induced weathering, classic weathering produced by rainfall pouring over the edge of that. You don't see it so much on the body of the Sphinx for a very specific reason that the body of the Sphinx has been repeatedly restored. Some of those blocks that we're looking at there were actually put in place during the old kingdom when the Sphinx is supposed to have been made from from new. What were they doing restoring the Sphinx 4,500 years ago if they'd just built it? You know, logic needs to be applied to this whole process. And we need to free ourselves from the dogma of the academic mainstream. So if this was all, if this water erosion began thousands and thousands of years ago, thousands and thousands of years earlier than conventional Egyptologists date this era, how old do you think that actual civilization was? Like how far back? I think it could go back 20,000 years before that. I think it was around all that time. And again, this is a point that I think needs to be made. Archaeologists will tell you that the entire population of the earth were hunter-gatherers during the Ice Age, say 20,000 years ago at the peak of the last Ice Age. Everybody was hunter-gatherers according to archaeologists. But we today live in a world where an advanced civilization, our own, if we dare call ourselves advanced and in some ways I think we're not advanced at all, co-exists with hunter-gatherers. There are hunter-gatherers in the Amazon rainforest. Some of them don't even know we exist. They've been spotted from aerial surveys. Hunter-gatherers in the Namibian desert, the notion that different types of civilization can co-exist on the same planet shouldn't be surprising to us because we do it. And that's what I'm suggesting was the case back then. But a civilization very different from our own. They certainly had technology, enough technology to explore the earth, enough technology to map the earth, very advanced astronomy, knowledge of obscure astronomical phenomena such as the pre-session of the equinoxes such as the obliquity of the ecliptic. I won't go into details. But it's present in ancient knowledge. There's an amazing book which I may have mentioned to you before, Joe, a book called Hamlet's Mill. And it was written by two professors of the history of science, George O. De Santiliana, and hearth of undecian back in the sixties. And what that book is dynamite because it shows going back into the oldest myths and traditions of the world highly advanced astronomical knowledge and astronomical knowledge that should not have been possessed by hunter-gatherer civilizations. Astronomical knowledge that could only have been accumulated through thousands of years of careful observation and recording of data. That astronomical knowledge is present in the most ancient myths of mankind. And in fact, it was that book Hamlet's Mill just as much as my first experience in front of the Great Pyramid that led me to begin asking questions about the narrative of our past. And I think it's healthy that we should have an alternative narrative. And I can't understand why archaeology is so... I have to say so afraid of alternative narratives. Because if they're not why do they react in this way as though we're some kind of existential threat? Why do they block me from getting access to sites if they're not afraid? If they're confident of their position, they should be able to maintain it against all opposition rather than trying to censor other points of view. Now, the Great Pyramid of Jesus probably the most stunning of all these ancient structures. And the stones are immense and some of them were cut from a quarry that's hundreds of miles away. How do you think they did that? Well, some of them, the granite in the Great Pyramid comes from more than 500 miles to the south. If you look at the famous Kingschamber, it's walls and it's roof. The ceiling of the Kingschamber are all made with gigantic granite blocks. Stunning details. Stunning detail. Those blocks on the Kingschamber and the roof of the Kingschamber waste 70 tons each. Now, Egypt soldiers will tell you that oh they could move heavy blocks because they put them on wet sand and they pushed them along on wet sand. Well, maybe if you're just at ground level that will do. But when you're 350 feet above the ground as you are in the Kingschamber, that won't do at all. I don't know how they did it. All I know is they did it. I don't think anybody knows how they did it, how they lifted those stones, how they brought them up to that level. I think we're looking again at a lost technology. And it was this ancient apocalypse, 12,800 years ago, that wiped that from the human memory banks almost completely not entirely completely because they were survivors. But removed most of it. A round of will tell you sea level rise. It creates a powerful high energy zone. Anything that was existing on those flooded coastlines has just been pounded to hell. I mean, talk about it, Ravel. Well, yeah, I mean, it's going to be a lot more energetic than now. I mean, imagine your sea level rising at three or four times at least faster than we've seen rise in the last century. And within their juxtaposed are these episodes of very rapid sea level rise. So you're talking about a very energetic intertidal zone. And anything that's there, short of large, magolithic blocks is going to be utterly obliterated by the time the processes is through. And I think that this is one of the things that, you know, the archaeologists and the prehistoricians, people are looking at that have failed to take into account the severity of these events we're talking about. Because the question always says, where are the artifacts? Where's the pottery? Where is the evidence that this civilization existed? And I have two responses to that. One, you don't realize the extent of the total remodeling of this planetary surface that took place. Because I mean, we could get into some of the stuff here. I have tons of images where I think maybe we'll get a chance to pull up a couple of really awesome drone footage here before we're done. But once you can wrap your head around it, you go really, you know, it's like imagine that you drop an atomic bomb on a city. And it completely obliterates it. And then a short while later, you drop another one on the same place. What's going to be left? And then 10,000 years, 20,000 years goes by, what are you going to find? What are you going to look for? You know, it's going to be just rubble. It gets reincorporated just into the geological stratum and it's going to be very difficult to differentiate for example, from what's called a conglomerate rock, which is basically we have just a huge jumble of broken rock cemented together. Right now within there, there could be all kinds of stuff that's not even recognized as being artificial in the sense that humans had anything to do with it. The other thing is, is when we talk about these ancient technologies, if we're only looking for a mere reflection of ourselves, we could overlook it completely because there is, I think there's evidence that exists. Now I mean, modern, some modern researchers whose work has been buried or suppressed, I think we're getting very close to rediscovering some of the things that our ancient ancestors were up to. And maybe this would be worth a whole show in itself. We could dive into this and I don't want to get into that today. But what kind of technology is you talking about? Well, I just, I shouldn't really get into it. Get into it. Get into it, we got to get into it. Okay, well, we've opened the door, sir. Okay. Well, okay. The passing of the HDMI cable, the passing, the passenger moment. Well, there are people out there now who have been working on trying to rediscover that. And, and again, I don't want to digress too much into this now because I, I would really rather be able to give a whole treatment of it. It might kind of derail us a little bit from this. But there are people who have been working on these things for, for decades now, basically in secret, in secret. And I've had the privilege of talking to some of these people over the last six or seven years. And right now as we're speaking, there's a, there's a group of people who who are basically going to open source a whole lot of stuff in the next three months. So it can never get suppressed again. And that's why I'd like to come back and talk and talk. I'd love to have you come back and talk about it. But we got to talk about it a little bit now. Okay. Well, there's a laboratory right now in the mall dives that's been building prototypes using these technological principles, which are based on implosion rather than explosion. And the inspiration for Tesla Tesla's ideas are part of it. I think you might. Tesla's ideas are very much a part of it. Yes, Tesla's ideas are very much a part of it. So is I don't feel a Victor Schauberger did the work with water and discovered. Yeah, look, Jamie, could you look up Victor? Oh, I have the, I have the cable now, don't I take it back. Let me find out. Well, no, no, let me, let me pull something up here. And I think the key thing is we're looking at technologies that are not the same as ours. Yes, and that's partly why archaeologists can't see them because they're looking for us in the past. And they're not open to the possibility that there were whole other kinds of technology that could be used. Right. I always go back to the ancient Egyptian traditions that speak of priests chanting as these huge blocks were lifted into the air. Were they using some kind of sound effect, some kind of some kind of use of sound that was able to manipulate matter. We know that sound can manipulate matter as a matter of fact, but they're lifting these blocks. It's again and again, it appears in ancient ancient Egyptian traditions. The notion that we could lift huge blocks with sound seems absurd to archaeologists. And yet it's there in the traditions of the Egyptologists and what Randall's talking about now is people who are working on a whole alternative path of technology. And maybe that's a rediscovery of the kind of technologies that we're used by a loss of I think that's what's important about what you're saying is that we have this very limited idea of technology based on what we've experienced. But if you had anatomically similar human beings that live for thousands and thousands of years, stuff just keeps on the know there. If you think about the amount of progress that we've achieved as modern humans, just in the last few hundred years, if you go back 400 years to now, it's a stunning amount of a challenge. Absolutely stunning. And if you have a completely different path of technology, one that's not utilizing internal combustion engines and cranes and and the like that we experience. Leverage, mechanical advantage, everything that our our tech is based around. Something that's insanely advanced tens of thousands of years of a different path. And that's that maybe what we're looking at. And that may begin to explain these these otherwise inexplicable monuments that have survived. Jamie, do I need? There we go. This is the work of Nikola Tesla. And he was, again, this is way too much for us to get in today. That's why we need to devote a whole session. Talking about this. Okay. But this is this was the inspiration. You know, his work was suppressed. A lot of his patents were taken sealed up by the US government for whatever reason. I don't know. But this is some of the stuff that's now being developed using his ideas plus some of the others. This is the man I've been talking to for the last seven years. Malcolm Bendall? Yes. And again, I don't want to get into it today. But like here's an example of what they're doing. This is a generator. It has no moving parts. It's all based on geometry, pure geometry. And the here's the basic idea is I think I understand it at this point. Residents, frequencies, everything vibrates. Have you ever like if we had an electric razor, we plugged it in, turned it on, set it on this table. It's going to move around. Isn't it? Have you seen that? Yeah. That's the beginning of the concept because it's vibrating. Everything vibrates at a frequency. And if you know that frequency, you can control things. And I think that's the basic idea of what we're looking at here. And it's all based upon the ancient numbers. And they're developing technologies right now. And they have been. I was recently contacted and given to go ahead that I could talk. I've been sitting on this for seven years without talking about it because they asked me not to talk about it until they had their patents in place and their licensing. That's all happened since last summer. So we're now free to talk about it. So that's what I'm saying. I think it would be a good idea to get me back on here. We can look at it. I'm going to lay this on Graham so he can look at it too because I really want to get Graham's feedback on this. I mean, would it be fair to say that there's an element of rediscovery of a less technology from the past? I think it would be fair to say that. Yes. And so through somehow through this technology they're able to move stones or cutstones or all the above, all the above and and even transport them. Well, what is all this? Well, this is the model. And this is diagramming all the frequencies of the elements and what their vibrational frequencies are and the numbers that measure those frequencies and they're all the numbers we get from looking at these ancient traditions that recur over and over and over again that I've been talking about in my sacred geometry classes for decades without knowing what the final result was going to be. So this this inventor who's working with this small group contacted me and this is what he told me. He said, you built the foundation. He said, you laid the foundation with your work on ancient geometry and I built a house on top of it. That's what he said. So for seven years he's been supplying me with all the information. I copy of all the patents. I have videos of the testing of the prototypes and Mazda, the car manufacturer in Japan is getting ready to do a $25 million testing of some of these prototypes that they believe they can retrofit internal combustion engines with and there's over 100 that developed over 100 patents on some of this stuff. And it's amazing and we'll be the fuel. Well, plasmoids, plasmoids as it says here are donut or toroidal shaped clusters of net protons or net electrons that once captured and placed into a toroidal orbit are capable of absorbing, storing, and releasing enormous amounts of energy within their self-generated and structured electromagnetic containment field. Plasmoids in effect function as an atomic battery that can be self-charging due to its ability to convert matter to available clean energy. So it's a lot to get into and I think it would take us kind of off what we're here to talk about. But today, at least what's promising is that there is some at least research or understanding and it's actually quite mature at this point. And in order to avoid the kinds of fate that they fell Tesla and Reich, Robert Oppenheimer, Victor Schauberger, and so many others that were working in these fields all kind of converging on this same insight. It's been conducted in secret. The laboratory has been that they've been developing this as in the Maldives so that it's been immune from government interference. And now I think it's about ready to go the next. What is the motivation of the suppressing of this information? I think in case of Tesla, wasn't it military, the fear of military applications? I also think that, you know, there are huge corporations that have very large investments in a particular path of technology, which is ours. And for somebody to come up with a whole new path of technology, very threatening to them. And much better from their point of view to suppress it, or if they can't suppress it to kind of buy it and hide it and keep things on the track that they're on now. I would say that's the motive. And maybe for people that are curious about this and maybe even skeptical, consider the massive change that nuclear power provided us. Whereas before the 1940s, this was unheard of. Yes, this even the concept of it. And all sudden, now we have nuclear power, nuclear weapons, the most profound power known to man currently. God help us. It's a power for use by adults, but unfortunately, it's the link with children who are leading our world right now. The leaders of our planet, the politicians out there, that they just complete usholes. I can't think of any of them who I feel any respect for whatsoever. And it's they who are in charge of this frightening, terrifying technology. We just aren't mature enough as a civilization to manage technology like that. You have to get that level of maturity. And I don't think it's a coincidence that these people are, they're not psychedelically experienced. Exactly. I've said it on your show and I'll say it again. If I could set the rules, I would absolutely insist that nobody has the right to run for a head of state or head of government unless they've had a dozen experiences with ayahuasca. You're here. Let them have those experiences first. Mushrooms will do the job just as well. A dozen major doses of mushrooms will do the job just as well lead to that self-examination that we see so little of in our politicians today. And I think many of them have actually decided, I don't want to be a politician anymore. And those who did carry on in that path would be gentler, kindly and more open to extraordinary possibilities. You know, we did have one president too. It's pretty a lot of evidence that he did in fact take several acid trips. You know, that was. Who's that? John Kennedy. Aha. Really? Oh yeah. You know, he was having multiple affairs in the White House, right? I knew about that. Okay. So one of his affairs was with a woman who was an associate of Timothy Leary. So that's well established. So the root there's basis to the rumor. That's another reason why they killed him. Could be. Well, it could be that because of, you know, his, you know, because he did really go through a pretty much a change of attitude during that last year. But you know what it comes down to is, you know, right now everything is going on in the world is basically about the control of energy and resources. And if there was a way of technology or energy that could do an end run around this idea that we live in a mall, thuzy and reality. And we have to have this, you know, fight to the end over who's going to control the energy and and who's going to control the resources. And we'd render our entire foreign policy, our military policy, all of that irrelevant. And from what I've seen about, and my, my evolving opinion about the possibility of their being ancient technology that if there was an ancient technology, it should be possible to recover it. And what I've seen in the last half a decade or more has initially skeptical, but as I've learned more, you know, gone arduously through these patents and things, I've become convinced that, yeah, there is something here. There's something here that there are people who have been working on these things. And they would like my role as they've requested to me is these guys are academic scientists and ventures, one of them's a geophysicist, a couple of people that I've met recently who are putting the money up from into this are basically in the inner Antis and Venters, one of them's a geophysicist. A couple of people that I have met recently who are putting the money up from into this are basically in the energy industry, who have seen the prototypes. I had a meeting in September or not September about a month ago, October, early October, with four gentlemen that are putting the money into this developing these prototypes. One of them said to me, well, when I first heard this, I didn't believe this was possible. But he says, I've seen the machines, I've seen the technology work. I'm now convinced. So they're doing, they've done their initial prototypes and now they're going to do this major testing Mazda, automobile manufacturer in Japan, has come on board said, you can use our laboratories and because of of course what they're thinking is that they may be able to get an end run around all the other from competition. And one of the things, and when I come back, we can look into this. I've got the videos of testing the prototypes, like taking one of the gentlemen that I met with his nephew or son-in-law, mechanical engineer, who took one of the devices and it took four hours, they retrofitted an internal combustion engine because what this device does is it recycles all of the waste products. Heat products, carbon dioxide, everything that's coming out of an internal combustion engine gets captured and recycled and converted back to energy. The initial test showed that the internal combustion engine went from about a 30% efficiency to 80% and this is just the initial prototypes. I can come on your show, we can look at the videos, I can show you all of it. I'd love to. So they're going to open source all of it within the next few months around the world. So they're looking for venues to put this information out because Malcolm, the inventor you saw, he says, you know, this is my legacy and I want the world to have this. So we can please go ahead. Well, I was going to say, as you say, that they've had to keep it secret up till now. Precisely because of the nature of the world that we live in. And I would say that we live in a system that is very controlling, that works through very clever means to control the way people think. But that the younger generation is beginning to break free of that in exciting ways. And I would say that archaeology, strangely enough, is a very important part of that system of control. If archaeologists can convince us that we are the end product of a long steady evolution where the apex and the pinnacle of human achievement, then it justifies everything else that goes on in the world right now. Any chance of pulling up the, um, do you think at enemy number one, clip in a minute, please, we'll do that. But do you think that they're doing this in kahoots? Or do you think they're doing this to protect their own personal interests? And it seems to align with the system for the foremost to protect their own personal interests. And their own personal interests are to express history the same way that they have always. Yeah, I don't, I don't think that there are many archaeologists who are actually out there deliberately lying to the public. I don't think that's happened. They're just egotistical human beings. They're just like everybody else. You know, you get invested in a particular line. Yes. It becomes, it becomes existentially important to you. It's your identity. It's your identity. It's your identity. And your knowledge defines you. You're knowledge defines you. And if others challenge it, your first reaction is self defense. Yes. You've got to defend yourself against this intruder who is, who is attacking you in, in one way or another. So I don't, I don't think that it's a calculated conspiracy in that way. But I do think that advantages being taken of it by other powers, by the powers that be, I mean, I don't, I don't want to get into the whole COVID and vaccine issue too much right now. As a lot, I don't know about that. But one thing I do know for sure is that the whole COVID and vaccine issue has been deliberately carefully used by governments. They've taken advantage of it to inculcate and encourage a habit of obedience in the population that we just kind of automatically say yes. And that's part of, that's part of the, the controlling powers in our society fighting back against this tendency to individuality and to thinking for ourselves. And that's why I say we live in a middle of a paradigm shift where things are, we're in struggle right now. And either one side or the other is going to win. But I believe that the force of good is a real force and that, and that the ability to think freely and think independently that the younger generation is showing is going to triumph in the long run. And what is this enemy number one video? Do we need to pass the sacred HDMI cable? Well, again, it's just, it's just this, this, that I was initially really perplexed by the way archaeologists responded to me. Why would they, why would they hate me so much? Why would they be so angry with me? Well, you're an outsider. And, and yeah, I guess, I guess that's it. Simply by, by proposing a different point of view. So it's just another short clip from ancient apocalypse. This idea is upsetting to the so-called experts who insist that the only humans who existed during the Ice Age were simple hunter gatras. That automatically makes me enemy number one two archaeologists. What I'd just say, we don't know. This is a spectacular mystery. You leave it at that. It's my job to offer the alternative point of view. Perhaps there's been a forgotten episode in human history. But perhaps the extremely defensive arrogant and patronizing attitude of mainstream academia is stopping us from considering that possibility and trying to overthrow the paradigm of history. Oh, that guy. Very, very dramatic. I was lucky to work with a, with a, with a really top class professional camera team in, in making this series and talking about COVID, my goodness. I mean, to make an eight episode TV series when the world was shut down, the number of quarantines we had to do in places like, you know, Indonesia, in order to get this job done. But we powered through and we, and we, and we got it done. And I hope, I hope that the series is going to make a difference. I'm just going to be part of that providing an alternative source of information to people who are fed up with being told what to think by the so-called experts. No, I'm certain it'll provide a lot of inspiration for people to think differently. Now, the possibility of this technology existing that we're talking about existing in the past would this technology be made with metal, would this, would these engines, these alternative technology engines? And if they were, we really wouldn't find evidence of them today. I think we should, I think we should be open minded to, to a whole range of possibilities. Exactly. One of the, you know, one of the issues that gets me into a lot of trouble with archaeologists is that I think there are latent human abilities, which we are not using. I don't know if you've ever had Rupert Sheldrake on your show. So Rupert has done a lot of work on telepathy, real solid scientific work. Just like, why does your dog know when you're coming home? You know, he did a series of controlled experiments where the owner came home at random different times of day. And the dog always knew when he was coming, some kind of telepathic message was passing back and forward. Rupert Sheldrake has shown that telepathy is a real thing. How do we, how do we, we're thinking to somebody in the next second, the phone rings. And it's, and it's that person, things like that, but Richard, Rupert has done very thoroughly detailed statistical work on this and shown that it's far beyond chance that this is a real ability that humans have, but that we're persuaded in our society to think does not exist. What about telekinesis, the ability to move objects with the mind? That sounds like Stephen King territory, but maybe we can do it. Again, our society has rested all its faith on leverage and mechanical advantage and a particular path of technology. And we've allowed what I think may be latent human abilities to fall into the abyss and not to be used anymore. So much so that we laugh at ourselves for even thinking of them. And whenever I mention things like telepathy or telekinesis, I'm not pinning my whole thesis on that. I just think it's something we should be open to. Well, if an ancient civilization were using those innate human abilities that we've forgotten how to use today, there would of course be no physical evidence for it whatsoever. There'd only be the results of what they did, like those 70 ton blocks, lifted 350 feet in the air covering the roof of the King's chamber in the in the in the Great Pyramid, impossible to explain in terms of leverage and mechanical advantage, but perhaps another explanation is needed. Also so profoundly advanced in terms of their ability to move immensely huge objects that it makes you consider in a way where we're talking about it. Look at even if we use the conventional dating of 2500 BC, how? How? What what what was available? How do they do that? Like I've never seen a satisfactory explanation from the Egyptological fraternity as to how this was done. They keep coming up with multiple theories about how the Great Pyramid was built and none of them make any sense to me. I've been lucky enough to climb the Great Pyramid five times. I've explored every internal passageway. This thing is just a gigantic mystery in stone. It challenges us to think again about everything in the ancient world. The fact that it incorporates the dimensions of our planet in its in its key dimensions that you can take the height of the Great Pyramid and multiply by 43,200 and you get the polar radius of the earth. You can measure the base perimeter of the Great Pyramid multiplied by the same number. You get the equatorial circumference of the earth. I won't bore you, but that number is not a random number. Anybody who goes into my books will find that it relates to the obscure astronomical phenomenon called precession of the equinoxes. Great Pyramid is almost perfectly aligned to true north within three sixteenths of a single degree. 30-naked footprint, six million tons, 481 feet high, and aligned to true north with this with this incredible precision. I think they're trying to they're trying to tell us something. When the pyramid speaks to our planet, it speaks to this earth. It's aligned to true north and it's built on a scale that models the dimensions of the earth and that scale is derived from a key motion of the earth itself. It's very, very clever. Again, I try and mention this to archaeologists. They say, it's just a coincidence. It's just rubbish. That's what they say. It's such a lazy way to dismiss the data rather than getting to grips with the data and saying, could this really have happened by coincidence or is something going on here? There are these key numbers that recur over and over again. We find them in the Vedas. We find them in the Bible. We find them in my introductions. They were in Samaria, over and over again. One of those key numbers, what Bert Graham just said, 43,200. Even in the way we still measure time today, if you think about how do we measure the length of one rotation of the earth on its axis, the meridian lining up with the center of the sun. We've divided that into seconds, right? Minutes, hours. 24 hours is the exact period of the earth's rotation with respect to the sun. 24 hours, time 60, time 60 means there's 86,400 seconds exactly in that period. On the moment of vernal equinox, the period of time of darkness and of light are exactly equal, 43,200. That number is the scaling ratio of the pyramid. If we were to take that the pyramid, as it is today, on the Giza Plateau, in large it by a factor of 43,200. As Graham said, the height of it is literally within a few hundred feet of being the polar radius of the earth. In fact, the range of air is within the range of air of our most accurate modern satellite surveys. When I come back, I could easily demonstrate that. I put together the slides to show exactly how it's done. The geometry of the height, the ratio of the height, to the square base, solves the ancient geometric problem of the squaring of the circle. Because what they've basically done is that if you enlarge that pyramid by 43,200, the square base now becomes precisely the equatorial circumference of the earth. Precisely. For somebody to say this is just coincidence. Well, if it was one example, or two example, no, there's dozens of examples like this where you could show that somehow somebody seemed to know something beyond what they've been given credit for. Something that they shouldn't have known at the time that that structure is supposed to have been built. What we're looking at in the Great Pyramid and many other structures around the world, staring us in the face, almost slapping us in the face, is evidence of a lost technology. And yet it's so resisted and so sneered upon by mainstream academia. This one, the things I'd really find very uncomfortable about archaeologists, the way that they sneer at alternative ideas. You know, the fact that I've taken psychedelics, that is used against me all the time by my critics. Oh, you know, Hancock takes drugs. So you shouldn't listen to anything that he says. That's what I told my kids. Excuse me. What a lazy way to dismiss an alternative argument just with themselves. Yeah, it's silly. It's also like what has he gotten out of those drugs and why are you so dismissive of that? Yeah. Yeah. This I'm so fascinated by the possibility of this ancient technology existing and what form it existed in. If they really did have the ability to calculate as you're describing and they did it with such incredible accuracy and the way you're laying it out, it's almost undeniable. The possibility of coincidence is far less than the possibility of calculation. Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. And yet this lazy dismissal is used to keep people locked in a particular framework of thinking. And that's what we're trying to disrupt. We're disruptors. We're contrarians. And I think there's a need for disruptors and contrarians in the world no matter how much they insult me, no matter how much they insult Randall. The information that we're putting out there sooner or later is going to do some good. How far back do you think this technology goes? You know, I keep pressing this because I want to understand what's the long end of this. How far back do you think human sophisticated civilization existed? If the conventional ideas ancient Sumer 6000 Mesopotamia 6000 plus years ago, how far do you think we're talking about? Well, first and foremost, I can't give you absolute facts. I'm working on my ideas about the past. I think it's a civilization that went back deep into the last ice age, maybe as far back as 100,000 years into the past. I think it's a civilization that emerged out of hunter-gatherer societies and emerged out of shamanism. You encounter shamans in the Amazon rainforest today who are using ayahuasca. Well, ayahuasca is a miracle in itself. You know, there's what is it? 100,000 plus different species of plants and trees in the Amazon. You have to put two of them together to create the ayahuasca brew. One of them contains DMT and the other contains a mono amine oxidase inhibitor. DMT is not orally active. That's why we have to smoke it in order to get the effect. But what they've done in the Amazon is make it orally active by combining it with the ayahuasca vine, which contains the mono amine oxidase inhibitor that switches off an enzyme in the stomach that allows the gut to absorb the DMT and for it to enter the brain. Now that is science that we're looking at there. We're looking at evidence of science. So the notion of science emerging from a shamanistic society makes perfect sense to me. And again, this is where the archaeologists roll their eyes. But when you ask those shamans in the Amazon, where did your ancestors get the knowledge to make ayahuasca come from? Surely it can't have been done by trial and error. When you've got 100,000 different species of plants and trees, you're taking two, neither of which is active on its own, which only work when they're combined together. How did you arrive at that? And they say, the spirits taught us, how did the spirits teach you? Oh, our ancestors used to use YOPO. They took a snuff. That's a DMT snuff. And in the YOPO trance, they were taught how to make ayahuasca. So the idea ludicrous is it may seem to archaeologists that shamanistic societies can create science. Seems to make perfect sense to me. And I think the lost civilization I'm talking about emerged out of shamanism. But it then went further steps ahead than other hunter-gatherer societies. An unlike our civilization today, which is in the process of destroying the last hunter-gatherer civilizations on earth. Some members of our civilization, I'm very glad the way the election just went in Brazil, because we need to preserve the Amazon rainforest. It's madness to cut down the Amazon rainforest and turn it into soya bean farms. Our civilization today has no respect for nature, no respect for hunter-gatherers who are people with an enormous store of knowledge of how to survive on this planet. I think that the ancient civilization I'm talking about had great respect for its roots, for its origins in hunter-gatherer civilizations. And that's why I don't think they contaminated them too much. They stayed away from them and pursued their own path once they'd achieved these levels of technology. You often talk about the use of lidar and ground penetrating radar and how they've uncovered these structures and the ancient Amazon rainforest was filled with massive civilizations. Yes, absolutely no doubt about it now. Is it possible that these massive civilizations were also advanced and through the use of pharmacology the same way we understand how to synthesize DMT and synthesize very psychedelic drugs. That's how they learned. Yes, it's perfectly possible that there is science in the hunter-gatherer mode of life and that they applied that science. The Amazon is not entirely a natural product. The Amazon is a human-made garden. The trees in the Amazon that produce food are hyper-dominant. That didn't happen by accident. That happened because human beings made that they created this incredible. We still don't understand it fully today. The terra-prater, the black earth, which is immensely fertile, which reproduces its own fertility through bacteria in the soil. There are still patches of terra-prater all over the Amazon and settlers in the Amazon seek them out to plant in. Again, this is evidence of science. There were cities in the Amazon. Populations of 100,000 or more have been now revealed in the Amazon. It was a completely different from what we imagine it to be. It used to be 7 million square kilometers. About 2 million square kilometers have been cut down by our rapacious short-sighted idiotic civilization. But 5 million square kilometers are left and we're just beginning to get a hint of what's underneath them as a result of LIDAR. This technique like light imaging and detection which flies, you can fly a plane over a section of rainforest and without damaging anything, you can see what's underneath that rainforest. What's underneath it is gigantic geometrical structures, huge squares, circles, a circle surrounded by a square. Just enormous, enormous constructions that you would not expect to find together as civilizations having made them yet. There they are in the Amazon. I've had occasion to, this is one of the recent sciences on this. I've had occasion to meet a few billionaires and I've tried to say to them, if you want to do some good with your money, put it into a major LIDAR survey of the Amazon because right now only a tiny section of the state of Acre in Brazil has been surveyed by LIDAR and what's come out of there. They're even finding pyramids in the middle of the Amazon. Then once they're found, archaeologists can go to them and have a look at them, put some money into a proper LIDAR survey of the entire Amazon and our whole idea of the past of the human species may change. When that comes back to my point, five million square kilometers in the Amazon hardly studied. 27 million square kilometers of submerged continental shelves hardly studied. Nine million square kilometers of the Sahara Desert hardly studied. And yet, Archaeology claims to know the whole story of our past ridiculous. They can't know the whole story of the past while so little of the planet remains so much of the planet remains untouched by archaeology. And why does it remain untouched? Well partly it's very expensive to go do archaeology in the Sahara or in the Amazon and partly because archaeologists are convinced that they're not going to find anything there. Well, LIDAR is breaking that myth. It's showing us that there is something to find in the Amazon. And I would urge any good-hearted billionaire who wants to see some real changes in our understanding of the past to put some money into LIDAR surveys. I know a number of the archaeologists who are doing this, a guy called Marty Parsons at Patenson for example, very very important work when they're doing it on tiny funds. They need more funding in order to survey the whole Amazon. And I think if the whole Amazon is surveyed, it's going to radically change the way we view our past. One of the problems is that both in archaeology and geology is the focus on a very limited specialized site. You will have archaeologists that will spend a decade excavating one site. And obviously they're going to know more about that site than anybody far and away. What seems to be lacking in the same with geologists, you know, you'll have geologists who spend years examining one site, one geological outcrop, determining the lithologies, the petrology, sedimentary sequence, the ages. And they can tell you all about that site. What's missing knows the big picture, integrating these different parts and these sites. And really this is where there's room for those who are not super specialized to come in and try to come up with some kind of a coherent model that can link these, link these sites together into a big picture, the panorama, the grander panorama. I'm thinking of the, uh, El Goodyear down at top. Yeah, tell me, down at top. Well, well, El is a, El is an archaeologist. And he was, for a long time, there was a dogma in archaeology, a true dogma that there were no human beings in the Americas until 13,000 years ago. Let's say 13,400 years ago. And they called them the Clovis culture. And the dogma was called Clovis first, that there were just no human beings here before Clovis. And all was excavating a site called Topper, looking for Clovis materials, but then he did what other archaeologists didn't do. They dug below the Clovis layer and below the Clovis layer. People kept asking them, well, what's below it? What's below it? Yeah. Yeah. And when he dug below it, he found evidence more evidence of humans going back tens of thousands of years before Clovis, going back 50,000 years, like so many archaeologists who've broken them old and found evidence that confronted the dogma. He was shunned by his colleague. What was the evidence that he discovered? Evidence of human presence in the Americas. For the ferrets. Artifacts. Objects. 50,000 years ago. I'm not saying artifacts of a high civilization. I'm just saying evidence that humans were here. This dogma that there were no humans in the Americas until 13, 1, 3,000 years ago, that dogma locked the archaeology of the Americas in the single place for 40 or 50 years. And every single archaeologist, Jaxank Maas, at Bluefish Caves in the Yukon, for example, who found evidence of humans 24,000 years ago, every one of them suffered. Their research grants were pulled away from them. They were shunned at conferences. They were insulted by their colleagues. But as time passed, they were proved to be right. And this is the important issue. When I was researching America before, I went down to San Diego and talked with the team there who excavated the Saruti Mastodon site. They think human beings have been in the Americas for 130,000 years, not 13,000, but 130,000 years. That gives you a lot of time for things to develop here in the Americas. Down in South America, there's a genetic connection between certain tribes in the Amazon and the peoples of Melanesia, of Papua New Guinea. And that connection is not found anywhere in North America. So the old notion, again, it's a dogma that human beings crossed the bearing straits when they were a land bridge in the north, and they traveled down through North America into South America. It made that the completely opposite is true, that people were crossing the oceans tens of thousands of years ago, settling first in South America, and then migrating north. And it's just very difficult for these ideas to become accepted, but little by little, this is what happens with paradigm shifts. As the new evidence keeps coming in, it becomes more and more absurd to stick to the old idea. Now, if you have human beings in the Americas for 130,000 years, then you have a possibility for an advanced civilization to have emerged right here in the Americas, in North America, in South America. And if that advanced civilization had based itself in the land that we now call the channel, Scatlands, there wouldn't be a single thing left of it because of the pummeling massive forces of flooding that tore across that landscape during the younger dryers. Now, the prevailing theory of what happened to the civilization and the Amazon rainforest is disease, right? And that prevailing theory is correct. It was the, there was a Spaniard Francisco de Oriana who accidentally managed to travel the entire way across the Amazon, across South America in the 1560s. I say accidentally because he was with 20 other guys, they were in a boat and they were going hunting. But they put the boat on the Amazon river and the Amazon river wouldn't let them come back. It carried them, kept on carrying them west and west and west. And finally, they ended up, they started off in Colombia and finally, they ended up on the Atlantic coast of South America. Well, on the way through, they observed enormous cities. They observed evidence of high civilizations of the Amazon. He reported it, but he was disbelieved. It was thought that he was making it up and it's these new LIDAR surveys that have confirmed that he was absolutely correct. And God knows what else might be found in the Amazon if the work were actually done. So those initial explorers carried diseases they carried diseases. This is the thing. Oriana encountered thriving, highly populated areas. 100 years later, all gone, completely gone, not because of muskets and sorts, but because of smallpox, primarily because of smallpox and other diseases that were imported from Europe that the indigenous inhabitants did not have resistance to just completely decimated those civilizations, almost wiped them completely from human memory. There's no doubt that that biological weapon is the reason for the conquest of the Americas, that it was the diseases that were brought in. And in some cases, those diseases were deliberately spread, but in other cases, it was just an accident of contact. And that's the exact same thing that happened in North America. That's the exact same thing that happened in North America too. That's how it became so easy for Europeans to conquer. Because of this. And that's the exact same thing that happened in North America. That's the exact same thing that happened in North America too. That's how it became so easy for Europeans to conquer. Because of the diseases they brought with them. And it is, I call it the earliest known example of a biological weapon that we're seeing in the story of the Americas. And so much was wiped out, so much memory was wiped out. And then not just the killing off of the people with the diseases that Europeans brought, but the way that the way that the church behaved in the Americas was appalling. The deliberate burning of mine codices in one bonfire, 5,000 mine books were heaped up and burnt by some idiot priest. You know, what's he doing there, but wiping out the memory banks of humanity? What would we have found in those manuscripts if we'd been able to find them today, if they hadn't been burnt by some religious fanatic who was convinced that his ideas were the only right ideas and everybody else was wrong? Christianity is responsible for a great deal of harm in this world. And it's time Christians sucked it up and got to grips with that instead of regarding themselves as a paragons of virtue, because Christianity has done horrific things down through the ages. Hopefully it's learned from its experiences. Hopefully. That does this seem very likely. But it's been an instrument, it's been an instrument of destruction of human memory. Those who were destroying that human memory know that they fervently believed that they were right. But their belief that they were right doesn't mean they were right. They were wrong, they've deprived us of huge libraries of knowledge, which would otherwise be available to us. That's why I call us the species with amnesia that we have forgotten so much about our own past. And we're in that kind of a Meezyac state where we just have a feeling that something's wrong. But we don't quite know what it is. It's one of the more fascinating aspects of being a person today is that we have so much access to information. And that we can find out about these things now that if you tried to bring these ideas forth in the 1970s, they'd be easily dismissed. But now because of LIDAR, because of our understanding of what disease did to North America, what the Christians did, and it's a far more compelling conversation. Yeah. And the internet. Yes. Well, I regard the internet as a poisoned chalice. There are wonderful gifts in the internet, but there's also terrible problems with the internet. But the one thing the internet has done is it's allowed people to communicate directly with one another. We don't have to go through the middleman, the big newspaper proprietor, or the big TV station. We don't have to go through the middleman in order to get to people. We can talk to one another directly and share ideas hopefully in a fertile way. It's sad that so much of the internet is just filled with hatred and fear and suspicion and people being utterly obnoxious to one another. But nevertheless, I'd rather have it than not have it because it's opened up so many doors of inquiry that would otherwise remain closed. I like to think, you know, when I was born mid 20th century, we had zero presence in space. No satellites. We'd never put up a single satellite. Right. We're in a position now where we can really begin to perceive things on levels that a few generations ago were inconceivable. Both on the microscopic and certainly we know how important the microscopic realm has been in. Oh, my God, yes. You know, when we start talking about nano diamonds and microspherals and all of this and being able to demonstrate that these great catastrophes have happened. I kind of use the analogy of fingerprints, which I borrowed from Graham, but fingerprints, you know, on a crime scene. You don't really see those without technological enhancement footprints on the other hand. You can see them. They're obvious. They're footprints in the ground. So I kind of look at the channel scab lands. Those are obvious footprints on the global landscape that are unambiguous. Right. Then on the other hand, the microspherals, the nano diamonds and the things like that, those are the things that you can't see without the technological enhancement without scanning electron microscopy or energy dispersive. Can I just get back on that to elaborate on the nano diamonds? This is one of the reasons we know that there was a series of air bursts and bits of a comet that hit the earth 12,800 years ago, because all around the world there is a layer in the soil. You can go down to Murray Springs in Arizona. There's a draw that was cut by floods there. And along the side of the draw, you can see a line in the earth about the width of a human hand. And that is the younger dryest boundary. And it's full of what are called impact proxies, things that could only be created by the massive heat and shock of an impact of an object from space. And those include nano diamonds, these tiny diamonds, which we would not see without high-level tech allowing us to see down into this miniscule world. That's it. That's very spring. That's the younger dryest boundary layer at Murray Springs. Which one's the layer? The dark layer. There's better shots of it. But it's that dark layer. It lands all along the side of the springs. And for the series, we went there with Alan West from the comet research group. And he explained to us exactly what's exactly what's going on here. And it's that's the first clues that led them to believe that we're dealing with a comet impact 12,800 years ago. And I don't want to misuse that word. It's not a single object. It's multiple objects. It's a swarm of objects. Those objects hit all around the world. They hit in North America. But they also hit in Syria. Interestingly, there's a site called Abu Herrera, which is very near to go backly tepi in Syria. Which was hit by what they believe was an airburst of a fragment of a comet. If we go back to 1908, June 1900 and 2008, many people will know that an event took place in Siberia. It's called the Tunguska event. Interestingly enough, that date, June 1900 and 2008, is one of the two periods in the year, June and November, when the Earth passes through the Torrid meteor stream. And what happened there was an object that's estimated to have been about 100 meters in diameter blew up in the air over Siberia. It flattened 2,000 square miles of trees. It was an uninhabited area. Nobody was killed. But if that had happened over a major city, it would have been cataclysmic. And that was just a small bit. And it left the same traces in the soil, the same nanodimans, the same evidence of another really intriguing thing is melted quartz. It takes temperatures of 2,000 plus degrees centigrade to melt quartz. And you find melted quartz all over this young Gidrias boundary layer. You find iridium, another object, another substance that can only come in with asteroids and comets from outer space. So the evidence is mounting. The evidence is building. And the team of scientists at the Comic Research Group, as I mentioned earlier, they've just now got some major funding. We are going, and again, I talked about that happy billionaire who I would like to see put some money into light, our surveys in the Amazon. I'd like to see them put some money into the Comic Research Group as well. Because they've funded themselves all the way along now, but now they've got some major funding. We're going to see some huge breakthroughs in that field. And it doesn't matter how much other scientists dislike what they're doing. They are giving us the data. The data ultimately is what matters, not people's opinion. And the data speaks to a gigantic worldwide apocalypse 12,800 years ago. Jamie, can I have the sacred cable back? I have to pee. So let's pause and we'll come back and get back to this. Sounds good. We're back. Okay, we're back. We're back. Yeah. Here we go. Okay. There we go. All right. So this is just sort of a graphic I put together to show the toward media stream. And this is based. There's two ellipses here, which goes back to the work of Fred Whipple way back in the 1940s, who was the first one to realize that the toward media stream was the byproduct of this ongoing fragmentation of an original giant comet. Because what he was able to do when he did this succession of photographs is he was able to run the orbits in reverse. And once he did that, he could see that these separate pieces within the stream all converged on the same point in space, which told him that they were once one object. So, but anyways, what we've got here is you'll notice here's mercury or orbit of mercury. My glass is here. Orbit of Venus and then this third ring here is the orbit of the earth. The green arrows show the direction of the orbit. So here's the orbit of the earth. And here is the green arrows again show the or the direction of orbit of the stream. And you can see that the earth's orbit crosses the stream late June, early July, right here. And then again it crosses the stream around now, November, late October, early November. And this has led the towards stream to sometimes be referred to as the Halloween meteors. Because they peaked right around Halloween. Okay, so what was the date of Tunguska? June 13th, 1939. Yes. So the timing was perfect. The other thing was that the position where the meteor emanated from space was perfect because you can see that as the stream comes around the sun. If you're here on the earth and you're looking up the stream, and here was the problem why the object wasn't seen until the last few moments is because you had to almost look directly into the sun. And this why people, some of the eyewitnesses described that it looked like the object was born out of the sun or that the sun split in two. And this fiery object came and exploded. You know, it didn't. Here's an important point. It did not hit the ground. It was an abist. It was an airburst. And a lot of what we might be talking about with the younger dryest would be air bursts. I just did a, a, a whole presentation on October 30th talking about the universal observance of the festival of the dead. And it's connections with the Torrid meteor stream. It's a very fascinating presentation. If somebody wants to learn more about this, you can go on my website. You can download. Let's the website. Randallcarlsen.com. Okay. Okay. So when you're here, when you're here, you're looking up towards the sun. But when you're looking upstream here, you're looking out into space directly towards the Pleiades. Very important constellation across the ancient world. Yes. And the Pleiades in traditional astronaut or astrological context is the shoulder of the bull, Taurus the bull. And you can go back and there's lots of mythologies about, you know, the epic of Gilgamesh, where the Gilgamesh and Aki do battle with the bull of heaven. And that's why it's called the Torrid meteor stream because it appears to emanate from the region of space in which the constellation of Taurus is. It's not coming to us from Taurus. No, but it looks like it is. It looks like it is. Right. So, so yeah, this is the general idea right here. You've got a radiant, the meteors are actually coming in and parallel lines. But when you look up stream, they're all emanating from a point in space. So all meteor streams get their name from the constellation that they appear to be coming from. So the Leonids, obviously Leo, the gem in its Gemini. Orion, it's Orion. Exactly. The Torrid's Taurus. So we won't get into this a whole lot. That took us, Gersge, you had some calculations on the size of the, yeah, the power of that event has been estimated based upon the destruction of the old growth Taiga forest. They were able to estimate how much energy. And the equivalent of that was about a 15 megaton hydrogen bomb. Now, how do you get your wrap your head around what a 15 megaton explosion would look like? Well, I got a graphic here that actually is an artist depiction of what a 15 megaton explosion over a major city would look like. There we go. Oh, Jesus. That is a 15 megaton explosion. Now, Tondorska was one object. It was about 150 feet in diameter. Moving it, a couple of tens of thousands of miles per hour. So it's got this tremendous amount of potential energy. It comes in so fast that the atmosphere can't move out of the way. The atmosphere piles up in front of it. It becomes like a solid, like a brick wall. And the object exploded maybe five miles up. Devastated, like Graham said, it's 2000 some square kilometers, about 825 square miles of old growth Taiga forest got completely obliterated. Now, if you want to try to wrap your head around what happened during the under dryest, think a couple of thousand of these. It would have been like an all out nuclear war. And it's left its traces all over the planet everywhere we've looked in fact. Yeah. And this happened many times for a thousand years. I think there were multiple impacts. It's clear that there was a peak of impacts 12,800 years ago. I personally think this is not the comedy research group point of view, but I think it was another series of impacts 11,600 years ago that brought the younger dryest to an end. And quite possibly an impact in a major ocean that led to the global warming with a huge cloud of water vapor thrown up into the air. That's actually not my thesis. I've adopted it, but it's the work of Sir Fred Hoile, a leading astronomer back in the 80s who suggested that. There were the 1,200 years of the younger dryest was 1,200 years of continuous cataclysm. And it was on an enormous scale. And the reason the Tunguske event matters is because it happened pretty much in our time. It happened in 1908. It tells us that we're still in interaction with the Torrid meatiest dream. That it's not a distant and an important danger. It's a real and present danger. If that object that exploded over Siberia in 1908 had exploded over a major city, we'd all be paying very close attention to the Torrid meatiest dream today. Because the results would have been absolutely catastrophic. But then, as Randall says, take that back 12,800 years ago. Look at the massive bombardment that took place then. Evidence is far as far west as the west coast of America. Evidence is far east as Syria. You're looking at a worldwide event. Thousands of air bursts, huge numbers of objects coming in. Some of them hitting the North American ice cap, physically. Some of them actually exploding in the air. The end result fully explains how we could have lost a whole civilization from the record. That's so compelling and so based on evidence. Yeah, it is based on evidence. And again, it's evidence that largely, unfortunately, is being ignored. And often when I talk about this, I'm told don't be a fear monger. Don't spread fear. But actually, I don't want to spread fear. I want to spread awareness. Because we're not helpless. That's one of the good things about our tech. We actually have reached a level where we can do something about dangerous objects that the earth is interacting with in space. In fact, that has done recently for the first time. For the first time. Yeah. Right. That pushing an asteroid just slightly off course is now we now know that that's a practical possibility. That's all you'd need to do with the dangerous objects in the Torrid meatyestream. But it would require a combined effort of all the advanced cultures on earth today in order to bring that about. It would be a big project. But it would be a worthy project. And I can think of many unworthy projects that the big nations are investing in at the moment, which we really don't need. This would be one that would be really rather useful. Yeah. Wouldn't it be better to cooperate and come up with a way of defending this planet? And see, you talk to some people about this and they kind of can sign it to the realm of science fiction. But clearly, I mean, just a couple of days ago, a new asteroid was discovered within the orbit of Venus that had been completely invisible. And it was huge. Now, it's not Earth crossing. But I think we mentioned this the last time I was on here. Remember, I went through this whole series since the late 1980s showing the near misses that have occurred every few months over and over. And I showed that on your on your show the last time I was here. Those are real. Those are real. And sooner later, I mean, they're out there now that have our planets name on them. Our name and our number. We just haven't discovered them yet. I mean, the estimates now of potentially dangerous Earth crossing asteroids is maybe 10%. Of what's actually out there. Yeah. And that's why I think we're not only dealing with a lost civilization of the past. We're also dealing with a potential lost civilization of the future. And if that happened to us, one of the big problems with today's information is stored on hard drives, all gone, all gone, all gone completely. And another big problem is that the majority of people in the advanced industrialized so-called civilizations don't have a clue about how to survive. Right. I know you do. Barely. But you've developed some skills, but I don't have those skills. And most of us don't have those skills to survive. Who would we take refuge with if our civilization went down? We would have to take refuge with hunter-gatherers because hunter-gatherers are absolutely the masters of survival. And I think that's what happened 12,000 to 11,000 years ago, that the survivors of a higher civilization, I don't like the word higher, but a different kind of civilization, took refuge amongst hunter-gatherers and created projects like Gobekli Tapi, which were used to instruct and to teach and to bring in something new. We have two episodes in Turkey in my series. One episode is all about Gobekli Tapi, but Gobekli Tapi, 11,600 years old, isn't alone. There's another site we were the first film crew to get into called Karahan Tapi, which has now been excavated. Dates from the same period, it's the most extraordinary and amazing site. Nobody knew it was there until a decade ago, furthermore they found another 11 sites, all of them in a ring around Gobekli Tapi, all of them into visible from one another because they're on hilltops. We've discovered them, but they haven't yet been excavated. It's fascinating that they all date to this period of 11,600 years ago. Another thing that we do in another episode of the series is we look at the so-called underground cities of Turkey. This is quite a famous phenomenon in Turkey that there are huge cities. They look like ant farms on an enormous scale that are dug out under the earth. Within hundreds of rooms that huge efforts was put into digging deep beneath the earth and creating these shelters, an archaeology does not have a good explanation about what they're there for or why they were built or when they were built. They're all cut out of stone. You can only date objects that were left in them. You can't say when they were actually made. What makes sense of those underground cities to me is that they were built as places of refuge that people could go into during an episode of meteor bombardment during the younger dryers because there wasn't just the one 12,800 years ago there were multiple episodes over the next 12 hundred years. It makes sense that these underground cities were built as places of shelter. Not as places to hide from an invading army. The last place you want to go if you have an invading army is to go hide underground. All they have to do is block up the entrances. They don't even have to fight you. But if you're dealing with a periodic event which will be over in a couple of weeks, there are great places to retreat into. The evidence is all around us, all around the world. That's why I've made this series because I want to show people that it's not just a single thing. There's a huge story here. When they date objects that they find in these underground cities, what are the dates they find? The oldest, they actually have no idea. They were used by Christians. They were used by Muslims. They were used back in 2000 plus years ago by homes in some cases. There are some evidence that they're going back 2,800 years. But it's all from objects found inside them. And those objects don't tell us when the original work of cutting out these enormous structures. They're looking at enormous will to create them. There's not just one. There's dozens of them. We find those, Jimmy? Oh, I'm sorry, Randall. You got the... Oh, past the sacred chord. Maybe you could find them. Yeah, I could. Darren Kuu, for example. What's the name of the place? D-E-R-I-N. I-N. K-U-Y-U. Got it right there. What's the oldest objects they find in there? In the 2008 100 years plus... Whoa. Look at this. That's... Crust section is just amazing. I spent hours down there just wandering around and looking at this amazing place. And it makes no sense to me. That's carved in the stone. Yeah, it's cut literally out of the bedrock beneath the ground. There, you can see a cross section on the left there. Oh, left. Yeah. Wow. These are a huge mystery. The fact that objects have been dated to certain periods does not tell us when they were used. Every new culture that went in there would have removed most of the stuff that was in there before. But when you ask yourself what was the motive for creating something like this? The motive is clearly to hide from a danger from above in my view. Mm. That's incredible. Yeah. And most remarkable places. And they can't be this. Two that I visited in the series are Darren Kuu and Kaimakli. And these two sites are joined by an eight kilometer tunnel underground. Eight kilometers wrong, which joins the two of them. Doug out of stone. Doug out of stone. The whole thing. Wow. You know, it's just long when it takes you complete something like this. Well, it would take a very long time indeed. That's all I can say. Nobody's really done the calculations. And that one shows a vent to the sky. Yep. They have vents to the sky to allow air to come in. You have to consider if you've got 10 or 15,000 people in there, they can't really stay in there much longer than about two or three weeks, which is about the time it takes to pass through the Torrid meatier stream. Otherwise, you're going to get huge amount of human refuse built up inside these. They're going to become in hospitable places. But if they're only to be used for two weeks at a time, then they're fine. They have air vents. They have water. They're they're incredibly well thought out. There's water in there or they store water in there. They store water in there. And down below it, it drilled deeper and you come to wells. That's incredible. Look at the sophistication of the construction too. So we're looking at a series of mysteries that are unexplained by archaeology or that are explained in unsatisfactory ways. And what I've tried to do is to offer alternative explanations that make some kind of sense of the anomalies that we're looking at. There are just too many anomalies that are not explained by the mainstream theory. And that's when you get a paradigm shift. When you get to the point where the mainstream theory just won't explain stuff anymore. Just like Clovis first, eventually had to be thrown out by American archaeologists. They just couldn't keep on with that fantasy any longer because the evidence spoke to a human presence far older than 13,000 years ago is beginning to happen now with the younger dryest impact and the events of the younger dryest. But as you begin to grasp the magnitude of these things when you start talking about the tremendous earthworks of North America, which only a small fraction still exists. The structures in the Amazon, which to me was to me the most incredible part of America before was thank you. I had kind of, you know, was getting the gist of it. But when I read that, I'm like, oh, wow. Because here was, I had studied considerably in depth into the North American monumental earthworks. I've visited most of the extent ones that still remain very impressive and then find out there's even a greater magnitude in South America in the Amazon. That was mind blowing to me. And many of them unexplored. Most of the money. Just identified on LIDAR very few have been, have been explored. And very little of the surface has been explored even by LIDAR. Absolutely. So tiny fraction, 2% maybe, maybe less than that. So when you look at the magnitude of these extraordinary building campaigns that you got to go why? There had to have been a motive. You know, it just, there's such an incongruity there between the idea of hunter gatherers or even subsistence farmers undertaking projects of such enormous magnitude. To me, there's just a disparity there that just, there's a disconnect. The so-called Mount Builder culture of North America has been hugely underestimated and not given the priority it deserves. That's why we diverted one episode of this series to the Mount Builder sites in North America to Serpent Mount to poverty point in Louisiana. Fantastic site. The thing that's not realized is that the vast majority of what stood here 600 years ago has been destroyed turned into farmland plowed under just wiped away in that process of making us a species with amnesia. It happened very much in North America, but the few sites that are left speak of enormous sophistication and the horizon keeps on going back and back and back. So poverty point in Louisiana, fantastic site, very large scale, enormous pyramidal structure there. But it is an, and dated to about 2,700 years ago, but it's directly connected to another site, Watson Break, which is just a mile to the south. It's, it's lined up perfectly with Watson Break. The two sites are anchored to one another. Watson Break goes back 5,300 years ago. There are other sites that go back 8,000 years ago, and these are just the ones that have survived. I think that Mount Builder culture, as it's called in North America, goes back deep into the ice age as well. We're looking at, we're looking again at a mystery that we only have fragments of it to try and draw conclusions from. But those fragments speak to a majesty in the past of North America that has been largely ignored. Part of the reason that it was ignored was that was that in the process of settling North America, it was felt useful to diminish the achievements of those whose lands were being taken over, to regard them as inferior in some way rather than superior. But when you look at the works of their hands, you see that superior people were definitely involved in North America and that they have a very ancient culture, which has been, you know, sadly, sadly unrecognized. And again, with the destruction caused by the younger driers, impact theory, most of it would be gone. Well, absolutely. The effect of that cannot be overestimated. The scale of the flooding across North America in the four or five hundred miles south of the ice cap, roughly the ice cap went down roughly what? About Minnesota? Something like that. Everything south of that was just torn to shreds by the younger driers, cataclysm. Absolutely wrecked. Anything that was there that was... Nisota, something like that. Everything south of that was just torn to shreds by the younger dryers, cataclysm. Absolutely wrecked. Anything that was there that would speak to our past was destroyed by nature, completely destroyed before other human beings came along and destroyed it further. And I just think it's important that we allow alternative voices to speak out. And that's one of the things that I really appreciate about your show, Joe, because you have a major platform, you reach a major audience. And what you're doing is you're allowing alternative voices to speak out. A lot of people misunderstand what you're doing. But what you're doing is actually allowing voices that had been suppressed to speak out. And thus provide the general public with more options, with more to think about than they had before. And I really appreciate that. Can I play one more from the show? Please. Do we need to pass the sacred cable again? Here we go. We don't go, it's the case, right? And that's the one called It Begins with the Word Joe. Joe, you very kindly appeared in my series. And I'm grateful to you for that. Oh, my pleasure. It's my honor. And this is a, this is a thing. Yeah, it's well, so am I. Let's, I just hope that it has the impact that that I believe it will. There's people that come along. And because of their impact, it changes the way people look at things. Graham Hancock is a man who, despite all of the insults and all the people disparaging his work, he has tracked on and on and on what I care about is learning the lessons of the past in order to clear away that fog that surrounds prehistory. And it's a fog because there's no documents. We have to build our picture of the past from fragmentary evidence. Yay. Yay. There's huge forces at work that would like this to be shut down. Archaeologists are already complaining to Netflix and saying this show should never be put on the air. Hancock, you know, has to be kept silent basically. They say they say that I'm misleading the public. I think the public are intelligent enough to make up their own minds. Well, I would invite those people to come on here and talk with you. Yes, I would love to do that. I would love to do fastening these see their argument about the younger, driest impact. Yeah, about all of this because it seems so compelling and so overwhelmingly evidence based. Absolutely. It would be a great debate to have. Very few archaeologists are willing to debate with me. That's what I was saying. I think you'd have a hard time getting some of them to come on here. They will make excuses like they won't lower themselves. Right. Engaging about such ideas or giving him a platform. That's my favorite one. That's the one they use a lot too late. That's a crosshore getting there. It's a little shot. Couple of images maybe. You got it. How'd it do? Thank you. It's really been fascinating to be a fan of your work to get to know you. And you were one of the very first guests that we ever had. Joe, we go back a long way. Yeah, because you were one of the very first guests. It wasn't just comedian like a friend of mine. Right. And I was so excited about that episode that we did with Duncan Trousel. Yes, that's right. You know, Duncan and I have always followed your work. We both have been giant fans of yours. But it's so interesting to see it becoming more and more accepted. Yes. And because of all the work with the Young Rejoice Impact Theory now substantiated by real hard evidence. Yeah. That's very encouraging to me too because I take a lot of flack and a lot of insults for what I do and for what I say. And what's happened a little bit by little bit is the evidence has come in which doesn't allow those critics to say what they still say it, but they can't say it with any authority anymore. Go backly, Tempe just destroyed the argument that the Sphinx can't be 12,000 years old. The Younger Dryas Impact Hypothesis destroys the argument that there was no cataclysm 12,000 years ago. There's just more and more evidence coming out and I think we're going to see much more of it in the future. Yeah. Once you mentioned the cosmic summit. And we have, yeah, we have a conference coming up next year, which is going to be called the the cosmic summit. And I think it's in June. Asheville, North Carolina. I'll put it up on my website, which is GrahamHankock.com. It'll be on mine as well. It'll be on yours as well. There it is. Look at that. There it is. That's, yeah, June 16th to 18th, 2023. Scroll up there, Jamie. So I see who's on there with you guys. Oh, yeah. Jamie Corsetti who's been on the podcast before as well. Keep going. I think we can find her some Johan James. Alan West going to join us. We're having, that's one of the good things about this. We're having a number of the scientists from the comet research group who are going to join us and speak at the event. So it's going to be a mixture of outsiders alternative thinkers like ourselves and mainstream scientists who are proposing. Yeah, excuse me. I saw his name. Yeah. Keep thanks. We have more. Yeah. I'm not familiar with Collins. These are all leading scientists who are involved. Oh, yeah. Tell Alamon. Yeah. They're in the involved in the research behind the young guys impact that. You go back, Jamie. Go down. Stop. Go down. This is somebody Lieutenant Colonel Lomeyer. He I would like you to get him on your show. Okay. He's what you could read about him right there. Former commander of the US Space Force Air Force Academy graduate fighter pilot relieved of his duties in 2021 for writing a book encouraging the reform of the US military. He's an awesome dude. And he would absolutely love to have a conversation with you. I would love to. What was his what did he that book that he wrote that relieved him of his duties? He was he was basically exposing the wokeness that was infecting the military. The political correctness and the wokeness and you know, they spent millions of dollars training this guy and then they dismissed him because he was telling the truth about what's happening. How the military has become becoming a political tool, which it's not supposed to be. It's of course. Yeah. And he's a he's a good man. And he's going to be joining us. You'll meet him. What is he I have not met him. What is he speaking about on this? I think he's going to well before all this pandemic stuff hit, um, he was he contacted me. I think he heard me on your show. I think that's where he can so he contacted me. He was based, I think in Huntsville. And he was about to assume like second command of the Space Force. In fact, there's a video where Matt Lomayer is meeting with he's got the whole pull up Jamie pull up Matt Lomayer, Donald Trump. And there's a video where he's got the whole space force behind him. He's meeting with Donald Trump talking about the mission of Space Force. Well, he contacted me and said that he was very interested in the idea of planetary defense. And he said there was a group within the Space Force that saw that as being a part of their mission. So he had set up. I was going to go and do a presentation to the base commanders of the whole Space Force on planetary defense and the need for planetary defense. And then the COVID hit. So then that got derailed. Then he was re he reorganized a second possible presentation. And that the dates of the venue and everything was set. And then he got the boot because his book came out. And I think he went on maybe he was on Tucker Carlson, maybe talking about his book and the wokeness in the military and like within a week, he'd been given the boot. So that's I think he's going to be talking planetary defense against a chance. Cancel culture. What? Cancel culture. Yes. Yes. He got some of the sinister aspects of our society today. Yeah. As those are how effective it is. It's incredibly effective in shutting down alternative voices. And as though our governments behave as those citizens who are adults are not adults but their children that they can't make decisions for themselves. We have to we have to respect the intelligence of the man in the street. Present everybody with all the information and let them make up their own minds. That's not sensor information before it gets out there. And it's this happens to me in archaeology. It's just a tiny slice of what's happening all over the world today that there's a narrative which is being forced down the throat of the public. And alternative views are being shut down very very carefully. It's basically the truth well out. Yes. I do believe the truth will eventually come to the surface. But it's it's it's basic human nature. Right. I mean that when the people have control of information, they want to retain control of information and the dissemination of that information. And where you look at people who go into politics, why do they even choose to do that? Because they want to control others. That's the nature of their personalities from the from the outset. And we need less of that. In my view we need much less government. Government is a most unhealthy thing. Governments are the next to religion. Governments are amongst the influences in the world that are causing so much chaos and so much misery in the world and spreading hatred and fear and suspicion all the time. We don't we we should have reached the stage where we're able to lead ourselves where leaders should be really just working for us, not dominating and controlling us. We need to reach that stage fast if we're going to move forward as a human species. Because right now the leadership of this planet is just full of shit from beginning to end. Well, the only thing that gives me hope about that is the resurgence of the interest in psychedelics. Yes. Me. The more people embrace that and the more people have these experiences, the more people will start to gradually understand that that really is the only way out of this. Yeah. Yeah. First of all, because of the experiences they will have, which will definitely alter the way they think. And secondly, because it is an assertion of the right of adults to make decisions over their own bodies and their own experiences. This is this is what's so fundamental to it. That's why it's a real liberation struggle that is going on around psychedelics. It's not a trivial issue. It's a very, very major issue. And it's a sign of the world that we live in that governments have attempted to shut down adult access to psychedelics for so long. But the new evidence is coming out that just doesn't allow that to happen anymore. This is why I think it would be valuable to talk to Ben Johnson about his work. And he's got an interesting story. I won't try to get into it. But other than the fact that when I asked him, how did you manage to get licensed? How did you manage to pull this off? And he said, well, I went in with like a dozen of my seal buddies into a variety of congressmen's office. And we basically walked in and said, you're going to do this. And they couldn't they couldn't back down. Not when you got a dozen Navy seals while sitting in your office saying, you're going to do this because they've had the experiences. Yes. And tremendously benefited by their experiences. Well, it's a it's a crazy aspect of the military and war that we expect these people to have these insane violent experiences overseas and then come back and just integrate it to society. How can they put it? How can they put it? How can they put it? With very little guidance. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Well, that that needs to change. And I think, you know, what he's doing is going to be a big factor in that. So many things. Of course, the legalization of it is only as far as like medicinal use. It's not going to be for recreational use. But even that, but even that, yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's how marijuana got started. Yeah. Right. That's one of the great things about America. It's something that I really appreciate living in Britain where everything is decided centrally by central government. It's nice to see in America that states the inhabitants of individual states can make up their own minds and can alter and change laws and take their power back to themselves. So one of the things that I most appreciate about America, everybody, Canadians get annoyed with me and they say, look cannabis is legal across Canada. And it is. And that's true. And that's great. But that was a government decision. What's needed, what's happening in America is people are taking their power back. And if they're taking their power back over their own bodies and their own health and their own consciousness, then the next step is to take their power back in lots of other ways as well. Well, that's the fear. And that's why there's so much resistance to this idea. And that's why there's so much of a power reach by the federal government because they don't want that. They don't want that. No. That is slippery slope. They want people to be passive. Yes, yes, men and women who don't ever argue with them. And the evidence, you see that as what you're talking about, these forced compliance during COVID. Yeah. They take it in historically, governments have taken advantage over when whenever there's a big situation where some sort of a disaster or national tragedy to grasp more power. Exactly. And it's happened here. And as I said earlier, to deliberate calculated strategy to encourage a habit of obedience so that it becomes habitual to obey. And, you know, whatever COVID is, whatever it is or it isn't, however it came about, whatever it's caused in origins where the one thing's clear, it's been used to encourage obedience. And it's been used very cleverly to encourage obedience. And we do not need to be obedient to these monsters who are running the world. We need to change things and bring the normal everyday citizen back into the dialogue. I think one thing that's encouraging about the response to COVID was the downside of it was this encouraging of obedience. But the encouraging thing about it to me is it's so many people are recognizing what happened. And so many people are far more distrusting of the government narratives and the medical industry and the pharmaceutical industry. And that they've realized that they've been used for profit. And that this narrative has shifted into fear-mongering, specifically designed to get more profit. I think the like Graham said, the I think the government and those in power want a flock of obedient sheep. But I think it's time now for the lions to exert themselves. That's my perspective. And how we do this maybe it starts state by state. We get governors in places who stand up to the federal government and say, no, you're not going to pose your mandates on us. We could govern ourselves. I think that's what starts. Yeah, I think you're right. And I think there's a lot of encouragement about the way people are discussing things today. That seems to me there's a lot of very reasonable people that have actually changed their perspective over COVID. They had a narrative in their mind about the role of the federal government and then seeing it kind of running a muck over the last few years. They've realized, oh, this is a dangerous trend. And if this continues, you're going to have some sort of a centralized digital currency. You're going to have a social credits core system. And when that happens, we're fucked. Totally fucked. Yeah. That's not a world we want to go into. No, we need to stop it now. And there's people saying that that's the only way we're going to compete with China, which is crazy. Like no, that's not true. Exactly. It's not true. That's what separates us from China. It separates us from all governments that are controlled by dictators. Yes, exactly. That we have freedom. Freedom of thought, freedom of expression, freedom to debate ideas and to propose alternative ideas and freedom to live your life the way you want to live. That's the beautiful thing about states. Right. Yeah, it is. It is. And it's exactly, it's exactly that issue that I'm up against with with archaeology and the past. Just as I would like people to adults to have sovereignty over there on consciousness, I would also like us all to have sovereignty over our own past and not to be told what to think about the past by so-called experts. If this is successful on Netflix, has there been any discussions about future episodes, future future seasons? Well, Netflix is the law, the jungle. Yeah. So if the, if the series is successful, I hope that there will be a second season. And if it's not successful, there definitely won't be a second season. But I hope there will be. I hope the series will succeed. I hope people will watch it. And, and if they do in that second season, I would like to look at psychedelics and I'd like to to look at the Amazon. I'd like to spend much more time in the Amazon looking at that and the way that psychedelics are used there. And also at the mysterious backstory of the Amazon, which so far is not being, is not being told. But we'll cross that bridge when we, when we come to it, either this, this series will, will work or it won't work. And if I can, yeah, if I can do a little plug, it, it launches on Netflix on the 11th of November, 2022. All episodes will be released at once. So people can watch it in one night if they wish, if they wish to do so. How many episodes? Eight, eight episodes altogether. And, and it's the, it's the last episode that really unfolds the ancient apocalypse element of this. And in the first seven episodes, we're looking at all the mysteries in the past of humanity that are, that are so far unexplained. Could I pop up one last clip? Yes, please. Are we, that's going to be the one called Horizon Jamie? For 30 years, I'd been looking for something I was told couldn't possibly exist. And advanced human civilization much older than our own lost to history. The mainstream version of history says that after the end of the Ice Age, on their own initiative, our hunter-gatherer ancestors suddenly began farming and raising livestock, creating settlements, and eventually cities until the first civilizations emerged around 6,000 years ago. But new discoveries keep on pushing that horizon back. That's the point where trying to bring those, bring those new discoveries out and let people see for themselves, you know, what is, what is going on here? And, well, fingers crossed, we're listening. It's going to be gigantic. We're going to force it. We're going to make sure people watch it. I think there's kind of a network of various researchers who are looking at different aspects of this and, you know, trying to get this word out in different ways. And many of them I've brought together in this, in this series. Yeah, good. I've brought together the leading alternative voices, including very much yours. Oh, thank you, Greg. I think the genie's out of the bottle, and I'm honored to have you guys on. I really am. It's been, I'll put it this way. I think that what we've been confronted with is this huge wall with big, big gates, almost like you might picture on Mordor or something, big gates. And there's little chinks in the wall and little cracks in the gate. And we've been peering through looking at this other world and only getting a little piece of it. But I'll make a prediction that within the next few years, we're about to blow those gates right off their hinges. And everything is going to change from that moment on. I think you're right. Yep. Absolutely. I'm very excited. Bring it on. Bring it on. Let's let's have a different way of looking at things. Let's not stay locked in the old patterns. Let's move ahead in in in new and different ways. Yes. Let's gentlemen, I'm honored to have you on, honored to be a friend. Thank you, Joe. Likewise, Joe. Thank you. And thank you for the work we've done together over over the years. Very exciting without without without your support, archaeology would have succeeded in keeping my mouth shut and then keeping me out of the public view. Your support has made all that difference. Well, it's one of the main things that I love about doing the shows to be able to expose people to really exciting. And in this case, I think very important ideas. Yeah. And I'm going to keep nagging you until I can get you out in the field for a few days. Go, I'll go, I promise. And in those gentlemen that you requested, I'll definitely have them on as well. Definitely. Let's organize a debate with some of the leading archaeological critics. Anybody out there? How are you boy? Get you on. Be happy to do that and treat you with respect. It's not going to be an ambush. Just love to hear a respectable position that counters this and see how they face up against the preponderance of evidence. I don't know. I mean, I don't know. Mike's, I thought if you're going to have a tough time convincing them to come on. Well, maybe as you were saying that as these gatekeepers die off and as younger archaeologists are more open-minded and so many people who maybe got into archaeology because of this. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Maybe I think the numbers is considerable. Yeah. And I've met many young archaeologists in the field on my travels under research who secretly tell me that they've read my books. Secretly. Yeah. Well, they need to keep their mouth shut. They don't want their bosses to know. But they have read my books and that they are interested. I think they're just as the younger generation in every area is breaking the old boundaries. I think that's happening in archaeology too. And I don't want to be somebody who's just completely putting down archaeology. Archaeology has done a lot of fantastic and important work over the years. And I couldn't do what I do without the way that archaeology has done. But it's just that gatekeeper role which needs to be broken apart. Well, through your work, I think that's happening. I hope so. All right. Thank you, Joe. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much. I enjoyed the heck out of it, Joe. Always. It's pleasure. So we'll have you back for me, man. How many have we done? I think we've done this probably the ninth. Well, we've got to get you on a couple more times. So to balance it out. So the next time we come on, we'll discuss all this alternative technology that's being worked on. You can do that in January if you want. Let's do it. Let's do it. All right. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Bye.