The Joe Rogan experience. I'll tell you what the problem is Grandma Hancock is the children. Well, you're ignoring, is you're endorsing drug use to children. And I think that's incredibly irresponsible. That's exactly what Ted said when they banned my talk. One of their statements they said that we can't allow this talk to be on the air because some young man might go off to South America and drink ayahuasca. That's so hilarious. And Ted cannot be seen to be endorsing the drinking of ayahuasca. Is that the, there was a huge issue with you. And by the way, your issue was after Eddie Wong came in here. And Eddie Wong told his gross story that makes you just go, ew, Ted. And apparently John Anthony West has a Ted story as well. Yeah. And I think that there's a lot of beautiful things that come out of Ted. A lot of incredible. So fantastic tools. But it seems like any organization, once people get into power and once people have the ability to tell other people what's cool and what's not cool. It's not getting weird. And you start telling Eddie Wong, they has to attend all these different things and meet all these donors. And like some kind of freaky cult. Yeah. Well, that's what he felt like. Yeah. You felt like it was really strange. Now, your, your thing got pulled. And what was the scientific explanation for why they got pulled? Um, it was, you, you, you had an exchange with one of the guys on Ted. I read the comments and you presented all the things that he had said. He said, please show your example of when I said this, I never said this. Yeah. What were the very, what were the things that he accused you of and what was the response? There were two of us who got our talks deleted. Rupert Sheldon, Rupert Sheldon is the other. His talk was called the science delusion. My talk was called the war on consciousness. He can't be shit on science like that. Call the science to the word. Rupert, how dare you poke the word? It was as though it was as though Ted felt that these talks must automatically be wrong. And that they had some kind of preconception about what we were saying. So they didn't even bother to sit down and listen to the actual 18 minute talks, not that much to listen to, you know, before deleting it from their YouTube channel. They just said this is pseudoscience. It's full of, and they listed a series of false statements that we'd supposedly made. But the problem was neither I nor Rupert had made those statements. So they never even bothered to look at it. They just read complaints and then respond to those. They'd read complaints and responded on the basis of those. So when we challenge them, okay, please go through, in my case, go through my talk and find where I say that ayahuasca allows you to communicate with an ancient mother culture. Where do I say that? I never said that in my talk. I never said any such thing in my talk. They actually couldn't do it. And so- Something you've said before? No, I've never said that. I've never said that right now. I heard you. Well, what do you think? When I clip it and what I talk about was the mother- Godness. Right. The experience of an encounter with a mother- Godness, but I never said it allows you to communicate with an ancient mother culture like a lost civilization. They knew I'd written books about lost civilizations. So they thought I must be bringing my lost civilization beef into the into my tech talk, which I did and didn't have anything to do with lost civilization. It was a talk about talk about consciousness. Anyway, the real original version was giving up the green bits where you were talking- Originally, I originally called the talk giving up the green. That's what I watched because I was giving my personal story of why I gave up cannabis. I changed that title because a lot of people pointed out to me that that's deeply disrespectful of cannabis and that for many people cannabis is a green goddess. Right. Cannabis was a green goddess for me and I accepted that. No, to those people I'd say fucking relax. Okay, because I love cannabis too, but it didn't bother me. Yeah, it is. Something we got really upset. I realized that to be upset. I realized that there is in fact a cannabis orthodoxy as well, which I- It's really interesting. Which by talking about my quitting of cannabis, I had upset this orthodoxy. But when I looked at my talk, my talk was much more about the war on consciousness than it was about that. That's what it was really about. So for example, I made the point that our society doesn't object in principle to altering consciousness. I mean, what happens when you put a kid on ritalin? You know, that's a powerful pharmacological drug which is altering consciousness. When you overprescribe Prozac or Siroxet for conditions of depression, those drugs are altering consciousness. We value alcohol. We invest- you know, have- multi-billion dollar alcohol industry. People don't primarily rate drink alcohol because of the taste. They drink it because it alters their consciousness in a way that they like. And so we don't object to altering consciousness in principle, but we object to altering consciousness in certain kinds of ways, which threaten the status quo. And that's what psychedelics do. They alter consciousness in ways that lead people to ask profound questions about the nature of the society they live in. And that appears to be the line that I crossed. So Ted tried to dress it up as pseudoscience. And when I called them on that, in the end, because they realized, I think that they were- they'd got themselves into some kind of danger. And it's still there on the webpage that- Rupert and I call it their naughty corner. They created a naughty corner of the Ted website where I put back online. And with all their reasons why they'd taken them off, so first thing they did was they crossed out all their reasons. So you can find that everything they said has actually been crossed out. And then they published our rebuttal. So that- It's not complicated. No, it's not complicated. We insisted that they accepted that nothing they'd said was true, but we insisted they leave it there on the public record, but put a line through it. Oh, wow. So that- And they did that? They did that. They did that. Oh, my God. They did that. And then they cover cool victory. I know. I know. And they published our rebuttals in full, but it wasn't a complete victory because what they didn't do, which is all we wanted, was for our talks to be reinstated on the Ted X YouTube channel. No, no, no, no, but you can't put your talk online yourself. Well, no, I have put my talk online myself. Yeah. And so have about 100 other YouTube channels. Oh, beautiful. And I think Ted took such a massive beating over this because it clearly was an act of censorship. However, they tried to dress it up. That they've decided not to go and pull the talks from YouTube, which probably they could do. So I mean, my talk had 132,000 views on YouTube on their channel when they pulled it, but since then, it's had hundreds of thousands of more views all over the internet. So, you know, they, the rather than actually suppress the talk, I think it's called the Streisand effect, you know, rather than suppress the talks. They ended up multiplying same with St. Louis Rubens. How was that a Streisand effect apparently? Apparently, I think it was by a Streisand tried to stop some public statement that had been made about here and it ended up multiplying the statement. You know, when you try, this is the great thing about the internet. When you try to suppress something, it grows. It doesn't get suppressed. The internet is... Including dick pictures. It is. It's the end of the video. Got one of those out there. Coming back around Grandma Hancock. You're going to find you. I've never had my dick photograph. Congratulations. How about you? I hate to plead the fifth.