episode 13 13 ladies and gentlemen. That's a number. It's a very important number. Very important. Tell me why. Why 13 13 is important? Yes. Well, we got two 13's backed back. So it doubles the normal potency of 13, which is already a mystical number, which terrifies people in the west. I think it's unlucky, but in Tibetan Buddhism, it's considered a very lucky and auspicious number. I was staying in a hotel in Vegas. They have no 13th floor and I don't think they had a fourth floor either. The fourth? Yeah, there's something about some cultures. The number four is unlucky. How many cultures do we get to influence our buildings these days? That's what's crazy. And what's crazier is at some point someone convinced a person, listen, can we just not do a 13th floor? And they listened to him. I'm like, all right, I guess we'll just go from 12 to 14. Shoot a Jennings house in a song. When I check in to 14 10, I know what room I'm really in. That's cool. Yeah, well, you know what? That's what's so funny about it is because that's the whole problem, isn't it? Is people want to pretend they're not in the 13th floor when they fucking know they are. Instead of just acknowledging, this is where I'm at. No, no, no. We're in the 14, we're 14. Call the 14th floor. Just call it and they'll be that. Dude, I went when I was in college, we had to do service for like to get the degree you had to go do like service overseas. So we went to India, the Darm Sala and we taught the monks English. And I was sitting with like listening over hearing a monk in a conversation with someone teaching him English and the person is trying to explain to him how there is in a 13th floor in buildings in the west. And the monk was like, does it levitate? Like, is it missing? How do they do it? He was genuinely perplexed. It was like a magical thing. Yeah, in a culture that forces its citizens, if they want to run the country, you have to believe in something that whether you're a Christian or whether you're a Baptist or Mormon, whatever you are, there's certain parts of your religion that if you just want to analyze them, just want to put them out on paper and say, okay, did this really happen? Did this guy really die and come back to life? Is everybody agreeing on this? Everyone's agreeing that a zombie, a guy became a zombie and he came back three days later and we're cool with that. This is a part of the doctrine. So this is like a part of running the country. I don't think you can be an atheist in this country. I don't think we would let you run it. To be you have to, I think you do have to have some affiliation with some religion or another. Something. Yeah, right now it seems to be like it needs to be Christianity. Like there needs to be like every president that has aligned themselves with. It's like we're trapped in this, this thing that you are when you're young. You know this thing you are when you're young, where you're looking at the people that are older than you. You're looking at society and you're like 16 and you're just starting to think, god damn, I'm going to be graduating from high school soon. What am I going to do with my life? You know, it's, you filled with so much angst. Yeah. But you always think, yeah, this shit doesn't make any sense, but one day it will and one day it will be the grown ups and will be the ones that get to make the rules and we'll go, hey, this is, we're doing things all wrong folks. We're doing things out of momentum rather than out of logic. That time never comes. And then all of a sudden you're like, you are I where you're middle aged. We're middle aged men. I'm a 51 year old man. I'm 42. We're middle aged. If we're lucky, if we're super lucky, reality, we're closer to death. Yeah, for sure. So and we're still trapped by this thing where you have to pretend you absolutely know. Look, live your life like Jesus is real. Live your life like you want to follow those tenants. You'll probably live a better life. If you really follow the actual true tenants of Christianity, but if you really want to believe that a guy came back to life and that only happened once and that you have to follow this book. If you don't follow this book that was clearly written and rewritten and fucked with by people and you know that people are known liars. Yeah. Why do we have court? Because people lie. What really happened? You have to fucking get a bunch of people to sit down and figure out what really happened. This guy said, I didn't do anything, you're on her. And they got prints and DNA. And in that world of known liars, we believe a crazy story that was written when people had no science, but we accept it because we think it makes the world a better place. Yeah, man. It's nuts. And there's like so many levels of that where it's like, yeah, that's one obvious level that if you want to take Jesus literally, which is you have to in certain forms of Christianity, you're going to have to deal with some pretty severe cognitive dissonance. You'll be taught maybe to question your instincts, but then go one step deeper and start thinking because the real question is, well, what is real? Like I mean, the other's obvious shit that's clearly bullshit. But wait, then when you start going down, you realize like you get to the point of the self. And then you start realizing that the self in this Jesus that everyone believes in are very similar in the sense that like, you know, I don't say, I believe in gravity. You would think I was crazy if I said it was a crazy thing to say, like, you know, I believe there's gravity. There is gravity. It's testable. It works. But what do you always hear when people are like, if you want to succeed, what do you do? You believe in yourself. And it's like, wait, what do you mean believe in yourself? I am a self. Why do I have to believe in it? Right? So that's just a it's a clunky way of saying self doubt is crippling. Well, self doubt, self, you know, rejection. I hate myself. I love myself. All these things have within it this concept of the self. And a lot of folks have not spent much time really exploring like, well, what is the what is the self? Like what is my particular self? And I think it kind of buys me a when we are Sasquatch. I mean, you know, the self or the many people's self is very similar. in a way to Bigfoot. It's a thing that they imagine that there's signs of but they've never really quite seen the Bigfoot, you know, but you know, remember that father in the trail, it's a gift. It means he likes you. Yeah. They would think that Sasquatches were taking and leaving gifts, taking their gifts and leaving their own gifts, swapping gifts. Yeah. Yeah. And we believed it. They believed it the same way people believe in a religion, you know, I have friend and she was a Mormon. I've told the story before. So forgive me if you've heard it. She was a Mormon, but I think it's important. And she was a devout her whole life. And then the family just fell out of it. And then they started realizing like they started going into the history of it. And they started thinking it was preposterous. It was right around when Book of Mormon was coming out to, you know, that hilarious musical. And it's great. It's really good. But she was really honest about she was like the problem is like growing up in that fundamentalist background. It makes me very susceptible to like healers and like psychics and clairvoyance and bullshit are spiritual people. She's like, I get sucked in to bullshit. And she was like almost kind of upset. Yeah. Not almost. She was kind of upset, but like perplexed. Like how do you rewire yourself when you've been trained to believe that a 14 year old boy in 1820 found golden tablets that contained the lost work of Jesus and all the Native Americans were the lost tribe of Israel. Oh my God. I mean, this is, that's the story, right? 14 year old boy. He had a magic rock. He was the one who couldn't read it. It's crazy. She started looking into it. And she's out. Gone. Gone. And that's sad too, man. Because like if you take some like basic tenants, which are true and not based on, it kind of reminds me of like, you know, you hear someone he's taken ayahuasca. And he comes to you. And he's got a profound message that came to him from some mythological creature, a dragon, a butterfly, has told him some kind of profound fucking thing. And you realize the bubble machine of profundity. You got a bubble machine for 1313. Yeah. Whenever we're talking about. I'm like, it's so, let's keep it rolling. The, yeah, the, so you don't get caught up in pop. But I'm not. When I know that's a problem of getting too high or like talking. What do we do? Let's just pop bubbles and suck the bubbles fly. But you know what I'm saying? It's like for them to really like take in the basic wisdom they got from the mythological creature, they needed a mythological creature. The mythological creature said something to them along the lines of you need to love yourself more. You need to give more to your community, whatever the message is. But if your Uber driver said that to you, it wouldn't get through. because it wasn't like phosphorescent. It didn't have multiple heads. So similarly with these religions, what happens is you do get some real transcendent wisdom that's sort of timeless mixed in with it. And then the people because they realize like, oh my god, it was kind of a fairy tale. They also reject the good stuff inside of it. And that to me is the big tragedy of any kind of fundamentalist, literalist interpretation that's being forced on people is because within that is inevitably something great or it wouldn't be so viral. Like Christianity wouldn't be here right now if there wasn't a core thread in it that had a beautiful message in it. It makes people nicer people. I actually have a really big conversation this weekend with a very good friend about another very good friend who's very religious. And we were saying like I think for some people it's an amazing framework and a guy to live your life. I really do believe that. I have several friends that are very devout Christians. Yeah. It's beautiful. And they're the nicest people I know. And Mormons by the way, I have friends that are Mormons still to this day. I have several friends that are Mormons and they are some of the nicest people. And I don't care if they believe something that I don't believe in. That's okay. It's okay. It is okay. But I mean, the idea that everyone is supposed to buy into stuff without questioning it is the reason why we are 51 year old, 16 year olds. Dude, I agree. And then there's the deeper symbolic shit that seems to be encoded in Christianity, whether from people projecting their own understanding on a pretty wild symbol set or maybe it was intentional either way. There's like a cool like you know, the if we talked about this like if you take a cube and unfold it, it makes a crucifix and like the cube represents pre big bang conditions. Wow. And the crucifix represents past, present and future intersecting with eternity. Oh, so if you have a square, oh, I get it. So the length, the height is twice is the width. Yeah. Okay. Make it unfolds into a crucifix for people that are annoyed with that sound. It sounds like a pencil sharpening over and over and over again. We're sorry. Sorry about that. Bubbles don't come free. You need a machine. You got to have a, we could hire somebody. Hire some duty. Just blow bubbles. What did I blow bubbles on the jerry, bro? Something like fucking manly wrestler, dude. I would do that, man. I would definitely do that. Yeah, different people coming in blow bubbles and occasionally chime in. Hey, I'm going to be on the jerry next week. What are you doing? I'm blowing bubbles. Oh, cool. You're the bubble blow for the week. You could start something that became like that's just what people do. It's like, did you get your bubble man yet? Right. Yeah. I'm a classic bubble man. I know how to do it. The new guys, they're too loud when they blow. Well, did Johnny Carson was Ed McMahon the first sidekick? Would you, did Jack Par have a sidekick? I don't know. Yeah, we're having options for before that. That's Sullivan and. Well, there was the other guy, Steve Allen. I think Steve Allen might have been the first. Was he the first tonight show or the second tonight show? Yeah. But I think that Ed McMahon was probably the first sidekick. And once they had a sidekick, people like, oh, yeah, you need a sidekick. You do. You need somebody to play that part because you can bounce stuff off of them. It's so great. The reaction. Yeah. So much better than a laugh track. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So Christianity, it's on one level. Are you fucking kidding me? It's like, I had this nerdy part of me, man, when you were doing the Jesus' a zombie thing, I really wanted to go technically not a zombie. Not a zombie. I don't think so, because he was buried, right? He did come back to life. But there's a move in Jujitsu called the zombie. Yeah. And what the zombie is is when you're in mission control and you're trying to get an underhook, you push your hand through like a zombie rising through the ground. So zombies get buried. Yeah. But I guess, you know what? I don't want to get into like a team company. Why not? Let's break it up. So what is a zombie? When is it just a person who's like severely disabled and when is it a zombie? Well, you know what I mean? Like is it? Well, they're dead. They're dead. They die. They're hard-stops feeding. But the doctor says they're dead. You would be like a complete asshole. If you're like, they have the same intelligence as humans. They're clearly, there's some brain damage that's happened to a zombie, right? It's a most movies. It's a person with brain damage. Does there any zombie movies with a smart? That's just every movie. Yeah, but I guarantee like there's, there's zombies movies where they run fast. That was an evolution of the zombie. It started running. The zombie became like kind of like hyper violent. And then, but still, I guess what they all have in common is that they're technically they're dead. In this instance, they don't have a heartbeat. They're not dead. Like a biologist would be like, the zombie is alive. It's just like a fungus now or something. Running through a parasite inside of it essentially. Yeah. It's some kind of fungus. Rabies. Yeah. Because they're, yeah. Got biome problem. What was the, the 28 days later? Is that it? Yeah. That was the first one when they ran. Yeah. And that was the scary. That was good. Fucking awesome. The running zombies. That was so good. And, and it was also shaky. Like when the zombies were chasing after you'd fucking panic because the screen was shaking when it was running at you. They were the first like, berserker zombies. You know, man, all this gut biome stuff that we're hearing now, like the, the stuff that he had just read about the study today, like they found out that what, the gut biome, what you're feeding your, your baby effects there, like they, like there seems to be a correlation between their gut biome and the way they act when they're like five or something. There are two years old or something. Sure, dude. And the autism link, you know, where they're saying they think autism might be related to like. Well, who's saying that? Jamie, would you mind pulling that out for a further? There's a guy named Dr. Peter Hotez and he was on the podcast and he is, uh, is an expert in, um, autism and vaccines and diseases and foreign countries, uh, particularly tropical disease and warm, moist climate diseases. And he was talking about how they've got it narrowed down to five environmental factors that happen during the womb that they think possibly contribute to autism. Yeah. But they don't think that it comes from something that happens later. Huh. This is current science, according to him, obviously I don't know what I'm talking about. Like for sure. I'm not a biologist at all. People looking at us are probably like, how do these scientists not know this? I should barely be able to say those words in order and pretend like I know what they mean. But I, I listened to experts. Um, the mother's microbiome, the collection of microscopic organisms that lives inside of us is a key contributor to the risk of autism. Some that might be one of the factors. So it's during the womb and neurodevelopmental disorders and offspring. Well, it would make sense that if your body's not getting the proper nutrition and your body's not healthy, that whatever's going on inside of you is not going to be the best environment for a baby to reach a hundred percent health. Just make sense. If you're eating terrible, yeah, while you're pregnant, it's not going to be good for the kid. But if you're eating really well and you're relaxing and taking care of yourself, it's probably better for the kid. I mean, this seems like obvious. It doesn't seem to make any sense that it that wouldn't be the case. I think the weird part of it to me, this runs into like ideas of free will or like autonomy in the sense that how much is the gut and the neurons and the gut and the neurons and the heart and all the interactions they're having with things that have different DNA than affecting what we do. And like, there's a lot. That's so weird. Because we contribute to depression. Yeah. Yeah. And it contributes to what else, autism, what other behaviors or in other words, are we just essentially being driven around by some kind of strange microscopic hive of creatures living in our shit? In some way, yeah. You know, Brian Cowan had a pretty bad case of psoriasis kept coming back. Nasty. Really bothered him. Try a bunch of stuff. Couldn't get it fixed. Went to one doctor who's a specialist in gut biome and it's connection to autoimmune disorders. And guy fixed him up. Just changed up his probiotics like what he's taking, pre-biotics and probiotics, gave him some like heavy duty shit. I forget exactly what he said, but it fixed it. And it was basically something going on in his gut biome. And that can be affected by stress. Yeah. It can be affected by lack of sleep. There's all sorts of stuff that goes on in your body. We have to think of ourselves as a super organism, like essentially like an ecosystem. We have to think of ourselves as like, you think of yourself as you. Hey, it's me. It's Joe. It's Duncan. We're talking. We're friends. Hey, what's up, buddy? We're going to keepers of the realm. Okay. We got a whole realm of things living inside of our body and we're feeding it twinkies. And it's freaking out. And it's like you fucking mourn here, but it like would feels like when twinkies go in my face. Yeah. I see your fucking knees hurt all the time. Yeah. Your back is killing you. You have all these inflammation problems getting zits in your 40 years old. Like what the fuck? It's because you're eating dog shit, man. You're not giving your body anything good. You're the keeper of the realm. And also this is something I've been thinking about is like how much data we're eating, which is equivalent to twinkies. It's like you eat a bunch of twinkies. Your body starts hurting. Then you're just slurping up whatever the fuck on the phone, right? Which by the way, I'm talking about me. This is what I do. You know, my bouncing around from like judge report to Huffington report to Reddit conspiracy to read it what the fuck is it popping? How long before you're looking at like a zit popping video. And that takes you down into a place of like, oh, let's just move to animal cysts. And then you fall asleep. You wake up screaming. And that's the equivalent of getting like gas, isn't it, for me, like a huge Taco Bell meal. Only set of farting. You're just screaming in the middle of the night because you dreamed a cult was dragging you into the forest. It's like this is to me. We seem to have not quite acknowledged that data is as much as like a food. And that so much of the weirdness that people are showing these like strange behaviors. It's got to be because of the crazy shit they're sucking into their optic nerves, right? It is. It's also the ability to affect people very rapidly, whether to get a reaction from someone positive or negative people are so addicted to that. Yeah. I watch people getting these Twitter beeps back and forth and fucking smart people, man, a smart friend of mine who I respect greatly tried to get me to retweet something mean that he was saying to someone else and like, get the fucking out of here. Like, why are you, what are you doing? Yeah. Like, what are you doing with your time? We get the one thing that I've done over the last week. We did a podcast with Bert and Tom and Ari and we all looked at the amount of screen time we put in our phones. Ari was proposing no smartphones. Yeah. Um, my fucking screen time was like four hours for a day. I was like, what? I'm a lie to myself and I'm so almost let see my own taking care of business. Yeah. Most of it is going through Google news feed looking for crazy stories of like animal attacks. Absolutely. Just the most. Look at that, man. I watched a video today with a guy riding his dirt bike and a bear is chasing him. I'm like, what in the fuck, what is happening? Look, man, I don't want to try to like enable your addiction. But honestly, I think the internet has come to depend on your wild animal attack videos. Like you have kind of become like a news outlet for the best wild animal attacks. People need to know. People need to see this shit, man. And like we don't know, I've never seen a vulture fight or rabbit or out of people do have a very weird idea of what animals are. And I think that the average person, I'm certainly no expert, but amongst the average person, I have a much better understanding of wildlife because I'm out in the wild. Yeah. And that's why we're hunting. It's a different world. It's a different world. I'm no expert, but my perception of it is as someone who sees wildlife in the wild, they see dead ones that other ones have killed. We came across a calf that had been ripped apart by wolves. I mean, we see stuff and you realize what that is, what that what that fucking forest really is. competing ecosystem of life and it's going on all the time and there's big things jacking smaller things There's birds snatching things off the ground and snatching other birds out of trees And it's happening all the time and it's magic and you have to have it that way because otherwise the the whole population The plant would be overrun you have to have your sorrow of watching the bear tear apart the fawn That has to happen because if it didn't happen you'd have too many fawns They'd be everywhere you'd have too many deer and you have to have someone who can take care of the bears Otherwise the bears will overrun the city where the humans live and we need to think about that and people don't want to because they Don't want to shoot yogi they don't want to shoot yogi and boo boo. There are friends This is a teddy bear. I grew up with a bear. You don't know what a bear is I've seen a bear in the wild when you see the bear in the while you're like oh You're you don't give a fuck about me. You're some weird heartless beast That is majestic looking who runs around eating moose and deer babies That's what your deal is you eat grass and berries and you like to lay around you're fucking cool a shit It's a cool ass animal. Yeah, doesn't mean you hate it But you understand what the fuck it is it's not like this idea like people don't want people to hunt bears in certain places like particularly like They're they're trying to regulate the size of The amount of grizzly bears in certain parts of the country. They're like hey, we we need to keep a handle on this Like the couple people get mauled You know people start walking through Yellowstone and get attacked It happens like a little bit more rapidly the numbers get to a certain like they're like these things have no fear of people Like we can actually help the population If they hand out bear tags and people start freaking out you can't kill the bears You can't kill the bears don't you kill the bears there's a reason why there's no fucking bears in California Duncan only black bears there are fucking state flag has a grizzly bear on it. Do you ever notice that? Yeah, the state flags are grizzly. They eradicated all the grizzly bears because they were eating people So in the fucking eighteen hundreds dude. There's a town. I think it's called Levesque. I think it's called Levesque It's out near like on the way to Bakersfield. Yeah, Lebeque Lebeque. I think it's called Lebeque It's a town named after the last dude that got killed by a grizzly bear in California Yeah, and to investigate this thing Exhumed his body and his legs were fucking ripped apart like his you know knees were snapped in half and shit You have to destroy this tape you got torn apart by a bear and they killed the bear and they buried him and that was the last bear There was the last bear attack they killed all the bears the reason why they killed all the bears because that's what you have Do you fuck do you want to be able to walk to your car? Yes, you don't you don't want bears in Santa Monica, okay shut up Just shut up. We do we're going into their territory man They'll come in yours too, okay stop don't be silly. We definitely shouldn't kill all the bears But you kill a few should definitely kill some she killed some wolves too I just agree to you. We have to keep everything alive. I'm gonna bring back to your dad. I wouldn't mind that Snatching people right off a car. Well come on. They could be controlled. Come on They could be controlled put them in a some kind of domed. I don't know We never knew they were bulletproof ring. I'm back fuck it people are shooting down on bullets just about some not hitting people on the ground Jim Lorskin it's the what the you know, I saw something You know your podcast. It's like everywhere now. It's like dandelions ever you like you can't anywhere I'm always getting suggested videos from your podcast And I saw one because I've been cutting down my meat consumption good for you and But that doesn't mean I don't eat meat. I just want to cut it down a little bit and And I have been feeling or kind of enjoyable from time to time sense of You know that I don't know if you let yourself do this you probably don't but that feeling of like kind of bullshit Like I'm a little better now Yeah, a little better of a person and I was really like I wasn't like overt it wasn't like hyper obnoxious You know, but just a kind of sense like I did it. I can cut down my beef consumption and I'm eating you know I'm eating you know a cheese here and there and anyway this video popped up And it's some gas. I don't know who it was talking about the number of animals that die in a beanfield Like any beanfield that you see so many animals just ground up and murdered and And it was great because I realized like oh of course. Yeah, right you the trick I was trying to play on myself Is the same it's the 13th floor shit. It's like I want the world To look like a Disney film, but it's a bit of a cop out even saying that my my my saying that because the reality is there's another solution The solution is organic gardening, right? So you can organically garden if you get a Plottle land and get some friends together You could all grow enough vegetables so you'd have to take place in large which lot with large-scale agriculture Or if you're dealing rather with large-scale agriculture That's the problem the problem is we have to feed in just in LA alone the greater Los Angeles area What is like 20 million something people that's so many goddamn people? Yeah, one's growing anything other than weed So what do we have? Well, yeah, we have someone has to grow this fucking food for us So they have to do it large scale. Yeah, I'm gonna do it large scale it involves combines And those fucking things are indiscriminate. They're just chewing up the ground and things get caught up in it And that's why when they clean fields when they pick whatever they're growing you see vultures after they run the combine You see vultures circling the fields because they know rabbits and rats and Jesus man all kinds of bugs I mean any kind of I mean I don't know if you care about bugs which is that's a weird thing, right? It's like vegans will get to this some vegans will get to this like line where they're like yeah, but that's a mosquito Fuck mosquitoes. Yeah, they have malaria. You know you get to like a life form Ethical boundary that's right. You can't relate to a roach also the hilarious thing when it comes to assigning levels of sentience and then based on that deciding if you should eat something or not You run into like a lot of weird problems, which is like number one. You're assuming a Lot just because they don't have this sort of nervous system You have I mean and who knows we project most of everything we are into the world and we don't really know what the phenomenon is but I saw some like Video of a little of an aunt taking care of the ants baby and I don't know if you've probably heard about how trees communicate with the My ceiling. Yes, and like how they'll send nutrients to their children And then so then you start running into I think which is a really fascinating problem which is what if it's all alive and sentient and feeling for real what if the there is throughout the entire universe just a sentient field of consciousness that is Interacting with matter in a way that it produces what we call life and that life is feeling terror Love maybe in different ways than we would that is interacting with matter in a way that it produces what we call life and that life is feeling terror, love, maybe in different ways than we would understand it, but it's still there. You know, that's a really under consideration by legitimate scientists. In fact, Sam Harris was wife just wrote a book about that. It's one of the subjects of it's called conscious. And conscious or consciousness, sorry, I don't remember which, I haven't read it yet, but I heard them talking about it on his podcast. And the concept that used to be like super woo woo was what if everything has consciousness? Yeah. What if everything has, but it just it can't move, it can't express itself, can't change its environment. It's limited just like we can't fly and we can't swim underwater and breathe water like we're limited in our physical abilities. Right. But we assume that whatever limitations that we have like this is where it ends, this is where the buck stops here. Yeah. Like everything that doesn't move, it's got to be stupid. But it might not be, which is one of the reasons why nobody wants to buy a house after someone's been killed in it. Right. Like what if that house retains memory? That was something that Rupert Sheldrick proposed a long time ago. You know, he's got that. What is that? Very strange theory where everything is more thick resonance, I think so. Yeah. They're even more thick resonance. He's a fascinating guy. And he's like a guy who's not afraid to take some chances and say some really woo woo shit. Yeah. I think he's a Christian as well. Yeah, I love his book. I think you're the one was telling me some of the studies are not so great. And it's well, it wasn't that I said that. It's that other people would complain about that. Right. Because there's some, there's some studies that apparently people lean on that aren't super legit. Like the dog knowing you're coming home one. Yeah. Like you got to replicate that shit because first of all, the guy might have a loud car. Dogs can hear shit way better than you can. Yeah. Like how far away is the guy when the dog starts going towards the door or does the guy just come home every night and the dog has like an internal clock. And he knows, Hey, it's five o'clock. Mike wants to become a home. Like if you come, have they replicated this for 11 30? What if Mike starts coming home in the Tesla where you can't hear shit? Who knows? What if he comes on to the dog actually know he's coming or is it dog just hearing things? Dog hearing a door or car. I mean, it's almost isn't always, doesn't always kind of seem like the most boring possible solution is usually the right one. It's like yeah. What's the most boring thing? The most boring thing is nothing's happening. But you're imagining the dog is somehow has a telepathic link to you. Occam's razor, right? Yeah. Occam's the simplest, but it's also the most boring. Like, you know, these crazy fucking UFOs. I'm sorry if you've talked about this a bunch on the podcast. But the UFOs that we're seeing that the, you know, Navy is releasing these videos of these tech tax zipping around and it's Navy pilots. It's not the people we interviewed in that show. It's Navy pilots who are like, yeah, I don't know what the fuck this is. And I was, I have great conversations with Uber drivers. And like we were talking about it. And this guy was like, in a lot of them are programmers and shit. And this guy was like, it's probably a techn- it's a glitch in the type of radar they're using. I think it must be a glitch. I mean, that's the most likely reality. They're not seeing it with their own eyes. They're not. I don't think so. I think they're just picking it up on radar. And so he's like, it maybe it's a glitch or maybe it's like, we should find that out. Can you Google if the pilots were picking it up on radar, the pilot spotted UFO, do you see if they, because I know some guys have spotted things with their own eyes. I know, I know for sure some guys have. I'm just, I'm not sure if the dad is acting. It's probably relevant to the conversation. No, it's probably the thing that we know. People listening going, yeah, with the fuck. I get super skeptical. I feel like, I feel like almost like it's a plot. I don't want to go full Eddie Bravo. But I feel like when I see people talking about UFOs, I'm like, okay, what else is going on? What are you distracting me from? This is really a big issue. It was like, is it really happening? Can I see it? What do you got? Got nothing? Oh, you got like some radar. You got radar from one, two pilots, three pilots. Okay, I believe it, but I want to see more. Why do I want to see more? Like what am I, and you'll get caught up in it. It'll chew up hours of your dad. Yeah, man. There's a lot of those guys that we ran into on that show. I felt bad for them, because they didn't understand what had happened to them. They'd gotten caught in this weird loop of looking for secrets and looking for mysteries to be solved and looking for hidden conspiracies and they get caught in that. And some of that shit is real, which is part of the problem. Some of it you can come across the Gulf of Tonkin in the north woods operation north ones. You can come across a bunch of them that are real and Ron, you can see how they put that together. You're like, what? You could see real crazy conspiring. Yeah. And then you can get lost and think it's everywhere. That's right. Yeah. Well, I mean, this is like, dude, I was just, what does this Jamie? Oh, according to day, the AAVs, what does that mean? Is that the new US? How about you say UFO you come on? Yeah, we're really going to change UFO. They're like, they have their own little thing. They were AAVs. We don't refer to us as UFOs. Those are my pronouns. AAVs appeared in an altitude greater than 80,000 feet far higher than commercial or military jets typically fly, fly initially. The print Princeton's radar team. It's a radar really high pro, print stories. What it's called. It's like a really high processing radar system. Why is it spelled Prince Ton? Oh, it's Prince story. No, it is. Prince done. It's a bit. I'll prosper in a weird spot. Oh, okay. Um, the radar team didn't believe what they were saying, chalking up the anomalies to an equipment malfunction, but after they determined that everything was operating as it should, they began detecting instances, which the AAVs. I want to know what the fuck that means. Dropped with astounding speed to lower busier airspace. Day approach the Princeton's commander about taking action. He said, I was chomping at the bit. I really wanted to intercept these things. What? Yeah. That's we have the fucking craziest people in this country. Yeah. Like there's a fucking there's an alien man. I want to chase it. I want to catch that tail. Fuck. I was a chomping by the tail. An ominous aerial vehicles. Can't come out. I can't hear you. He's already in name for it. Whoever invented that new name is an ass. He's an asshole. Give us a break. I was actually the one who decided to call them AAVs. Come on. You know, technically it's not an unidentified flying object. You're not taking our fucking UFOs, man. I'm going to fight that. What is it again? What is the exact phrase? An anomalous aerial vehicle. An anomalous aerial vehicle. It's an AAV. You're an asshole. An anomalous. It's an anomaly. I want to propose a new name for UFOs. An anonymous aerial vehicle. It's probably a part of a billion dollar study. Two fighters were diverted to intercept one of the strange objects. When they first arrived on the scene, the pilots didn't see any flying objects, but they did observe what the lead pilot commander David Freaver later referred to as a disturbance in the ocean. The water was churning with white waves breaking over what looked like a large object just under the surface. Then they know it's one of the objects flying about 50 feet above the water. Freaver the commander of the elite black ace of squadron. This is a goddamn Nichols cage movie. Who is a top gun program graduate? With more than 16 years of flying experience described it as about 40 feet long shaped like a tick-tack candy. With no obvious means of propulsion. It's white. It has no wings. It has no rotors. I go holy shit. What is that? Dude, you know the guy, whoever the company is that makes tick-tacks. You're like, yes, they're calling them tick-tacks. It's free publicity. Totally. Ttick-tacks is the one sponsoring this whole deal. You think it is? Yeah, man. People are buying tick-tacks right now. Listen to this. You just say tick-tack enough. Remember those old subliminal things you do in movie theaters when you're watching a movie? It's a hungry e-popcorn. Every 50, 100th frame, they would stick like a hungry e-popcorn. They would put subliminal text on the screen. Damn, I want some popcorn. If you just say tick-tacks. Ttick-tacks. People are buying tick-tacks right now. Well, we do know that pilot's got great breath, right? That's a tick-tack man. If like the first time you see a UFO, the first thing that pops into your head is it looks like a mint. That's nuts. There had to be other ways to describe it. They got stock and tick-tacks, bro. For sure. I googled tick-tack after he said that to her because I couldn't remember if they were square or if they were like tick, you know, the rectangle would expect a good UFO to look like. Yeah, you know. Bloring. Yeah, like super Apple like like an Apple made a UFO. Yeah, it's like a pretty sleek. Yeah. But going into the ocean part, that's the part I like the best because that kind of lines up with Hollywood theory and that and like that maybe like they're flying down. They're based in the center of the Earth. Of course they have a base in the Earth. Why wouldn't you have a base in the ocean? We never go there. Do you have a fly over? I was just in Hawaii. You fly over five hours of water. It's just water. Well, that's that strong of a app thing. I feel like we've talked about literally everything. You know this drama app? Don't worry about it. Okay, good. It's great man. I love that I have to think if I'm pretty sure we've talked about this, the heat maps, the Strava heat maps that seem to show people walking under the ocean and stuff. Walking? Yeah. We haven't. No. It's like Strava, you know, it's like I think it was Strava, right? It was like a way for you to track your steps and some people apparently weren't some bases in the Arctic or in the ocean. Walking around and it showed up before they could like turn that function off for top secret facilities, like the places they blur out on Google Maps. So do you think there's like a military base under the water somewhere where submarines go? God, man. You know, I want to think that, but I'm always moving the meg. Yeah. I think it's probably a technical error, but fuck, maybe. I mean, I don't know. It's like the implication of these tech tax and all of it, if you really want to like the first to me, the most obvious one, minus the turning water evidence is that it's some kind of equipment malfunction. What's also that they have an unlimited budget for black ops? Yeah. We don't know what that number is. That's right. We don't get to know. Yeah. Right? All that weird shit they do when they're making stealth bombers and all that area 51 stuff. Yeah. How much money goes to that? Like, what is the number? Let's Google this. How much does the US spend on black ops? I had, I was going to bring this up in the middle of what you guys are talking. There's a program here that was going on. The A A tip advanced aerospace threat identification program was going on and had a just the A A tip. I'm just, I'm just fucking out of your money, but I'm just getting used the A A tip. 22 million is what their budget was in 2012 and this said that it doesn't still go on, but apparently it does Lewis Elizondo says it's still operating and he is part of this. So they spent 22 million dollars to see if the UFOs were a threat? A year. And then there's the stars academy. Yeah. That's, that's, that's Tom DeLong stuff. Yeah. Well, some of it's still going on. It's all, listen, I am, I'm fucking rooting for it. I wanted to be real. I would love it if it was real. But if you look at like the history of the great ideas, a lot of them did come from like weird moments, you know, like Tesla, like basically at a seizure and felt like it was being contacted by something like you do run into stories of at the very least inspiration, but quite often innovation coming to people via like weird. I transmission. Well, I've been thinking this for a long time that maybe ideas are living things. And these ideas, even though they, you think of them as something your brain is creating and maybe your brain is creating it. Yeah. But maybe it uses your brain to create it so that it can manifest itself in the real world. So when you have ideas, whether ideas are turned to be art or music, like, you know, Jimmy Hendrix comes out with Voodoo Child, you're, you are inspired by that. Yeah. You see it. It gives you a great feeling. You exchange currency to listen to it. I mean, just that one song, how much money has been generated by Voodoo Child. It's one of the greatest songs in the history that you know in the universe is the, the opening guitar riff. I've listened to that a thousand times. Easy. I listen to it all the time. Whenever I'm like, I need a to pick me up the, it's a masterpiece. It's a masterpiece of music. And where that idea come from? Well, it came from his brain. Right. But where was it before it was in his brain? How does brain cook it up? And what is it? What are these things? They're just floating around that you grab out of culture. And how do you turn them into something that people go crazy for? Yeah. Because occasionally a guy will take one of those ideas and make Voodoo Child or, you know, make someone else's song or make someone else's painting or, or, you know, make a fucking building that's inspiring. There's these things that come into your head. That's right. And you're at the end, what they really do is they're like the eggs of objects because they, they come to your mind, you think about them. And then you say, I'm going to make a fucking clock. And you start making a clock. Right. Where is that coming from? Where, oh, it's just your creativity and it's just your mind. It's just your imagination. And while it's just your thought process, your synapses, firing, yeah, yeah, yeah, you're right. You're right. We're all, you're absolutely right. There's no real Woo, Woo, Woo. Or is there what the fuck is a thought figure that out? No one knows what that is. Especially where are they coming from? I mean, how many times you've written a joke and you laugh as you're writing? Like, we're the fuck did that come from? Yeah. Yeah. Well, I mean, or saying, and he sometimes likes you're watching sentences come out of your mouth and you're sort of, you don't feel like, yeah, every day, yeah. All the time. Right now. Where is that, you know, who's articulating it? There's a, this, I've been studying Buddhism and any Buddhist out there. If I fuck this up, I'm sorry. If you're, if you're more advanced or no more about it. So I'm probably going to say the words wrong and stuff. It's really interesting. So it's like, there's like eight consciousnesses. I think it's eight. And the sixth one is your thought, the continuum of thoughts. Right. So that's like where most people hang out and they think that's who they are is the infinite cycle of repeating thoughts in their head. So below that is your senses. And then the one right above that is the seventh. And that's what is considered subconscious in the West. But, um, so that's where all your memories are. That's where all your, uh, like, uh, just all the shit you can't remember that happened to you that, uh, that stuck back there that appears in people's art or appears in your neurosis or whatever. And then above that is the eighth consciousness. And that's the stored experience of all human beings. And whoa, that's happening. It's like the global mind or it's with the yeah, we have the Akashic records. Yeah. And so basically that one drips down like, uh, like water and a cave, it drips down into your subconscious, which drips down into your thoughts. So when you're having these thoughts, according to this model, uh, it's not necessarily your thoughts, you're getting a kind of distillate that's rolling down through the global mind being flavored by your subconscious and then being flavored by your identity or who you think you are. And then so by the time it comes out of you, it's got you wrapped up inside of it. But it's a projection of some like shared mind. It's pretty cool. That makes, that makes actual sense. You know, that sounds like crazy voodoo hippie talk, but it actually makes sense that we all know that there's something that we share the sun and we, we all feed off of each other. I mean, you know, I've said this many times that I am a different person with you. Yeah. Like we're different together. And we're different with other people as well. I mean, that's how human beings are. And when we interact with each other, we have this bonding thing. There's a, there's a, an interaction thing. Yeah. And that's why some people are toxic for you. I mean, the idea that you're supposed to stay with everyone is like crazy. Like some people are just not good for you. It's not a good mix. You know, you're not good for them. They're not good for you. Get out. Yeah. But that there's something that's going on. It's not you just as an individual. And then what we're talking about gut biome and that as well. Yeah. You're, you're, you're also sharing gut biome with each other. You're sharing DNA with each other. You're sharing the skin. There's, there's little organisms living on your body. You hug people with no shirt on. You're sharing organisms. Yeah. So one of the reasons why it feels good, I bet. Yeah. Yeah. Man. I mean, it's probably a great way to swap organisms to keep them spreading. You know, I mean, yeah, it benefits your biome if like you want to like pollinate or get out into the world for sure. I was reading them out. I was listening, actually, listening to a podcast, uh, the Steven Renella podcast, Meadeater. And there was a guy on who was an expert in moving wildlife around how they like sometimes they'll move wolves in different particular areas. They had too many moose in this one island. And so they moved wolves in, but the wolves, there wasn't enough of them. And they were on an island. So they all start fucking each other and they were fucking their kids. And they're, they're DNA just was a mess. Yeah. Just all sorts of inbreeding and it was just terrible, which is also fascinating. It's like nature's like, no, no, no, no, no, no, you can't just stay around and fuck each other. You gotta get out there. Like nature, even with animals, nature's like the, the, the, not the game we're playing. You gotta move it. The game we're playing is not male and female. The game we're playing is male that doesn't know female. That's the game because you can't fuck your sister and you can't fuck your mom. Stop. If you do it a few times, but after a while, your kids are just not going to come out good, which is weird, right? Like how come if you're good and your sister's good, how come if you have sex, there's a high likelihood that the kid won't be good, there's something wrong with the child. And if the child fucks the sister and then they have a child, it's even more likely. Yeah. That, you know, I mean, this is what inbreeding is. And this is one of the reasons why you have a lot of problems with certain dogs, species. Sure. Yeah. And it's, it's a weird little thing that nature's got built into it. Yeah. And just like keep moving, bitch, keep touching each other, keep spreading the biome. Got to move. Yeah. No matter what you want. Swap and spit, that keeps it moving. Have you seen a planet earth with that poor sloth, that poor horny lonely sloth? Just horny. I pretty sure it was a sloth. It was some kind of slow moving tree creature. And they set it up. You know, I don't know how much of it is real. Like how much of it is there just filming animals and telling a story about them. But this sloth is horny. It like howls out into the forest. Like, and it hears like a streak of a woman, a female like, and it's like, oh, fuck, you know, it's, they yet this poor guy. Look how, can you get it from where he's in the tree or we like to show that. So he doesn't show it. So he, he doesn't have a girlfriend. That's what's up. Yeah. He's climbing. He's climbing. He's the self of the sloth world. This is an it's in cell slot. It's not because this one's actually what you can see. This sloth is going for it. It's like, it's not staying in his apartment on the internet. It's, it's leaving his tree, swimming across an ocean, climbing up another tree. But what a dirty trick nature played on this motherfucker to have him move so slow. Everyone can catch you. Yeah. It's like nature's like, listen, you guys are too fucking stupid. There's too many of you. We're going to have to have it so eagles pick you off. So they have them so slow literally no one can miss them. What a goddamn dirty trick. You ever see a bear run? They run fast. Give us see a fucking wolf or a coyote run. They're ridiculous. This poor bastard, this poor bastard is going so slow. It looks like he's on slow mo. Like we're looking at the leaves. Yeah. The leaves are moving in normal speed, but he looks like he's on fucking slow mo. He looks like he's been eating binsos for the last nine months. Like just fucked up. He's got an infinite Xanax prescription. But yeah. Yeah. He's barely getting bought. Yeah. What we must look so fast to them. Like to them, we must seem terrifying and how quickly we're moving about the eagles. You know, what is that eagle that gets them in South America? The harpy eagle. Is that what it is? The biggest eagle on earth? I didn't know harpy's eight sloth. All they eat is monkeys and sloths. That's their favorite shit. They snatch these sloths out of the tree. Bitch! Get over here. They just dump, dump, dump, dump. Whoa, dude. What is it? A fight between the twin and the sloth. Sloth fights back. Oh my god. A sloth fight. Oh, that's a really young eagle. What's a baby? Oh, the sloth is actually swinging at the eagle. Imagine that. You'd be like, what are you doing, man? It's more like when someone's trying to wake you up, it's like, yeah, yeah. No, that's like a drunk guy at a bar and you're trying not to fuck him up. You like, please don't make me hit you. That is exactly it. And the eagle seems perplexed by it. Yeah, but you see the harpy eagle kill one because it's crazy, man. They just swooped down. They're so enormous. And one of these guys, first of all, kudos to all these wildlife biologists that actually go down there and risk their ass. Look at that boom. Hold on, back that up again. Motherfucker. Boom! Jesus. That is a big killer bird and he just snatches that poor little guy. But somebody had to be there to film that. And there was one of them that I watched on the harpy eagle, which is a beautiful animal, where this guy who was a photographer, who was one of the scientist who's studying him, got attacked. The eagle swooped in and fucking took a swing at him. G-O-Z, okay. Yeah, barely. But I mean, that gets sketchy. When a 25 pound flying bird with knives coming out of its feet is trying to snatch you. I mean, something that can literally carry a fish. Can you imagine how strong your hand would be if you could shove your hand into the river, snatch a salmon and pull it out with one hand? I'm going to be honest, that's strong. I do that. That's how I fish. It's amazing. I love the feeling. She made a YouTube video. I don't want to film myself out in nature, you know how it is. I just heard it. That's my private time and the wild. Probably just snatch them and then they fly with them. They're so fucking strong. Yeah. If that thing was coming after you and I think the harpy eagle is probably even bigger than 25 pounds. I think 25 pounds is like a big ball eagle. Yeah. I think the harpy eagle is even larger than that. Two. One of my friends told me something that has always kind of creeped me out. It's obviously probably not true. But like, you know, my favorite things. Yeah, my two university of pro science. He's 11 pounds? That's it. What's the heaviest eagle? Wow. I'm off big time. I guess that makes sense, though, because like a turkey is the giant turkey's like a 20 pound turkey. The stellar's sea eagle is average weight 15 pounds. Oh wow. The line eagle 14 pounds harpy eagle 13.1. No shit. Why do I feel like we've done this before? I don't know. I feel like you were. I thought you were right, though, but maybe it's just I guess I was in Vegas and I had to bet whether or not you looked up the weight of the biggest eagle. I would bet a million dollars. I know what it is. Definitely looked at it. I know exactly what it is. It's I got a confused with an with an extinct eagle in New Zealand that was enormous that they think hunted people. And that one was 25 pounds. And I was shocked that that's it was only 25 pounds called the host eagle H A A S T show a picture of what that fucking thing was none of them verified to exceed 20 pounds. But they think they were bigger. Yeah. See, that's it. That's where I fucked up. I was looking at this thing. And I was like, why it's only 20 pounds or 25 pounds? Because you look at the size of it. Like it was a fucking huge. And they really think they might have hunted humans. They think that's that might be why the people I think it was New Zealand, why the people in New Zealand wiped them out. And this was like before the white man came and fucked everything up. Did you see that documentary on Falcon earring? No, which one is that? It's this woman who's like, I wish I could remember her name, but she like goes up to I think like Tibet and they like took her in and taught her how to like hunt because it's the way they hunt with birds. And like the whole relationship you have, you sort of have to raise the Falcon from a baby and they're like connected to it. But it's the most insane thing to witness because it's such a remote place. And it's such a like traditional people. They don't watch TV. They don't know, you know, they're not like absorbed in shit like we are. They're just out there hunting with giant birds. And you know, they figured out how to do that. You know, that's to me all the stuff like horse, right? Any any human animal relationship when you think back to the first person who saw Falcon, I was like, I'm going to catch it. And I'm going to train it to catch rabbits so we can eat. Yeah. How how how how that shit is. I don't know if this is the exact documentary, but this is one on it called the challenge where that's not it. But that's it's these are like in the like Saudi Arabia. These are like some sharpening applause. So some sharpened to be here in a second. What are they using them to hunt? It seems like they're having an event here. So I don't know. Oh, they're sharpening their beak. What the fuck? Yeah, this was in it. This is another version. They're watching soccer. They're riding on sand dunes. These guys are driving land cruisers in the middle of the desert somewhere. Yeah, they're in land cruisers. They're letting go pige. The pigeons are going to get jacked. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. They got a room filled with pigeons or those Falcons. Yeah, probably Falcons. Well, no, those are I can't do that. Which one of the pigeons? Some of them have to be pigeons, right? Those are pigeons. So what is the challenge? Like who jacks the most pigeons? The fuck is that? Wait a minute. It's called the challenge. The movie is called the challenge. It's a documentary that came out one awards a couple years ago. Really? Yeah. And it's just about Falcons, Jack and pigeons. I thought this was the one he was talking about, but apparently it's not. I want to watch that multiple, this is sharpening the beaks and sharpening the claws. Dude, this is going to be your next thing. Wow. You're going to get into Falcon nearing the next time I come here, you're going to have a Falcon some kind of like when them Mongolian dudes with the fur hat, the ring, the fucking spike on the top of it. That is the one. That's it. Monkey holes. Guys driving around with a guy. I'm sorry about this movie. Oh, wow. No shit. Yeah, dudes have crazy money, man. They just have to figure out some way to ball. So they get killer birds. Look at those chairs. Dude, birds are an amazing thing. If you really watch them and see them in the wild, like do their thing, like snatch a fish out of the water, what it is is a raptor. It's a flying raptor that just we tolerated because it's small, but we probably killed all the ones that could kill us. Well, yeah, right? They were like giant, giant eagles at some point. Get that fucking eyes on that thing, man. Look at that. Look at the eyes on that thing. It has a giant, if that was a big thing, like the size of you coming at you and trying to kill you and eat you. First of all, you'd be totally helpless. If that thing was your size, you would be 100%. Every human being would be 100% helpless. Those things are so strong. It would grab a hold of you with its feet. It would start ripping you apart with that fucking bull cutter. It has grown out of its face. Yeah. Fuck, man. It would just, just that fucking thing would be the size of a sword, like a samurai sword that would just be smashing and ripping your guts out. You'd be, you'd probably still be alive for a second to watch it. Take a taste of your guts. It would probably be like the size of one of shak shoes, right? That would be his beak. It's size 22. Yeah. Like a beak, right? You look at his beak? Yeah. Huge knife. Big fucking head. This big, big ass shoe for a caring you to feed its babies, right? That's what they do. They eat you first and puke you into the baby's mouth. Yeah. And they eat other birds too. Whatever the fuck they want. Those things are always fun. You know, I used to find them headless in my backyard. There was like a little bit of a war between the, the hawks in my yard. Yeah. We put in this glass fence in the back of the yard and the hawks can figure out the fence and they fuck it. And they, a couple of them got KO'd. One of them, one of them we managed to save. We brought them to like a wildlife rescue place and they rehabilitated them and saved them. But another couple of them died. And then we would find dead hawks. So I think that one of them was like the dominant hawk and he died. You place and they rehabilitated them and saved them. But another couple of them died. And then we would find dead ha- So I think that one of them was like the dominant hawk and he died. And then other ones just started moving into the area. Like they were flying around my chicken coop and like little juvenile hawks who kind of assholes. Almost like teenagers. I was like, what the fuck is going on here? And then I'd find one of them with his head missing. She's sorry. So like some other hawk killed it and ripped its fucking head off. And a bigger hawk left it in my yard. My dead with no head. Like a message. Oh, shall I figure out what the fuck eats something's head? But apparently that's something that a hawk will do to each other. So it's like the equivalent of like the madmax putting your enemies head on a spike in front of your area. Yes, you claim you own like all his friends get to see his headless body when you shit on it when you fly over. I'm not. Find out if that's true. That might be a lie. Do you want? It's true. But I want to find out if a hawk's because I'm almost, we're very high right now, ladies and gentlemen. But I'm pretty sure that I read that when I found the headless bird in my yard. Have you seen the Tibetan sky burial shit? Yes. Yeah, that stuff's cool. Man, that's crazy. Yeah, it's amazing. Tell people what it is. That's when you basically instead of cremation, your friends hack your body up into pieces and take it to where they're vultures, buzzards, I'm not sure which vultures. Scatter your body. They descend on it. They eat it. And all that's left is bones. They even smash the head so that the vultures can get inside the head. Get your brain. All your memories. And then I just saw this incredible documentary on the history of, I think it was the Himalayas. There's civilizations there because like they're genetically, they it's why the Sherpas are able to help people. Like they are able to take oxygen and more. There's some kind of split that happened. And that high in altitude. But like these fucking crazy scientists were repelling down the side of these cliff faces and going into tombs and the side of cliffs and looking at these bones of these people where they're not sure of what their history is. And like they'd been pecked by birds. So they were like, oh, OK, they were doing the sky burial even now. But some of them had spikes nailed into them. So like they they made up tires or something. Like maybe there was like a zombie like who knows what the fuck happened. But back then they thought that you know, I mean, even in Western graveyard, you'll find spikes through what part of their body. I think they're chests or their heads. I think you'll really killed them. And then the birds was post death as part of their ritual. Yeah, yeah, pretty sure not for sure, but pretty sure. But that was not uncommon. I mean, there's so many examples of finding like graves that have spikes hammered in them because people thought that the body was a vampire. That didn't come from nowhere. You think that there was a time when bodies just come back to life and that parasite's dead now? No. No. I think there was a fucking time where people's neocortex hadn't formed enough to separate their subconscious from their conscious. So they were like hallucinating more. And also they were like they had a kind of they were projected a lot of crazy shit into the world. Also, imagine when you found out you could lie like the first liars. Yeah, this is like there were people that would have language and then people once they started communicating like hey, who fucking ate the tomatoes? It's not me. Yeah. And you realize you can get away with that. Yeah. You could lie and so you didn't eat tomatoes when you did. Who's the first liar? Because before language, there was no liars. There's no liars in the lion kingdom. It's not even a concept because you can't have a lie until you have communication. Well, you could say there's I guess you could say lying is the equivalent of camouflage in the sense that when you see a some of these insane like animals, but bugs in particular that look like flowers, it looks like, you know, it's, yeah, that's a lot of deception. It's a form of evolutionary deception. So yeah, I think that like it's a linguistic, it's a linguistic camouflage that people use to try to like navigate through society not just people monkeys and monkeys, monkeys use language and they lie to each other. Yeah, they found out that monkeys have a very specific sound they make when it's an eagle and they have an other sound that they make when it's a cat like something on the ground. So they have something for up high and something on the ground. And so one monkey will yell out something like, oh, an eagle's coming the other monkey scatter and then he gets the fruit. Yeah, it's crazy. And then they'll yell the something's on the ground. They'll run up to the trees. They lie to each other. To me, what a funny as fuck of thing is how much we lie to ourselves. That's where it gets amazing. It's like, you know, you were talking about, and I've done the exact same thing with screen time when you're presented that humiliating number of hours and you've been telling friends you're busy and you're fucking looking at that. Just think, you're like, dude, I've been like, you know, looking at bullshit. But then before you do that, but it's my job, you know, I've got to kind of be online. It's like, no, you're addicted to technology. And because you can't stand the fact that you don't have the discipline to stop using it, you would rather make up a story involving some absolutely verifiable bullshit so that you don't have to deal with the fact that you aren't in full control of yourself. And it's a non rewarding addiction, which is really strange. It's like when you're looking at stories on like the Apple news feed or something, you're scrolling, looking for something that's going to captivate you. Yeah. What is a Apple having problems with keyboards? Yeah. You start reading this and it's like, oh, you can't walk away. Can't sell laptops. You can't use it anymore. Like how much of that in my, like you were saying earlier, how much of that is junk thoughts? Yeah. He's a junk thoughts like junk food junk food. You're just consuming consuming. And I don't think it's useless. I think it serves a purpose. Some of it does. If I mean in the sense of maybe not a purpose in the way you're going to be as a human, but a purpose in the sense of like if you apply a little bit of like mindfulness when you're using your phone, how do I feel right now? You know what I'm talking about? Like how do I fucking feel? You'll realize you feel a specific way. It's a kind of like numbness. There's a quality of like a kind of like sedated numbness to the hypnotic state you've been lulled into by the algorithms. And there's some pleasant kind of like I guess you could compare it to some like low level euphoric painkiller, but not very euphoric, mostly just a mild numbness that is pretty good at turning off anxiety. And the set or you could at least displace your own personal anxiety. Like if I'm scanning through my phone and I find the inevitable bad news, whatever form it's in, I could pretend that my anxiety is related to that news. You know, and then that's when you get people who are very anxious and they I've seen it. I mean, so I see who has a famous some person tweeted, I'm here in this beautiful place. And I can't enjoy it because of our president. You know what I mean? It's like, whoa, I don't I'm not sure. That's the real reason why you can enjoy that place. I think it might be actually that you haven't dealt with a fact that you're a vet you're freaking the fuck out. Right? That to me is like the purpose of a phone. It's very good at tricking yourself into thinking that the reason you feel like shit is because of something happening in the world. It's a bandwidth either too. And here's what the problem with that is sometimes you have like these legitimate thoughts. And when you have these legitimate thoughts, meaning like meaning like something you're working on, something you're like, whether it's an idea you're trying to do on stage or something else. Another project that you're doing, these things they require your bandwidth. Right? And when you're always looking at your phone, it chips away percentages of your bandwidth 10 here, five there, 20 there, seven there. And you don't think about it because no, I'm still concentrating on the project. I'm still on the project. The project, the project, the project, the project, but really know, really you're in two rivers at the same time. You're in this wacky river of nonsense and wondering who got this and how much they're getting in this divorce and who died in the Dominican Republic. Oh my God. Another person, another tourist. Oh my God. You know, and you're just you if you want to look at all the bad stuff that happens among seven billion people, you have to think of all the interactions that humans have. Yeah. All the literally billions of interactions every day, people constantly and occasionally one goes fucking Western. Yeah. One goes sideways and that's the one you see on YouTube, Jesus Christ, this world's going to shit. Yeah. And then you watch another one and you watch another one and you watch infectious diseases and snake bites and what happens when you get in a neck crop. See when you're fucking flesh starts falling off, and you're just eating bacteria. You're just saying how they get that snorkeling. The next thing you know, you're fucking just numb, numb to your real life because you're taking in data from everywhere. Yeah. That's it. Fuck man. And it's like then that gets inside of you and now you're just a turbulent you have a turbulent self that is digested a version of the world that's only half true. And so because of that, you're going to be half a person because you're not looking into like your own, whatever the fuck you are, you know, what are you, what are you like that? How much do you even think about what are you? Yeah. How much time have you spent to me, it's like the craziest shit that like you're you're we were talking about the sex drive being this insane compulsory engine inside every sentient being that I know. Of course, there's exceptions. But like this is if you're writing a computer code, right, this would be a line of code, right? It keeps you going keeps you going. So to me, something is fucking astounding. Leeweered is why the fuck can people not sit still and be quiet for periods exceeding 10 minutes, 20 minutes, 30 minutes, literally the least metabolically outside of sleeping, right? You're what you're not really exerting energy when you're sitting still and being quiet. You're not really doing much. And yet if you ask, I could ask a person if they wanted to go for a walk, that was sure I'll go for a walk. But if you're like, do you want to sit with me for like 10 minutes quietly? It's weird. I get it. They're like, no, I don't want to. I'm not into that. No, I don't want to do that. What the fuck is that? To me that if not that I believe in simulation theory, but if I wanted to prove it or like play around with it, the idea that we're like, non player characters and some super advanced simulator, one of the ways I would experiment would be like, oh, sit still. Why the fuck can't you sit still? Why is it that suddenly your mind goes insane? Why is it suddenly that you got to get out? Why do you feel bored or crazy or fucking like overheated or anxious or nervous? Is he productive Duncan? Yeah. That's why that's why everybody wants stimulants. Yeah. Yeah. When it be more productive, yeah, when it contribute more. Yeah. People I mean, I think it's that's what someone might say as an explanation, but I think the fucking real reason is like people are carrying a disordered universe inside of them. And when they sit down and there's nothing to look at, except what's around them, they're forced to deal with the fact that actually a lot of the disturbance in their life is more related to an interior like, maile strum of thoughts and unexplored feelings. And then this is just basically shaping their entire existence. They're like in every single moment recreating a universe of disorder and then getting really upset because if you see disorder in the world and it keeps reappearing, like, your friend is like, why do I get taken in by these people all the time? It's like, well, you get taken in by these people all the time because inside of you is a behavior pattern that is replicating this phenomena. And you're pretending that it's not a new to the point where it's a mystery. It's like, why do you know, when I drive somewhere, I'm not like, why do my car drive me here? You know, unless I'm like, fucking high out of my mind, it shouldn't be driving. Which case you gave noober, man. You know what I mean? But, but. But we're gonna find a Starbucks. A person will legitimately be like, I don't know why I did that. And it's like, well, what is, what are you? What are you? Yeah. Right. Are you something different? If you have sugar in your gut? Yeah. Are you? Yeah. What when you're candida level hits a certain number. Yeah. And it starts telling you need sugar dunking. How about a nice cold, cold, cold dunking? Yeah. Dunkin just crackle with one Coke. It's not gonna hurt you to have one Coke. You're right. I need a cake to go along with it. Water who wants to go and buy water. I just like, that's the Coke. Nasty fucking water. Water's not so boring. Flavorless and air. It's the flavorless. I've stayed in love here with my water. No, I want fucking sewage brown sugar death poured into my fucking guts. Or a nice IPA. Yeah. It's bitter yellow liquid. It tastes like wheat. Yeah. Well, I have a addicted personality man. I like it because it's like it's fun to play around with it, meaning that when I am reaching for the thing, whatever it may be that I know I shouldn't be doing. It's in the sense of fun. Well, I like watching the rationalization that my mind starts spitting out for it. You know, like, oh, I'm doing this because it's like, you know, I'm relaxing. You know, it's a celebratory moment. I feel a little bummed out and you look at like the instant way your mind tries to come up with a bullshit story to write off the fact that you are riding around in a vehicle that you can't control. And that is not a very appealing way to be. No one wants to hear the pilots say, guys, taking my hands off the wheel. What you see what happens for the next 10 minutes up here? And yet their whole lives are like that. They've just taken their hands off the wheel. But then they're trying to make sense of it. You know, like how many times do you mean alcoholic? Who hasn't accepted yet? They're an alcoholic? And they're like telling you all these reasons for, well, you just see my childhood, man. You just got to understand my childhood or, you know, it helps my writing. I'm a better writer when I'm drunk or on and on and on and on. And it's like, no, the reality is you're fucking hooked. You're addicted. You can't stop your hand from bringing something into your fucking mouth. And you can't deal with that because who wants to deal with that shit, man? I want to be in control. So I'll make up a story. I'll make up a story. I love watching your shit, man. That Goggins. What's his name? You're a Goggins. Oh, he's great. I love him. Fording laziness globally. This guy's galloping down the road yelling into the camera. And I love it, man. Especially as a person who's really good at telling the stories. You know, so like, I'll fucking wake up in the morning. I'll be like, yeah, there's time to go for a jog. But, you know, I probably should fill in the fucking blank. And it's always very important. You know, there's always a real good reason for it. Like, but regardless, the truth is I have yet to achieve the ability to grab that particular part of the steering mechanism of the, my identity, you know, and so rather than just deal with the you, you can't control yourself. I'll tell myself a story. I love that to you. It's a tricky one. Yeah, it is. That one, the comfort one is a tricky one. Comfort is the siren. Come back to the couch, done coming here. Done, gang. You are a nice cup of tea. You are tea has no vice. It's actually good for you. It's herbal. Yeah. Just relax. A little tea. So, see, little catamy. Not really. What are we, the New York Times? Find out what the intellectuals think about the way the world is. Yeah, right. Yeah, it's amazing. I love fine things to do, man. I don't, you know, I don't sit down and listen to music. I listen to some albums. Well, I need to because, you know, I'm interested in music and I'm thinking of like making some songs and I want it become inspired. I think a lot when I'm running and it's one of the main reasons why I really like to do it first thing in the morning kind of gets my head going. Like it gets me ramped up real early. I like to do it like first thing in the morning because it gets your head thinking. Yeah, like it gets you like you're out there breathing and running up the hill and you're pushed yourself your tired and then the thought will come into your head. You know, just out of nowhere. You get a strange idea just popping your head and then you start dancing around with that idea. I wonder and why are you even thinking about that now? And you start thinking about shit. You need to fix about it. Kind of clean my fucking office and you just want it and thinking about why didn't I kind of call that guy back? Fuck. And all these like it's like brain maintenance, like your brain's like shaking from all the pounding. It's like, hey, hey, we got a loose screw over here and I'll for. Yeah, forgot. I got to call that guy on that. Tighten that bitch down. Yeah, man. Yeah. This is what I love about meditating and that's something I am I am finally and figured out to do regularly and I love it. I love it. I want from doing it every day. That's awesome. Every day. How much time? 20 minutes. How much time do you jerk off during the meditation? Oh, God, man. You know, it varies based on the weather. It's so fucking brain made you horny. I just get sad. I want to beat off. It's just yeah when it's raining. It's just like I come faster, but then like if it's windy, I can get it out. If there was a movie about someone who just became a fucking info maniac when it rained out, I'm sure that happens. Like as soon as it rains out, it's like fuck. We're good. We're good at work. If there was if that's how I mean you think about humans, dude, how we're affected by things. I went depressed when it rains out. Or you know, we don't like I did now again, definitely. I just feel like saying the shit because you get attacked by scientists or smart people are like, you know, what are you talking about? I know I don't know what I'm talking about. We're talking about a hypothetical world. People get horny when it rains. Well, yeah, but I want to take it into the sun, man. I want to move into the next level, which is like where to solar minimum now, apparently, which is the sun is not very active. And so the sun. I knew it. That's not it. I'm an NASA scientist. Can you tell me this? It's the craziest shit, man. The sun freaks me out. Not just like the fact there is a sun, but the solar observatory. The shit that happened up at that solar. Observatory. I'm high. Can you say observatory? I'm a solar observatory. Can you say observatory? Turn the bubbles on, please. Turn the bubbles. So what's happening in the solar observatory? Well, you heard about this shit that happened. There's the solar observatory that just got fucking shut down all of a sudden. And like the black helicopters came in. And like anyway, I don't know what happened there, but the sun is it a solar minimum right now. Look, we have to fucking get through a paywall. You see it, bitches. What is this? Oh, you need to fuck it. Oh, my God. You're coming. Continue. What do they want for us? Except you folks. You're folks hitting NASA, so ho space probe spots giant alien discs shoot out of hollow sun. What? That's not a rough. What's the express Duncan? That's like that's the hardcore scientific stuff. Take me to like something last time. Yeah, who is the is the express like the Daily Mail that they makes who makes stuff up like the choir or someone was the. What was the newspaper when the Daily News is. His motto. That's what's total solar eclipse will pass right over. a space observatory. Oh, wow. Joe, have you really not heard about the solar observatory that got shut down? Oh, pretty. That picture is when you look that up to solar observatory shut down black helicopters. Go back to that photo real quick before we do that. We'll do that real quick. Sorry, by the way, if I'm just. I'm just. No, it's okay. I'm very sorry. But look at that goddamn photo. This is photo of the solar eclipse. And you see all the rays of the sun. By the way, imagine if these are little multiverses each in, are we out of juice? This thing just devour bubble to get run out of fucking bubbles. We ran out of bubbles right when you're about to talk about the multiverse. Look at the rays coming off that thing. I mean, what is that? Is that what that is? That are those solar rays? Is that what the fuck is that coming off of that thing? Those are called zeitgar spirals. Those look like they'll fuck you up, man. Yeah, they're deadly. They're like definitely one of the most dangerous thing in space. You know, that's what Robert Shock, the geologist from Boston University thinks ended the ice age. His theory is that it was a mass coronal ejection that caused lightning storms like rain coming down, but lightning all over the earth. It's a very common fear and preppers. Do you watch preppers? I've watched a couple of times, but it freaks me out. Everybody's got a reason like I'm building this shelter, because I'm afraid of hurricanes, but yeah, you hear like. Deliberals, the hurricanes, algae, the sun comes out. A lot like I should. Well, I mean, look, we can only exist in a very narrow temperature band. That's what you have to think is strange. We have a temperature band. What is it? It's from like fucking 20 below zero until like 150. That's all we got. Yeah. And we got this weird little spot. This piece of shit die already. Goddamn it. How much juice does it use? What's got a little observatory in here? Not observatory. It's got a tiny solar observatory and it's getting shut down. It's, you know, the narrow band that we can live in. We're so fragile. That's an organism. Yeah. That we should be terrified of this giant nuclear explosion that's a million times bigger than the earth. Sure. That we need to stay stable. We need to keep, I mean, imagine relying on that thing to make sure the temperature is in like a range of plus or minus 100 degrees. Like what the fuck are you talking about? It's crazy. It's crazy. It's crazy. It's crazy. It's crazy. It's crazy. It's crazy. It's crazy. It's crazy request. Well, this is like, you know, I don't believe it, man. But I love hollow earth theory. Here we go. Oh, yeah, baby. And light bubbles. If aliens were watching us, like terrestrial aliens, not they would be like, what the fuck is wrong with you? Y'all live on the outside of the thing? You got to go in. Like, because mountains fall out of the sky. You're going to build your whole- And the inside collapse? Well, I'm saying like if you dig deep enough, maybe there's a way. No air down there. Well, that's you got to get air down there. But, yeah. I mean, it is when you think about it. It's like we've built this fragile civilization using this super advanced brand new, interconnected technological matrix that is dependent on satellites, giving GPS coordinates to keep everything running. And we're right next to a ball of fire that has historically from time to time blasted so much fucking crazy shit at our planet. There was a time that it caused like telegram wires to spark. It's like, if that shit hits the satellites, they're going to go out. Oh, the power grid goes down. And everything goes down. It's not conspiracy theory. It's happened. Yeah. And sometimes it cools down. And it enters into a thing called a grand solar minimum. I think is what it's called. And that sometimes starts ice ages. Like there was a mini ice age that happened not that long ago where the sun theoretically just, I don't know, it stopped being so active. And then... 1790. 1790. Yeah. Yeah. And that's so... This is like a reality that nobody seems to really like think about. I mean, that to me is the funniest thing when everyone's fighting each other or all like furious at whoever the fuck is like nobody wants to accept like mountains fall out of the sky. The sun from time to time burps fire so bright that it causes fires to break out on the planet. And then all the other shit we don't know about. You know, just this stuff we don't know about. Like that if we could talk to... Yeah. 1,200 foot asteroid could crash into earth because NASA missed this small detail. Oh, Jesus. Less than a week old story. Jesus Christ, I don't need to see this. NASA fucked up. Yeah. Well, they haven't been getting any money, Jamie. You think that's why? Yes. Trump has diverted all the funds to the Space Force. No, the truth is... Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, would they even tell us... I mean, that's the thing. No. No. You don't think? No. Let it hit. You don't think they'd be like... No, what are you going to do? They wouldn't warn us. It's going to hit. It's going to hit. You know, Neil deGrasse Tyson says we're like decades away from being able to divert it. Decades. Decades. Yeah. Yeah. If something's coming our way, some civilization ender, we're fucked. And this is not conspiracy theory, folks. There was an article today that I put on my Twitter that I read about Hyenas. These have Hyenas in Canada. Up until the last Ice Age. There's Hyenas in fucking Canada, dude. Like this whole thing changes all the time. All the time. There was a mile high sheet of ice up there. Yeah. It's two miles high in some places. That's right. I was just in Chicago, man. And you look out at the lake Lake Michigan. Yeah. Which is amazing. You look out at from Chicago. Whoa, whoa, whoa. That was a fucking glacier. That was an ice sheet. I didn't have melted. I got that. That's how I got there. That's the remnants of the melted ice sheets. The whole fucking thing was under ice. Yeah. Dude, there's a place in Wisconsin where my friend Doug has a farm. Casanova was constant. That's a part of what they call the driftless area. And the driftless areas, the places where the glaciers didn't come down and crush flat. Everything in front of them. That's why you go to the Midwest. Wow. It's fucking flat. Yeah. It's flat as this table. Why is that? Because the fucking glaciers came down just smushed that motherfucker. Just, that's how it came down. This giant, mild, high wall of ice just destroys everything in front of us as it rolls across the landscape. But it didn't hit this one area of Wisconsin. And it's, or it didn't hit it as hard. Because you got all these beautiful hills and valleys. It's pretty dope. Wow. That's beautiful. Holy shit. Isn't that crazy, man? It's crazy. That happened 12,000 years ago. So this is, we're not talking about something that's a long time ago. And then boom, that shit melts and becomes an interior freshwater ocean. And it's essentially what it is. Dude, it's like our entire civilization is living the way like a middle-aged alcoholic who's starting to realize all the trouble they cause. Yeah. It's still dead. You're going to keep drinking kind of like, it's like, if you look at like our old species as one thing, it's like right now we're dealing with like the same thing maybe smokers deal with after a lifetime of smoking. Like suddenly health effects are starting to happen. Right? We've had like a nice run, but now we're starting to get a little bit of payback for all the decisions past generations have made. We've got fucking radiation pouring into the ocean. The ice caps are fucking melting. And then on top of that, the majority of us can't just, can't deal with that. We either say fake news or we say, uh, nothing. I'm going to be dead anyway, man. Yeah. Those are the two things because the react that to me like this fucking amazing thing about being a human is that we are like a technological hive that has built itself around a planet, using the materials of the planet to make technology. And we're still at the point of hive life where we're pretending there's different bees when we're all the same fucking bee. You know, it's just some of some of us are running weird operating systems. And we can't accept the fact that it's like, listen, we're a fucking hive of supervans primates that are all living together in a hive. Because that's the overview effect. Man, where astronauts talk about flying over and looking down, it's like it's all the same. The cities are mostly all the same. It all the structures all look pretty much the same. Of course, it's a fucking hive. It's a schizophrenic hive where pieces of the hive are like, yeah, over there. We got to bomb that part of the hive because that part of the hive is. It's a fucking hive. A schizophrenic hive where pieces of the hive are like, yeah, over there. We got to bomb that part of the hive because that part of the hive is different than us. So that part of the hive wants to hurt us. You know, it pheromones being released, you know, not by queen bees, but by influences. You know, like the news, the media, blasting out this data pheromone that gets us ready for the wars, gets us ready for the violence, tries to justify, rationalize it. And then there's other weird new, like little mini queen bees popping up, releasing weird pheromones, the influencers. You know, they're like, some of them are making people dress a certain way, fashion or whatever. Some of them are making people freak out. Some of them are making people more calm, but we're dealing with the fact that we're all starting to wake up, right? We're all going to have to wake up to the fact that we're all the same thing, living in a hive. And that if we don't come to that epiphany as an individual, we're, I mean, we're prepped like we figured out a split the atom. And we've got the technology as it's coming in is making the ability. It's like, I'm sorry, please go ahead collectively. We kind of know, but it's very difficult for everybody to act. Yeah, right collectively, we kind of know that we can't do things the way we're doing. But they're going to do it. What are we going to do? Well, he's going to drive that truck with the smoke coming out of the back. Well, fuck it. I don't want to fix that. What am I going to do about this? What do I do? What do we do? Who's in charge and what do we do? You're asking me? No, anybody. Nobody has the answer to that. Yeah, I think you got to like get pragmatic. I mean, I, I, there's that thing, John Paul Sartte said, and I'm not, John Paul Sartte once said, but it has stuck with me ever since I heard it, which is whatever you do, you give the planet permission to do. You give everyone permission to do. So to me, what's helped me like live a little less in a, in a crazy, like, asshole way. I mean, aside from having a baby is realizing that, oh, if I can't stop, you know, using as much plastic as I do, the world's fucked. If I can't stop any kind of activity that I look into the world and think, man, why are people doing that? Then the world is fucked. Because if you, you know that, fuck, I'm sorry, man. Can I rant about this quick story? Do you mind? I'm sorry. You know that Gandhi story? Which one? Which one? The one about like this, and then this, who knows, could be fake news. I don't care. It's a parable. It's cool, but this woman brings her kid to Gandhi and says, I can't get him to stop eating sugar. And Gandhi says, come back in a month. And she's like, all right, comes back in a month and Gandhi looks at the kid and goes, stop eating sugar. And she's like, why did you wait a month for this? And Gandhi's like, well, I wanted to see if I could stop eating sugar first. And you know, before I'm like, why? Yeah. So it's like, to me, being cool. Right? There's a listlessness in the world. Because everyone wants to be heroic. But people are wanting to act on the global stage while neglecting their, their, their home, their family themselves. And it's frustrating because you, why wouldn't you think that? Because it seems like we're being like, you're seeing the big, big scale of things. But it's like, personally, when I fucking finally clicked, man, I can't change anybody else. Like, I'm not going to make anyone do anything. I'm not going to make anyone meditate. I'm not going to make anyone do this or that or do anything. Because everyone's doing their own trip anyway, man, who the fuck am I to say? What are we? But that's part of the problem, right? Is that people are trying to get people to behave a certain way. That's what we're, we're experiencing a lot of that right now. Yes. Yes, man. And it's like the thing is that's the impulse is noble. But it's unfortunately, it's like trying to build a fucking second story house when you haven't built the first story, which is like, you need to like get your own house in order. Yeah. And then maybe there's some teaching. But usually by the time that happens, you don't, you're not, you're not a talker, you know? And so to me, that has been like a real exciting thing to realize that this is Jack Cornfield says this, I'm sorry if I've said this before, tend to the part of the garden you can touch. And that's it. So it's like, to me, it's just a big relief. Number one, you can't do shit for anybody else, but yourself. Number two, you don't need, no one, none of us know, we don't have to impose some moral thing on you. But there is a one actionable thing, an action, anyone can take, which is a moral, which is find out who you are. That's it. Find out who you are. Who are you really? What are you? Explore that shit. And then see how you start changing. I think that's a real pragmatic solution to all this stuff and it actionable too. And it's like, if you want to find out who you are by, you know, rubbing mayonnaise all of your dick and letting your dog look it off. If you think that's a true exploration, go ahead work for me. I'm enlightened now. It's a way of just kidding. Speaking of which, oh, Jay's on Twitter, I saw that shit. Do you see that one guy who made a parody video of his welcome Twitter world? Like, he made this weird dad video. It's so strangely, what's the word? Apocalyptic? No, disingenuous, strangely disingenuous. I thought it was like he's like, he's acting again, but he hasn't acted in forever. And also maybe he's suffering a little bit from the football injuries because there's a struggle. I am very sensitive to people that have been hitting the head a lot of times, struggling to talk. Yeah. Because I look for it. I've seen him people I don't want to see it in and it's scary. And we all talk about it. Like people that work for the UFC fighters, trainers, people do kickboxing. Everyone talks about seeing certain folks, yeah, starting to slip. And some folks will start to talk about it about themselves, you know, they're having a problem. Yeah, that's what I got. I was listening to that. So could low Twitter world? All right, I didn't pick that. So Jay Simpson. Yeah, I'm going to, I can dispel some of the BS. The people have been saying about, about me with no accountability. Yeah, plus I'm going to talk about sports and politics. It's like this weird acting job that he did. It's creepy man. It was weird. All that. Yeah, it was a weird moment, man. That's a cool, that thing that happens to people who have like done shitty things where instead of just saying like, yeah, I fucked up, I can't see that. You can't say, yeah, I killed somebody, right? Well, you can. But if you do that, you're going to suddenly, and it'll be, I think for anybody who's done shitty things, the moment you just say it, you get to be standing again on the real ground, like the real terrain instead of like the bullshit world you've been living in. But when you decide not to do that, then you do have this like, it's like the uncanny valley. Like you have this like, Android quality to you because you're not reflecting reality. You're reflecting reality after you put lipstick on it and sunglasses and combed its hair, put some perfume on it, got it the nose job, got its ass, got ass implants. And that's your fucking reality. This super plastic, like someone who's been getting plastic surgery for years. And so you're pretending that that's your existence. You see it, man, when people are getting sentenced for killing people. And they're like, the look on their fucking faces like so confused because they have created this valley in between that person, the person they are. And you know, they've split in half essentially. And they can't deal with that's why so many people have murdered people will say, I wasn't there. I don't remember. It was a dream. I didn't know. I didn't do it. And Gacy, I should be, I should be sentenced for running a funeral home without a license. He was saying when he was out of town, people were bearing kid dead kid bodies under his fucking house. You know, and he meant it. He tricked himself enough. Really? Absolutely. Because otherwise you have to deal with the fact that you are a murderer that you killed fucking, you strangle fucking kids that you dress like a fucking clown, you know, and like killed kids. Like it's so unpalatable to deal with that shit because you're just a crazy lunatic who is out of control. So you'd rather make up a story. Usually it's conspiratorial. Somebody was like, somebody's like, hey, man, you know where you could bury those kid bodies. I think Gacy's out of town. Jesus Christ. Yeah, man. Isn't that fucking crazy? It's fucking crazy. Yeah. Jesus Christ. I know. And that's the thing with people voice out about OJ that someone's like, he doesn't even believe he did it now. But the problem with that is there was a fucking emoji that he tweeted at this guy. You know, or he had a direct message with this guy, and he had like 16 knives. And he said he's going to cut him. Like if that's true. If he really did send that, if it's not Photoshop, that's not bullshit. You imagine getting a DM from OJ because you made a parody video. Jesus God. Cause like, while I guess what he did was he put OJ's video where he was talking. And in the background, he had someone screaming help, call up, please help help. And so then OJ sends him this direct message allegedly. Who knows what really happened? Who knows? But if it did, dude, I would fucking I would like find a cave somewhere. I'd want to move to the homo is I can deal with it, man. Hello, Twitter world. I'm just, you know, because he could get you like you could get you if you wanted to. I bet maybe yeah, I mean, how much times you have left, 71 years old after ADM's you it disappears. You know, people like we don't know where he is. Norma Donald tweeted out. I'm so where I know I'm said, hey, juice. Um, I just wanted to tell you that through that video, I know the golf course that's behind you. So I could figure out where your house is and I wouldn't do that. But somebody else might. Yeah, that was hilarious. Norma Donald's so funny. He's the best. I'm trying to get him to do a podcast. I was trying to get him an Adam, you get to do a podcast. I don't know what he can do though. While he's got this is net Flix deal. I mean shows. I don't know where it's at. I don't know if he has a contract, but he should do a podcast. It's a goddamn national trawacy that he doesn't have a podcast. He's so fucking funny. Well, isn't his show kind of like a podcast like it has that. He hasn't been doing it. Oh, and they don't want him doing interviews and stuff. It's like it's a little tricky because he said some crazy shit, you know, Norm says crazy shit. And he said some crazy shit like like if you about someone saying something and well, you believe that you'd have to be you'd have to have down syndrome. Like he thought that would be better than saying you'd have to be retarded. And people like what the fuck damn it. Maybe people got real mad at him. I think it was on the stern show. He's just he's just a treasure. Dark eye. Joe, I'm sorry to like I want. I like I thought I know these questions for you man. I was like, yes, I'm going to ask my questions on their show. And it's not in the moment like we often do, but I really do. I know you've probably been talking about it, but I wanted to hear your take on deep fake because like that fucking deep fake of you really bothered me. Like it's set off like a whole series of thoughts in my head that like of all the futuristic shit, that freaks me out the most. Like well, for someone like you or someone like me, it's easy for them to do it because they basically got a library of all the sounds that we can make with our mouth. And so they put it in a database and then they can get you to say words you've never said before in an order that you've never said them before in a way that you can kind of distinguish for now. I kind of can hear that it's fake, but it was me talking about sponsoring a hockey team filled with all chimpanzees. Yeah. And teaching gyms to play hockey sounds exactly like something I would do. And it's close. I mean they had one a few years ago that they did with Ronald Reagan where they had a fake speech. And this was way, way before the internet. And someone had pieced together a fake collaboration of a bunch of different Ronald Reagan speeches and then used them with sound editing and turned it into a whole statement that he never gave before. And then the White House went on television and showed how they did it and showed on the news all the different speeches that they pulled from and the actual sentence is where they pulled from. They showed it to you. So there could be no denying someone, I forget what it was, maybe there was a Russians, was it the Russians? Of course, someone had done that. But I don't know, I don't know who did it. But it was interesting because I was like, oh wow, they can do that. But I thought, you know, think about how many times Ronald Reagan has given speeches. You just take listen, someone with painstaking detail, mark down all the words in those speeches, put them all in some sort of a multi loop. Because it's you know, you have to go like to feel spectra sauce. They have old, old, real to real sound recorders piece that shit together splice it up. And then release it pretend that Ronald Reagan is trying to start a war with Iran or something like that. I forget what it was. Do you remember the premise? No, I don't remember the premise of that. But I, you know, remember that the recording? I don't know. I kind of remember it. But it's a foggy memory man. But this is like to me of fuck the sun and all the things to worry about. This shit is really intense. Like you know about the hostage, the fucking weird hostage, a phone thing people are doing, where they're like, you get a phone call from the phone number of your wife, and you answer it. And it's like we've kidnapped your wife, you know, someone freaking out in the background, they're like, send us money or she's fucked. And like they've been right now what they've been doing is they've been, you know, someone will say, let me talk to her. And they just hand it to some lady. He's like, I'm in there. And he's like, oh my god, it's her. I'll give you whatever you want. People have been sending the money, you know. And like when you consider like what happens when deep fake technology intersects with just the ability to like call people from spoofed numbers. And that suddenly if someone gets your phone number list, they're going to be able to call your friends as you and record conversations where as they sort of dredge up, you know, who knows, whatever they want. Maybe they want a blackmail you, maybe they want to get money, maybe they want to embarrass you. That to me is like so spectacularly fucking weird that we're going to end up having to have passwords that we tell each other away from our Lexus, which is like, listen, if I call you and I'm seeming strange, you know, the password is like go for 69. Otherwise it's not me, you know, because that's going to, that's a reality. I mean, just look at people are already fucking doing with spoofing numbers. That's fucked up, man. And like that, that aspect of it and also just like supply and demand. In other words, there's one Joe Rogan right right now. But if an AI starts duplicating you and improving on you, like, and I'm saying, you know, five or 10 years, no offense, man, but maybe an AI could like turn you twice as smart, you know, make you like whatever. Who knows what? And then suddenly you're no longer in demand in the sense that once the Joe Rogan AI package goes on the dark web or makes its way into wherever, people are going to just be able to download you and have conversations with you and make video. You know what I mean? That to be is the, what are the most bizarre realities that we are entering into as one where you're going to go on YouTube. There's going to be a video of you. Looks like you sounds like you, but it's like 50 times funnier than you. 50 times cooler than you. 50 times smarter than you. Because it's an AI pulling the internet. It's just you, but better. And no one's going to want to watch you anymore. It's like, I want to watch, I love the real Rogan, but I want to watch the Rogan who's brain is functioning 50 times the speed of a normal human brain because that guy Wow. That's how they're going to take over. Well, right. I saw obsolete. Where you, they are, yeah. The versions of all of us, they're going to be like invasion of the body snatchers. Yeah. That's right. That's right, man. And that's not, I mean, I'm even let's say it's 20 years away. That's still too fucking soon. 100. Let's go crazy. Yeah, we're going to be basically like sort of drowned out by multiple versions of ourselves with exponential intelligence. That was my concern when I was talking to Kerz while about downloading your consciousness into a computer. I'm like, what's to stop you from making multiple copies? If you can make one copy, yeah, like what's to stop you from being like, tell me some fact guy with a little dick was a real asshole, wouldn't hack into the system and infest it with copies of him. Yeah, they just overwhelms everyone else's data where he is omnipotent and he is literally the ruler of the realm that he exists in. Yeah. Yeah. Because he's figured out how to hack into the grid and take over. Imagine you think you're going to be in heaven, you're going to enter into this virtual reality. But look, you're going to get to what fly dragons and have sex with beautiful women and eat fruit and this fact guy with a little dick. He hacks the system and then everybody's going to suck his dick and everywhere you go is a version of him is trying to get his suck his dick. Come on, come on. Yeah, fucking people's ears. He's holding people down five, six of them on a person. Just fucking you from every angle. That's what he created. And his, I mean, that's what a computer virus is. Sure. It's fucking everybody. Right? If you think about that, the most, there's a lot of viruses. I don't know, what percentage of viruses, Jamie, you know this, are not financially motivated. There's got to be some viruses that people create just to fuck people. Sure. Right. And the old days for sure, man. I mean, I think they were just there to fuck up your to freeze or computer fuck up. They didn't, they weren't worm. They weren't grabbing data to use it against you. They were just like, you know, shutting your computer down to be a dick. Yeah. Or making it say weird things like, you know, real basic, the old viruses in the days of AOL, remember those man? They were cool. They were like scary, but not like today where they like shut down the power grid until you send somebody a million dollars worth of Bitcoin. Oh, you have to completely remap your hard drive, completely reupload your operating system. Just kills, or you have the only way you're going to kill the operating system. Swipe it clean, start from scratch. Sorry. It's all cooked. Yeah. All your work. Fuck off. Gone. Gone, man. Just like this vent going with a little dick back out of every but hundreds of them. A sea of them running at you, pulling on their half-hour dicks. What? There's a story going around this weekend about Samsung TVs having viruses in them and you're being able to scan it for a virus. There's like a program on it that allows you to scan for viruses. And then to the guest today, Samsung deleted that tweet. Oh, great. People are pointing back to this being an like the weeping angel program where the CIA can use your TV to listen to your conversations and they are doing that and they're recording it. Weeping angel. What a great name. Why doesn't the CIA start naming the fucking Navy UFOs? Weeping angel? Why do they call it that? Why do they call it? What is that? That's why why do they have to bring angels? Is that Satan? Is Satan a weeping angel? Is that what they're saying? Like, what the fuck is that? Weeping angel. That's weird, man. That's fucking weird. But like, you know, the implication that they in your deep fake that they sent out to the world was it already happened. You know, they're like, how do you know this hasn't already happened? In other words, like, how do we know we're not duplicates? How do we know we're not one of an infinite number and array of like, you know, versions of us that are being populated all over some server somewhere. Well, that's the thing about the simulation theories that one day we if things keep going the way they are, like, then I was going to bring this up when we're talking about people like looking at cities and looking at the grids and looking at the hive. Like, what is what are these cities doing while they're spreading and they're being productive? They're making things and they're making better things all the time. Well, if they're making better things all the time, like what are they interested in? Well, they're interested in computers and CGI and artificial intelligence and artificial life. And they're all definitely moving in some sort of a greater technological dependency. Like, we're pretty dependent now, but it's going to get greater and greater. Yeah. We'll get more and more. Well, one day, they're going to have a reality that isn't tangible in the sense that without this system, you wouldn't be able to experience it. But it will be a reality. Once you're in the system, once you're in the system, you will feel your elbows on the oak desk. Yeah. You will feel the sweat on your palms. You'll feel the sunglasses on your nose. You'll feel all those things. Yeah. So who's to say that that's not real? Well, that can happen one day. If they can create an artificial reality that you cannot discern from the reality that you're currently experiencing, how do you know it hasn't already happened? Right. You don't. You don't. And some super fucking smart people think that we should keep open the possibility that that is what we're operating under or that the stability and the rigidity of the dimension that we exist in is not nearly as firm and not nearly as permanent as we like to think it is, which is one of the reasons why psychedelics is so exciting. And so there's so, they're transformative, but they're also valuable, but they also they illuminate the possibility of others of other things, other dimensions, other life forms, other levels of consciousness, other ways of interacting with each other, especially mushroom one. I kind of all of them. All of them that when you take a transformative dose, you experience some weird thing where you're like, oh, this is possible too. Like this is like a whole another way of existing. Like who's to say that if human neural chemistry, right, if that's what's causing depression, elation, and dopamine, and serotonin, all these different wonderful things, it's what caused melatonin and all these different things that happen when you're sleeping. And then the psychedelic ones like the DMT. What who's to say that we have to exist with this mixture, right? Who's to say that life with a thicker mixture isn't also possible and might be going on around us all the time. Like there might be these porous sort of entryways into these other dimensions that are consistently open and closed and they're constantly around us all the time. But when we're just in straight normal consciousness that we experience without perturbing it with alcohol or pot psychedelics, we want to think that this is reality. This is rigid. This is it. But maybe it's of reality. Maybe there's a fuckload of them. Maybe when you make decisions, you enter into different ones. Maybe you're constantly shifting the one that's around you and how you interact with people. You mean like your decisions are the way you navigate through the multi-first. It's entirely possible, right? Yeah. Yeah, man. You know I say that too many times. Well, we could. It is a thing if you just think about how little we understand about consciousness, about happens when you die, what happens when you sleep, what, how little we know about what is going on when you're communicating with people, what is going on when you're interacting with people? What are these fucking ideas coming from? Yeah. Are these ideas little life forms in a non-observed state? Yeah, man. Bro, you take it off the glasses? You didn't crazy? I just realized I don't get to look at your beautiful eyes, show. I was enjoying this. We did it for hours. It's done right in here. But the, you know, man, like the, when you start, the thing you're saying about psychedelics, kind of like showing you a different way and that when you're in a base reality state, you people spend a lot of energy trying to imagine a so litity that isn't really there. And like, you know, as I've been taught by some people, the, you know, if you start breaking it down, just logically, for example, like, you know, your past, for example, you know, you ever do that spend any time with your memories and you realize like, well, you know, your most vivid memory, whatever it may be, you can't really taste what you're eating or feel that you for you that you're feeling or the fear you are feeling or whatever. Because if you did, then you, the memory would not work for a person who was trying to like stay alive. Because you do, and if you just remember the last time you got punched in the face, you would feel it. You know, and also if you could remember tastes, you wouldn't be so inclined to eat because you could just go back and think to the last chocolate bar you ate and you would taste it. Or obviously, if you could remember orgasms, as they are, you wouldn't really need to fuck. You would just think about having sex whenever you had it and you would come. You would feel like you're coming. So if we look at memories experientially, there's a lot of like senses that aren't gratified by memory. And also, if you look at them from the visual field, even the most profoundly quote photographic memory is wavery at best. It's not HD. It certainly wouldn't be a 4K TV. It's got a kind of like quality to it that is just, you know, it's a little transparent. So then when we think about the future, obviously that doesn't exist. Like, there's just no future. Nothing is outside of this point in time. And so then now you've basically just from a simple analysis of your memories, which a lot of people imagine. That's who they are. Like, there are snake in the present moments the head and the back is the past with all their memories sort of intertwined. But you realize like, no, that's really foggy approximation of what happened at best. And you really don't remember most of the shit you did anyway. Like, you don't remember what you ate three days ago, 10 days ago. So then you realize your whole path, the thing you've been using to define yourself as a person, you barely remember it. And the parts you do remember it, they're not really clear. So that's gone. Now that's death. Your dead, anything that happened before this moment, that's death. It's gone. There's just this for real. That's not now there might be some neurological encoding, but there's no past forget it. That's why people like to get really good at things, you know. Well, I mean, it gives them a sense of kind of stability. That's why if you have a physical skill, like say you could do gymnastics, like do you know Chappelle, Lacey? No funny, funny up and coming new comic, but he was a world champion cheerleader. Like crazy skills. And he's jacked, built like a linebacker. Well, no, I don't know football defense it back running back. Anyway, stud could do a back flip. Just jump through the air and land. And you're like, what the fuck? Yeah, right. When he does that, he knows that he had those experiences. He learned how to do that. He has a skill. He has a very unusual skill. Like a break dancer. They know they can do that crazy shit with an hop around on one arm. Yeah. They're feet up in the air, crisscrossing and going to the lotus position. How many people can do that? They can do that. They can do that. That defines their existence in a way. Yeah. Because now they're not just living in the moment. They also have knowledge. There's a pill. Crazy. Yeah. Fuckin nuts, dude. There's one that he sent me. I'll send it to you, Jamie, where he flips a girl through the air. Look at that chain. You can do flips a girl through the air and then catches her on one hand and presses her above his head. Crazy. Dude, it's fuckin bananas. Bananas. Banana. So he knows that he can do those things. He knows he can do those things. He learned those things. Yeah. So those things carry him. They define you. They give you extra value. Yeah. You can hold onto them as a support, like a security blanket. And it's crazy world. Hey, I can play the piano motherfucker. Yeah. Let me get on that piano. I'm going to show everybody at the party. I'm deep. Hold on to them as a support like a security blanket. It's crazy world. Hey, I can play the piano motherfucker Let me get on that piano. I'm gonna show everybody at the party. I'm deep and I think that you don't party piano mass Oh my god Sing us a song of a piano man Who's a song tonight? We're all in the mood for melody. I exist. I exist. I want I'm real trying to give some of them trying to spray something out in the world that people like the smell So they come closer to my flowers. That's right. Yeah, you deserve more Duncan You're seeing you should sing all the time everywhere. Oh, thank you. Just sing. I should even talk you're an angel I know the way you sing is amazing. Well, I trained for five years I just like to sit around and listen to you have you ever been in a party where somebody breaks out of guitar and actually sings a song like animal How style Well, that's That scene is amazing. Yeah, I have I'm trying to I think that if that has happened It's one of the memories my brains like we're not gonna remember that we're not carrying that with us because it would because it's how the hostage situation Let's face it like once they sit on and start strumming that shit if you're the guy who walks out Look at that fucking hater. He can't play guitars Ego's being challenged when the reality is you're like I don't want to deal with it man I don't want to deal with all the levels of having to face the fact that you Fired a neuron that made it seem okay that in the middle of a party where nobody was playing music or maybe music was playing You turned it off dude. I know of a guy who in the middle of a football game pause the game to show his acting real What well that's just lunacy that's a no that's someone he's like Pause the game. It's just a broken man or woman paused the game to show an acting real Shambling house real man. You guys got to check this out of the game can wait seriously guys the game can wait He did a great job. You're gonna get a great pleasure out of watching me fake Watch me fake now I'm a detective. Look at me. We got a gun Dude, it's It's a hunger to because it's this is this is the Quad I mean it's like you're talking about back flips. It's like imagine the self is so The self is so imaginary that we have to exert to the point of doing back flips To give us a sense that the self must be as we think it is it's that's right Like you don't have to exert to be sitting in a chair gravity does it for you There's no energy that needs to be exerted, but how often do you hear someone saying What a great day Is it this a great day? It's a great day But why are you saying it like why do you feel any to exert this much energy to announce to me? It's a great day Hmm could it be that you're not quite certain. It's a great day Could it be that there's a feeling in you that something's a little a mist so you got to like paint reality with words to make it okay This isn't a ghost story. I'm not gonna die. Isn't or is by saying? It's a great day. Are you putting out this hope that I'm gonna go? Wow? Duncan's such a positive guy He's amazing. Yeah, when he says it's a great day. I feel it is a great day He puts me in a better mood. Thanks Duncan. Yeah, I mean I think if you look at like anytime I've done that shit. I'm too high Getting paranoid and I'm trying to get some affirmation from a friend. You know That's usually the feeling is what I'm need like you know like when you're around someone you realize like They want me to compliment them right now They and you feel the like when they when they open the fucking doors on a spaceship You've they've temporarily opened the doors of the Infinite vacuum of that worse when they get upset and you don't compliment. Yeah Wow, that's the craziest. You know, I'm kind of knowing you for a long time. You've never compliment in my art I'm saying castles are my life and you know You know you don't even say they're cool. They're fucking great man. Okay. You're saying castles are incredible. I mean, you know It's just weird. They're have to tell you Yeah, I know. I'm sorry, man. You're great. You're great. You're real. We worship you. We'll worship you forever You'll be known forever as a great sandcastle maker. That's a funny thing And also add to that the very same sort of person who is intent on getting you to acknowledge their fucking sandcastles Which is a great description of it because no matter what you're doing It's a fucking sandcastle look at those glaciers there. You know, whatever you're doing forget it But then you have these people who on top of this sick need for a person to affirm their existence by complimenting their Ridiculous sandcastle art. They also want to leave a legacy It's like it's not enough that we worship you now you want generations of people to worship you That's a big one for people leaving a legacy. It's a big one for artists big one for athletes Athletes want to leave records that no one will break. That's right leave a legacy behind man This to me this is like being a dream and wanting to leave a memory of yourself in a dream You know like you want your I want my people I met in that dream I want their kids to be talking about me after I wake up. It's like when you die You know, it's done. We don't know exactly what's after this But you're pretty much recycled man. There might be some Carmrick momentum. There might be some kind of like some residue It's all over again. You're peed in scratch Often got one females two cells three and then you just keep doing it in infinity to get it right Keep that loop going keep that loop going like we're a we're essentially in some kind of like Carmrick Sanding mechanism, but if you like life, why wouldn't you want to do it again? There's in light that it wasn't if you like life Do you like life? Yes? If you found out that this was what you were going to do forever and ever and ever and it's gonna repeat itself Over and over and over again. We're just no pointless Pointless now and it's finite Is it different if it's pointless and it's infinite is it different? Different don't you just enjoy life is that the key the key to just enjoy life? That's where it's ironic when you pick up a skill like learn to play the piano or learn to do backflips or My case learn to do martial arts is that you actually become a better person through learning how to do something because it's hard So you learn about yourself you learn who you are you learn the bullshit that you tell yourself like to really get good It's something if you want to get that good. It's doing backflips man. You got a fucking actually practice You can't bullshit yourself. Oh, I really don't need to come into it. You don't look to do what that guy can do You got a fucking practice and by practicing you put yourself through this rigid Exercise routine and you do it correctly and you exert yourself and you have it requires 100% of your focus and then doing so Whether it's playing piano or throwing kicks or whatever the fuck it is in doing so you understand yourself better Yeah, so even though ironically you're kind of Defining you who you are as a person and you're giving yourself like extra clout because you're a you're the fucking man It dunking a ball into a net. I'm the fucking man. Everybody watch and watch that. Oh, yeah, but By doing that you actually learn how to become a better person too because it's hard because it's hard to do and then if You can figure it out the puzzle will help you get a better hold of all your human skills Because it would be a difficult thing if you really want to get good at something if you really want to leave behind a legacy Like you have to achieve a level of focus and a level of intense Thinking and concentration that most people are just gonna peter out before they get to that spot sure I mean that's what I love about what you're talking about is it's a force field in between you and An elite like fuck the Illuminati the force field of the learning curve Separates every single person from a terrain that cannot be reached with money Like I don't care how rich you are if you want to learn how to do a backflip You might be able to pay for great trainers But you still got to do the fucking bet work. You got to do the work So this is cool because you now you enter into a realm that is inaccessible by money is inaccessible by power But is weirdly generally accessible by anybody in other words the only thing keeping you From whatever the fucking thing is you want to get good at to show yourself that it is possible to Leave the reality that you're in and enter a completely different reality because for me if suddenly I was in a world where I could do fucking backflips Might as well be an alternate dimension like if I got home and did a backflip in front of my wife She would it would be that she would probably be more amazing if I like levitate it You know what I mean she'd be like what the fuck have you done? What you've you've reality must be fragmenting so it's like in other words the you whatever you're at whatever the thing is that you you are There's always this interesting mountainous rugged terrain Separating you from a completely different universe where you can do backflips play the piano play the guitar Whatever the fucking specific thing it is you want to pick up that's kind of cool to me It's like the only thing keeping you from it is consistency. It's not money Usually unless it's like you want to be a falcon here or some shit you got to get a falcon But in general, you know, you could like that's why I love about that Goggins man I like that guy like you it's weird how much he impacts me even though I'm still a fucking But in the morning I will look and I Like I like it one point I thought someone was running next to him filming him before I realized it was a car And I'm like I want to know who's filming Goggins. Yeah, yeah, I realized I was disappointed because I thought there was an anonymous Nana-nam-s. Yeah, it was running getting no credit It's probably is fiance, but you know that's that to me that's kind of like I love that because it's like it's equal Access no one is being barred from the learning curve now the specific learning curve You might be getting barred from you know what I mean like you want to mow GONE it's a thousand fucking dollars, okay? Like you're not gonna get that you're not gonna learn to play that if you don't have that kind of money What's a mowg one? It's like something that fell out of a spaceship that I'm obsessed with the like it's just this beautiful synthesizer man Oh, oh, oh, oh Yeah, fell out of a spaceship. Do you not have to piss so bad? Can you talk to Jamie and then I'll let you pee? Yeah, I know you have to pee too, right? How did you know man cuz I could tell shared mind cuz I'm wriggling you're moving a little funny. Yeah, yeah Who wants to pee first you want to pee first? What a fucking gentleman you pay first because if you announced it you gotta go I think I can wait. Okay. I'll be right back. Okay. Great. I like to stop the mug one. Yeah, forget it. What do you? What moke you have a mug right now though, right? I got a sub 37 but um The you know the mug one is Polyphonic and the sub 37 is monophonic so you can't really play chords on it But it's not just that it's like the whole I mean it's a cult around these synths because they did figure out a way to Dile in this perfect specific beautiful sound that once you Even I mean if you like playing music, which you know, I just do is that you play me I feel like I asked this he'd take a year ago what you just play for yourself mostly You just like to sit in a room. Yeah, and turn off the light or put on mood life You ever and just make your own music and sit listening to what people are making for you to listen Yeah, well, I mean I like both but I just I like the With synth musical synthesis. I really there's like a weird kind of philosophy behind it Which is not only do you not have to worry about making? You know, whatever it is you an album or something but it kind of like allow yourself a break From imagining you even need to be musical Just like you know you give kids pots and pans and they fucking thing it together It's just fun a friend of mine Billy mays the third He's actually this son of Billy mays he travels around playing music as a An under a name called infinite third and he does a thing called mouth council Which sounds like almost what you're doing where he takes a loop pedal has a microphone He starts and makes a sound and then he passes it around to the next person It's like you have it you make a sound yeah, then Joe would make a sound and by the end of the eight person nine person thing He knows how to use the pedal enough that it becomes basically a song Almost like a song. It's a dris is the drone in loop. So it's not really yeah No, it's not musical, but it's it's almost like this and he does various similar things with by himself It gets real cool, but it's just like like what you're saying though. It's not music to listen to necessarily Got structure This is it's to have on and like the background sort of and like yeah, whatever you're doing really can't use a lot's ways It's like yeah, I think it's just like you know you could be whoever this is clearly a great What up musician? But also you can just enjoy dialing in these like insane howling alien noises for no reason other than you just are trying to make sounds and That's it. I mean it really is like you take that and combine it with most any psychedelic marijuana and what you have there is the ultimate Fucking spaceship essentially that you're just like you don't need we're just talking about It's not the idea behind this is you can get good at it and these things are so precisely dialed in that if you wanted to be like the You know they teach you music just from interacting with it But also there's just this visceral like pleasure of making noises through scents, you know Whoa, yeah, I often think what would happen if you got sucked into this world like don't do that to me Don't you put that evil on me Ricky Bobby? I would like to put that evil on you that would be fucking cool You start playing a mover off playing quick Had to swear off of it was playing it again again. I know hours a day hours when you ask me you text it do I play quick? Mm-hmm And I got the same feeling you get when you have a friend who's like gone sober and they're like asking you want me to drink Yeah, man. I had a problem Playing hours a day and I just went cold turkey and went stop. What are you doing? I'm gonna go take a piss. Go piss. How long does it take you to piss with that suit on? This is depends on where I'm at like in a combat situation I wear diapers. Yeah, but in general it takes like 30 minutes or so and I'll be back all right great This whole episode 13 13 was 100% Duncan's idea. I get this text message from hey man Can I do episode 13 13? Just do the finger at the window. I'm like fuck. Yeah, you can I need I need to do that with you I was gonna ask if you guys are planned it. Yeah Well, we planned episode 666 that was also his idea. That was the last time he wore a pope outfit And I wore my white NASA outfit. I have a white NASA outfit and an orange one That was awesome But yeah 13 13 is a real thing But we are not really on 13 13 because just like podcast on planes in there 70 Amma may shows like companion. Yeah. Yeah, those those are 100 so that's a crazy number. Well, you guys are talking about anyone to interrupt the conversation But this has sort of just come out to help with the deep fake stuff Adobe's announced that they've got a tool that they've I don't know how well it works right now That just show a picture so they don't show it in action or anything But it's a way to to tell if a photo has been manipulated with Photoshop somewhere and keep that off those Instagram holes I Know that anybody looks like you know, I mean do those this some Instagram people literally look like cartoons Like you look at their photos. You're like, what are you? You're not a that's a picture You have never fucked with the app a face face tune. I think is a lot of people use So that's a really like you can just draw some guys where you do it. Yeah for sure they do their whole face is blurry Yeah, it's like what's happening here. I put my glasses on closer at it. Like what are you? You're spray-paint weirdly rosy cheeks Yeah, you're spray person We're talking about Instagram filters like AI Adobe's new AI tool can spot when a face has been Photoshop. Yeah So saying keep that off the Instagram hose Yeah, you got like a if you see that one Instagram person who is actually a CGI She's like oh, I've heard that. Yeah people didn't know her name. Yeah Well, they're saying they're gonna do that the models now You know they do that with houses like sometimes you look at a picture and you're like what it's way in minute Is this real and like under construction currently will be completed summer of 2020? You're like whoa, so this is not a picture of a house. There's a CGI House you got shadows and the floor has texture. I mean it looks fucking real man I've seen some real ass looking houses And that's you know real estate agents using that shit Why wouldn't like a clothing designer have like the perfect body to complement their perfect clothes? Yeah, that I'm sure you've shown this on your billion times, but yeah, that you're talking about the AI that just generates people Yeah, that takes fake models beautiful perfect people. Yeah, yeah, yeah, in every way I agree every way Perfect in fact. It's funny that some people trip out about people that look really good on Instagram and they say they're giving off unrealistic body images Hmm, and that this is something we should stay away from unreal is like that guy from Vox was doing that about He's got everybody's hating on him because he's saying that about gay thirst traps That they they put out unrealistic body images and you should think about them the same way you think about cigarette ads or Or liquor ads. Yeah, exactly what no they're in shape Unrealistic is such a crazy thing to say when you're actually looking at a real person. Yeah unrealistic body expectations Um no That guy goes to the gym and that's what you look like when you go to the gym that is real That's not just realistic. That's real. It's not unrealistic Some people don't want to look at other people that look good. I Read this article by therapist who is saying like that was the other one The leah posted that dad bods are more attractive to women than rock hard abs survey said The that survey said was in front of their fucking fat husbands 100% of the use millionaires, you know, did they well? It's Chris Pratt and Leo and I are the caprio first of all Chris Pratt is not have a dad bod he's sticking to stomach guys been silly. Yeah, that guy's jacked You mean I meet him in real life. He's he's a stud Who's the guy? Leonardo caprio caprio? Yeah Do you think that dad bod you know like you hear this like you usually find out this way down the line But like some phenomenon society was like cooked up in a boardroom, right? Like for example Let's say I don't know you made Twinkies and you realize like shit man People like really getting into this Ketogenic diet and working out and there could be a potential you probably have some AI saying like hey We've got like a health craze predicted for 2021 meaning Twinkiesales are gonna drop by like 50% because guys I want to go there don't want to be fat Right and so then you start disseminating into the world like all right. Let's come up with this thing What's a what's a way to call somebody out of shape? But like to connect it to their virility because they're a dad bod yeah dad But so then you start getting it out there like you know it helps if any product that is like bad for you Kind of depends on two things one that it tastes fucking good and two that you can trick yourself into believing It's worth eating right like it needs those two things like in other words if there was like delicious Uranium like some lunatic created like the sweetest most flavorful uranium biscuit You're not gonna eat that shit, you know you're gonna go Chernobyl and fucking all your stomach's gonna melt at the dinner table But if you could come up with like you know a nice IPA like you were sager some kind of thing that's oh It's just poison basically it's gonna destroy your liver over time It'll be a slow progression and you could like sink in the alcoholism you know your personality will change and it will like nobody would do that Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah I don't even know what you're saying right now. They go no one's gonna do that. It's such a stupid premise No one's gonna drink poison slowly Toxifies your liver shut who would even do that shit man I would never do that. I mean I drink because I'm sophisticated and then like you Did you by the way read that shit about how like hangovers or brain damage? Like when you have a hangover and you get better your brain hasn't recovered yet Just the part that you could sense has gotten better But the you have like physiological damage the tapping of course like it's what it was when you read it You're like way of die of course It's fun. It's fun to be drunk to be drunk. It's fun to be drunk. Oh my god It's fun to be lit if it laryngean's joking. Oh, I mean that's one of the realities of any great thing is like it is a delight And it is a beautiful part of life for many people but We it's some point you just start tricking yourself. I mean that's one of the things McKenna I love these said is like how history has survived alcohol like we managed to have that as our sacrament and still we have Civilization Wow, it's incredible because it didn't like it does turn people into fucking 28 days later doesn't it? In some ways some people it does, but it's really interesting when you consider his idea that at one point in time There were psychedelic cultures that really didn't have our standard intoxicants, right? So they didn't have antidepressants. They didn't have stimulants. Yeah, so it was something like coca leaves that they were eating right They didn't have processed cocaine, but what they did have was copious amounts of silsovin Yeah, the allergic acid and different plant forms. There was like a bunch of different things. The mr Ryan's used ayahuasca DMT. There was that that shaman when they found his bag They found it was like a two thousand years. How many thousand years old? 2500 years old had DMT in his bag. Yeah, it's like any fanny pack you find a burning man The same ingredients Exactly exactly yeah, it was a yeah, that's hilarious. I love when they find that shit out What do you got that the DMT was in that rabbit nose thing, right? Yeah, the fox nose Yeah, that's only a thousand years old. I thought you were leading done to that 2500 year old marijuana that just oh yeah, that's true too. That's a new one. Yeah, so people have been just getting blasted forever The best course they have been as soon as they found it. They're like why would I just go with regular life? Yeah, it's the best it's it's it's it's so wonderful that that's being disseminated in the culture right now It's also people are decriminalizing it all over the place left and right. It's slowly starting to happen Colorado first Always boom. They're on track now Oakland Oakland decriminalized it as a city They put it as the lowest priority all plant medicines including ayahuasca you saw a OC's tweet mm-hmm Yeah, it's amazing, but she can't get traction other people in Congress like what? Whoa it's hard it's hard to sell that bill. It's hard to sell Yeah, they'll research and you know maps has been doing amazing stuff with soldiers and you've Been to the actual maps conference. Yeah, yeah, it was it was wonderful because it's like these you know It's as much as I love hanging out with you and like my friends. He takes psychedelics It's really inspiring to be around scientists who are sort of figuring out a way to translate that experience into data set that can convince legislators to Change draconian laws because they're doing the hard work You know you and I we get to go on and on and on about the multiverse and the DMT entities We can make things up we can make things up. They can't it doesn't matter if they've taken it and had a real experience where some advanced Whatever you want to call it is appear to them whether they're a part of their subconscious or an alien and said listen Here's what's going on we do this with every planet the first step is we've got to like undercut the hierarchical centralized power structure and we know the only way to really do that is by teaching people that their identity is They think it is isn't quite right if we can expand the human identity Selfishness goes away if we can get rid of the problem of trauma and people dealing with trauma by being aggressive to the outside world Then over time this are come from some of the human identity expands beyond the parameters of me and into us and if that happens Then we can like enter into like a type A civilization whatever they call at the beginning of a global civilization But first we've got to get the fucking monkeys to climb down from the tree of them their selfishness Yeah, and if we can do that and get out we can lure a few people out of themselves just like getting a buggy out of the tree so that like People are like wait a minute. I don't think I'm just a me. I think I'm in I'm connected everything purely interconnected in fact I don't think I'm anything I think what I really am is the connection Between me and others that's where I exist not in this but you are something right because you're very unique like you personally are very unique What you're one of my favorite friends, but you're also one of my weirdest friends. I'll call you up. You're always talk dude You got to read this book. It's like dude. You got to watch this documentary and we will talk for hours about the crazy shit over But yeah, you are very specific like you're very I don't get the same conversation with Joey Diaz I don't get the same conversation if I call Ari. Yeah, you know everybody has a different thing that they're also There's something going on that's uniquely you right? Oh, yeah I mean to say yeah because otherwise you think it a nihilism and you're like a magic point Right that's not it at all. It's that you don't exist in a vacuum. It's like that's the main thing And it to me like the fundamental problem right now is selfishness It's like when you're mad at someone on the interstate. What do they do something selfish when you're mad at someone in your life What do they do something selfish when someone's mad at you? What did you do something selfish almost always and like this is the reality is that selfishness is a Nate quality of being a human we are a self There is a sense of a self rather and we feel mixed up in it but the what you realize is like you know those fucking times where you Authentically not because you're filming it for your Instagram or whatever help somebody and you don't talk about it You just suddenly do it you're not like giving someone money either But you get engaged with a person and you're there and then it's One of my favorite mushroom trips was when I started coming back and I before I really came down I started thinking like what was I doing? I was being so Being a human I was being a fuck oh fuck I mean human but for a second I wasn't a meat I had merged in to something bigger than me similarly if you just Get really engaged in helping people you'll notice that for that amount of time You don't feel quite a shitty and it's not just because you're doing something good And there's some like angel casting blessings on you It's because you got out of yourself for a second in the sense that you Became more than just you you were you and the person you were helping and that to me is like a really interesting Aspect of where we're at as a species is that the reality is man Yeah, we're all special and beautiful and wonderful but also you're not happening in a vacuum You're completely inexorably interconnected with everything and you can't get out of that You're in it for real and the boundaries you've constructed Around you and whatever you think the rest of the world is they're just in your head It's not real you made it up you told yourself a story and you believe that story so much like the poor motherfuckers are getting like the most psychotic cults You know where at the end of ten years they revealed to you some crazy crazy shit beyond crazy You spent like nine hundred thousand dollars in this fucking thing and they're like yeah We all got shit out by woolly mammoths and now you have to be like I'm fucking either believe this and Dive in or I'm like fuck. I was wrong all this time similarly most people have constructed this ridiculous armoring boundary around them based on you know this is bad and this is good and that's Good and that's good and here I am in the midst of it and that's a real painful situation to be in because you have to fucking Constantly exert that force-field situation. It's really I think why so many people are depressed and exhausted and can't really Relax because how can you relax if you're constantly in a state of creating an imaginary barrier between you and infinity called yourself It's a really exhausting Probably practice to be engaged in and then some people who impose themselves on other people They make their life and their problems 100% of the focus of this other this to be engaged in. And then some people who impose themselves on other people, they make their life and their problems. 100% of the focus of this other person. So that person becomes an enabler. You see that with husbands and wives at times, or even with friends, like one person is the active asshole, and then the other person is the fixer upper man. Mike fucked up again. I got to go get him. You know, active asshole. Centralization, man. And it's like our whole, from like our family structures, usually to like the entire way we run our government, is usually centralized around one key identity. And that we, you know, we, we've had this conversation many times on the show, which I like. The preposterous nature of a king, a president, a pope, a bishop, a world leader, a teacher, whatever the fuck it is, it's preposterous. And it's also quite dangerous, you know, because it's like not only do we have the situation with a parasitic friend, but even worse, you can get into the situation of the charismatic friend who's tricking you into doing some, into the idea that you could do something called cosmic hitchhiking. That's what Chogum-Chompa calls it, which is basically the idea that like, I'm going to use you because you are so great. And you will be the thing that helps me become a real person. It's another. Chose in one. Yeah. You're the chosen one. You are our teacher. We worship you. Oh, oh, show us the way. I should be born the Dalai Lama. So from the jump, you're something special. You have the chosen one. And you're the one, you're the reincarnation of who who are they supposed to be? Oh, they're a Tulku is what it's called. So it's the Tulku system. And the way it would work would be, you know, because you have to like if you look at the history of Tibet, it was called the Hermit Kingdom. And it was closed off from the rest of the world. It's very hard to get in there. Seven years in Tibet is about somebody you made it through and became friends of the Dalai Lama as a kid. Anyway, so within this system, there is this idea that beings reincarnate. And if you're awakened enough, if you're like really like at the sort of last phase of the sort of, what would you call it? The cycle you were talking about earlier, then you stop losing at least some of the amnesia that happens when you get processed through the liminal in between period called the Bardo, between this incarnation in the next. So anyway, they go to children, they put in front of them the particular items that belong to the previous incarnation that they think they are. Oracle's vision, visionaries bring the monks to a particular village. And then the kid picks it. And then that kid becomes the next, this or that. It's called a Tulku. How many kids do they look at? Ah, I don't know, man. I don't know the depth of it. The kid turns on to be an asshole. I think it's powers away. Well, I think it has happened where Tulku's are like, it's similar to like, what the fuck is the, what is the thing where those kids get one summer to go? Like the summer of fucking, what is that religion? Oh, yeah, that's Amish. That's a rumble. You springer. Rum's springer? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, rum or rum's springer. What is that? There's a great documentary on that. Yeah, something, the devil's something. The devil's, it's like a great name, the devil's summer. But it's just like the devil's playground. The devil's playground. I want to go there. Where's that? Fuck and smoke. And then a lot of them come back. Whoa, what? I believe that was one of the ways they studied the impact of MDMA, wasn't it? By like, because like if you find someone who's taken MDMA, but no other drug, it's pretty rare. So you need to find a person who's only taken MDMA. Otherwise you can't like assess if there's some cognitive damage because it could have been the acid. It could have been the mushrooms. It could have been the time you fell on your ass when you were hammered. Who the fuck knows? But these kids, some of them have only taken MDMA. And so I believe that they use them as a sample to like determine if there was any kind of neurological damage caused by the drug itself. But so I think it's simple where phenomena happens within that system where some kids are like, I'm not a reincarnated being. I'm a musician. I want to go play music and they leave. Do you know who's a musician who's also reincarnated being? Jimmy Hendrix? Students ago. What? Yep. When did that happen? I didn't know that. I think the Dalai Lama might have hooked him up. Told him what? One of those guys over there told him that he was the reincarnation of someone's super special. Jesus God. It's a big deal over there. Well, they had a ceremony and everything. I know. For my sense of, and this is the long written thing about it. Oh, that's a lot of words. I know. That's the guy that's a real shit. The recognition of Stephen Segal as a reincarnation of the treasure revealer, Cheng Drag-Dor-J. Wow. Of that to say, Paul Yul-Monastery. So he's a reincarnation. Well, that's comforting to know he's always been with us. You know? Because it's like one of the things that does bother me is to imagine a world without Segal. You know? So it's cool to know he's always been here coming back again and again. How come nobody was ever a loser in the past life? Oh, but he was always a fucking awesome. Wow. You mean, oh, right. Yeah. When I went out. When I went out. I'm a little full of shit. The full of shit people. Yeah. Of course. Like, what are you going to be? Like, you know what? If you're making money as a fucking psychic and you're like, well, you're basically like a gutter rat. You've only been a rat. You've been filth. You weren't even, you're a mucus thing. Like, I'm not sure what you call it. The kind of jellyfish that killed babies. You're a tape worm. You're one of those longworms that went into someone's brain. And trick and no, sis motherfucker. You're uncooked pork. You're a moth. You're a, yeah. The whole, like, to me, like the whole reincarnation. It's a tokoo. Yeah. I told you it's a statement from the guy. I'm recognized, my students, Steven Segal, as reincarnation tokoo of the treasure revealer, tongue-dragged or J. Wow. So, I've been some confusion on certainties of what this means. I'm writing to clarify the situation. No clarifying necessary. I'll see you later, man. I gotta go. You might be full of shit. You're well, Segal's got five hookers going to this guy's house right now, so we speak. Well, also the other, so there's talk of like ending the tokoo system. And the Dalai Lama's even said that. And recognizing that, because what's cool, the Dalai Lama among many things is that he said, you know, he's very rational. And he said, if science proves something in Buddhism as off, we'll change Buddhism to fit the rational mind. And that's the beauty of Buddhism. There's pageantry in it. There's ceremony. There's ritual in it. Just like any other religion is beautiful. Personally, I think that there is a sort of area of experience, accessible through their practices I guess could best be compared to psychedelics or something like that. But to me, what I love about it is all the pageantry aside and all of it aside, it's not faith-based. It's a very basic series of ideas that you have to digest. You have to think about. You have to look into. You don't just get to be it. It's like, you know, maybe some forms of it. There could be an example of that. But in general, it's more along the lines of, here's the basic, fundamental principles behind this knot in the coreting of a human life than we've discovered. Here's where some sufferings coming from. All the suffering, in fact. And here's how to fix it. That's the foreign apple truth of Buddhism. And that just hearing it, who gives a fuck? You could hear life is suffering, the cause of suffering, the attachment, get rid of attachment, suffering ends. Here's the system to get rid of attachment. And whatever, life is suffering, what's that even fucking mean? What does life even mean? What does it even mean by suffering? This first noble truth, it gets completely mistranslated anyway. Dooka, it means wobbly wheel. It's more akin to like if you're riding a bike that's got not enough air in it, it's going to be a rough ride. But it's going to be even more of a rough ride. If you have somehow tricked yourself into thinking, there's enough air in the tire. So that any time you hit some bumps, you're like, what the fuck is wrong with the wack? You know what I mean? That's it. That's it. It's like wobbly wheel, the thing's wonky. You think you're not going to get disconnected when you've been on the line with Verizon for an hour? You're going to get disconnected. It tends to happen. You're going to get cut off in traffic. You're going to fail. You're going to be disappointed. This is reality. But somehow you've imagined that it doesn't work like that. And every single time you're met with the truth, you're like, oh, oh god, this sucks. And so that creates a lot of problems. And it creates two, some ways to deal with it, which is desire in a version. So you're somewhere and you want to be somewhere else, basically. You're somewhere and you're like, I don't want to be in this place. Or you're imagining that if you get this thing or that thing, the pain you're feeling of the wobbly wheel go away. Do the experiment. See if it's true. That's all you can do is really look at the shit that you want. I could come home and Mo could have pulled up and given me seven Mo Guands. And I'm going to sit and play those fucking Mo Guands for weeks and weeks until I'm sweaty and smell like fucking just someone shoved a salami under the balls of an ape. I'm not going to take showers. I'm just being as stinking like probably weeping into the mug and sneezing into it. Anyway, the point is eventually after I, the distraction has gone away, I'm going to return to my fundamental self, you know, the fundamental condition of existence as it is, regardless. And so this is sort of the, some of the principles as I understand it, which are really quite intelligent, you know, it's really, and what I love about it most of all is there's always this invitation, which is go see, go see, it's not because I'm telling you this, believe it. It's like go see, maybe it's different for you. And, but you need to go check like every time you're doing the thing that you've been repeating over and over again, is it making you happy for real? Is it really working? Is it working? And if it's working, great. But if it's not and you're trying to pretend it is because you've been doing it so long. Well, who's winning this game of self deception? What, what, there's no winning if the game is tricking yourself. And what, and what do you do? Like how do you feel about life if you're always tricking yourself? Hey, Twitter world. Yeah, man. That's right. You will only feel that everyone is trying to trick you. And you'll feel like there's a grand conspiracy. And you'll feel like the world's out to get you. And there is a grand conspiracy, which is that you are running a game on yourself. Yeah. I feel like we should end with that. Yeah. It's very important for people to hear. Yeah. I truly think it resonates with all of us. We've all done that. The lowest points of consciousness in your life. You've run little trick on yourself or to get past things. And I think some of that trick is run because you don't totally understand who you are. You want to. Maybe I'm this guy. Maybe I'm maybe I'm a hardcore Republican. Yeah, you know what? Those fucking Democrats, they tricked me for far too long. I'm over here now. Yeah, I found my home. I found my home over here. And that's one of the things that people do. They really do. They hop from ID. I used to be a vegan, but now I'm a fucking carnivist. I just eat all steaks, ribeye steaks all day long. You know what? I couldn't believe what a pussy I was when I was just eating vegetables. Congrats. That's a lot of it, right? Yeah, man. And it's almost exactly like what we're talking about with religions. That you look down at these grids and these grids are run by different operating systems that require different behavior from their women. This operating system, you can't drive. You got to address like a beekeeper and you have to do this and you have to do that. This operating system, you put a plate through your lip and you got a bone in your nose. And this operating system, everybody gets face tattoos and this operating system, you know, and no one eats peak pork. It's another, God does not. In our operating system, you get the same thing, I think, with right and left, with vegan and meat eater, with picky poison, like whatever the fuck it is, whatever thing it is that you're into, especially ideological, especially lifestyle-based, there's always an opposing one, like the people that don't want people to be gay, or the people that even a lot of the abortion stuff, a lot of the abortion stuff, it's like how much of this really well thought out behavior and how much of it is, how does your tribe respond to this? And one of the ways you can tell, especially if you're talking to a hardcore lefty, or a Republican for that matter, we can offer two examples. But one of the ways you can tell is hardcore lefties do not like to discuss late term abortion. You say, what if it's a fetus? What if it's a baby? What if we're talking like eight months in? It's a woman's right to choose. It's a woman's right, no, it's a baby in this person's body. When is it a baby? Look, I'm 100% pro women's right to choose. I'm 100% pro choice. But late term abortions are fucking weird. It's dark, it's strange, and everybody knows that. Everybody knows that. But if you're a hardcore lefty, you won't say it. And then hardcore righties, what if you're raped? What if you're a little girl, a 13-year-old girl, and she was raped. You want that girl to carry her fucking baby? Are you crazy? She was raped four weeks ago. We found out she's pregnant. What do you want me to do? You want me to pray? How about fuck you? How about fuck you, my raped little girl, is not going to have to carry someone's baby fucking asshole. And the idea that you're invisible man in the sky that watches over everything you do, but allows rape to occur. Allows little kids to get raped. You want that little kid to carry a baby? I'll fucking kill you. Right. You're goddamn crazy. There's people that feel like that too. Well, this is, if you want to find the commonality, the common thread, it's just the way you're describing, which is a natural reaction. If someone's saying that to you or controlling your life in that way, it's aggression. So like on both sides, it's not that there's an articulation of a point of view. It's at the point of view is being flavored with anger, with aggression, pushing, pushing, pushing. It's a woman's right to choose. Yeah. Or it's not or whatever. Both sides have with them a quality of aggression. So this is like, this is not to oversimplify things. The reality is, man, one, we've got to cut ourselves into a break. And you know this, and you've articulated this better than anybody, we weren't. We were monkeys not that long ago. Real recent. Go look at monkeys, see how they act. Crazy. Right. Number one, give yourself a fucking break. In the evolutionary perspective, you're just barely waking up. But because you've been a monkey, inside of you, there's some serious, serious aggression, because that was the way to deal with the eagle that was bigger than you, that carried your wife away to feed to his chicks. You weren't going to fucking have a sit down with the eagle. And be like, listen, I know you need to live. And in my wife, I imagine she was delicious. We've been, you know, charming for the last several years and feeding her. And you know that baby's going to die, because he was drinking her milk and all eagle. But listen, I wonder if maybe you could just spare the rest of my family. What you're going to do is kill that fucking eagle any way you can. Fire, spears, whatever. So now to think that that has gone away, it's very similar to a person who takes a vacation. And suddenly realizes, I can't relax. Well, you can't relax. Because for the last fucking year, you've been going non-stop in a state of constant stress freaking out. You're on vacation. You think that momentum's going to go away? No, it's just going to be more apparent. So you're going to like, I'm going to go to let down and try to fuck it away. But yeah. And then you're on the airplane hung over. And it's like, you know what I mean? You're all fucking hung over. And it's like, what happened? That wasn't vacation's already over. So that's what has happened to us, which is like, listen, we've got it good right now. But it wasn't that long ago that saber-tooth tigers were dragging our children into the fucking jungle and eating them. And we find feet that were our kids' feet in a bush somewhere. And this trauma is in us epigenetically. So anyway, the point is, give yourself a fucking break. But the other point is that being said, recognize you're being aggressive. Your approach using anger and intolerance is not working. It is as much as noble as your purpose may be. You want a global civilization of joy, whatever the fuck it is. It's not working. If you're using the exact same momentum that causes the wars that you're hoping to stop. So the first step has to be, I think, an internal, personal exploration to create some, not to even get rid of the aggression. Or to be like, I'm bad because I'm angry. I'm, oh, that bullshit. But to create some, to find out what is the circumference of the self. And then within that, you realize the thing you thought was all of you that coiled up fucking anger is in fact a tiny piece of you. It's still there. And it's still useful at times. But it's not all of you. And because the circumference is widened, the next time the angry part of you starts bubbling, it's just like it's the difference between somebody throwing a brick and a bathtub and a brick in the ocean. It's like a brick in the ocean, no big deal, a brick in the bathtub, fuck you dude. Why you throw a brick to my bathtub, bitch? You the fuck are you? So that's the idea is like we're not trying to annihilate the self or say this person, this human being you are, it's irrelevant or it's not worth this or that. It's just what is the circumference of your identity? And that's the exploration I think that Buddhism invites people to do or any religion that is real and good. It's inviting people to find out what you are. And then as a natural byproduct of that exploration, you become a little more gentle. And because you're gentle, you're more effective. That's where it gets really weird. Gentleness seems to be quite often. The, what was my friend saying? He's like, you know if my dogs are outside, I'm like get the fuck out the fucking house, they're not coming in. But if I'm like, come on, come on, I love you and you really mean it, they come running into the house. So this is the thing, it's like, the aggression stuff it worked man, cause of the eagles and the tigers and all that shit. But you know what I mean, now maybe there's a new way. Yeah, and we're stuck. We're stuck with the DNA that's got us through. How to survive the holes in the tigers. That we needed it. Yeah, we needed it. Don't fucking bit, you know, don't like a revital or something. Like in fact, love it. I think that's part of the appeal of the dad bod, part of the appeal of like, you know, someone talking about unrealistic body expectations. You're really talking about like less reliance on the flesh, the virility, the athletic ability, the ability to conquer, you know, the ability to breed and spread your genes and fight off predators and enemies and invaders. It's not nearly as necessary as it used to be. But necessary, but the people who are not capable of it despise it, cause they think it's the problem. They think the ability to conquer is the problem. Yeah. The strong and if everyone was weak, essentially the argument for socialism, you know? What's that? You don't have it, if you don't have it and you see other people have it like, I don't think anybody should have it. How about that? Oh, yeah. And it's also part of it. I mean, people have encountered, like if the thing is, is like take a person who has some chip on their shoulder about dudes with muscles, right? If you look at it, that didn't happen by itself. They weren't didn't wake up one day. And like, I fucking hate biceps. What happened is like people with muscles who were traditionally like ideally, were like meant to be warriors and protectors in a noble way. They've gotten really aggressive. Like you see, and it's not all of them, but how many videos have popped up of, you know, a police officer? I'll blow your fucking head off. Get the fuck. Sure. Because the kid took a doll, you know? Yeah, like that video we were talking about. Yes. So it's like, so similarly like, sometimes what's coinciding with the muscular thing is also a dominant aggressive attitude. So the two have become mixed together. Yes. Let's conflate them. Yes. And there's, there, if you've ever been around people or real fighters, usually they're like the most general people you've ever met. Super nice people. And it's unnerving. Because you know, like Eddie Bravo, he's nice, man. You know what I'm around him? Like I forget that I could just suddenly be dead. You know, I mean, if you didn't forget he'd be nervous around him all the time. Like, you know, you're in a great conversation with him and join his company. And then like you could just, that's it. Yeah. So similarly like, this is what happened. So the idea is like you've got to continue on of possible ways that humans express themselves. On one side you have the condition of like the noble warrior, which is a trained discipline person who's literally putting themselves in front of others. The samurai, you talk about it a bunch. You know, who's fading into the background, who doesn't even give a fuck if anybody knows they did anything heroic because they've given up on that. It's a very spiritual way of being. Well, then there's also the concern about the Warmonger. Like why does the Warmonger exist? Is the Warmonger like the firefighter that starts their own fires? A lot of the times, yeah. Because they live for that. They live for that experience. Because that's what they desire. Yeah, yeah. If you want to sell umbrellas, you need it to rain. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, but this is again, corruption of a potential ideal, which is like regardless of the fact that we've all kind of like witnessed various examples and pretty much every profession of what it looks like when things aren't so great and imbalanced. There's also examples of people who are the opposite of that, who are like completely in service, who like, you know, how many firemen got fucking incinerated in September 11th, man. You know, and the truth is, I can't name unfortunately embarrassingly enough. I couldn't name one of them if you paid me to. These are people who literally gave their entire life up, who went up that fucking thing. They didn't think they were coming back down. They were firemen. They looked at that and they were probably like, yeah, I'm going to die. I bet I die today. But they're like, if I don't do it, well, no one does it. So that's an example of how good it can be and why we need it and what it can really be. That's a sacred way to be. And the exact same is true for pretty much every profession. And yet, when aggression gets in there, it fucks it up. It's hours it. It imbalances it. And it's like ultimately completely ineffective, you know? And it's also another version of selfishness. Yeah, right. We're talking about before being the problem. The real problem with the naked aggression behavior, naked aggression, meaning unprovoked aggression, is that it's entirely selfish. Like I want what you have. I take, I conquer. Yeah. That is selfishness and it's worse, most primal form. That's right. And on that note, we're going to wrap this bitch up. Duncan, John, so you're the fucking man. You're the man. I miss you. Thanks for having me back time. We need to do this more often. We don't want to say this. And let's do a shrimp rate too. Where's Chris Ryan is driving that fucking van around the world? Chris Ryan is going to come back here in light. And every, look at his page, every picture he's getting further and further out in the woods. I don't know what he's like. What's he doing? I love you buddy. Love you too. Bye, everybody.