Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast, by night. All day. And we're up. Side in time. Exciting times. It's a good time to be a conspiracy theorist. It's a good time to be a conspiracy theorist. It's a great time to be a comedian. These are the good days. They all are nothing days. Yeah, these are the good days until the election. And who the fuck knows what happens? Just ask forward to it. Did you see this thing that the Biden administration pushed through this new martial law thing? Yeah. This is very disturbing. Jamie, please Google this so we can find out what the actual law states, but it's DOD directive 5240.01, giving the Pentagon power for the first time in history to use lethal force to kill Americans on US soil who protest government policies. What are they expecting? You're going to 5250.01. Sounds right. Is that what it is? All right. Did I tell you what it is? I'm sorry. 5240.01. DOD directive. This is from RFK Jr. posted this on Twitter. And I'm finding out about it because people are blowing me up about it. That's fucking terrifying. That is a terrifying thing to push through for the first time in US history, giving the military the ability to shoot and kill American citizens. That's crazy too. It's interesting because you know what the Smith-Monse modernization act and stuff like that. It's almost like they kind of in a weird way just make it legal what they're already doing. Have you used it? Was that the Smith-Monse modernization act? The Smith-Monse modernization act that Obama pushed through, which basically made it so it was legal for the US government to use propaganda against its citizens, which they were already doing in different ways through CIA and all that stuff. So it sounds like we can legally do it. You can't sue us now. How crazy is it? It's legal to lie. How crazy is that? It's legal to the government to not just legally lie, but they can concoct completely fabricated stories just to push a narrative if they decide that it's in the best interest of national security or whatever. To just manipulate energy in your mind and all that stuff to get you to believe certain things. And we need to bring back shame. That's my opinion. Well, they have none. They have none. It's not gonna work. They can't bring back shame to lizard people. Yeah, they can't. They can't feel anything. It's in their reptilian brains, which is very some weird shit going on right now with that. It's weird because like, you know that David I. I stuff where he said they're all lizard people. I don't think they're really lizard people. I don't think they're really shape shifters, but they do behave in a reptilian way. Like a corporation does. Like a psychopath. I don't know if they're actual reptilians, dude, but there is something going on that they are a group of people because they're all related, which is very weird. If you like, oh, you go back far enough, they're all related. Like if you study Obama and Bush, right? You know, because I remember when Obama was running, I was like, oh, change. It's gonna be change. I hope and change. And then you start studying like the bushes and the Obama's and they're their first ancestor. Their common ancestor is a Hinckley, dude. Right. And you go to John Hinckley, the guy who tried to kill him. What are you? Number set. What? Yes. Their common ancestor is a Hinckley. And then when you realize that Hinckley was related to Obama and Bush and related to the bushes had dinner with the Hinckley's the night before Reagan got shot. And here's crazy. That's the thing. What? Yeah. Is that crazy? You think, okay, I always thought Hinckley was alone, that was infatuated with Jody Foster. What? So no, dude. And he actually, there's actually interviews, dude. Where he said, Uncle George told me to do it. Oh, Jesus. Okay. And they just let him out. Now he's doing like plain and coffee beans cause he's put out an album or something. He's throwing off it. He's throwing off it. But that's a crazy thing. Barack Obama, the 10th cousin once removed of George W. Bush through Samuel Hinckley of Cape Cod, whole Lee shit. It's so crazy. So crazy. I've never gone down the Hinckley rabbit hole. What's the, so John Hinckley, the guy who killed or shot rather Reagan, what was his deal? Was he he was like, he was like, M. K. Ultra. Yeah, he was a little off. He was like the one family member that was a little off. Wow. Here's the craziest thing about that thing. That the Hinckley that shoots at Reagan, he's the first one that can use the I'm mentally not capable of defending myself. The I'm two mentally ill. What's the what's the law where you can, where you know? I know what you're talking about. Yeah. Because right around then John Lennon was also getting like assassinated and his killer tried to use that. I'm mentally, I'm not mentally capable to kill John Lennon. Do we remember? What was his name? What was it? The dude and I watched that whole story. Is there a rabbit hole to go down? Yeah, that's a crazy story too. Because like we had this kind of, there's two errors of like assassinations where like everybody was getting assassinated or they were tempted. Yeah, yeah. And then we had Chapman shot and killed Lennon. Now is he an MK Ultra guy? Do you think? So he had that what book did he have on the ride? Was it called? Catch on the ride. Catch on the ride. Catch on the ride. That's some MK Ultra shit right there. Were they alive? Is he still alive? 69 years old. Getting fucked in jail. Yeah. MK Ultra shit is left and right, dude. The second gunman, not Mark David Chapman. Yeah, nobody touched on Lennon. Author claims. Oh, author claims. Those authors. Well, you know, you know, the, the, I just believe in authors. The door guy at his, his apartment building was a like a CIA FBI spook. Jesus Christ. Yeah, they just load, they just load it up. When it's meant to happen, you don't get out of there. There's layers upon layers upon layers. It's, that's why when you talk about any of these things, you know, even like when you talk about the Trump assassination, there's a lot of stuff. I go, that's a little weird, you know, like that's a really weird situation right there. Cause if you study these high impact events, they're like, it's like, it's like, it's kind of like that scene in John Wick, do you know where John Wick like the hit goes out on him? And he's in the plaza. And now every assassin has a flip phone suddenly, they're all on flip phones. And it's like boom, take out John, that, that's a high impact event. There's layers upon layers upon layers, we're, you're not getting out of there like 911 JFK. What does this Jamie document shows CIA and FBI spy on John Lennon? Oh, the care of the interrupting the election in 72. What was, which one was 72? Was that a McGovern? I think that was when Hunter as Thompson wrote fear and loathing on the campaign trail. McGovern in Nixon. Yeah. That was the one where Nixon won by the largest margin in history because McGovern's running mate turns out he was Kooku and had gotten a lecture shock therapy. Oh, dude. Didn't tell anybody about it. And you ever see the press conference that he announced that bro, that dude looks like he just got out of the pool. He's fucking so bad. And like, you thought Tim Wallace was a bad VP. This guy, they're like, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, you can't be the vice president. If you study the Malcolm X assassination, the guy, the guy who was giving him mouth to mouth at the end is a New York police officer that was so undercover that even like the New York police didn't know about it. It was this crazy like secret group within it. They didn't even go through like getting their badges and anything like that. They were like separated early and then infiltrated all these, these organizations. Like the guys who shot him were working with the FBI, the guy who's given them CPR is a undercover new. How exciting must it be to be an undercover dude to be like deep? Imagine being like a fucking IDF soldier who's in Hamas. Dude, that's crazy. You're in Hamas. You're in there. And you're so deep too. You're so deep that no one even knows what your actual job is. And there's like Israel doesn't play. Israel don't give a fuck. They don't give a fuck. They have a bunch of those dudes like in Phil's trade. has bla everywhere. Got guys in everywhere. That's what everybody up on those pages. Yeah. That's crazy. That pager thing is one of those gangster moves in the history of espionage. And it's like you guys, you know, that is. Technically. No. 100%. That what you call it? Yeah. It was 100. It's claimed that's not in all that stuff. This episode of the Joe Rogan experience is brought to you by Call of Duty. You know, when a new Call of Duty drops, everyone's trying to find a a way to squeeze in those extra hours of gameplay. I get it. Life is busy. But sometimes you just Hey, Joe. It's the replacer. Yeah. No, you. Hey, I'm going to take it from here so you can enjoy some Call of Duty to Black Ops. It's great. Now, listen up folks. Life can be chaotic, but you shouldn't have to miss out on the latest Call of Duty. Just because you've got, I don't know, responsibilities. That's where I come in. I will handle the boring stuff like work, chores, even podcast ads. So you can dive right into the fight. Call of Duty, Black Ops 60s out October 25th. So dive in because I've got your back. Remember, I replace you, play. It's not simple. Man, the replacer always gets it done. Seriously, though, if you're hooked on Call of Duty, this is your time to jump in. Head over to call of duty. dot com slash black ops six to get in the game. Call of Duty, black ops six available now. Fuck in wild move man. What a wild move. And then you study where like, they're dicks off. They could get anything like they could have this thing listening to us. It's it's that it's that yeah, the boot is listening to us. This coffee's that's where it's now they have wifi in the ability with wifi to see everything in the room. Not only does wifi see you, it knows what position you're in and knows it sees you as you're moving around. It knows everything. It know even these phones like they never they never shut off. What was I talking to? I was talking to some people last night, your club and they were talking about how like your phone knows exactly like what time it is and and what you tend to look at at that time. So when you flip it up, those are the apps that come up. They have you down on lockdown. Everything. Yeah, it's crazy dude. Like I've been studying this stuff a lot. And this is the weirdest thing is where everybody thinks I'm a crazy person. I don't thank you. Finally somebody put somebody gets me. It was got really lonely there for a while. When you were out there at the end of the pier, you're out there. The other pier, the hurricane was coming. And there was like, what's Sam doing? Scary guys. Yeah. We need water. We need sandbags. And now they still think I'm crazy, but at least they're like, OK, he's right about everything. Right. It was fascinating to watch Cowan slowly melt away the layer that he had put up. The blinders that he had put up all his life. And it's like so far I get a text from you're right about everything. Where do you get your news from? I'm like the street stock. Well, Calot is so hard to convince. He and I, we had this long ass conversation in Utah a couple weeks ago. What I was there for the UFC. And just long ass conversation where I was laying some things out for him and then showing him. He's like, no way. I was like, yeah, read it. He's like, what the fuck? I don't know. Read it. It's so crazy because you know, he's super highly educated. You know, and Brian Calon is a sweetheart. People don't realize that. He's almost to a point like he's a people pleaser where he just wants to make sure everybody's happy. A little bit of that. A little bit. And he kind of puts himself in some weird situations once in a while. But at the end of the day, he has a good heart and he means really well. He's a great guy. I've been friends of Brian for 30 years. Yeah, he's the best. We're real good friends. I love him to death. And he wants to have hope. You know, he wants to believe that the government is good. Yes. And I think the government is mostly good. Yes. That's what I think about people. I think people are mostly good. I think most people are great. But I think the reason the second amendment exists is some people are not great. Yeah. Some people are really bad and you want to protect the great people from the people that are really bad. And that's a reality. Unfortunately, I would like that to go away. I would like there'd be no need for guns because everyone's amazing. That would be the best one. I'd like to be the best. But pretending that everyone's the best without fixing all the problems that make people fucked up in the first place while trying to remove guns. So only outlaws have guns is the dumbest fucking strategy. And every city that pulls that off like Chicago or Detroit or any of these places that try that shit, it's a disaster and a fucking war zone. You know, I mean, there's more people get murdered in Chicago every weekend and probably any city in the country. The places with the strictest gun laws have the most violence. Yeah, it's fucking dumb. Doesn't work that way. You have to, you have to look at things realistically. And then you have to look at the root of the problem. Instead of looking at the actions, don't look at the actions, look at what causes the actions, extreme poverty, despair, gang ridden, crime ridden neighborhoods. If you don't fix them, you're going to keep getting the same kind of people that come out of there. So that is where we we spent $175 billion on Ukraine. That's so quick. We could have easily fixed all of our inner city problems. We could have set up community centers, given people nutritious food. We could have like completely renovated the schools, fixed the schools, brought in athletes and musicians and people to do seminars and show people how they can get out of things, teach people trade life skills, life skills, teach people things that you can use. You can apply and get jobs, show them how they get jobs. You know, there's a lot of people that are fucked, man. They're fucked and there's no, they have no one reaching a hand to try to help them out. And we could have done that. Scarcity did that scarcity. But is that on purpose? Yeah, I don't think it is. I think they're acting in the interest of the people that pay them. And the interest of the people that pay them is supporting the military industrial complex, the pharmaceutical industrial complex. And then all the people that give them money, keep getting more money from them and ignore all the other people. This is what I think they're doing. And this is what I think they're doing with voting as well. I mean, I think it's the exact same thing. The reason why they're letting in so many people and giving them money and putting them up in hotels and then asking for amnesty for all these people that came in. We need people that this is like this new narrative. We're not having enough babies. We need people to come into this country. Sure. Not that way. Yeah. Not where you don't know who the fuck they are. We like the 15,000 of them rapists, 14,000 of them are murderers, convicted murderers. It's like it's just what we know. It's like you're having a party and you're like, there's not a lot of people there. It sounds like I'll invite a bunch of people. We're like, oh, the doors for fun, the gangbangers. Yeah. We're men. But then you study, you study a lot of this stuff and it just gets into like, I think like this kind of like dark energy stuff, man. It's like if you study like what they did to the native Americans, if you study what they did to the black community, they run the same playbook over and over again, which is take take like if you study the natives, right? They took, they killed all the buffalo, which mean took away all the jobs from the guys. That's a little more complicated. That the native American story is a little more complicated. But in that regard is the buffalo thing. There's some evidence that some people were killing the buffalo to deprive the native Americans of food. But most of it was just want and destructive recklessness and just like greed, just horrible greed. Yeah. You know what they were doing it for? Pickled tongues. That was the primary getting before they're even getting skins from the buffalo. They're getting tongues. Tongues was like one of the big things because you could take them. You could pick them. You could send them back east. They're worth a lot of money. That's crazy. Because a buffalo tongue's like that bit. Yeah. So they're shooting this 1800 pound animal for a fucking 10 pound tongue. It's nuts. And then you know the guys in the males, the men did have jobs. Yes. And the women always had jobs because they had children and that was their job. And then you look at the black community. They did that exact same thing with the crack epidemic. They took away all the jobs. They flooded it with drugs. They locked up all the men, destroyed the community. And now you see that kind of happening in the bigger cities now where it's like, I was flying on this one air life. Forget what it is. And they were like, we're training only women now to be pilots. And I'm like, is that the best idea right here? I'm going to train the best humans. And they have to do women. Great. If they're not women, don't hire them. So you're taking away from jobs from guys and like as men, what you know what that is. That's all that DEI stuff where they have to like in order to get funding. And in order to like there's, there's a financial incentive to meet DEI quotas. A lot of these are abandoning them now. Yeah. One whole bit happened during the Obama administration. Yeah. Have you ever seen we showed it yesterday on the podcast? Was yesterday or the day before? Um, the spike in what race is. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And you gave things. So she talked about that one time. All of it comes up at 2012. It just starts at 2011 and just spikes, thousands and thousands of the articles that mentioned in these papers. And all mentions on social media, all of a sudden became a big thing. And then you have all your race hustlers who are taking advantage of these DEI quotas and they provide seminars for exorbitant rates. This is the Al Sharpton hustle, the Jesse Jackson hustle. You know, all those, there's a lot of those guys that capitalize on white guilt and got in with a fucking nice fucking day. Hey, Jack, do you care? Make a great money. I want shrimp cocktail in the green room. You know, they. For diversity, you know, hook me up with some Dom Perion and they, you know, they pulled it off and that's what you're always going to have. You're always going to have people that take advantage of any kind of a situation like that. I think, but that one seems to be, I don't think they realized the impact it was going to have. I think they were just trying to push a narrative that people were racist and like, we should not be racist and it was like a good talking point for the Obama administration. But then it spread to transphobia and homophobe. It just went wide. Yeah, they're just looking for xenophobia. I think it's that there's a bigger play and it's the Biden conquer. And these are, these are playbooks that plays in the playbook that they run to do this. And you know, it's like, for me, it's like study the cultural revolution of China, study the Bolshevik revolution of Russia. And I'm sorry, but people can think I'm crazy, but what the Nazis did to Germany, it's like these are, these are playbooks to destroy these, these giant, powerful countries that you can't just invade because you'll get your dick kicked in. So you have to kind of destroy from inside and I think everything you're talking about right now is out of a playbook of cultural Marxism that this is how you destroy from the inside. And like that, Yuri Bevinoff or whatever is last name is dude, I just saw another video he did where like in the guy ruined it by putting up all these stupid pictures and it made it way more weaponized than it needed to be. But man, he breaks down how you break down society. There's a couple videos, one of him sitting down. And then there's one where he's given a seminar and bro, he breaks down every single step. Mm hmm. And you go, that's happening right now. That's destroyed the confidence that people have in America. They've destroyed the faith in America. People think that the American flag is racist. It's so crazy. So crazy. Schools will kick you out if you come in with an American flag t-shirt. Like this is bananas. It is crazy. It's crazy. It's like fried flags or mandatory in some place. It's so crazy to me. And I'm working on this bit right now because like everything in television is like civil war. There's got to be a civil war. I mean, we're movies and I'm like, between who? like the right and the left. That's got sounds like a curb stomping to me. It's like you're going to have like the redneck versus the furries and like, who's fighting here dude? It's like ridiculous. And because like it's gotten so crazy that like, you know, if you call somebody a fascist that meant they were like taking away your rights. Now it's just your dad who watches Fox News. Right. It's like so stupid racist. I can call racist. It doesn't mean it's almost like a badge of honor at this point to be called these terms because it's just by annoying people who I don't like anyways. Right. So it's it's destroyed this kind of fabric between our relationships between everybody. And it's destroyed the meaning of words and it really opens the door for real racists. Like if you only have one word and the word is racist and you apply that word to anyone, everyone. All the time. They applied to Graham Hancock, the archeologist. I had this fucking guy on this flint double guy was an archeologist who literally wrote things implying that Graham Hancock's work empowers white supremacy. And I asked him about and he was like trying to get around it and dance around it. But I've seen him do it online with other people too. And this is a guy in Graham Hancock who's talking about ancient cultures. He's he's literally saying we're talking about the like Egypt. No one's saying that like white people built the pyramids. Yeah, they're saying that they've been there longer than people think. That's it by the same fucking people that live there in in northern Africa. It's the same fucking people. No one's saying white people. There's no white people back. I mean, especially in that area, what are you talking about? It's not a white thing. It's Egyptians. It's Africans. I love him. But yeah, you can say racist and everybody's like, oh my God, the racist halfway. Right. It's not, but it loses. It's crazy. The problem is there's real racist out there is fucking KKK is real. White supremacists out there. And when you call a fucking archeologist, you know, an amateur archeologist, a racist, because he's like trying to say like, hey, maybe this stuff is older than we think it is. Well, you now, what about the, what are you going to call the real, are they super racist? What is, what are those? And what is this? What is the play, like play the tape out? What does that mean? Like what? Like if you go, oh, these, this is white supremacy. What does that mean? Is it, is it, is he's trying to say that they're stealing like their valor? Is that what they're saying? Like they're trying to take away the notion that these ancient indigenous people constructed these things, but no one's saying that. Like he even implied that Graham has said something about aliens, which he definitely hasn't. He doesn't think aliens built it. No, the, what the, they're misrepresenting the argument and the argument is a fascinating one. And there's backed by actual science. And the argument is there's a thing called the younger dry impact theory that happened around 11,000 years ago, documented proven 100% real event. They know the dates that it happens because it happens every year. Was it November and June? Is that when the media, the lead media, media shower, is that what it is? So there's a comet shower that we pass through twice a year. And every now and then a big chunk like the Tunguska event, the Tunguska event in the early 1800s, which flattened like a million acres in Siberia is the exact same time period where we pass through the shower. So they believe that at 11,800 years ago, this impact and this is proven by core samples that show high levels of your iridium, high levels of this nuclear glass that happens on impacts. And they find this stuff all in the same area around 11,800 BC and then another one that's somewhere around 11,800 years ago rather. And another one that's like 10,000 plus years ago. So they think there's like multiple events that took place over a few thousand years, which totally makes sense if we pass through this fucking shower all the time and it nuked a giant chunk of Siberia in the early 1900s. So all he's saying, all Graham Hancock is saying is we are a species with amnesia. And I call him a racism. It's the whole thing's nuts. I love it, dude. And like if I think the world before that event was crazy, bro. It was like, it was like, I think it's like a game of thrones meets like Harry, like it was the craziest thing ever. Everything like even if you study like the stuff that happened in the Bible and all these crazy things they say people did, I think all that stuff was possible before that. And they just wiped out this incredible civilization that was so advanced and they had they could manipulate energy and they could do all that. Who built the pyramids? Maybe Neflon who no, dude, giants just lived in logs and put, I mean, giant, uh, barracks and put them in there. Whoever did it, they had an insane level of sophistication. Yeah. It doesn't make any sense when you compare the rest of the world. The rest of the world at 2500 BC, which is the conventional date, let's say that's correct. Just the conventional date. Graham Hancock thinks it was probably much earlier. But let's say that conventional date. Anyone else was doing anything like that 2500 BC, not even close. So what was going on there? How did they just have insane resources? That they have so much food and water and the existence of 1000s years. Just like, you look, we were talking about this. I had Brian Cox on yesterday and we were talking about how if you go back literally 120 years ago, you have Wilbur and Orville Wright flying this bullshit ass plane. Yeah. Now 120 years later you have Elon Musk and Starship. Right. And then you're talking about the same rockets on a fucking machine. That was crazy. That was crazy. The kind of progress that you're looking at is fucking impossible to imagine. It's so crazy. So imagine if these Egyptians had this same sort of situation where they had an established civilization, an established culture, plenty of food, plenty of resources, brilliant people, no war. And then they just start figuring stuff out, but on a different pathway, instead of with like engines and internal combustion and electronics, they go a different way. And we don't know what that way is. But it's totally possible that that way exists. Yeah. There's a lot of great YouTube channels that break this stuff down like my lunch break and analog. I've had a mom my show and they he was telling me this story about how like they they were drilling low and then they got to this and there was just giant like cavern and they found like holes of civilization down there that was empty. And he talked about one time where they just kept drilling and they just would find civilization on top of civilization and they got low enough that they found like like in America, they found like Chinese writing low enough. There is this. Yeah. If you say these guys, they have these YouTube channels. It's it's on my lunch break and analog and they just they just break down kind of like something I talked about last time I was on here, which was Tataria. But it's lost civilizations. How our timeline is completely fucked. It's not even it's not even real. There's people think like we're millions of years old and we have these giant events that kind of come and reset us. But they dig deep enough. There's like civilizations keep digging. There's another civilization over and over and over and over. We're just we're just on top of giants. Well, that's the case with Egypt. There's old kingdom and then there's new kingdom stuff. And when you go deeper into the sand, you find more complex buildings. Which is not bigger stones like crazy stuff that old kingdom Egypt stuff is a specific style. And so, you know, maybe that was 11,800 years ago and then maybe 10,000 years ago is the other one. Like we don't know. We don't know how old that stuff is. Well, it's almost like the Egyptians would just kind of moved in and they're like these are our pyramids and like Egyptians of Cleopatra's age. Yeah. Yeah. And you know, long ass time ago had knowledge of the constellations, had an understanding of how to point something to perfect due north, south, east and west. And just the calculations that have to be involved in getting 2,300,000 stones to come to a perfect point. Crazy. Like that's insane. And then some of them, they're moving these stones from 500 miles through the mountains. And then they have stones that are like 80 tons and they're lifting them 300 feet onto the ceiling. Like you tell me how they're doing this. How the fuck? How the fuck do we, how would we do that now? But forget about that. Even if you're in these small kind of towns, you're just going to like pick any state, you're going to a small town. They're city hall. It's like the most beautiful building you've ever seen surrounded by trailers. And you're like, who is here? Who made that? Why they make that and where they go? And you see that all over the place. But you know, the thing is like craftsmen for like if you go into like old houses and old churches, the craftsmanship is insane. Have you ever been to Vatican? No, that's on the list. Vatican's incredible. Saint Peter's Basilica is fucking mind blowing. You walk around us. It took hundreds of years to make and the craftsmanship. That's on the list. Vatican's incredible. Saint Peter's Basilica is fucking mind-blowing. You walk around and it took hundreds of years to make. And the craftsmanship is just spectacular. When you rock around, you're just hanging out like, what the fuck man? You chose some photos of Saint Peter's Basilica. Dude, it's immense. I don't know how tall the ceiling is. It's fucking crazy tall. But it's like everywhere you look is incredible or Nate craftsmanship. And that was a thing that people did. Like show the inside, that photograph. Look at that. Click on that. Look at that man. The detail. Oh my God. In real life, it blows your mind. Because you just like, how long? What was the motivation? How did you get the money? Like, who did you steal all that money from? You took a break. Click on that other one, Jamie. The one. Wow. Look at that. And then the one to the left of that too. Look at that. Fuck, dude. And when you walk around in there, I mean, photos barely do it justice. See, look, the other one there, the right hand side, Jamie, with all the people in it. Right next to that to the right. Yeah, right there. Look at that one. So that gives you an understanding of the scale. You see all these people roaming around in it. It's fucking amazing. And so people were just really good at carpentry and craftsmanship back here. And it was a scale that was taught in school. You know, like how many sculptures are there today? It's probably a dying thing. It's probably very few natural sculptures. But back then, it was a real craft that you can get into. And especially, you know, you're doing all this stuff by hand. Like they didn't even have power tools. Okay? So that whole thing was built without table saws, no band saws. It was all planers and hand chisels. Something like hand saws. Something, dude. You don't know. I mean, like we don't know the technology. We know the dates of that. We know the people that did it. That's all doable. It's specially doable over hundreds and hundreds of years of working on it, which is what we know that they did. When you get to things like the pyramid, all definitions kind of fall apart. Because there's too many stones. It would, I think they said that, they gave a timeline of something in the neighborhood of 20 years, the Faro Kufu, his lifetime, and that in order to build that pyramid, just within his lifetime, within his ring, which is like 20 years, you would have to place a stone every 30 seconds or something crazy like that. You have to cut place, measure, and it would take 30 seconds per stone. And you have to run the clock. I mean, I know the far. It's so crazy like that. They're building that. And now I drive through this country doing stand up. And you see like churches are in like strip malls now. Right. It's like you got church right next to a jamba juice. There's no, nobody's building these amazing buildings anymore. Right. It's super sad. And it's also like, is it done on purpose that kind of make you raise your anxiety? Like we said, come on. That's what you and I part ways. That's fine. I'll go my way. I think you get the Joel Osteen's who are in a giant fucking stadium because they want to make money. You know, that's what religion has become a way to get tax exempt status. And you can be a baller. You could be that Kenneth Copeland guy with fucking flying around on Tyler Perry's jet. That guy, that guy's crazy. You see that interview? Scared about the D. Oh man, when the woman interviews him about what they did. Yeah, that I did. Crazy. Oh, fuck, vicious man. I feel bad. Scared he's just all the people in his name are like real returns. Yeah, that guy's not in Jesus. Yeah. That's the thing is like how is there's some scams that are legal and crazy. It's hell evangelist. It's the best scam that's legal. Because it's a legal. It's your own church. It's legal. You don't you don't have to be a real righteous person. You don't have to be following the Bible a lot of them are gay. They're they're fucking people left and right. Like remember Tammy Fay Baker and Jim Baker and just cuckings and Jessica Han, remember that that scandal? But was it the thing that he liked to just watch his wife get railed? Was that a little story? Was it the doc at the or the like the mini series on them was like you just love to watch her get railed? Maybe it's crazy. I wouldn't be shocked. Yeah. I mean, you get that wrench in the weird shit. Jessica Han, who went up banging Sam kennison, which is hilarious. It's like places you will go in the people you will see. I remember one time Sam kennison was on Howard Stern. And Jessica Han was calling in. You're a piece of shit. I fucked you. It's clean. Well, that's so gorgeous. Back then, those were national stories. Those were huge national stories when a preacher like when Jimmy Swagger got going to the bookers. Yeah. I've seen. Yeah. Remember that he's crying. Yeah, it's kind of crazy too, because like I grew up in that era and that all that stuff kind of made me like question the church and then question God. And then I just kind of go, oh, because I've been spending some time with my friends. We kind of listened to Johnny Cash read the Bible. Oh, wow. It's the best. The world was even you read the Bible. I don't know how old he was, but it's like very soothing. And it's like, I'm going to be honest with you. Like I'm on this journey right now, but I've never sat down read the Bible. I mean, I don't know. I hate when people say they're on a journey. I don't know. I'm going for a walk. I'm getting. Say it. No, it's fucking broken. Nothing's wrong. I'll be in a spirit. I'm just trying to learn, right? Because I've been like a real knuckle dragon my whole life. Yeah. I'm trying to get into the higher vibrational. Right. So I'm studying this shit. Ash reading the New Testament. Oh, so he was old. It was old Johnny Cash 1990. Okay, not too bad. Not too old. It's the best. Oh, wow. That's fucking great. And you just listened to him. And like I never sat down read the Bible. I've never actually read what was in it. I've been always told what was in it. I never read it. And now to hear it actually read, which technically I'm not reading it either I'm listening. But you know, it's like it's really interesting. I try to say I read a book to Donald Rollins. I told him I read it on the. I listen to it on all you two. He goes, oh, you didn't read it. I was like, I absorbed the information, but you did not read it. That guy ran into it. I read this book. You listen to it. Which is fine. I've read a book in a long time. Because you're busy to read articles. I read science papers, but I don't read very many books. Most books I get on the shot in the sauna or get on the white on the way over to here. Yeah, I love it. I love it because I can retain knowledge better listening than I can actually reading it because I just go, what did I just read? And I have to go back and I'm the worst for this. It's a skill. You have to learn how to absorb information. So it's like everything else. Like if you're talking to someone, but you're drifting, you know, you're not really thinking about that. Like, oh, I got to do laundry. You start thinking stuff. And then you catch up to what they're saying. You're just looking for clues, especially if you're talking to someone who's just talking at you. Talk to people that talk at you are so brutal because they're not really there with you. They just have a thing and they're pressing play. You just have to be there. Yeah, but to be there. And they're just drive by shooting. Yeah. And they just want you to smile and make them look good. It's kind of weird. Like they don't really give a fuck what your opinions are. But if you're talking to one of those people, it's super easy to drift. Yeah, 100%. You start thinking about shit you got to do. Oh, yeah, I probably do that. I forgot the color guy. Well, I'm a crazy person. So my brain is thinking about a thousand things at one time. Welcome to the club. Yeah, I do. I'm like an iPhone. I'm multitasking, doing a bunch of stuff. We were trying to have a conversation about this in the green room. All the different people. They're all, I go listen, anybody doing this job is out of their fucking mind. Crazy, which is fine. It's okay to be out of your mind. My favorite people are out of their fucking mind. Yeah, just be a good person. Be out of your mind, but be nice. Be out of your mind, but be nice. Be generous, be charitable. It's okay to be out of your mind. But you should also probably figure out a way to manage your mind. You know, my way to manage my mind is cold plunges, workouts, saunas, brutalize myself, meditate. That way when I do, I do such difficult shit on my own that the regular life, the difficulties of regular life are pretty passive. They're not that big of a deal. It's not like three minutes and 33 degree water. You go through it, get to it. It's not a kettlebell workout. Well, you're fucking thinking you're going to throw up. It's okay. Like jujitsu class, you're getting strangled. If you get through all that stuff, like regular life is easier. That's, that's why like being on the couch is bad. Being on the couch is bad, not because it's not great to be on the couch. I loved being on the couch. I love watching me a little Netflix sitting down for a little show gun binge watching. It's fucking awesome. But it's too comfortable. And when that becomes your baseline, then anything that's uncomfortable becomes difficult to handle because your most of your day is like relaxation and sedentary lifestyle. That's not good for you. It's not good for your brain. Forget about your body. Forget about vanity. It's not good for the brain. The brain needs, you need voluntary adversity so that life's adversity becomes normal. Like if you, I'm sure you know military guys. Yeah. I know I have a lot of friends that have been in war. And those guys that have been in war have a completely different reaction. I'm sure you're bullshit. I'm sure regular bullshit is not that big a deal to those guys. They're just like, this is just regular bullshit. This is easy day. Easy day. You know, because war is fucking crazy. And it's like how much, how much have you seen, how much have you had to deal with? And that's why rich kids and spoiled kids, they have such a hard time now beginning life. Look at Hunter Biden. I agree. With that poor bastard. You know, if that guy was your dad, if your dad was a fucking vice president, he was never home. You probably don't go to. Yeah. You'd probably be in Vietnam. Smoke and crack with street hookers. It's taking pictures of your dick. Yeah. Why not? That guy's got a huge dick for always on Coke. It's like he doesn't get Coke dick. It's unbelievable. It's taking my agra too. It's a fucking hog for a dude on crack. Well, I never looked but congratulations. Oh, yeah. I have to do research. Somebody asked me, they had a copy of the entire laptop. They said, do you want us to know? I'm not one. Why do you want that? I do not want that. I don't want to be in possession of that. Yeah. But also like, isn't it illegal? Like, that's not yours. There's things on there that seem illegal. Well, I'm sure there's activities that seem illegal, but isn't it illegal to be in possession of someone's private property that was copied without their knowledge? Yeah, I think so. I think that's illegal. Yeah, I think you don't want that. Yeah. So you know what's interesting? I don't want to interrupt you, but that's one of the dirtiest playbooks when they inject child porn into someone's laptop. Yeah. They do that one all the time. Yeah. They do that one all the time. Yeah. They just do that to the brother. Well, does not true. Let me see this. What you don't know how many people they do that to, but they have done it. Someone in some intelligence agency has dropped child porn into a person's computer. That's a fact. That's a real strategy. People have talked about it openly. People have been caught on tape talking about it. But people get busted and you're like, oh, how convenient. Yeah. This guy got caught with child porn. Now everything he says you'll never listen to again. One of a guy that got caught with child porn was the brother of the guy who went to the golf course to try to kill Trump. Also, the brother of the guy who was blamed for the Vegas shooting, same playbook. Crazy. What he puts in that, both of their brothers happened to be child of. Yeah, it's crazy. And they just put it on your computer and then they rage in and there's nothing you can do about it. If that's that is the one most unforgivable thing of all time. I agree. If you have that on your fucking computer, everybody agrees you should be dead. Except some of these crazy professors now who are trying to make the term minor attractive person. I'll fight everybody. Everybody, I'll fight them all. Yeah, punch a lady. It's so crazy. You like that because you know, the weird thing about that because there was this whole push, you know, about drag queens and I've been the drag shows, they're great. Personally, I don't think they need to be reading the kindergarteners. That's just my personal opinion. Right? And now they all get a lot of them get busted without having weird paths. Right? And the reason I do that is whether it's the child sex changes and all that stuff is like most of the people pushing that stuff are in therapy for trauma that occurred to them as children. And now they're totally fine with traumatizing children with weird ass shit. To me, like kindergarten should be A's, B's, C's, adding all you know, Matt, it shouldn't play games. Football. Drag queens seem like algebra to me, like really advanced shit that most adults don't even quite understand. Why would you ever push anything sexual to people that have even, they haven't even come close to puberty. Yeah. That doesn't, that makes no sense. It's gross. It's not just gross. It's disturbing. And we're also ignoring the fact that human beings are extremely malleable. You can convince people of all sorts of things. You can influence people to do all sorts of things. We know that. That's why cults exist. That's why you can get, why do you think they get little kids to become suicide bombers? Because they don't know any better. Try getting a 55 year old guy with a wife and kids in a job to be a suicide bomber. He was like, what? Try getting some fucking guy in New Jersey who takes the train into Manhattan every day. Try to get that guy to be a suicide bomber. You're like, what the fuck are you talking about, man? Try to pay my mortgage. I'm going to my kids recital tonight. 100% blow myself up. For what? They have people that rely on them. And then kids just have nothing. And they're very trusting of adults too. And they really believe that they're going to go to heaven. They really believe that they're going to be martyrs. And then they have framed photographs. I remember there was this documentary where there was a school in the Middle East. And they were talking about today's students or tomorrow's holy martyrs. And it was printed on the wall. And in it, they had photographs of various children that had blown themselves up. And they were wearing the vests. That's so fucking so fucked up. Bananas. But that's the playbook. The playbook is you get young people that don't know any better because they're easily influenced. So in the guise of this, all this woke shit, people have put aside what was fundamental about human nature. There's a reason why you don't let children get tattoos because they make poor decisions. So why are you letting them get their dick cut off? I couldn't agree more. It's like what insane world are we OK with children cutting their dick? It just makes no way to- You're cutting their breasts off or taking hormone blockers. Oh, do you see the latest one? New York Times wrote about this. They did a study on hormone blockers for children. And they decided to not release this study. I saw that yesterday. Because the study would empower people who against go to JK Rawlings. That is so nice about this. Because she had the perfect response to this. Her response to this was so perfect. The whole thing is completely insane. If you're going to do a study that proves that hormone blockers are good for children, then you find out it's not. The correct thing to do is say, hey, we just found something out and we shouldn't give hormone blockers to kids. Now, forget about this is just for a happiness sake. We must not publish a study that says we're harming children, because people who say we're harming children will use the study as evidence that we're harming children, which might make it difficult for us to continue to harming children. It's so sad and tragic that unbelievable. OK with this. US study on puberty blockers goes unpublished, because of politics, Dr. Suss. The leader of the long-running studies said the drugs did not improve mental health and children when gender distress and that the findings might be weaponized by opponents of the care and should be, because they're not not only that, there's severe health consequences. Also, there's the other bullshit that you could just like reverse them at any time. That's not true. You're using them during a developmental cycle of a child. During a developmental cycle of a child, it determines what their penis size is going to be. Like some of these kids that they do it to, and then they try to have gender transition surgery, they don't have a penis that they can turn into a vagina, so they start using their rectal tissue. So then their artificial vagina smells like shit, literally, because it's made out of rectal tissue. And so there's all these online forms of people talking about the malodorous fake vaginas that they got from these operations. And then you have to keep it to dilated. It's basically a tool that you got to put in, and at some point that wound's going to not start smelling good, because it's not meant to be there. Well, I mean, maybe you could, if it was made out of a dick, maybe you can keep it from smelling like anything other than dick. It's going to smell like dick. Right out of dick. Right. But it's like, Daniel, it's smell like dick. Like if you have a pierced ear, sometimes those holes seal up, right? So you have to keep a peg in there. You have to keep an earring in there in order to keep the whole open. Otherwise, it'll close up, and you have to reopen it. You have to do that with their fake vaginas. They'll heal up. And I just don't understand as a parent how you can't go. Now, we're not going to do this. I don't understand why you would allow the thing that is the most beautiful thing in the world, your child to go through that. I don't understand that because my whole thing is protect my children at all costs. As much as I can, I protect them from as much as I can. And to allow this to happen at that age, be like, yeah, just do it major surgery. What, how early is it? 10, 12, 13. Like crazy. What kind of parent is that? And it's a decision that's going to haunt them for the rest of their life if they don't agree with it. If they're unhappy with it, and there's a lot of D transitioners, a lot. And they get shamed. And they get shamed. Oh my God, they get attacked so hard. It's so crazy. Imagine someone that's been coerced into doing something horrible. They'll never have children again, ruin their life. They get older and they realize like, oh, I'm just a gay man. Now I don't have a dick. Or oh, I'm just a girl who had autism and was confused. Now my breasts are removed and I have a deep voice forever, forever, forever. And so trapped. Can of children, forever. Your life is ruined in the name of woke and not just that, but also in the name of money. This is where it gets fucked because when you look at the amount of money that's generated by this, like if you go back to like gender transition surgery places, like gender affirming care centers in like 2007, this a couple does a few. Yeah. Because there's always been transgender people. There's always been people that have gender dysphoria. And then there's people that have auto kind of failure. And the auto kind of failure people are the people that are sexually aroused by the idea of dressing up like a woman, but they like women. And those are the fucking creeps that walk around women's bathrooms. Yeah, they're the swimmer they said that they had that. I'm sure there's been a bunch of them like that. They get aroused by the idea of dressing up like a woman, but they're heterosexual. And so they're protected under the same banner. So you've empowered perverts and molesters to go into women's room and stare at women and why they're peeing with their dicks out. Yeah. You know, it's crazy. They get a kink out of walking around women's locker rooms, they're hard ons. And this is or they're dicks out, but this is this is just one aspect of it. And then there's people that really do have a mind of a woman and they're trapped in a man's body and maybe gender transitions, the thing for them, but they should be, they should be like protected from making a poor decision while they're young. Yes. So, you know, I mean, let yourself up like a Christmas tree. It's really shitting the 18 or 21, 24, whatever it is, whatever age we figure out. Yeah. But people make, especially men, the frontal cortex on a man doesn't even really fully evolve until they're like 25 years old. I think mine was 50. I think mine was 52. Yeah. But it's interesting because it's this thing we kind of seeing society right now in our culture where they're trying to make outlaw shit mainstream. Like when I was growing up, there was always that story that there was a city in Colorado where everyone went to get transitioned and you went out there and that's where you did it. You didn't see it. They're like centers everywhere. Yeah. For a long time, Colorado was the place where I always heard you went to go get your dick cut off and stuff like that, right? Which is fine. Again, live your life. When, you know, when I was growing up in a small town, I don't think we had any trends. I think we had maybe one and they lived their life and they, they lived that outlaw lifestyle. Same thing with adult film stars, right? You know, I did the naughty show. I interviewed all these adult film stars. That was way before only fans and now like your secretary is an only fans and they don't understand the lifestyle that comes with being an outlaw, right? Which is like, like there's a reason why porn stars live like the average age is like 38 years old. They're like span, right? There's like, is that real? If you go and you stuff, like there's people on YouTube that put together like these in a memorial, adult film stars, they're all super young and it's all like ODN suicide murder. It's not an easy lifestyle. There's certain people that are built for that and it comes from trauma as a childhood that, you know, they can't really imagine the people that you're associating with every day, the men who are pimping you out of these movies. It's an outlaw lifestyle. It's same thing with the trans stuff. They're trying to make it so the normies are doing it and it's like they're not built for that. There's a certain kind of person, built for that, that certain lifestyle. The business got wiped out by the internet. Remember how the result is like bailouts of businesses? Isn't it funny that no one bailed out porn? Yeah, it's so crazy, dude. It's so crazy, dude. I used to live in this gated community, real nice neighborhood and there was a dude who lived down the street who actually did Jiu Jitsu with me and he was a porn star. I know. I think I know what you talk about. And he made porn films and so he was loaded. This dude had a fucking fat Mercedes and a beautiful house and his house is a panel like just a playground like this. It was just balling out of control and producing porn. And then the internet came in long game. Pang house. You got repossessed, lost everything. Everybody went broke. They went from making millions every year to making zero dollars. Yes. Because all the porn was legal and it was all online. And it's tubes and you go into why is that a thing? Why is this porn all free? Why is that that suggestion bar over there suggesting some weird shit to me? It just brings you deeper and deeper into the way. You keep clicking on links and links, put up ads and there's some banging out ad revenue left and right. And we're getting some straight normal ads too. Like a Ford truck I once saw in porn now which was like a really weird commercial before you're about to watch interracial gang bangs. It's like bad all that's done in a sneaky way. I bet all that's probably done in a sneaky way. I bet the companies don't even know what they're advertising for. You know, I bet it's like a block of ad that goes to like some glamor. I mean, you got to think of how much money must be involved in those streaming sites now. And how many views are getting? If you go to a video, it's got three million views. Why is that any different than watching a stand up special ads, three million views? You're not paying attention to the fucking ads on the right as cause you're going full screen every time. Yeah. It's really great. But the game changed and I always think this is like kind of a year. Right here, 20 and 2006 pornography industry generated 12 billion in annual revenue, which is more than the combined annual revenues of ABC NBC and CBS in 2023, the pornographic website market. And you have to project to be valued at one billion. So they lost 11 billion. That's what all the rebounding that's the rebounding. Right. So there was a complete devastation from 2006, which is right about the time that this fucking dude lost his house. I think he lost his house like 2008 or something like that. So they just once the, the you porn and all that shit came along, it just took the fucking legs off of it. But the 2023 one doesn't include the only fans numbers. Oh, yeah. That's got the charts. Yeah. That's crazy too. And that's an interesting thing. That is the most empowering way for porn stars, right? Because they are could get rid of the pimps. They get rid of the pimps. They get rid of the producers. They make their own revenue. And a lot of it is like boyfriends and girlfriends decide to film, you know, like fucking amateur stuff and people love that stuff. And that, that is like an insane amount of money. And they're making it, they're making all of it, which that's the most. Some of them are. I think there's this big thing where they're like, this chick made a million dollars. And then you study like what the average person makes. It's like a hundred dollars. I saw this great meme where it's like, you started to only fans. You made $10. Now everybody, your town knows you have pepperoni nipple. Yeah, there's definitely that. It's not always successful. That's for sure. The median income for only fan creators is $4,995 a year. According to Keeper Tax following service for the freelance workers, however, it is likely some creators make a lot of money where others make none at all. So for the median to be $4,99, that means some girls are making $20. Yep. Yeah, some girls are making 20 bucks. What was my point? My point was the point is it used to be an organized kind of like a real industry. And now it's not that it's wild. Last and everybody's doing these. You know, it's really weird, dude. Is how similar comedians and porn starts business models are? They're almost exactly the same if you study it, right? It's like we have podcasts. They have only fans, right? They put clips up on Twitter. Yeah. The Twitter still Twitter during all the censorship still. Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, hard core porn always on Twitter, which is really crazy that nobody pushed back against that, that never went away. And then now and snuff films. It's so crazy to me. That's a lot of Instagram. Instagram is a lot of murder. I watched the guy today get stomped to death that same video. The guy got stomped death by the elephant. I had to watch it again. What the fuck, man? Who did this crazy? My algorithm on Instagram, I hate it, dude. I hate it. It's all buttholes, dude. So many people got on. I can't get away from it. Red Band got me turned on to the ladies who find the loophole to show their tits. Oh, with the express feeding face, fake babies. So they have this big, juicy tit and they pull this hot girl on the sundress because they're this big, juicy tit and sticks in the mouth of a rubber baby and you're like, hey, I was at the airport flying here and I love children. especially now I have kids. I realized how magical they are and like, you got your airport. You don't see kids like you used to when I was coming up. It's just no way is having kids anymore. At least that's what they're telling us. But so I'm a that's why we need immigrants. That's why we need to keep the borders open. Sam, I see that I do it even like, you give them money. Even Max Gill's birth rates going down. It's like Max Gill's are having kids now. Dude, that's crazy. Is that real? Yeah, like, dude, I saw this chart which stated like the birth rates of all these countries. It is not the only place that's only down 20% Jamaica. There's still dropping dick. Nobody probably don't have a lot of plastic over there. The part of it is reproductive cycles are being devastated by plastic. Dude, we're entering our children and men's face, dude. I'm telling you, bro. Maybe where we're no more than kids. Maybe that's like ridiculous. Everybody's like, that's crazy. Yeah, now like everything's militarized and nobody's having kids. Wow, I mean, it's going to get to a point where abortion rights are going to be moot. It's not really important because nobody can have kids. Nobody's, yeah, it's really sad, dude. It's weird because this is what happens in industrialized civilizations anyway. So whenever you have like cities, what happens is women enter the workforce so they have children later and then men want to have children later as well because everybody's focusing on the career and then you have IVF centers and everything because people are too old to have kids. They're late 30s like, oh my God, we have to do something to have a kid. You know, anytime freeze the embryos, do whatever you got to do. And so it's normal for third world countries to have more kids. You know, it's always been the case because you need children because you need children to help you work. You know, if you're working on a farm or ranch or you need kids and then you get to cities and people like, well, the wife wants a career as well and it, you know, birth rates always drop. But you get to places like Japan or South Korea. It's crazy. It's kind of, it's traffic. Everyone's watching, eel porn. Nobody wants to go go with the bitches. Well, it's not even that man. It's work. It's work, you know, especially in South Korea. You know, they're very hard working. It's a very hard work ethic and the population drop is so bad that it's something crazy. Like one out of 100 people today will have grandchildren, something bananas like that. So nuts to me. You know what else is kind of crazy like the, what feminism has done. And there's a, I think we're in big trouble or gene pools in big trouble. Like especially if you take a look at like how many, there's like so many only fans. It's unbelievable, right? And that, that lifestyle when you're a gorgeous woman like that, that lifestyle that you start to go into only fans, that kind of like shuts certain doors in your life. And one thing that that it's going to happen is like, hi. Or just women like that. That lifestyle that you start to go into only fans. That kind of like shuts certain doors in your life. And one thing that that it's gonna happen is like high value males probably don't wanna adult film star as the mother of their children. And these are like Viking bitches, right? Like, you know, these big old juicy titties and all that stuff, they should be putting out super soldier kids. But because these high value males don't want that, that's gonna fuck that gene pull up. And then you look at college and you have these really smart smart, smart, or I'll say intelligent, intelligent, intelligent, and women don't wanna have kids. So now you got the smart ones I have in kids and the super built ones not having kids. It's gonna be like super devastating to the gene pull. We like, it's gonna get really weird. I think we live through the best times and I know every generation says that about the next generation. But I think we had a great like diet. Well, isn't like only friends almost kind of like hitting the lottery plus shame. Right. It's like you got money that's coming out of nowhere. So you're gonna burn through it likely. You're probably not gonna be the best business person. Maybe you are. Maybe you're investing it. I wanted to maybe change your identity. I'd like to be a financial consultant to the strippers. Like I always wanted to do that. Like help them invest. Stripper money. Put a call on this, put a put on that. They must all have only fans, right? One, dude, they said like 30% of Miami is only fans. What? Yeah, it's like some crazy number. Google that. What are you saying, Jamie? I've seen only fans creators say that like if some of the strippers only had enough self confidence to know that they could just be on only fans instead of going to strip club. Perhaps. Maybe this. Google what Sam said about only fans of Miami. That's like some crazy high number. That seems bonkers. 30% of the whole high. I mean, but everybody's hot Miami. I went to Dunkin donuts. I saw a chick working there. I was ready to leave everyone I love for. I'm sorry. I'm like, I will band it everybody for those. I always say you should have a passport to go to Miami. Yeah, that's not America. That is a wild country. It's the Latino San Diego. And then San Diego is the white Miami. That's how ghosts did. You go to Miami like you go to San Diego. You're like, you're so gorgeous. And you're happy. What is going on here, dude? Right? Because they're not in the show, but it's in the street. One hundred percent. That's like Texas ladies. Yeah. Beautiful women out here and they don't need any attention. I love that. They're not trying to get famous. Trying to just be in normal people. They want to film. They're just normal people. Well, that was one of the main things that was appealing to me when I first started looking at Austin. When I would come here, I'm like, these people are so normal. They're nice. They're just nice people. They're ideal. They're just living their life. You get so used to that Hollywood word. I hated Hollywood weird world that way of behaving and thinking. It's all wrapped around narcissists. It's all wrapped around the entertainment business. It's all wrapped around these people that dictate whether or not you work. These overseers of the industry. I get asked the audition for stuff all the time. I'm like, I'm done. I'm tired of going in there auditioning for someone who probably couldn't do the role anyway. So I'm trying to impress them. And I can't act. I'm a horrible actor. I'm functionally illiterate. I can't write. I can only do one thing and talk mad shit. And that's it. I'm lucky to have a clear message. Thank God. I think God has the right time. I just started podcasting with you in that entire shop. Oh my God. We'd be fucking doomed. We would just be making each other laugh. And we'd be constantly getting fired. I love six street energy. I love going there and just feeling the energy. It reminds me, dude, of like, you remember Hollywood, sunset, bullvard in like 98 when like Kobe and Shaq were crushing it with the Lakers. And it was just chaos. And we didn't know how good we had it. And it was so much fun. And now that's all gone. Well, also, we were undercover, right? Because even though I was on TV, nobody knew who the fuck I was in 98. Yeah. It was like we were just kids. We were just young guys like in this wild business. And we couldn't believe we were working in Hollywood, working at the comedy store. You know, and then all these celebrities come by. you see Quentin Tarantino there and Dr. Dre there. You're like, what the fuck? This is crazy. Couldn't even believe it was real. Dice Clay's there. Like what? My favorite, listen, there's two times at the comm store that I loved. Obviously when you came back and it was just fire and it was like every show is selling out instantly. But there was also that dead period at the store where it was like, we could just go up and bomb with dignity and nobody cared. There was nobody in the old water. You were just eating a dick and you felt great about yourself. Because it was like towards the end of mid-season. Like she was still in control but she wasn't like that. That was in 2007 to 14. Yeah, it was just, it was gone. Yeah. No, no, it was right before you left too. You were, I loved you. You were the only one putting your name on the marquee still. You know, you'd have these guys popping in doing an hour to name wearing on the marquee. It was chaos, man. But the reason why they did that is because they had this erroneous idea that you wouldn't sell tickets in LA if your name was at the comedy store. I knew they could see at the comedy store. Why would they go see you at the forum? Yeah. And I was always like, who says who? Who says who? Yes. So I always appreciate you putting your name on the marquee because we got the performance in front of like, Pat crowds. But during the week, I remember I'd walk up steve run as easy still working at the cash restaurant. He's like, should I get a new job? You'd look in. There's like 10 people in the OR. That was like, um, 94 to like 2003. Yes. I got in in 98. And it was it was I always said it's the purest comedy ever was because the inmates were running the asylum. Oh, yeah. And you could just be you could go do a sad, you blow over there. Have a great time, live your life. And it was such a blessing because everybody that was there during that time has gone on to do amazing things. They're all over Netflix. They're podcasts are huge because we were allowed to just bomb with dignity. We were allowed to experiment. Yes. It was so important for creating comedy. You got to take chances and you got to try things. And if you're just trying to kill all the time, you're going to do your best material always. And the store kind of got to be that for a while. Like 2000 and COVID. Yeah, 14 on the problems. It was packed every night when I came back all of a sudden it was like the new gold rush. And it was every night Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, two shows, three shows sold out. Everything was sold out. Amazing crowds, enthusiastic comedy fans. It was because they were internet comedy fans. It became like a different thing because it was before it was like, let's go see comedy. They didn't give a fuck about comedy. So if you've got to laugh, you earned that fucking laugh. The way I always say is the store goes through these different errors. So went through the Richard Pryor era. When Richard Pryor's filming, live in the Sunset Strip and like the early 80s, this was like the thing, like you'd go see Richard Pryor at the comedy store. And I'm sure the comedy store from everybody that like Dom Herrera and people I talked to was hopping back then. And then there was the kennison era. And then kennison, I think around 88 got banned from the store and something happened. And I don't know what he did. He probably shot somebody or something. I know he shot one of the signs in the back. Yeah, they replaced them like so sad. It's like, dude, there was a bullet hole from Kansas. Leave it there. Leave it there. So then after that, there was this giant drop off. That's when I came along. I came along in 94. There was no one there. It was like, I had heard about the comedy store was Mecca. When I lived in Boston, everybody was like the comedy store. Richard Pryor's Sam kennison, Dave Letterman, Bill Hicks, comedy store, the comedy store. You're like, you was like this magnet you had to get to. I got to get to the comedy store. And then when I got there I was like, what? I was like, boat ax. It was like the leftovers, the people that were around in the 70s and the 80s, but never they were lazy. They were fucked up. They never got their shit together and they had these terrible acts. And I remember being there and the crowd was like non existent. No one was there. I was like, wow, this is the comedy store. And it was like that for a couple of years, many years. You came in 98. It was like that 98. So it was 94 till around the internet. And then the internet started getting the comedy store packed again because we were all on like only not only fans. So my space, we're all advertising shows on my space. And that got the dankook led that. Dankook changed the game. I was like 2002 ish somewhere around then, 2002 three. That's when it really fucking kicked in. And then fear factor was huge. So then my name was the marketer that then. So then it was packed again. And then it was internet fans. It was a totally different vibe. It was like a really fucking good time. But then 2007 I left and I'm like, fuck this place and then it dropped off again. It dropped off again. And I remember when you came back, like I remember I wasn't in town. It was a big event. And everyone's so excited and the things just changed and it just became just fine right there overnight. But I always could tell whether whether you or Joey Diaz was on the line up because when you weren't on the line up, the crowds were totally different. And I'm like, oh, triple is going to have to work tonight. Do you feel rough one? We're going to war. We're going to lose some soldiers. Can I? You know, if you threw Joey up on the show, first of all, whoever goes on after Joey's in real trouble. But also like you learn a lot about yourself. Oh, yeah. It's an education. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Oh, are Joey in the OR was almost impossible to follow. And then on top of that, like all the taboos have been destroyed. Yeah. He just did 15 minutes on eating ass and shove it as nose and someone said, do the pigeon and destroyed the room. Like people couldn't breathe. They were laughing so hard. They couldn't breathe. People were knocking drinks over table falling onto the ground. It was normal to see people fall on the ground when Joey was on stage. But the thing is, it's like all the taboos were shattered and you could just have fun. You know, you could just do anything. You could just have a good time. I felt like that here club last night. Oh, yeah. I felt like that. I like it. It was so funny because I came out and I did, I did kill Tony two weeks ago. And you know, I took Tony on his first road gig. You can actually watch. There's a video on YouTube where I used to do something called before and after. And I would interview like I take door guys on the road. I'd interview them before the show and then I would interview them after the show because I know it was going to be chaos. And you can see Tony's first gig. He ever did on the road is on the internet. Wow. And now, you know, and I did like kill Tony super early. So you know, that's kind of how I thought the show was how it was when first started. So I, you know, I called Red Band. I hit up Red Band and told him like, hey man, my special drive, can I come and do the show? It's like, yeah, come on. So I'd be telling people, like, hey, dude, I'm doing kill Tony. It's like I'm having a kid. Like I'm giving, like I'm going to have a new child come into the world. People are like, I'm so happy for you. You deserve it. You're doing great. You deserve, you're, I'm like, I didn't realize why I was walking into. Bro, when you, you should have come to Madison Square Garden. When you see. I don't know why didn't go. I was like, David's like, why do you go? I go, kill Tony. We could have done that. We could have gone. I didn't even think about it. You could have done a set. You know, Tony in Madison Square Garden was so insane. So for me, it was so emotional. Like, I had to be there because I was there when he was doing it in front of 18 comics in the belly room. Yeah, so no one too. No audience. I was a frequent guest. And it was just fun. It was just the thing we would do with fuck around. And I thought it was a great workshop for comedy. And I thought it was a great way for these amateurs, these people that are doing one minute to kind of get feedback from guys like Dom Herrera and to like, yeah, kind of figure out how to do comedy. It's like, it's a little bit of a training wheel for doing comedy. Also, tremendous pressure, even back then. But imagine like someone went up in Madison Square Garden. It was their first time on stage. Where do you go from there? You don't. You don't. The bombing was horrendous. But 16,000 people and rabid kill Tony fans in front of this amazing band now. And you got dice clays there, Shane Gillis is there, Mark Norm. I mean, it's fucking all my favorite. Man, it was bananas, David, tell it was incredible. I was incredible. I didn't even think to go. I was like, man, why didn't I go all my friends were there? I saw our race. I wish I was about it. I should have went. It was fucking amazing. But I'm there right. I'm there. And I do kill Tony. And like, I just feel this freedom. I haven't felt in a long time. Yeah. Shadow in the cave in Hollywood of canceled culture. And people are just afraid. I mean, they're just afraid. And they're also afraid of not getting gigs. So the problem with LA is that even the comics that were really good at one point in time, they started getting TV gigs. Yes. And then they backed off. They backed off what they did. And I felt that. When I went out, what else on news radio, my fucking producers had this to me, he goes, why are you still doing comedy? You're an actor now. I was like, oh no. My immediate thought was like, oh no, like I could get stuck here doing this. I was just doing this for money. I was doing this because I couldn't believe someone paid me $25,000 a week. I was like, what are you talking about? That's insanity. I was like, oh my god, I'm a baller. I couldn't. It's 1994. It was just crazy. It was just crazy. I'm 26 years old that I'm making this insane amount of money. Like this is nuts. And so I went from that to this realization that this could be a trap. And I was like, oh no, I'm doubling down. I'm going to get after it. I'm going to really, really get after it with comedy. I'm going to do the same kind of comedy. And I've thought about that during the fear factor days too. And I'm like, if I lose fear factor because of comedy, so be it. But I am not. Dude, that's why I love you. You're such a word. You love the art. I've always felt that from you. You've always loved the art. And I've always totally respected that in you. Because you could have slide. And I know you like, you fucking, like you take a pad and no pad and you write and you work those bits and you listen to yourself. And you always always like fine tune it. And that's why when you're special and you did live, which is fucking bananas. I loved it, dude. I was so happy for you because I know how much time you put into it. Well, it's also doing it live. It's like scary. It's crazy. Which is why I wanted to do it live. I was like, fuck it. It's do it live. It's great. Dude, like fucking Bill O'Reilly. Fuck it. We'll do it live. It's so, it's so nuts because most people, people don't notice about specials is most people record multiple shows so they could edit it together. So they get the best representation to go up there. And like, like last night, I did the smaller room in your club. And there was a couple moments where I flubbed some words. And I was like, don't don't don't crash the plane. Don't crash the plane. It's a fucking dude. You just flubbed a couple more. It's okay. And then you get you right at it. And then you go. Yeah. Like, to do it live is crazy. But you know what? It made me realize that I could do more in regular comedy. Like, I could work more. I could work harder. You know, you remember the movie, Moved at a Blues? Yeah. I loved that movie. One of the things I loved about that movie was like the discipline that Denzel Washington's character had. Like his girlfriend's trying to fuck. He's like, no, no, I got to practice. I got to practice. I'm like, I don't even practice. I was thinking that. Like I hardly practiced. I hardly right. I'll write occasionally. I would write back then especially. I write a lot more now. But I would write occasionally. I said, don't write. When I got ready for the special, I was writing every day. And I was going over my bits every day. I was listening to them. I was writing them down. I was writing them out the day of the show. I've done thousands of times. But I was writing them out the day of the show. I was listening to recordings. I watched a film of the recording. I was like, I am going to be dialed the fucking. And then when I did it, I was like, why don't I do this all the time? If I do that all the time, everything would be so much better. Do you have time, bro? How do you keep all this stuff going? I know I'm like, I got in yesterday and I wanted to text you. But I'm like, oh, dude, he's so busy. I'm just going to let him do his thing. My phone's constantly blowing up. And I'm not even close to what. I don't know how you keep everything going. And not like it's amazing to me. because I'm constantly like I'm a verge of like, I'm just going to fake my own death and disappear. Well, one day I'll probably disappear. But what I'm doing is exactly the amount I can do. So I have it in a good situation. So my situation is I work out in the morning while my kids are at school. I come here. I do the podcast. And then I do stand up at night when everybody's going to bed. And that's what I did in LA too. Like a lot of those shows that I did, like Joe Rogan and friends show it. I did in the main room. I did it 10 o'clock. And the reason I did it 10 o'clock, my kids are already in bed. So it's perfect. I have dinner, hang out with the family, go, and then I write late at night. Because that's what I'm the most juicy. When I come home from a show and my brain's fired up, and I can sit in front of that computer. And maybe I said one thing that I think could be something. And then I'll just listen to that thing. And I'll just start writing. And I've gotten so much out of that. And it made me angry that I didn't do it more often. Because like some of the best bits that I've come up with over the last couple of years have all been stuff that I actually wrote. Not just ideas that came to me that I fleshed out on stage. And I've had some of those that became bangers, but the sitting down and writing things out and trying to get my perspective. And some lines that were just, we lost a lot of people during COVID. And most of them are still alive. I love that. I wrote that. I was like, that's exactly what it is. We lost those people. But that came out of writing. a lot of these things that I was writing out. Like I took chunks of them. And that became the bits. And I was like, God damn it. I gotta be more focused. So doing that live special really lit a fire under my ass. So insane, dude. People have no clue how that is. And anyone who's ever shot a special has to be like, that's insanity, dude, to do that. Because most people don't have the ability to do that. And I respect you. And I've always done that because you do have the discipline. Now that I've gotten sober, that's what I work on is discipline. The getting into a routine of going workout, get this done. And now, I'm gonna be honest with you. I always was a stage writer. I mostly just wrote on stage tagged it and could remember it and get the beats down in my head. But now that in November, I'll be doing stand up for 30 years. I don't even, most people are retiring from whatever they're doing at that time. I still absolutely love stand up comedy. So, but now I've kind of talked about all the things. I really used to get downloads, dude. Like I would get downloads of jokes. Jokes would come to me fully formed. And I would just go on stage and do them. Like I remember one day, I'm sleeping. I just wake up. I'm like, the seven stages of grief of shitting your pants. Right. I just had the joke like right there. And it's like this I did on my special. And it's a great bit. But now I've kind of tapped in everything. And I've taught, I heard Doug Stanhope talk about this one time. Yeah. I talked about everything I cared about. Yeah, but you know what Doug told me? Edibles changed all that for him. I don't know. And I'm like, yeah, dude, that's the fucking, that's the steroids of comedy. I'm thinking about, I would love, I mean, I'm four, December 9th will be four years. I'm so thankful for my sobriety. Stay simple. I do want a micro dose during your Jitsu, but that's about it. That's the one that you don't have to, you don't have to do drugs. You can, I don't want to. You can stay on this path and be incredibly creative without drugs. It's just some people drugs are not good for just like some people should need peanuts. Well, it's like it's just my, the point is like now I'm sitting down and writing. And I'm like sitting down and I'll write my goal is at night to do like 30 minutes of stretching, 30 minutes of writing and then 30 minutes of reading. You know, that's 30 more minutes than you would have done. If you didn't, you add that up. That's fucking hours and a week. And you add that up to jokes. You're going to have 10 minutes here. Five minutes there. If you can get one good bit a week, that's about five minutes by the end of the year, you're going to be, or like five good minutes a month. You just got to get five good minutes a month. Five good minutes, a month's amazing. And then you have a whole hour at the end of the year. Yeah. That's incredible. And that if you do that for two years, you can pull from a hundred and twenty minutes down to a murder 60. Yeah. So that's why I'm working on that. But I like what about that? If you have five good minutes a month, you have 12 months out of the year, you know, you're going to have 50 fucking minutes. Maybe, you know, when you trim it down, maybe a little less. But that's pretty fucking good. That's pretty goddamn good. And I'm trying right now to really work on like taking my experiences and and turn them into jokes instead of just doing observations, which I'm fine. But I'm trying to take experiences that I feel to make it as authentic as I can. Sure. And you know, sometimes I could like I could wander into some stuff where I'm like, I'm sure somebody already said that. But I'm just like, you know, it's authentic to me. Like I have this bit about I almost I almost OD'd on like a gas station boner pill one time. This is like a true story. You get it for red band? No. I was just one day. I don't know why I was at a gas station. I saw the Rhino 55,000. I'm like, give it to me. And I was up for three days straight rock hard. And I'm like, I don't know. What is in those fucking days? I don't know, bro. I think the steroids and those things. I don't I was up to an I had you two in the morning. I'm like, this is not good. Probably meth. But I'm probably like, I'm sure somebody might have talked about this, but I don't care because this is my experience. Yeah. And I'm I'm just going to write about my experience. I'm sure people I mean, red bands talked about gas station boner pills forever. He was the fucking the guinea pig. He was he would get the different ones. He'd be mad at the gas station ran out of him. And he was telling me the scam how what would happen is they would test these things. They'd find out there's biagra and I'm going to bunch other shit. And so then they pull them off the market and then they would just come up with a new company name and then sell the same shit. Thank God. And it was like instead of Rhino, it was steel rhino and iron rhino and golden rhino. But they're so powerful. But it's crazy that that that was a thing for a long time was gas station boner pills. They're still there dude. I never touched them. I did. I thought about it. There's a couple of times I loved it. You know, because I like them throttle. I was in a week state of mind. And I saw that stack there was by a pack of gum like, nope, I'm not going to do it. You know what I scared I was going to love it. I didn't want to do them all the time because you don't also you really were taking a risk. You didn't know what was in the. Yeah, but let's find this out. How many people died from gas station boner pills because it's not zero. It's not zero. There has to be some guys that died. That has to suck. That has to be along right up there with the guy who died in Mr. Hands like Magic. Oh, that funeral took like a fuck more than a hundred times before that one horse killed him. Isn't that crazy? It's going to eventually got to catch up with him. In the video, Mr. Hands, that's not even when he died. He died in a different video. What? That video was successful. That was a good time. That was a good time. No, no. Good times, bro. Yeah, when that horse nuts in his ass. And you look at that thing going up into his body cavity and you're like, how? where did it go? Where did it go? That's in his throat. That dick was my arm probably alarming my arm. That is a giant dick. But apparently dudes are fisting and they're really getting up in there. That's another Instagram rabbit hole I went down. How many of us do hold on? They get up in there. I'm in the gram. They're showing you know. They're talking about it. Oh, guys, we're talking about like how far they get in there and how they couldn't believe it like until they met the right queen. They could really get in there. How many people have died from gas station bullet pills? Let's guess. I'm say 1200. Really? Yeah, 1200 deaths gas station boner pills all time. I'm a little bit of dollar only because I think that people are like, let's not tell them they died from a boner pill. So who's actually who's actually? Probably Agra probably Pfizer Pfizer's like go take our share, which is probably actually the smart thing to do. I'm going to give you one of our people 26 26. Can we find out Jamie? Jamie, what we got the information I'm getting is going to be tough to get to because you'd pride that from a heart attacks. They're not going to say it was, you know, the gas station boner pill that could do. I found nothing that's linked to anybody to death. Not that that's not true, but that's like COVID vaccines. What other drugs are you on? No one was so crazy. People just died. What are the drugs that you want if you're taking gas station boner pills enough to kill you also, you know, right? You might be a wild boy thing you took. I know wild boy. I'm still going to call it gas station heroin. Have you heard of that? Well, I've heard of that. That's what they call boner pills. There's another drug that they're warning you to stay off of called. They call it gas station heroin. It's a new one heard of it. Is that like bath salts? It's number of the bath salts. Oh, yeah. It could be like that, but I've never even heard of this. I don't know what it looks like. John McAfee, the guy who invented antivirus. Oh, yeah. He was, he was cooking up his own meth. Allegedly. I say this will all do respect, rest in peace. Rest in peace. Yes, on the podcast one day by the way. Great. When he was running from the law, he was casting the podcast called in. It was fascinating conversation. But John McAfee allegedly had like a lab in his backyard, like a very sophisticated lab because he's a genius and had an online forum that he was posting at detailing how he was making all this with photographs and showed the lab and everything. And then later, I think they caught him that it was actually him and he was saying, don't you understand parody? This is joke. I don't do meth. Come on, guys. But he seemed like he was doing meth. Dude, he wiped up a hooker. God bless him. He what? He wiped up a hooker. Yeah. It's this stuff. I've never heard of this product. Recall announcement, Neptune resources. Yep. Elixir warning. Don't take it. Okay. What is it? I don't know. That's the one I was telling you is a gas station. Yeah. That's the one I was telling you as a gas station. T and that's a team. Never heard of it. And it was on the list with Kratum and the back and gas station. Bonnour pills. Oh, that's fine. Now, whatever the that Kratum stuff is fucking sketchy. Yeah. It's like that pink cocaine where they're just like it's just literally an everything bagel of drugs. Antidepressant. Oh. An antidepressant. An interesting. Interesting sold on the brand name stab long Tain Tatin all and coaxle among others a typical Tricyclic antidepressant which uses mainly in the treatment of major depressive disorder Although it may be used to treat anxiety asthma and irritable bowels syndrome. Oh you fart in a lot have some heroin Fucking cast agent heroin so this stuff. Oh, it's an opioid agonist With opioid agonist effects. What does that mean? For the elder 49 hours Jesus Louise's so people just drinking this stuff and gas station gas station heroin here are eight things to know god This is a new thing They have pills too Describe before it became available as gas station heroin Tain to Neptune Tionneptine was prescribed to treat depression and dozens of countries now US poison control centers are reporting a dramatic spike in cases Involving it a drug that isn't FDA approved and one that authorities warn possess possesses overdose and dependency risk Well that cratum stuff definitely has overdose. Yeah, and dependency issues I have a buddy of mine who's in treatment. He's in recovery and he was taking cratum and They were actually they had this one company and it's in pills and he gives me some So what does it do years ago? You get great, you know, it's it's great for pain relief and and when you have it in low doses It actually acts as a stimulant and higher doses does different things and so I try it. I was like wow this stuff's weird This is interesting. Well, it's a high. It's a weird high. It's interesting Go fast. No, it's not much. It's like it's like a little pick me up for like a couple of pills and so then I go He tells me takes it before he works out. I go how many you take? He's like I take 10 What I go you take 10 I go okay? What's that like? Well, I'll try 10 so I take 10 What I was high as a kite. I was like you are not in recovery You are high this isn't coffee because two was like a mild stimulant. I was like oh, this is interesting 10 was like but it was interesting because I didn't lose any motor control function So I worked out when I took the 10 and I went and hit the back I was like that that way. I'll know like if my motor functions off not at all nothing was off So hand-eye coordination was perfect everything was the same no It wasn't drunk. It wasn't high where you like oh man. I'm fucking hot It was like what is this some completely different pathway But didn't affect my motor skills which I thought was really interesting Because like I worked out total but I was like I am high as a kite and I called him I'm like bro you are not in recovery. I'm like you are high. Yeah, that's so weird. You're so high. This is so It's like I worked out total but I was like I am high as a guy and I called him. I'm like bro You are not in recovery. I'm like you are high. Yeah, that's so weird. You're so high. This is so whatever that is I don't know what the dose was with ten of these fucking pills. It was I was really high I did with that I had somebody gave me a six zine as that's in yeah, they can get me a six I was drunk driving dude. I had the pullover be like just calm down I like cuz they thought it'd be funny I'm like putting I don't feel anything as I'm walking. I'm like That's interesting. He felt like you lost your motor. I do I would if everyone in in AA didn't do zines or zines I would say relapse. That's how how like all over the place. I felt when I took this that's a big jump I'm a six yeah, yeah bro Lucy's have 12s and there's a cunt. This is a What was this one here? This might be an eight? Was it 12 one 12 no? No, I mean am I gonna get really is it tobacco just tobacco? It's just nicotine straight and 18 but here's the there's a guy called Pablo and they have a 50 Here's a 12 and we'll pop a 12 now. Let's go you're gonna pop a 12. That's fucking go Do I'll be throwing up in the corner? I might get hiccups. I'm not gonna throw up but There's a company called Pablo's that have a fifth three or anything. No, no, you don't know pussy three I'm not pussy. Oh, I might have three. No, he's these are three's these are this is a company called athletic nicotine These are great. This is the perfect amount in my opinion to like to stimulate your mind like before writing before you go on stage I do this You tell me no, you tell me I'm not scared. Okay, so I'm not just stand up drooling by the end of this You'll be fine. He'll be fine that drug. I was looking up to you and Epstein is also sold as a new tropics Could be very careful with that. Oh interesting Anti-depressiveness in the same way when they were selling it in France They said they didn't know how it worked any depressed and linked because it's not SSRI Met it as well as overdosing it can be very bad Hmm, and it's sold as a sodium so like in tablet form too. Whoa. Be careful. Yeah, that sounds bad Cal and found out that that company That Kevin James recommended You know that company Trinity gold Trinity gold has a seat of benefit in it and two other pain relievers that are banned Yeah, Alan made a big video about it because he he contacted me what says this is interesting Kevin James told me about it because Chris Wiedman told him about it Chris Wiedman UFC fighter said I'm using this. It's great. My joints feel great and it's all natural I need joint stuff. Yeah, don't not don't take this stuff Trinity gold contains scroll up Sorry, we're that hidden drug ingredients food and drug administration is advising consumers Not to purchase or use Trinity gold a product promoted and sold for joint and muscle pain FDA laboratory analysis confirmed the Trinity gold contains a seat of minifin die-cloe die-cloe fenac and Fennel Buta zone so die-cloe fenac and fennel blute buta zone are banned and They're fucking very dangerous So here it is die-cloe fenac is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory may cause decreased use of cardiovascular events such as Excuse me increased risk of cardiovascular events such as heart attack and stroke as well as serious gastrointestinal damage including bleeding ulceration and fatal Preferate preparation of Perforation of the stomach and intestines the hidden drug ingredients may also interact with other medications and Significantly increase the risk of adverse events particularly when consumers use multiple nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory containing products So fen buta-lazon buta fembuta zone fennel fennel buta zone is another Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory that was discontinued for human use United States due to the risk of serious and life-threatening injuries most serious and life-threatening injury associated with fennel buta zone treatment is bone marrow toxicity Oh my gosh The body does not produce enough red blood cells white blood cells and or platelets certain types of bone marrow toxicity are Reverse of a however in rare circumstances it can lead to death and And so why would you take this so Chris Wiedmann was under the impression that all the stuff in this was natural He got it from this other guy the guy who manufactures it and he's in business with this guy So Chris is now doing independence studies on his own to try to send other versions of it to the lab The guy apparently is saying that he thinks someone sabotaged his product By putting shit in it and then getting it to the FDA and having the FDA test it but Another possibility is that this guy is a piece of shit putting stuff in there to get you so results It'll be resolved. The will find out but in the meantime Kevin James who was taking it. I you know, as soon as Brian texted me I texted Kevin I go hey that stuff you're talking about look. This is what's in there It's like holy shit I feel bad for fighters because that probably happens more than we probably know where they Take a supplement they've been told it's fine and then they that doesn't happen and then they get popped for steroids or for that So that's a awful. Yeah, it's terrible especially when you know like Khalil round tree It was DHEA which isn't even a performance enhancing supplement It's just a just a natural supplement and it but it's banned So he got popped for that and he turned himself in because he turned he found out that the substance was in a supplement They were giving him and he was like hey fucking idiots. It's it's bad So he only got a temporary ban. It was only a couple of months because it was clear that a It was not going to have a performance enhancing effect and b he was very transparent and in fact he reported it But there's a lot of guys to get popped because they'll buy some shit from you know GNC and they think it's you know, oh it's fucking muscle builder But me while the steroids in those things it's crazy. I feel so bad for those guys When we were first making alpha brain we were making it. You know you have what happens is You have a bunch of ingredients you have a proprietary blend that is your Supplement whatever you're making and so all these ingredients in alpha brain were shown to enhance cognitive function And so we combined them. We did a bunch of different versions of it came out with one Double blind placebo control tested at the Boston Center for memory and finds out where we spent a lot of money to make sure This is legit right, but the company that was making it makes a bunch of other shit too And so we started doing third-party testing of our own product We're finding vitamins in there and creatine shit. That's not supposed to be in there That was just in there because they didn't clean the vats Yeah, so they're making steroids in one thing and then they clean it out and then they're making gas station dick pills The next one they're not cleaning them. That's my girlfriend. She Dana has a peniology So she can't even go anywhere near that stuff and even if they cook they can't cook it somewhere else because you never know how Grying the plate is or whatever they're cooking on that the peanut out is so dangerous They don't even let people eat peanuts on planes anymore because the dust from eating peanuts gets in the air and people can get sick Do you can you believe that you so I remember when they allowed smoking on a plane? Oh, yeah, which is hilarious because That kind of gets into with the COVID stuff like it like the plane has the greatest Air air filter system out there so you could literally smoke in the front row and like it didn't affect really far No, no I remember being stuck in the back because that was the only place I can get a seat was in the smoking section back when people did smoke on planes It wasn't the back. Yeah, it was in the back. The back was a smoking section where the toilet was so you'd smell shit and cigarettes entire flight Yeah, no that that thing didn't work That mean, maybe the ventilation systems weren't as good back then But there was smoke everywhere back there See even get a photo of the smoking section on an airplane in like the 1980s. I remember I was playing the club called riddles in Chicago Just outside. It's like uh, I forget what the city outside Chicago, but it was one of the last places that you could still smoke inside And the stage was so high so you would literally be like in the smoke So here's people smoking on an airplane. It's so crazy dude Like when they always announced this is a non-smoking flight like where are the smoking flights? I remember we get in planes even in the 90s and there were still ashtrays in them That is ashtrays in the crowd Time traveler. I'm a fucking time traveler That's all Joe dad. Look at all these people smoking crazy smoking section of a plane It looks fairly smoke-free. They probably had some ventilation back then. So this is 84 in Miami Is this when they were this guy smoking and their interview in a model playing is this when they were trying to ban it? Yeah, probably this looks like a conversation If you're asking people about what they think when do they ban it when they ban in flight smoking Hmm, let's take guess. I'm gonna say 94 What do you say? I think it's way before that 1987 yeah, so seven years congressional action 1987 led to a ban on in-flight smoking and 88 airlines Basie United States ban smoking on domestic flights of less than two hours So more than two hours you could smoke which was extended to domestic flights of less than six hours in 1990 and to all domestic and international flights in 2000 International flights 2000 pilots were allowed to continue smoking after the 1990 ban due to concerns over potential flight safety issues caused by nicotine withdrawal Smokers yo Prohibition Land the play yeah, give them give them a fucking patch the US federal aviation administration Regulations mandate that functioning ashtrays be conspicuously located on the doors of all airplane bathrooms This is because there must be a safe place to dispose of a lit cigarette of someone violates the no smoking rule That's why they're there 1990 air Canada adopted non-smoking policy on all its routes 94 Canada was the first country to ban smoking on all flights operated by Canadian carriers which also covered charter flights But not foreign airlines flying to Canada Wow So basically 2000s they wrapped it all up Which I'm happy about Yeah, still smoking restaurants then Wow, I remember the Addison improv He's still have smoking and we'd come from LA In the early days the commish door they had smoking that's crazy the 90s you could smoke in doors I remember Drew Carey of all people Barney's Beanery they put a ban on smoking and all restaurants and bars in Los Angeles and Drew Carey was protesting it and The idea is that not I know right he was one of the people The idea was that like you're gonna kill the business and you're gonna also Freedom like people know that you can smoke there if you don't want to go to the place Smokey don't go there. Yeah, but the thing you have to think about is but now you can smoke we didn't there 1988 reason smoking Drew Carey yeah I remember Drew Carey was like a outspoken guy about all this Is that's massive Barney's right any smoking? He's smoking at Barney's Beanery. I guess he was a smoker. I didn't know he was smoker Yeah, but that'll make Terry and show up, but it's all they were like hey, you know We've always smoked don't take away our freedom, but the thing you have to take in consideration is waitresses and bartenders Yeah, those people die from lung cancer because of secondhand smoke because secondhand if you're only breathing in smoke The whole time. Yeah, do you remember that gig we did in Toronto? The oh, yeah weed gig yeah, I call it guerla in the mist because You can't see anybody in the crowd. You see image like I just black figures moving dark shady figures moving in this in this Tire room was filled with weed smoke to the point where you literally could barely see like you weren't breathing air You're breathing weed smoke you were contact height the minute your foot hit the stage You were bonkers guys who didn't smoke pot would go there. I don't think you were smoking pot No, guys who didn't smoke pot would go there and be obliterated like by the time they did their set They couldn't remember their jokes. They were confused and anxious and fucking scared Toronto's got a great comedy scene right now. I just did a gig up there and those it reminded me a lot of your club Dude those kids don't care bro. They'll say everything to anybody all the time. I'm like how is this possible? Well, I think Canada is experiencing a lot of People that are rebelling against the the tyrannical government the government is so bad now in Canada. You can't post links to stories So they've they did it in a very sneaky way saying that these social media companies have to compensate The media outlets that have the thing but the thing is it's like a lot of them are just links You can't even post a link to a story in the New York Times On to anybody okay with that. How are how are people in the far far left? Right the progressive left? Which is like the last I'd say like 10% of the population right how are they okay with? With information being censored like why would you even no matter what your stance is I think you want to date away They didn't a sneaky way saying that this is financially unfair to these media corporations who are suffering I mean that is true like there's the reason why they have to make these horrible clickbait ads and the reason why editors put clickbait stories and headlines is Because they just need people to click on the links. They're fucking starving. They're all going under the LA Times As far to bunch people people the newspapers are barely hanging in so my question you is like you don't think it has anything to do It's censoring No, no, it does for sure. This is my point my point was the premise of it seemed reasonable Oh more people need to go to Canada times wherever fuck it is to get their their information They shouldn't be going to Twitter or Facebook and so to do make people go to these websites to get their news We're gonna stop all of the The ability to take these things and post them But what you're really doing is you're stopping awareness. Yes Because people aren't gonna be able to filter out all you do like back in the day when we just read newspapers You had to be a fucking real nut to get into the Kennedy assassination Right you got to be a real nut you had to be reading books. Yes, you don't really get into meeting in basements Ad There was no internet so it didn't exist so you would have to get a physical newspaper to read it and most people only read the stuff in the beginning of the sports page So you read the first couple of pages see if you're gonna die are we gonna die? What's going on Saudi Arabia? Let's go on Yemen and then once you get past that you get to the sports and you read the comics or whatever and That was why we were so uninformed we were grossly uninformed because most people are naive right very and now Most of the news I get is from links most of the news I get is You'll send me a link someone else to Alex Jones will send me something someone send me something You know Michael Malice will send me something I get I get stuff from Dave Smith I get stuff resources. Yes I get stuff from people sending me something and then I go to Twitter And I find things and I send it to them Twitter's well send each other stuff and this is Greatly increased people's awareness of things like this This fucking martial law bill that they pass through who fucking would have known about that? Who would have known that the government of decision to make lethal force from the military? Something they can use on citizens of the protest again. There's a long story about how this has maybe been misinterpreted over the last few weeks online This is a report This is the this is the martial law thing. Mm-hmm. It's been a thing I guess originally since 2007 it was taken down offline for a while then reposted and that's why they're saying that This is they call it a data void well It says a reissued department of defense directive that documents procedures Around when there is potential use of lethal force against Americans subset of these rumors alleged directive to be suspiciously timed with the coming election. Yeah kind of Miriad and Evolving rumors rely upon speculation about the motivations behind the change to the DOD directive and perceive differences between this new document and existing documents This sounds a little bit Like they're trying to minimize this And they go to the time when the first when it's this is exactly what I'm saying right? But the bottom line is this is for the first time in history Where they have pushed this directive and it is happening during an election and it is a thing where they're now saying you can use lethal force On protesters so all these things you're trying to gaslight people and thinking this is not a big deal This is a gigantic deal This is a huge deal and like this kind of fits into my whole belief about what the the alleged kidnapping of the the the Michigan governor which turned out to be a bunch of I saw the funniest meme and our he was like what's your man? Oh, yeah Autistic fuck right It was so funny and then you get into so they took that guy who's running that FBI Program and moved him over to January 6 And he was in charge of that. Yes. So it's like I personally believe you go Sam What do you think that's all about? I think those two events were to try to drum up support for? For the homeland security opening up a department of domestic terrorism in which they can label a US citizen a domestic terrorist which means all your civil rights go away right and That's a big movement right now within the government to be able to take away your civil rights Which if there are domestic terrorists we should have a movement to stop domestic terrorism But when you have agent provocateurs who in infiltrate these organizations and then turn the military izations so that they can go in and shut these protest organizations down That's when things get dirty and that seems like that's what happened during the pushing the in the the the the whatever event they want to happen kind of convince you guys you may Maybe we should go try do this. Yes governors cause it's some crazy 12 out of the 14 people We're working with the FBI 12 out of 14 these two losers who got roped into it And then there's that kid who the 19 year old kid who they talked into detonating that fake bomb You know that kid yeah, I think I believe that was in Dallas So they take this young stupid kid and they Fucking radicalize him and then they give him a cell phone and tell him press these buttons and that bomb will go off They give him the fake bomb bomb as a work. He does it and they're like we gotcha. Yeah, we use your idea Yeah, 100% do you guys remember that really weird case that happened either either Utah or New Mexico where they found that compound and then they were like they basically discovered that According to the guy running the compound that they were training school shooters. Well, yeah No, yes, and then the case just got dismissed and sent away and it's the weirdest thing I've ever seen in my life dude that they were training school shooters here What was this how long ago was this this was like a couple of years ago like three or four years ago? So this place was trained New Mexico compound suspects were training children for school shootings prosecutors say 2018 what and then they just dismissed the case or the case just went away the five suspects accused of abusing 11 children at a New Mexico compound were training them to commit school shootings Prosecutors said Wednesday the defendants were to be released from custody There's substantial likelihood defendant may commit new crimes due to his planning and preparation for future school shootings the court Documents said the filings did not provide further details about the alleged training the makeshift compound appeared to have a shooting Range on the property and loaded firearms were found on the property authority said a foster parent and one of the children's Also said the defendant had trained the child in the use of assault rifle in preparation for future school shootings Whoa and so what happened with this? The case gets like either dismissed or something like that. It's really weird. It's really weird But you get into it. It's an Imam was a part of this scroll up a little bit um Well, hodge his father Imam Suraj Well, hodge. I said hodge dude if you can't say it. I can't say New York Imam has Said he has no knowledge of the alleged training said spokesperson spokesman Imam Al hodge to leave Abdul Rashid Imam was the first Muslim to offer an opening prayer before the US House of Representatives. Oh, how convenient The Muslim alliance in North American Whoops, no, thanks. The Muslim alliance in North America said is also a character witness for a convicted 1993 World Trade Center bombing mastermind Omar Abdell Rahman Jesus Christ This is what I'm telling you dude Everything is an intelligence trick dude. Well, there's certainly a lot of intelligence tricks And that's that's something that people are super reluctant to admit to despite the overwhelming amount of evidence But if you go how you doing with that three, you're right? I took it out already. You took it out. I was good It was much better mild as mild. I can I like as I want to do it. I like this spark she up a little bit. Yeah I like it. I like a little cigar being on then Hmm here and then my brother loves cigars and my grandfather loves cigars I just never got into it the only time I ever smoked anything was if I was at a bar in a hot chick started smoking cigarettes That's that would be my inn. Oh, yeah, got a sick and then I'll just start slinging right I never really got in game. Yeah Yeah, cigarettes are a wild one because if someone's willing to smoke cigarettes, I probably want to do a lot of wild things Yeah, it is weird just like a thing But it is one thing I'm not into like women could almost do anything and I find it hot Smoking is like one. I'm just not into it's bad choices federal judge federal jury convicts for New Mexico Compiled defendants in connection with kidnapping and terrorism. Is this the same one? Wow kidnapping and terrorism. Oh Yeah, according to evidence protect presented at trial and other publicity available Court records or publicly available court records in December Saraj Wahaj Unlawfully abducted his three-year-old son from his wife in Alabama. La La atville Levitt level Laval I Think that sounds right and the defendants had formed the belief that the child was her son and was possessed by demons The group took the child to New Mexico Deprobing him of his medication and the loving care of his mother and subjected him to the exhausting regiment of daily spiritual Exorcisms The child died fewer than two weeks after arriving New Mexico before investigators say any not so this is a lot of wild shit going on over this place arm the leaven firearms including AR 15 bush master assault rifle high capacity magazines and hundreds of rounds of ammunition The group conducted weapons and tactical training and required some of the children to do so as well the group conducted the training with the intent to face the nation and kill those who refuse to believe as they did They spoke of waging jihad and becoming martyrs Oh fun. I wonder how many of them have snuck in through the border kids these poor kids man born into world a shit. Oh Yeah, I'm a socks. Oh, yeah, one lottery. We won the lottery. Yeah, we certainly did. It's crazy to me It is crazy And this is just like but you know this is my whole day always you know going back to the lizard people stuff at the beginning was like If there wasn't this apex predator class Like out there manipulating energy and manipulating people like how much chaos would be happening in the world You know, right there always seems to be like if you dig deeper Okay, there's an intelligence agent somewhere involved in that and well whenever you have money That's I mean this is back from war as a racket a smelly but yeah thing that he wrote in the 1930s This is a guy who was a famous general and after was all over he realized like his entire all his years of service They approached him to do assassination and he said no, I won't do it like corporations Wanted to assassinate. I think it was FDR I'm not quite sure which the president was but they approached him about basically Doing a banker cool on the government and he said he wouldn't do it Jesus Christ How crazy is that this has been a few of those organized over the years which is fucking terrifying But this is just like what happens whenever people are in power especially unchecked power and you know this whole term the deep state people want to think of that as conspiracy theory Okay, you have elected officials elected officials have to get elected But the people that run intelligence agencies don't have to get elected and they have Massive access to money and power and power and they don't want to leave that position The business plot called the Wall Street push Putch I say that put Putsch CH push whatever you you attempt is good to me Okay, the white out political conspiracy in 1933 in the United States to overthrow the government president Franklin D. Rolt Roseville and install Smetley Butler as dictator Butler retired Marine Corps major general Testified under oath that wealthy businessmen were plotting to create a fascist veterans organization with him as its leader and use it as a coup d'etat To overthrow Roosevelt in 1934 Butler testified under oath before the United States House of Representatives special committee on Un-American activities the McCormick Dickinson Dix-Dine what an unfortunate name Committee on these revelations although no one was prosecuted the Congressional Committee final report said there is no question That these attempts were discussed were planned and might have been placed in execution When and if the financial backers deemed it expedient holy fuck man Holy fuck right Yeah, and it's so crazy to me because like just hearing that is like if you actually study FDR Like he very much was a Wall Street puppet like he very much was in there Doing their bidding and he had a lot like all this crazy stuff with Pearl Harbor Connections the Hitler all this crazy stuff that people never hear about and it's it's it's super interesting to me that When he's seen as a puppet of Wall Street, they're also trying to take him out and also if you think back then There was no Access to information so they could do all this stuff like the assassination of Kennedy They could do all this stuff and completely cover it up There was no one had a chance no one had a chance and anybody opened their mouth was dead Anybody that opened their mouth wind up dying. It's a suspicious circumstance. Well. Yeah So I just didn't episode with a guy he's called the dark journalist that's where he goes by and he mind blown He was telling me like yeah all the people that you think were involved in The assassination of JFK they were involved the intelligence agency multiple toage and agencies The you know the the the Federal Reserve you know a bunch of people one of the groups that I never heard of was basically the space program like the people who ran the space program of that time were involved in it because because Kennedy wanted to share all the information they had on like UFOs and Technologies with the Russians because he didn't want the Russians to think if they saw something weird in the sky It was the US and like some kind of weird nuclear Well, yeah, so and you think about back then who was involved in the space station say with me Nazis who were brought over, you know, we discussed last time as operation paper clip. Yeah, I don't think they're not These loss I think they just krypt walked over here and suddenly lost But we took all the good ones that were engineers and scientists But I don't rush it took the other ones the only pushback I have on that dude is that if you're like if it's some kind of thing Where we're sneaking them over they're bringing them over Like nobody changes their names like everybody didn't have to sneak them over They were brought under the protection of the United States government and no one could know if they were Nazis There was no information. Yeah, but I'm gone head his name and he was like on trial Everyone's like Well, it does not see over here Simon Weithens thought Simon Weithens thought center said that if von Braun was alive today They would charge him with crimes against humanity. Yeah, they hung the five slip well does not see over here Simon we didn't call Simon we didn't call senator said that if on brawn was live today they would charge him with crimes against humanity yeah they hung the five slowest jews in the rocket factory in berlin to motivate people to work harder it's so crazy so they're all notsies so if you think about the notsies hated the Russians and he wanted to share all this information with the Russians and they did not like that at all and here's the craziest thing i was like oh what i want to tell joe here's the craziest thing i've had people on my show talking about this like there is a belief out there that they had the head of the the the power pyramid of intelligence agencies is nasa because if you think about this it's the one thing that everybody wants to work together on like we're possibly in some we're having this weird kind of nuclear standoff with Russians but somehow some way we're all working on a space station together that in an ark are the two things where everyone like puts their differences aside we're like let's all work together and it's like there is this real belief that the head of the snake of the intelligence agencies which is which is like uh massage cia my six is nasa space station is the nasa organization yeah the thing that would make that plausible is if the knowledge of alien life is absolute absolute real and they have to protect that information yeah i'm getting out yeah i mean it's interesting to me because it's a one thing everybody works on even i and arkas like they're all in on this treaty and then everyone's claiming a piece of an arkas and they all just work together even though they don't want to get even though they may not get along in every what do you think about all that talk of direct energy weapons in an arkas and all that shit here we go look at he had to take a breath a 100 percent like you know Sam who runs the world who runs the world Sam hand the god sorcerers okay i'm not even kidding and it's sorcerers run the world we're battering sorcery and at the highest levels all this is my honest opinion all the new tack next generation weaponry is just hard wired mysticism dude it's like they've been working on the shit for years and years and years and years and you like not just like years we're talking centuries if not thousands of years and you take a look at weather manipulation direct energy weapons this reading my my mind they can wipe your your whole mind of like thoughts it's all sorcery dude we are literally in a time where like holly berries character in marvel universe that we're doing that stuff uh doctor strange stuff i mean we're doing all that stuff that we think is amazing in marvel comics our government has that technology what what ela musk puts out these these robots like yeah how are you doing i think that's the flip phone of robots right now what DARPA has is 40 50 years in the future well we can see what so the thing about DARPA is DARPA um like Boston dynamics Boston dynamics publicly traded company yeah and then they they sh is it i think it is um they they but the thing is they show all their innovations and they show all the the new stuff they're working on but the stuff that they're working on keeps getting better and better and better to the point where like when are they going to stop showing us because like they have i think robots that do like those ninja courses now yeah she knows yeah they do backflips they can run like cheetahs yeah i think that's the slow roll out so we get used to i think what the DARPA has the real stuff is way beyond that and they slow roll it out to us over time i believe that their stuff is what i believe most of the UFO stuff is yeah 100 like you know you look at area 51 they're like oh look at this it's a crazy base that's not even the base that that is the smoke screen well area s4 is that everybody mountain yeah that's where bobble is our claims he was working on back engineering the flying saucers i said a crazy thing about bobble is our was there like he got busted running a hooker fucking uh brothel yeah i think he did isn't it crazy yeah well boy within the biggest he's a wild boy well also this is a guy that put a jet engine the back of his Honda you know he was kind of a crazy person before you mean he was a young man that's why they brought him over allegedly to area s4 in the first place because like they the way science is supposed to work is you get a bunch of people and they collaborate on something and you write papers so that other scientists can review it and find out if it's correct yeah the way they were doing it everything was compartmentalized because it was so top secret they couldn't let other other science doing it and other scientists work on it and so because of that they weren't making any progress so what they would have to do is bring in completely new scientists every few new eyes with new eyes and go what do you think of this and they didn't even tell them what it is well lizar said i had dinner with lizar he's very compelling me and Andrew Schultz had dinner with uh lizar and Jeremy corbell and uh lizar is very compelling and what what he essentially was saying was that when he got there they showed him this thing and it had an american flax sticker on it and he was like oh that makes sense it's ours so this thing that people keep saying is one of ours and then as he starts examining this thing you realize like this doesn't have any seams like this thing is like 3d printed of some unknown alloy there's no controls inside of it it's designed for something that's like three feet tall like what the fuck is going on and then there's some reactor in there that has an element that's a completely theoretical element in a stable form that the bombarding with radiation that manipulates gravity yeah and so he's they're trying to they're telling him like tell us how this works it's like what so what's that called when you'd go back engineering back engineering yeah yeah so that was what his job was back engineering it but when he was doing this he was on a completely top secret level of information to the point where when you're at that level they have to monitor every they bug your house they monitor your phone yeah calls everything so he couldn't even tell us why what he's doing so the way it works is they fly you out of vegas so they give you a call 11 p.m. go to vegas go to the airport you got to go so he tells wife I got to go to work so like what if you go to work at 11 o'clock at night what are you doing so I got to work and so she was like fuck this dude he's cheating on me I'm gonna cheat so she starts banging her flight her flight instructor she's taking flight lessons she bangs that she starts banging this guy and so because the lazzar would be an emotionally unstable position if his wife is having an affair he loses his top secret clearance and they have to relieve him he can't work there anymore so then he starts he's telling his friends now he's like you can't believe what I've been working on I want to show you and every Wednesday they have this area where you can go to this plateau and you could look out at area s4 and you could see in the sky then piloting these crafts so he goes there with friends on multiple occasions and gets arrested and once he gets arrested then he realized I'm like they might fucking kill me yeah I'm gonna come clean and I'm gonna tell my story so then he contacts George Knapp who's an investigative journalist at a of Las Vegas and the first ones that he does the first interview does he's got his face blacked out you can't see him and then he's like you know what to save my life I probably should be like full public with this it might be the only way they don't fucking kill me so they were threatening him and you know very mysterious breaking into his house very creepy mysterious shit so then he tells the whole story hasn't varied from that story at all in more than 30 years what do you think of disclosure do you think there's some bad agents in it I think and I think this sometimes and people come in and talk to me about it I think they probably use people like me as a mouth piece to spread bullshit Bill Cooper thought that he thought that they gave him documents so he would go out and tell people yeah I bet they do that's the best way to hide something the way you hide something is he connect it with a bunch of stupid shit like you connected to Bigfoot you connected to like you know skin walk or ranch you make you seem cookie and then people just dismiss it yeah dismiss all of it and I think that's the best way to hide a drone program best way to hide a drone program is say you know we are in possession of things that are not of this world yeah like wow really yes and there's these top secret organizations and they want to stay top secret but as you notice with all this disclosure nothing really gets out it's just talk yes and so this is what gives me like all my spidey senses go off like I've smelled bullshit nothing's really happening right right nothing's happening and Jeremy Corbel's convinced that new disclosures are right around the corner because he's balls deep in a stock my go okay maybe maybe but I'm not seeing anything what I'm seeing is a bunch of people talking about these things and that doesn't mean anything to me they're interesting I'll keep you having them come on I'll keep talking to people it's interesting do you think they give people information hoping they'll put it out 100% I think there's also people that are still in the government that say they're whistle blowers and they go out and they spread false false information I have a friend of mine's named Trevor who he told the story on my show about his dad worked at this like in Stu and Chicago and his dad was just like a handyman at the place he'd fix stuff right and well one day gets a call to a level that he's never been before and he goes okay I'm going down so he goes all the way down he gets in it's like a weird weird like just a weird floor it's like weird energy he starts walking down the hall he looks in there's like animal experiments going on his dad tells him this and his dad tells him this way later on like he's does how much time left in his life at this point so he tells him this story and it's um he says he sees some weird stuff with like monkeys going on a weird thing with horse in this thing so he keeps walking like what is going on here he goes far enough right and he sees this there's just this room with this giant craft and he's like in all of this craft and he and he Trevor's dad tells him I see something in there and it's like gray I don't know what it is and then all of a sudden this tiny green thing is like walking on the outside of this craft and he goes what the fuck is that something bang guns are on him it's security what are you doing here he's like I just work here I was sent down here to to just fix something like get out of here and like what are we going to do with him so he says that he has to agree never to tell anybody anything right but as his dad is dad tells tells Trevor every time he travels he'll go to a random country somewhere he'll get pulled in security he gets put in a room and these men in black come out and sit down and go did you tell anybody did you tell anybody and he's like I haven't told anybody anything and this would happen to him multiple times and Trevor said his dad's not that creative never never would come up with crazy stuff like this told him towards the end of his life when it was coming to an end so my question is do they have him come down hoping that he's he'll he'll start talking about this with people because part of it will be not you know if it's real it's probably incompetence it's probably something competent person told them to go down there some arrogant incompetent person that thought they had complete control over the scenario and they needed someone to go down there and do something just set them down there so maybe they trusted him maybe but it's also like if he's working on anything top secret they're listening to all his phone calls like he wasn't he was like he was like a maintenance guy that worked up stairs guarantee after that they listen to all they knew where he'd travel and they'd chill up with these men in black but they probably listened to everything he did too just to make sure that he wasn't flapping his gums so this whole thing with the men in black too this there's this belief right now that maybe it's like because you see videos of them walking through walls not that they're just what they're just astral projections where like have you ever seen videos where men in black just kind of show up anywhere walk through no where you get in these videos dude the street the street the street Twitter I mean I get sent all this stuff they might be bullshit it's possible or or they're it's like well if you were going to be an alien and you're going to blend in with human beings dressing up in a suit would be the best way to do it be a person to suit where sunglasses they don't see your eyes and just you know move around like a normal person if you can come here from another planet you don't think you can disguise yourself as a different life form possibly of course do you think aliens are from other plants I think they might be angels and demons um I'm not opposed to that idea I think there's probably well there's definitely dimensions that we don't like Brian Cox was here yesterday as I was saying and he was trying explained to be quantum computing and how quickly quantum computing works like that a problem that would literally take the entire amount of time that the earth has existed to solve why regular computer can be solved in a second by a quantum computer and this quantum computer is literally somehow another accessing other universes to come to its conclusion to do these calculations it's not it's not only operating in this universe it's operating in other dimensions simultaneously and instantaneously the way he said it was like and by the way this is Brian Cox who's like you know like a serious physicist yeah you know he's a professor he's a genius and yeah and he's literally explaining the mechanisms of quantum computing and explaining that quantum computing even though they can't even figure out how to program it yet is already showing that wormholes are possible that's so crazy so there's wormholes are being used somehow in the quantum computing I'm sure I'm butchering this Brian if you're listening I'm sorry I am one of my favorite things to do on YouTube I go down weird rabbit holes like I like the watch weird show on YouTube I love watching black people get the haircut I fucking love that shit I don't know why it's just entertaining but one of my favorite things to do is watch a long form math oh boy yeah I don't know why because it's like I like watching an alien language yeah so like I watched this one video where was like 17 lines of math and then they get to the inclusion and all I wrote was I've never done this in my real life ever in my life I've never had to use any of this stuff because it's so smart right and I love to just like be like this isn't how I use them real life well all that is rudimentary in comparison to this quantum computing idea and the quantum what's fast at me what the quantum computing idea is that if there are is this theory of many worlds so if this theory is accurate and there are an infinite number of universes would say that it's entirely within the realm of possibility if you think of that being a real thing that something can transport itself from those other dimensions to where we are so it might not be a metal craft that comes from Venus it might not be something so simple like that's probably too simple for our little our stupid little minds might put it into that category right and also that might be how they present themselves to us to make themselves seem at least tangible yeah instead of what they really are which is probably outside of our ability to grasp our understanding yeah minds can't do so whatever these things are I bet they're from multiple sources I bet there are actual physical things that come from somewhere but do they come from other planets do they come from other dimensions is it both are some of them interstellar travelers and some of them interdimensional travelers maybe I mean I think we're basically ants where these like very rudimentary things that as far as we know we're the most complex thing in the universe and I think if you scale that this is one of things that Brian and I were talking about but if you take artificial intelligence and quantum computing and you imagine a sentient life form that relies on quantum computing instead of very good and it has access to like nuclear power plants to power it you essentially create a god you get to the point where something is so powerful that it literally can control all the elements in the known universe and then other have access to other universes and that this this might be what we're dealing with and we might be dealing with these beings that have always been here and they come and go and they observe or they intervene or one of the things that Lazar talked about one of the most bizarre things he found he said they had this very thick document that was all about religion and that essentially what these life forms use us as is containers and he didn't understand what what that meant by that like what is in like containers for what he's like I don't know but they think of us as containers and you would think maybe containers for souls if the souls are real thing and look the concept of the soul has existed forever very unusual for the concept of something to exist for a long time with no basis in reality you know that's why I'm interested in dragons like why is every civilization why do they all have dragons they mentioned dragons in the Bible but sometimes they don't mention dinosaurs well I think because people weren't alive when dinosaurs were alive but I bet they were alive when dragons were alive I bet dragons were real thing and in fact force Galante who say wildlife biologists believes that there's a real possibility that dragons were an actual animal but that if you have an animal that has a bones that are similar like bird bones and something that you know we select how many of them would you find what would you find that's left of that you know most things don't fossilize I think dinosaurs are dragons that's what I think they were well I mean it's possible that there was some form of look birds survived this impact in the eucatan whatever killed the dinosaurs did not kill chickens all right because chickens are literal dinosaurs yeah they're literal dinosaurs you know and if you're ever seen a chicken eat a mouse it's fucking wild they're the most ruthless ferocious little animals raptors birds those are all dot eagles American Eagles a goddamn dinosaur and that's what it is they're dinosaurs that lived and in fact some of the more recent models of what dinosaurs looked like they've updated to add feathers when I was in what is that I just saw it earlier today dinosaurs preserved tail and amber so look at that feathers feathers in a dinosaurs tail so there's a museum in Bozeman Montana and this museum has one side of this raptor they have a velociraptor and on one side of it they have it's like a real size velociraptor and on one size they have it with like dinosaurs skin like we like to think of it but the other side they have this theoretical version of it that's covered in feathers that's probably what dinosaurs had so dinosaurs died during the impact but not all of them the birds lived and they're just smaller the one there was no food okay so a big Tyrannosaurus wreck there's nothing you're going to starve to death those things died off but the little ones lived and it's so possible that something that flew like a pterodactyl like we think of pterodactyls as being like bat wings yes maybe they had feathers maybe that was a gigantic fucking predatory bird and maybe some of those fucking things look like dragons you know maybe maybe the the images that think of all these different cultures ancient medieval Europe um china japan china for sure all of them had dragons you're the dragon there's so many dragons like it might have been a real thing and I think most of them didn't have dragons that spit fire either I think that was like a fucking hell yeah yeah yeah yeah that's a short deal what do you think the alligator is a dinosaur predates the dinosaurs crocodiles crocodilian species predate dinosaurs really yeah like so looks the what's the yeah there was there was crocodiles and crocodile species enormous ones by the way that predated the dinosaur and I think modern alligators they go back they go back really you know sharks predate trees really predate trees there was sharks on earth before they were trees maybe we were all underwater for a long time well life definitely existed underwater a long acid crocodiles are older than trees also Jesus Christ damn that's crazy yeah so those are dinosaurs when you see a giant Nile crocodile those are fucking dinosaurs that's a type of reptile they scare me they should I I draw you know I'll be in Florida will be driving those show there'll be like a dead crocodile ran aside I'm like mostly in Florida they're all the same to me they scare the shit out of me dude they should they're fucking people walking their dogs and they just come up and grab them and the guy jumps in there and like tries to save the dog like brother people don't give a fuck yeah they're not that wise that's a one of the crazy stories I heard this guy was running from the cops gets to a bridge jumps off the bridge right onto an alligator alligator eats them no way well how about that guy who tried to save the shark do you see that video where he tries to save the shark on the beach and he dragged to the end and the shark turns around and kills him oh god you watch that video if you want to see it dude I almost yeah dude that one video in Egypt where they're at a resort and this kid is swimming and he's screaming for his father as he's getting slaughtered oh no I can't watch oh he's screaming papa papa he's just getting fucking murdered by the shark whoa whoa whoa you see his legs go up in the air so the water turned red still tries to scream yeah fuck sharks what would you do if that was your kid what can you do you can't help them there's nothing you can do the kids hundreds of yards into the water by the time you get there he's already dead yeah and you're going to be dead too most likely it's a feeding frenzy at this point you go out there it's a suicide mission you can't you just have to live with a nightmare for the rest of your life like that Jamie what do you got what do you holy shit oh don't watch don't watch oh no no no no no no no no no no no no I don't want to see his guy get killed or how about that kid that jumped off his cruise into the water and it was shark filled oh god it's like what are you doing what are you doing well there's a reason why you know it is yeah sadly natural selection the people that have stupid ideas they don't make it and that's always been the case it's getting crazy it's just the it was the world always crazy and the just and just the social media is allowed to see it allow us to see it in real time well it's it's super crazy today because we have more capability right because now we have guns nuclear weapons and you know back in the day it was people were super crazy but they killed everybody with arrows yeah you know and catapults I mean you just listen there's more hands on in a way just think about all the shit that humans did back when there was no written history we did horrific horrible things wiped out the the Mongols killed someone in the neighborhood of during gingas cons lifetime 50 to 70 million people crazy they killed 10% of the population of earth yeah so people have always been more d and a's and like half of the people on planet earth he's just dropping he's just slitting throats and dropping dick oh he's he's dropping dick all over the place taking everybody as a wife air quotes wife this is a wife but it's like humans have always been crazy they're what it's just it's probably less violent now but more capability and more awareness of all the chaos in the world because it makes you sad half the watch all of it and then watching like the parties kind of kind of you know you got these liberals now that are pro-war it's like the weirdest thing ever dude we have to win yeah you have to win and you crane like what are you talking about Russia has nukes they've threatened to use them are you fucking serious like I try to start a chain a change dot org right to get us to help do you crang get their own federal reserve so that they can print their own money and we don't have to send them any more money and I couldn't get anyone to sign it like change that oil it's a have them print their own fake money so they can load up our money why do they need our fake printed up money well it's because it's a big scam it's a big big manufacturer scam and the money is not just going straight to Ukraine it's going to weapons manufacturers yeah and they're giving Ukraine in aid they're giving them tanks and weapons and the craziest one is the Taliban in Afghanistan when we leave we leave behind billions billions of dollars of high-tech war equipment and then they put parades on where they're driving on the street with tanks yeah and black hawks like what so crazy just to leave that all they leave it all they're billions and empower the Taliban with modern weapons these guys that are living in fucking caves goats all day and they all said they have black hawks it's so really that whole area is crazy oh my god you don't even know the half of it i have a buddy who went who served over there multiple deployments in in afghanistan and he told me it's insane it's just the male rape men raping each other and raping boys he said it's fucking rampant it's called man loves thursday yeah that's what they do it ain't just happened on thursday bro bro Brian and I went on a tour we did it with Steve burn and dove david off and they told us about that that like the afghanis they see women for procreation men for pleasure and uh how do you fix that like imagine trying to install a democratic government into a place that as child rape as a normal thing he said that the guys would be they would have parades where guys would have their harem of boys and that the most amount of boys make you look like a pimp and so it was like it was cool to show all the boys that you're fucking and since this is like down the street yeah we're on main streets and then it just becomes generational what direction you do to the next year which is so tragic he said they had this guy who was like this uh mentally handicap guy that was working in this kitchen and they were all take turns raping this guy and he caught him raping this guy and the guy would just take it it's just normal just normal and they did it to each other he said they would go into the barracks and they'll be fucking each other and it's like Jesus Christ the more I you know don't you think that that's probably how human beings behave back in like the Spartan days yeah yeah like the Spartans all fucked each other yeah the the the the taking not taking it if somebody doesn't want it is like a new thing right like way back in the day yeah consent is a brand new westernized it's like sarcasm and consent are just westernized things that most people don't understand and then back in the day was just a like savagery do savagery full on savagery and you're never going to get these like I just had this guy on my shows names Jay Dyer and he came on he was talking about how basically British intelligence made all the the borders of the Middle East like they just created borders like these borders that we see is this Saudi Arabia this is this this is that those were made up by British intelligence they just basically went in based on tribes they said okay here here because most of these people are just tribes like if you study like the history of Saudi Arabia it is so nuts it is so crazy because basically they were just nomads and they discovered oil there so the banking kebolic comes in and goes here's what we're going to do we're going to set up an apparatus to extract this and they just have to have all these terms made it up if you I do I don't want to go too super deep but you read this go holy shit like people I've you know you've got guests on here talking about how the British Empire didn't really end that is the most true shit ever they become bankers they became bankers and really dude I think America and Britain our relationship really is master blaster you know what right where does the big dumb monkey and they just the time like yeah that's yeah that and that's really what's happening man if you study how like the British intelligence infiltrated uh Islam it's like all crazy stuff dude and just and they just they they're everywhere man so you know even when they go in like 9-11 where they're like the Saudis were involved that's really British intelligence well wasn't the whole idea of suicide bombers and jihad wasn't that didn't they do that when the Soviet Union had taken over Afghanistan yeah it did it to try to like fight against it and also demoralize them by getting them all hooked on heroin nobody comes out of Afghanistan the same you go in there try to tame that you just can't do it nobody's tamed it it's all just warlords it's crazy and you see did you ever see the we had Jason ever met on the podcast who was in Nirvana and also in sound garden and then went over to become a special forces soldier after that wow yeah after that and really fucking interesting guy but he said that there's ancient Greek like construction that looks like the parthonon in Afghanistan yeah and this should find some of that stuff they have photographs of this stuff but you can't get archeologists out there to study it because it's too fucking dangerous that's run by the Taliban back to the sorcery dude a lot I think a lot of this war that we see happening is about just erasing our history like That's run by the Taliban back to the sorcery dude a lot I think a lot of this war that we see happening is about just erasing our history Like you remember when the Taliban were just shooting these giant beautiful statues and destroying them raised a race a race a Lot of people think there's something not a lot But some people think that the weapon of mass destruction in In Iraq is a portal. It's not really about a bomb. Yes. So real weapon of mass destruction. Well, they go in where do they go? The first thing they do you ask anybody they go right into the museums they start taking all the old artifacts From everything there's wiping out a stargate So there's a lot of talk like this whole thing with like You know like what are the plans after october 7 all this stuff? I think the old gods are coming back dog I think the old gods want to come back and rain And I think a lot of this is about bringing back like the I don't know No, I'm thinking like the Zoya or asterism and stuff like that if you study Zoya or ask like if you study the weirdest thing If you study like if you study like satchel liberty that's a dude, bro It is a cross dresser and it is a oh, yeah statue liberty is an old old Zoya asterism God called Mithris and you get into if you study it You can even say like the old one at a time first of all Images of ancient Greece and Afghanistan. Let's get those first. I want to lose this Okay, I don't lose this and then we're gonna go to satchel liberty. Okay, so look at this stuff So crazy to the model of what it looked like that's a model what it looked like But they do have some images of the actual rules So ancient Greek ruins in Afghanistan look at that fucking bananas and no archaeology being done Look at this is fucking insanity and the stuff that ever been showed me is actually a little more Even complex photos that he took of these ruins. What about what I can't pronounce say it Look at the tiles and leave these Greek statues. I'm telling you man. This is all from Alexander the Great Okay, now go to statue of liberty. Yeah, I was getting in there. I want to see what the statue of liberty looks like Is it true this statue of liberty? Click on that is Modeled after the Persian god Mithra. Yes, hardly first both the original. No, I don't believe any of these fact checkers anymore But let's let's look at the Statue of liberty giving a good image of the statue of liberty. It's a dude Hmm, it's a drag queen. You sure? Yeah, trust muscles there to like Mithras You see the face right there. That's Mithras. Yeah, I don't want to do that's Mithras. Look at the jaw Yep, it does look a good so if you study like you know who gave a statue of liberty France, right? Right go to photograph of the statue of liberty's face again Scrope make that one them in the center big that does look like a guy looks like a Greek god. Yeah, that's a dude and drag After I'll go to thick the neck is yeah, dude thick neck dude Look at that does look at a guy Look at that one that image to what's up in the top right hand corner. That looks like a guy Look at the arm. It does not look at a feminine arm. Look at the hand old Pagan look at the hands of your asterism God They're coming back. Whoa See if you get a better image of the statue of liberty that one there. It says flicker the middle on the bottom bottom in the middle Yeah, boy that looks like a dude Holy shit, Sam Treably Statue of Liberty is a fucking dude So if you study like back to that image of them posting it there was an image you just had up the But in the bottom. Yeah, the scaffolding look at that That's a guy man So if you see like avatar dude if you study the French Olympics with the arm and I look at the hand That's on a woman's hand. Yeah, dude. That's a thick wrist. Wow Statue of Liberty is a guy Holy shit, man Does he have breasts? Yeah, the sky came on my podcast named Christopher Knowles and he's the breast. There's no breasts. Yeah, statue of liberty is not a breasts Wow So fucking guy Kind of they probably added that later. That's Photoshop. Let me see. I don't see boobs. I see a gut, but that's my pecs See if I'm standing here like this. Yeah, yeah, I definitely have tits. I'm trying Statue of Liberty breasts. Oh, you're gonna get to a weird porn site. Yeah Oh Breastfeeding videos that fat tip right there those ones are different. That's fake. That's a big juicy-titty one That's that she's got silicone Hey, those aren't real look that way look that way to look you're gonna get to a porn site I think it's all right Sam. So if he's bringing this on. Okay. There we go. Sam. You're the fucker man Thank you, buddy. I love you so much. You you've shown me so much love Over the years and I'm so appreciative of you. So thank you. Appreciate you as well. You're awesome And you go hard. Yeah, I appreciate you. I appreciate you. Um, you're special I have a special it's drops and stopping everywhere I might put it on YouTube But I got to beat the shit out of it because we go pretty hard on this But if you go to like Twitter Sam triply you go to Twitter dot com slash Sam triply or you go to rumble rumble Been very nice to me. They featured my grumble. Great rumble rumble rumble on my special free speech platforms That's around Twitter's great to man. I got I do me. I got a three million three million views on one put long time ago But I never get that they're not suppressed anymore And then when you know when Elon took over Twitter I gained like seven million followers and like a couple of us like that. Dude. They suppress the fuck out of me. Yeah I'm suppressed on Instagram. I'm almost positive. Oh, dude. I'm stuck at 19.3 million I know that's a lot, but I'm stuck there for like quite a while 124,000 followers and I've had that for five years. Okay. Can't go above it. I'd opposed get 25 likes Yeah, suppression. It's crazy. And you can also go to sam triply.com. You can also find all my podcasts there I'm my broken simulation conspiracy social club Cash daddies and what's my other one? somebody puck I just can't stop won't stop and Yeah, I got go to my tour dates. I'm torn working on a new hour. All right. I'm very I love you