On December 3rd of last year in Southampton,  England, there was a murder that has come to trial. There was a conviction just the other day  and it's in the headlines in the UK. Typically, it wouldn't be worth spending a ton of time on a  single killing in a foreign country. But this one tells you so much, not just about modern-day  Britain, but about the West and the attitudes that have brought us to where we are now in the  80 years since the end of the Second World War, that it's it's worth recounting in some  detail. So, on the night of December 3rd, 2025, a man called Henry Noak, he's an 18-year-old  university student, was walking back from a bar. He was totally sober. Blood test later showed  that his blood alcohol content was lower than drunk driving. So he was sober. Walking in the  other direction was a man called Victram Digua. It's 23-year-old Brit seek. His family's from  India walking with his brother. Now there was no apparent confrontation between the two. Noak  filmed him on his iPhone for a second. We've seen that tape. And then almost out of nowhere, Digua  pulls out an 8-in long knife and begins stabbing Henry Noak, the 18-year-old college student, and  ultimately kills him. Stabbed him five times, including in the chest, in the heart. Now, it's  worth noting that knife crime in England is famously on the rise. In fact, to such an extent  that knives are difficult for ordinary people to buy in London. Try to buy a set of kitchen knives  next time you're over there. Not so easy. You can do it, but it's heavily regulated. British  citizens are not allowed to carry 8-in long knives. White British citizens are not allowed  to. But Sikhs are because under British law, carrying a knife is allowed because of the  seek religious exemption. Seeks have argued in court and their lobby groups have argued  that they should be allowed to carry knives and so they can't. So again, in modern Britain,  whites are not allowed to carry weapons. Seikhs are. And in this case, a seek used legal weapon  to murder a young white man. What happened next is really the most interesting. So Vickerman  and his brother realize that Henry Noak is badly injured. And so his brother suggests, why  don't we call the police and claim racism? And so that's exactly what his brother did. We have the  call, the actual call. Here's what his brother told police dispatch the night of December 3rd. We  just got attacked racially by some white person, right? Okay. Whereabouts are you? Uh, we're  on Belmont Road. Just out in the street, are you? Sorry. You're just in the street. Uh,  yeah. Literally, I just parked on my car to come home and he's attacked my brother. Now, it's not  clear how long this man has been in the UK. He may have been born there. from his accent. It sounds  like he was, but he's from a family of immigrants. But he's been there long enough to know that in  the West in 2026, racism is the ultimate crime. In fact, it's literally worse than murder. And so  he tells police dispatch this man, this white man, this random white man, as he describes him, just  walked up, started hurling racial abuse at him, knocked his turban off his head, and punched him.  And the police take that very, very seriously. So they sped to the scene. Meanwhile, the murderer's  mother also came to the scene. She arrived before the police did and she took the murder weapon  and hid it. She brought it home with her and didn't tell anybody that she had it. In other  words, she participated in the cover up. Now, the police arrived fairly quickly to find Henry  Noak bleeding and unable to stand on his own. He said to them a total of eight times, "I have been  stabbed. I'm dying. I can't breathe." He yelled it so loud that neighbors heard it. In fact, some  of them called the police to say there's a man who's been stabbed and is dying. Nevertheless,  police treated Henry Noak, the dying man who was bleeding out in their presence like the criminal  because he had been accused of racism. So, they handcuffed him. They dragged him through  the graffle. They ignored his plea for help. I'm dying. Doesn't look like that. Like you're  dying. I've been stabbed. Don't think so, mate, says the cop. Now, we're not guessing about any  of this because we have the body cam footage. Here it is. I don't want him. He was on the bin on the  other side of this. He's jumped over these fences and stuff like that. And he's up here, mate.  He's obviously he's fallen from there and he slipped from there. There's other shooters left  over there, mate. What's your name, mate? Huh? Has anyone been hurt other than him? Yeah,  me. My brother, he's took my turban off, started grabbing my head. Are you injured? Yeah.  Yeah, I've got swollen eye a little. All right, just step back a little bit for me. Someone  flagged these down. What's happened to you? All right. You've been stabbed. Whereabouts? Don't  think you have, mate. And then you got to keep up. Hand breathe. Put the hand in the cuff, mate. This is the This is like this has  happened to us. You've been walking. Keep you on your side, mate. Got to retrieve then  saying to him I'm keeping him on his side. We were set up when we had him in but he didn't like it.  What's your name mate? At the moment you are under arrest. That's for assault. So you do not have to  say anything. may harm the defense if you do not mention your own question which you should later  rely in court. Anything you do say may be given an evidence. All right. So there's Henry Noak  bleeding out. Those are his final moments drowning in his own blood being arrested for racism. Now  keep in mind the police did no investigation whatsoever. They arrived on the scene. There was  a non-white man claiming racism. There was a white man claiming he'd been stabbed. But they took  only one claim seriously and they arrested the man who'd been accused of racism. If that looks  familiar, it should because that is a standard not simply in the UK, but in Australia, in Canada, and  much of Europe, and in the United States, racism is regarded as a more grave crime than murder.  Now, no one will say that, and statutes don't reflect that, but in effect, that is true. Being  called a racist entitles you to being treated well like Henry Noak was, like an animal, dragged in  your final moments on Earth in handcuffs through the gravel until you die. The police don't even  consider checking to see if he's actually been stabbed. And again, he had been five times. So  if that enrages you to see that video, because of course it's a reputation of the core claim of the  West, which is equal justice. Each person is as valuable as every other person. That's the basis  upon which our societies were founded. Actually, that was the justification for importing a brand  new population. We're all the same. But in effect, it's turned out just the opposite. White lives  in the UK are worth less than the lives of so-called minorities. And this is visible  throughout the society, theirs and ours. And anyone who says it out loud is in fact the  criminal. And if you look at the coverage of Henry Noak's murder, you will find much of it very  recognizable. CBS denounced anyone who complained about his killing as quote far-right. They're  trying to make far-right points. They're Nazis. Only Nazis would care about the death of Henry  Noak. But of course, he's not the only one. He's not the only white Britain who's been stabbed to  death by an immigrant. Of course, there are many. But big picture, it's not simply the stabbings.  There has been for 80 years a policy in Britain to make it very clear to people who were born there  that they're not welcome in their own country. At the end of the Second World War, Britain was  99.9% white. 99.9% white. As of this year, half of all births in Britain are non-white. And  so in that short period, a couple of generations since the end of the Second World War, the  population is completely turned over. Brand new people. And on what justification, you ask?  Well, that's not clear. It's a little strange to be on the hunt for Nazis in a country that fought  the Nazis. The Brits famously gave up a lot, including their empire in their effort to beat  Nazi Germany. So did the United States. And yet in both countries that sent millions of men to fight  the Nazis, there is an ongoing hunt for Nazis, which is to say the unearned blood guilt of the  Nazi crimes is being imputed to people who fought the Nazis. That's very, very odd. And it shows in  every metric, every measurement, in employment, in life expectancy, in nutrition. In the last  couple of years, white Americans are the leading group to die of malnutrition related illnesses.  White Americans. And at the same time, that very group is lectured as privileged, as having  unearned advantage because of their skin color. There's an entire academic discipline devoted to  attacking white people on the basis of the fact, the supposed fact that they have unearned  privilege. And yet, of course, the opposite is true. They are dying. The leading cause for young  white Britons is suicide. The unemployment rate among white Britons is astronomical. In the last  5 years of new jobs created in Britain for young people, British firms hired one white Britain  for every 27 foreigners. And those statistics aren't so different in the United States. 90%  between 2020 and 2025 of all new jobs created in the United States went to foreigners. 90%.  Is that an accident? Could it be that recent arrivals from Punjab and Lagos are just that  much more impressive than the products of the fabled American education system? Probably not.  It's almost like it's intentional. And of course, it is intentional because it sends a message.  Don't get too comfortable in your own country. Don't assume that you have rights because you  were born here. Don't take pride in anything your ancestors built. Stay on edge. Now,  what would be the motive of people sending that message to the indigenous population of a  country? This isn't yours. It belongs to people you've never met. That is the message. We can  only guess at the motive, but we can say that throughout Europe and throughout the Anglosphere,  that is the message from our superiors. And so, you have to ask yourself, why are we putting up  with this? Because it's not enough just to look at the stats and say, "Oh, the people whose  ancestors built this country are failing, are held to a different standard of justice aren't  allowed to arm themselves while new arrivals are, etc., etc., etc., are disadvantaged in  jobseeking, in admissions to college, in federal grants." All true. But you also  have to remember that that group of people is not only put at a grave disadvantage because  of their ethnicity. The greatest systemic racism ever practiced in the West is being practiced  against the people who built the West. All true. They're also being browbeaten and lectured  and fingerwagged into silence. Which is to say, it's not enough to hurt people.  You have to humiliate them as well. The only crime, the only real crime in any of  these countries, and the United States would be among them, is complaining about what they  seem to be doing to you and noting the obvious. So London, second biggest city in Europe after  Moscow, a beautiful city and in many ways, have to be honest, still probably a little nicer  than the biggest city in our country, New York, but still much reduced in quality of life from  40 years ago, and dramatically in decline as compared to 100 years ago. Anyone who notes that  London is not as nice as it once was is the crime, is the criminal. Here's Sadi Khan, the longtime  mayor of London, often referred to in the United States as a as a radical Muslim who's nothing  of the sort. He's just a conventional white liberal with an Islamic sounding name. But here's  Sadi Khan explaining why people would criticize London on social media. Most people's experience  of London is very different to the version you see on social media. And there's a reason for that.  We've done some research and looked into what's going on here. Basically, you got a combination  of uh people using the algorithms on social media that that monetize negativity and hatred, but also  a combination of state actors, whether it's China, Russia or MAGA influences being unhappy that  a city that is progressive, liberal, diverse, is incredibly successful. I mean, we are the  antidote, the antithesis of nivist populist movements. So don't be surprised if you got  people on social media spreading misinformation, disinformation, and lies. It's the Russians.  They're the ones telling you London's not as nice as it used to be. Because honestly, the one thing  we know about London is diversity is its greatest strength. Now, you're not invited to assess  that for yourself. You're not invited to ask for evidence that that's true because in fact it's  not a political slogan. It's a religious precept. It's the one thing we know that diversity is our  strength. Now if it turns out that diversity is not our strength, we can't admit it because that  would be apostasy. So we have to keep chanting it again and again and again. And you almost as  you listen to Sadi Khan wave away any criticism of the city that he's so gravely mismanaged for so  long as state actors spreading disinformation and lies which are not the same thing by the way.  Disinformation is information that we don't want to hear. Lies are things that are untrue.  It's disinformation that he's concerned about. But as as you hear him lay all that at the feet  of Putin or China or MAGA influencers, you suspect that maybe he's starting to believe it, that he  won't allow into his own head what is obvious to everybody else, which is this experiment has  failed. This is not working on any level for anybody except the people in charge. Another  way to put it is if the relationship between the citizen and the state is a contract, a social  contract, only the citizen is keeping up his side. So the citizen gives up some rights and quite a  bit of money in exchange for what? Security and services. He wants to live in a decent place. He  wants his children to get a decent education. He wants non- embarrassing infrastructure. He doesn't  want to get stabbed to death on the way back from the bar. That's what the citizen wants. He doesn't  want the neighborhood that he lives in to change in 20 years with new people who he doesn't know  and didn't ask in. He wants some control over his life and he wants the state to provide some  measure, some basic measure of security and services. And the state no longer does that. There  are so-called developing countries, many of them around the world that have superior infrastructure  to Britain and the United States. Many of them. They're not richer countries. They're just  countries in which the leadership class takes its own vows a little bit more seriously than ours.  Oh, well, in exchange for getting a private plane and the long title and the medals on my chest, I  have to provide basic services. And by the way, we can't have stabbings in the middle of our  capital city. And so they do that as leaders have always done. But this leadership class in the west  has stopped even trying to do that and has instead replaced its duty with hatred toward the people  it has failed. And that's very obvious and it's hard to see that really if you live in the United  States and that's one of the reasons we wanted to show you what's happening in Britain because the  distance makes it easier to understand. But if you look at our country, you have to ask yourself,  is it really so different? We spent a year talking about George Floyd pretending that he was murdered  by a cop in Minneapolis when it was very obvious from the second day that he had Odeed on opioids.  Poor man. Not making fun of him, but that's just a fact. He was not strangled to death by a white  cop. The whole thing was fake. And we spent a year talking about that and nodding solemnly and  excusing the riots that followed and the murder of innocents that followed, holding the rioters to  a different and lower standard of public behavior. They were exempt from CO laws. Do you remember  that? Meanwhile, is the problem in the United States, and we do have numbers on this really,  that white cops are killing people of color? No, that's not the problem that we have. In fact, it's  almost exactly the opposite of the problem we have and everybody knows it and you can look it up  if it's still on the DOJ website because they do keep stats on this. So why lie to us? Well, in  order to humiliate and degrade and dispirit us, that's why. And it's hard even to know that  that's going on because it's so omnipresent. you heard about a country, let's just say  Poland, under the Soviet occupation of 1971, and you were told that in Soviet occupied  Poland, there was no privacy whatsoever, there was not one place you could go where you  were not surveiled by your government. Even in your own bedroom, people were listening to you.  Even when you got in your car, your sanctuary, a machine began to lecture you, hector you like a  neurotic girlfriend about wearing your seat belt, slow down. And if you didn't, the vehicle would  take control away from you, exert autonomy, and strip you of yours, and just act in the  way it decided best. You would have no privacy, and you would have no autonomy. If you heard  about a place like that, you would say, "Well, that's the definition of totalitarian." But you  would be describing America right now before AI. So, it takes a little bit of mental effort  to get perspective on the world you live in and how far from the promise it is and how much  it has changed, how totally unacceptable it is, how totally contrary to human thriving it is. It's  no surprise given those facts and many more like them that SSRI usage is beyond belief. The suicide  rate is unacceptable. People are miserable under our current system. That system is called liberal  democracy. There are very few Americans who don't support liberal democracy, including me. I support  liberal democracy. It's our birthright. Liberal democracy. It's the greatest thing we have.  Liberal meaning respecting of human rights, the rights with which we were born. And  democracy meaning we own the system and we put our representatives in office by  voting for them. We're in control. We're the shareholders here. Liberal democracy. But  the truth is, our democracy is neither liberal nor democratic. It doesn't represent people and it  doesn't acknowledge fundamental human rights. It bulldozes them. And everybody on some level knows  this, which is to say it can't continue because nobody believes in it anymore. Some of us are  hoping for a peaceful resolution to this crisis, but it is a crisis. When the government begins  to actively harm the people it supposedly serves, it's reached the end. I mean, it may take a  while to end, but it will end because that doesn't make any sense. It's intolerable. It  would take a lot of technology to force people to obey a system like that. And even then, it  couldn't go on forever. And this one won't. So, as you think about this, it it gets pretty  dark pretty fast. The system you grew up with, the one you were taught to love, the one about  which there was at one point a lot to love is going away because it just doesn't work. And  historians will debate why it didn't work in the end. Were the flaws inherent to it? Was  it bad leadership? Was it the baby boomers? Who knows? Wiser heads will determine the  answer. But in the meantime, it's enough to know that it can't continue. And that's one  of the reasons that you're hearing an awful lot of dark muttering about revolution, violent and  otherwise, on the internet. And everyone talking about that should remember what that actually  looks like. Civil wars are the ugliest of wars, and they tend to go on for a very long time.  And innocents die in huge numbers. So that is not an outcome that you want if you can help it.  But what are the options? Well, out of nowhere the other day, we saw somebody a clip of a man  in Britain offering some measure of hope. Not because the current system can continue. It can't  and it won't. But because there are options that are not based on hate and division and violence,  that are instead based on decency and kindness. And in fact, we haven't always lived this way. Our  current system is a fairly new invention. People didn't live this way 200 years ago. In fact,  they couldn't imagine it. That man is a man called Frank Wright. Now, he was caught on camera  by a reporter walking down the street in the UK, and the reporter asked him a question. You know,  what how do you think Britain's going? How are things going? And he gave a pretty remarkable  answer for a man on the street interview. Here's part of it. So, what does Finnish look like? What  does finished look like? Finished looks like an economic collapse. Finnish looks like spending all  your money on foreign wars when nothing works in the country. Finnish looks like you can't get  a job for being competent. There's no sanity even in recruitment. We have a competency  crisis because for increasingly ideological and insane reasons, employment opportunities,  even training opportunities are restricted. There's there's there's one news story after  another about why for political reasons we're doing mad things that bankrupt the country that  that basically park people's careers that exclude talented people of genuine principle from any area  of influence whatsoever. And taken collectively, this is the politics and economics of national  suicide. So, it has to stop. So, who is that guy? we thought. But we shouldn't have been that  surprised because if you're on social media, you've had similar experiences probably many  times. You'll be reading something like Twitter or Instagram and there's a lot of garbage and porn  and lunacy and bots and there's a lot of ugliness and pointlessness and timewasting material. But in  the middle of all of that, occasionally you'll run across somebody writing something beautiful and  true and perfectly expressed, and you'll think to yourself, why haven't I heard of this person?  And what is he doing posting on X at 2:30 on a Wednesday afternoon? Doesn't this guy have a job?  And the answer is, he may not. Our system is so inimicable, so hostile to inherent superiority, to  honesty, to truth. itself, but also to cleverness and creativity that it has systematically excluded  some of the brightest people in our country and in Britain from gainful employment. The man you  just saw, Frank Wright, who you never have heard of. How do we know that? Cuz he doesn't have a  job. That's why that man should be in a leading position within the intellectual realm in Great  Britain. He should be a noted public philosopher obviously and you will definitely think that after  you hear the hourlong interview we just did with him which we're going to play in just a moment.  But he's not doing any of those things. Again, he's not really employed. Why? Because like a lot  of people like him, he can't get a job. Not just because he's the wrong color and gender, which he  is. Not just because he's not gay, which he's not, but because he's honest and smart. And honest and  smart people have a kind of irreressible habit of questioning why are we doing this? Of asking  inconvenient questions. And people like that are not welcome in the oligarchy. Why would they  be? They're troublemakers. They're disobedient. The problem is that when you take people like that  out of a system, the system loses all creativity. The system loses the ability to continue itself  to make anything interesting, to have enlightened ideas, and in the end even to be decent. It  becomes a machine, and that's what ours has become. Spring is the most refreshing time of  year. Nothing compliments it better than black rifle coffee. Lots of it. This is an American  company founded by veterans with conviction. They built the whole thing around a simple idea. Do  it right or just don't do it. They're definitely doing it right. We know cuz we drink it all  day long. If you want coffee without theatrics, start with just black. Whole bean if you grind  it yourself, ground if you don't. No sweeteners designed disguise mediocrity. No seasonal gimmicks  masking weak beans. Just bold American roasted coffee that delivers what it promises. And if  you prefer variety without lowering the bar, try these supply drop variety rounds. A curated  lineup of pod roast that rotate in but never compromise strength. Consistency, standards,  discipline, out with watered down blends, in with pure American coffee. You can grab just black  or supply drop variety rounds on Amazon or go right to black rifle coffee.com to stock up from  the source. Black Rifle Coffee, veteranfounded, American roasted, still standing, still brewing.  But Frank Wright, despite being excluded from the system, and he would be here in the United States,  too. Let's not lie to ourselves. Has managed not to become bitter or hateful or angry or a racist.  He's a thoroughly decent, cheerful, hopeful, kind man whose prescriptions are all about loving  your neighbor, no matter where he's from. Because Frank Wright is a Christian. And as you hear him  speak, remember that he speaks for the old Europe, the old England, the Christian Europe that gave  birth to our civilization that produced the most interesting and enlightened ideas in the history  of mankind. Also produced the most revolutionary technology in the history of mankind. It was a  truly successful while flawed society and it was a Christian society. So, here's Frank Wright  reminding us that the way we live now is not the way our great-grandparents lived. It's not  the way our great-grandchildren will live. And that's okay. Here's Frank Wright. Mr. Wright,  thank you very much uh for joining us. I became aware of you like most people fairly recently when  you were interviewed as a man on the street, as we say here in the United States, and gave this kind  of beautiful explanation of your concerns. And so we pressed a little deeper and I want to read  back to you a couple of quotes from a a series that you have started um that I will be watching.  Uh but I I want you to explain if you would what you mean by this and I'm quoting. We live in a  belief system that no one believes in anymore and it has created a terminal crisis that it can't  escape alive. We have been trained in a way not to see the elephant at all and to call the mess it  makes of everything progress. And then finally, you write, "What is ending now is not the world,  but the world as we knew it." What system are you describing? Well, I'm describing the system  that was marketed to us as liberal democracy uh which we've all taken, we've been led to  believe deliberately, um because the system rules us by media is the acme of human organization.  It's like the verdict of history. And we've all kind of accepted that this is this is the only  way we can live. But in fact, that system was intentionally put together over a hundred  years ago. And as I've explained elsewhere, it is the god that failed twice. And it was there  to replace the civilization that we had before. and the tremendously destructive opportunity  of the great war and then the second world war provided if you like the uh the opportunity  to install this system in place of the European civilization that we'd inherited from the monastic  system of the church over a thousand years ago. So what we're doing now is we're realizing that  the beliefs that we've been supplied by this system no longer explain the world and the crisis  that this system has created isn't just national or local and it is local to you and I and it is in  both of our nations but it's worldwide and there's a collapse of belief in the system and I would  like to remind people that it is the foundational technique rather it's central to the political  technique of the 20th century to manufacture belief in your own system. The system manufactures  belief in itself through every form of a cultural production. I mean, you know, your the things  that you buy, the disposable items that you have, the terms and conditions that are increasingly  offline as well as online. When you notice that this is everywhere and it's infused into  practically every transaction and life is a series of transactions now in the main in this system  because it's near list and it's consumerist. So you then you notice the the remarkable fact  that you've never noticed that you're policed by a total ideology until it starts to fail.  And it's failing now. It's not working for all of us. You know, in one of the most divisive  times in human history socially and culturally, everyone can agree that everything's getting worse  and there seems to be no answers from within that system. And that's because the system is the  problem. I think everyone listening to this, regardless of ideology, senses the truth in what  you're saying. Um, one line stuck out to me. The system is no longer capable of explaining the  world around us. What What do you mean by that? Well, um, what I would say is that the crisis  that has been created by the way that we are ruled has become so impossible to manage that  it's completely out of control. If you look at the idea, the reason why I go on about the idea  of technique is because technique is is one word for saying, you know, the refinement of the  process of producing a standard result. Now if you look at what our politics has done over a  century then you can see that it's been refining itself if you like at the speed of the development  of communication technology to produce a system that manufactures belief in itself and we might  be caught up in a lot of the effects. So we'll complain about something that's woke for example  or we'll complain about some mad war that's been launched. But really all these things make sense  from the point of view of one big idea which is if you understand that from its beginning the  liberal system was about creating a global standard in everything in economics in politics  in culture and in belief. And when you see that as just an object a standard object we're going  to we're going to standardize the whole world. That's the object. That's the objective. then you  understand everything that's been done and then all the madness makes sense because for example  one remarkable thing I discovered was some of the people that put together the Federal Reserve and  then the you know the international liberal system management and the Council on Foreign Relations  they described themselves as internationalists. That's that's the right early marketing term for  what we call globalists today. And so you can hear a lot of people complain about that. But really  if you understand that the general idea is to standardize the whole world under the standards  of this new system under its political economy, its politics, its economics and the belief it  supplies and the only beliefs it really supplies are the beliefs in itself and it excludes all the  other ones. You can see why there's a terminal crisis now because the only beliefs that we  can find that can explain the world aren't supplied by the liberal system. And that's why  they're policing speech. And that's why they call anyone anyone who makes a sane, decent,  and indeed Christian objection to the politics and economics of mass destruction. That's why they  describe you as being evil for demanding a decent life and a future for your children. That's  why they describe you as an extremist if you dare to notice the obvious out loud. And these  are some of the effects of this system that's disintegrating. And part of that technique if you  like is the creation of crisis which they then go on to monetize. Like obviously the war industry  is a huge crisis management model that saturates our political class and effectively sponsors  them and then permissions further misadventures that result in mass destruction, misery and of  course magnifying the scale of mass migration. If you look into mass migration, it has been  misold to us as a human rights affair. It's not. It's a business. It's become an industry at scale  where governments and NOS's permission the arrival of millions of people which are often transported  into the West by criminal gangs that charge them considerable amounts of money to do so. And this  in turn was created by these pointless wars that we fought time and again over the last decades.  And to point that out, basically one of the most remarkable things that occurred to me one day  whilst uh doing extensive reading as a result of my extended leisure time because I'm rather  routinely unemployable given my disputatious and principal character. I I came up I came up with  this idea that regime change changed our regime more than any other. And that is a remarkable  fact. And it did because I'm sure you remember the '9s. And sadly, it's not the '90s anymore,  but the '90s was very different world to to to what we're in now. And that was before the regime  change regime really kicked in. And look what it's done to us. Look what it's done to the world.  The these are the these are the causes. You see, one of the problems I found with conservatism, the  doomed ideology of conservatism, why did it never conserve anything? Conservatism has largely become  a kind of political and media phenomenon in which you monetize outrage by winging about terrible  effects and never investigate causes. If you want to solve the problem, have a look at where they  come from. That might be a good start. But if you do solve the problem, then poof, your audience  disappears and you can't make winge bucks anymore. So, you know, it is kind of fatal to the grifter.  But we should try and move beyond that model of simply spectating of being kind of wires of the  obscenity of our own existence and try and say, can't we do better? And you can't do better if you  don't know how bad has been done. Inflation makes credit card statements particularly scary. You  work 40 50 hours a week just to buy groceries and gas, things you used to be able to afford without  thinking that much about it. Then the banks charge you 20% interest. If the system is designed to  keep you underwater, it's working. But there's another option. Our friends at American Financing  are doing something the big banks despise. They are helping people. Mortgage rates in the fives,  supporting the American dream of home ownership, and they're showing homeowners how to take their  hard-earned equity to wipe out high interest debt. Now, we're against debt in general, but in this  economy, most people have no choice at all. So, don't go bankrupt enslaving yourself to to a  lender. Average savings are about 800 bucks a month, and it takes only 10 minutes to talk to a  salarybased mortgage consultant. No upfront fees or obligation to see how much you can save.  Give American Financing a call 800685-5696. That's 1800685-5696 or visit  americanfinancing.net/tucker, America's home for home loans. Yeah. Well, I  think you've you've answered the question in the back of my mind since you began speaking,  which is why aren't you the most famous living philosopher in Britain? Uh, as you should be. Um,  and you aren't because you are committing the sin you just described by asking questions, pointing  a finger to the cause of the problems and not just hyperventilating about the problems themselves as  I did, for example, on Fox News for so long. So, um, congratulations to you. Shame on me. But  notice, you know, who had a higher paying job. So, I guess that that kind of you're making your point  or I'm admitting that your point is true. It is true to my shame. I'm I'm I'm toxic to money and  uh you know it doesn't like me and uh there it is. I don't care. You know I'm I'm I'm used to that.  I'm not going I'm not blaming you personally. No, the the thing is is that we we all we've when  we we think about blaming people really even in some of the worst most offensive and in  fact almost unforgivable cases. You have to look at people and really genuinely ask can you  honestly just blame them? People are responsible for what they do. But we have all been raised,  I've been raised, you've been raised in this total political technique which has formed our  consciousness about the world which has distorted our moral sensibilities which has given us false  aspirations and the worship of false idols. And so, can you blame people when they're misled?  Can you blame people when they become subject to mass delusions that send them into frenzies?  because the system has been designed to do that. And if you think that this is speculative, the  the the giant of post-war American diplomacy, George F. Kennan, who was a genius at pre  preventing the outbreak of um nuclear war, and so should be commended for that. But in 1948,  and you can read this in the congressional record, he published a paper called on the inauguration  of organized political warfare. And in that paper, he said that he should use the CIA, which had  been created a year before in 1947, to basically create cultural propaganda through the the direct  sponsorship and creation in some cases of things like modern art, uh, sponsoring speakers such as  Sir Isaiah Berlin, the international and greatest champion of the liberal idea in the 20th century,  the art critic Clement Greenberg, touring musical operations and orchestras and so on. And this  became, if you like, the the seinal point of the development of cultural production in the the  mid to late 20th century, where you find now, if you look at it with this through this prism,  you can see that practically everything that's produced in our mass culture is in some way a form  of propaganda for the liberal political economy that that rules us all. So basically everything  that you see, everything that you consume, all the avenues that you have to navigate to earn  a living and to communicate with people and even to get access to your own money, these are all  contingent on some kind of tacit acceptance or submission to a series of ideological rules that  you're never asked about and you don't really have any chance to object to or you risk your meager  livelihood for your increasingly worthless money. And so when you notice that this is another reason  why people are losing belief in this system. And it's not because of radicals and online extremists  like me and bigots like you, Mr. Carlson. It's because of reality. The awful reality we  live in is unignorably bad. And no amount of sophisticated cultural production and propaganda  can persuade you otherwise. So it's finished. It does seem like the final bet though of the  organizers of this system, the maintainers of the system, the stewards of our system is  technology is supercomputing AI. And the point of that I I'm starting to sense is coercion. Like  it doesn't matter whether you agree with a system or like it when the control grid is in place, you  have to obey. Well, here's another problem about the political technique of the 20th century.  Every time something has been made possible by technology, we've seen our political economy  adopted wholeheartedly without any real attempt to mitigate any serious threats to the dignity  of human life, to whether or not it's going to improve, maximize human flourishing, or indeed  emiserate us. And so you see that every time something's invented, you you invent the liberals  invent a new series of kind of moral values, what they call ethics, to permission its  use. You've seen this in the development of technology to sterilize and mutilate children,  for example, which has peniciously been presented as a human rights issue. That was made possible  by technology. Now just to use that example and to use the example of artificial intelligence as  it's so-called just because we can do something it doesn't mean to say we should do uh and that's  a very important question for political power and I think that's one of the duties of the state  to look into how can we best use this for the purpose of the human flourishing of mankind  which should be the duties of the state and if it is good great but let's be careful with it and  let's see what good we can do with it rather than have it just used, misused or indeed unleashed and  ravaged through our lives. And one of the reasons why this may very well get permissioned uh by the  ruling elite that's currently installed is because they've reduced the value of human life to price.  Our economy sees human life as disposable. It can be simply eliminated as a matter of convenience.  And that's celebrated as the pinnacle of women's liberation to basically kill your own children  because they disadvantage you by being alive. And the same thing with the elderly. We're effectively  disposable. These these arguments I believe are now moving outside of the traditional Catholic  Christian base. And even atheists and liberals are beginning to realize, hang on a minute,  we live in a vast evil machine that sees us all as not only replaceable but disposable. It's a  disposable political economy and I think we should dispose of it before it disposes of us. And this  is the reason why I I've been on about surrogacy for so long because that was permissioned in 1993  in a law in the United States which astonishingly established the right to buy a human life. And  that's what surrogacy is. It's the hire of women to produce a human life for sale. And this if  this is not the um one of the if you like the lowest points of human degradation in history I  don't know what is but I will finish by saying this in his notes towards a definition of culture  around the middle of the 20th century TS Elliott said there is no limit to the depths to which  man can fall. So we shouldn't expect that just because something is shockingly morally degrading  like surrogacy that people will wake up and go oh no that's that that's enough. No, if we don't  actually stop it, we will continue to fall into the abyss. And I think we've all got that sense of  falling now. You know, when you have a nightmare and and you you're falling, then suddenly you snap  and wake up. I think we're all waking up at the moment. If I can just ask a question about motive.  So you said at the outset that the design of the system was to create sameness uniformity globally  as a standard a universal standard in belief in economy uh in culture and that's obviously worked.  But what was the motive behind that? Why would anyone or any group of people want that do you  think? Well, if you look at the um by the way, this is not speculative and it takes place in  the the record of the Federal Reserve and the United States Congress and so on. This isn't  speculative fiction. It isn't some kind of grievance narrative. There are several major  interests involved in this uh that I can call to mind immediately. Obviously one of them  financial people like JP Morgan and later on the Rockefellers who could see the enormous uh  potential of having if you like a debt issuance system that was globally exportable a standard  model where whatever you wish to permission in these new liberal democracies that you were going  to create you could finance it by simply printing money and that's what they did and that's partly  the reason why liberal democracy failed in the first 15 years of its life. failed in along  the 1920s through the 30s and all the liberal democracies that were installed um shortly after  the great war they just dissolved because they couldn't answer the financial crisis that their  new economic model had created and they had no political answer to bulcheism but apart from  that you had the international financiers who wanted a global standard economic system for  their own interests you had you had people like Bert and Russell and John Dwey these kind of  atheist pragmatist rationalist philosophers who actually sold you the idea that if we had a one  world government, we could end war and that they would sell that to you with these humanitarian  principles in mind. And I think Burton Russell was quite convinced of that. I mean, I don't find that  a convincing argument because there's a profound reason why that's wrong. And that's because  liberals believe that man is perfectable and that according to the the myth of progress that man  just gets better every day because the calendar flips over. But the inexraable moral progress of  mankind is a myth. And the British philosopher John Gray has expanded that very cleverly in  his seven types of atheism showing that this is just a fantasy. It's a utopian delusion.  But those people sincerely believed it. And these people are dangerous. They're fanatics. And  this is where utopian thought leads you. Like the British thinker and journalist Pete Hitchens said,  you know, the trouble with utopia is you have to row across an ocean of blood and you never arrive.  But but that that has meaning in reality. So you did have well-meaning liberal fanatics like um  Bert and Russell and John Dwey actually wrote a series of essays in the 1930s called towards a  common faith and he said that we should supply we the liberal elite should supply a kind of global  Christless religion a common faith so these plebeians could believe in it and we could somehow  unite this new global system of interdigitated um liberal democracies which are all identical  in having bicameal systems. And incidentally, all identical in the fact that you can only vote for  left liberals, right liberals, extreme liberals or bulcheists, which is what you could actually vote  for in the first instance. Yes. So whilst whilst you're in this new happy utopia, we're going to  give you this belief system. And bear in mind that comes from um a thinker called Matthew Arnold who  wrote a book in 1863 called Culture and Anarchy. And I'll finish with this that he said that  because we're going to liberalize the world and democratize it, but obviously we're going  to subtract religion because we liberals don't believe in Christ. We're going to retain the  outward structure of the church and the arature if you like of our civilization, but we're going to  remove the supernatural and Christ and God himself from the center of that. And he said we should  replace it with culture or we'll have anarchy. So from the 1860s, the liberals had this idea of  standardizing the world beneath their own godless standards. But they recognized that without the  foundational Christianity of our civilization, there would be anarchy. And so Matthew Arnold  imagined that he would he would promote things like poetry and classical art and classical  music. But instead you got like Taylor Swift and televised sports. And then of course nowadays  you get like the current think craze where you all put on some crazy hat or or kneel for an obvious  criminal or something. But these are all elements of the mass production of culture which generates  mass belief and literally does drive people insane because it is fundamentally counter reality. This  is a count is this is a revolutionary ideology and all revolutions are basically revolts against  the natural order uh the changeless order of being and reality created by God. of course. And so  what they do instead is they create this kind of makebelieve reality for you to live in. And so the  final thing I'll say about this is a foundational figure in the creation of the liberal system was  a man called Walter Lipman. And Walter Lipman said that in order to rule these new democracies  where all these awful ordinary people will have the vote, what we must do is create a pseudo  reality, his words. And he said we should use mass communications to do this. And when we can  get people to believe that the advertisements and mass communication picture of the world is the  real world, then we can change that picture at will. And that's how we'll rule them. And that is  the foundational moment of the political technique of the 20th century. Things around the world  are moving so fast right now, it's impossible to keep up with all of the changes. But we do know  that when those changes happen, markets change, too. And nothing changes faster than the price  of precious metals, gold and silver. It just shifts in an instant because it is a reaction  to and against what's happening in the world. So timing is essential. If you're thinking about  adding precious metals, and you definitely should. We do. You need to know when prices are going  to move and why they're moving. And Battalion Metals makes that all really simple. You can buy  the dip when it happens. So, if you want realtime alerts sent directly to your inbox when gold and  silver prices move, go to battalionals.com/alerts. Markets move fast to stay ahead of  them. So, it's battalian.com/alerts. Do you think that technology, new forms of  mass media will allow this to continue? Oh, yes. Uh and and it has and it is because you can  see how the refinement of that has taken place from the paper and cinema age through the radio  and then the television and the internet age. But you can see that the technique has become  refined and that it's become ever more subtle and now you have a form of addiction towards a  constant stream of mind rot that just burns out your brain. And I'd like to remind everybody that  uh melting down due to information overload isn't just for your political enemies. So, you know,  practice some informationational hygiene every now and then because otherwise like a kind  of laser beam of slop will just burn a hole directly through your cereal cortex and you won't  notice it because you'll just be numbactically inactive. So, that's what happens. Similarly,  right, I've got to say this. You live in this system where you're supposed to live without  complete moral restraint. And they say it's fantastic to just indulge all your sensations  because that's how you can sell more things and that's how you can sell everything to anyone.  Just say, "Look, liberate all your desires, have no restraint." But if you have noformational  restraint or any moral restraint, you end up with the jaded appetites of the Marquee Assad.  And I've unfortunately read the Marquee Assad's work. I have too. Well, they're not some  fascinating account of adventure. You can just see a man degraded by the fact that he's saturated  himself with ever more extreme pursuance of of his unrestrained and repugnant desires until  eventually he feels nothing and he is dead to the world. That's what you end up like when you  are saturated with information and desires and pornification and the constant stimulation of of  wants in place of needs and and it impoverishes you. It doesn't liberate you. It it liberates you  into a void. Actually, annihilates you. And so why is that technique not going to work now despite  it being so sophisticated? It's because we can all see that this has not produced the paradise on  earth that the adverts are telling us that it is. In fact, it's produced the opposite. And and  again, it's that reality that is making people not just disaffected or oh, I think I'll make a  different political choice this time. It's like, what have we done? What has happened to our lives?  What does my life mean anymore? Who am I? This is a profound existential crisis for the West. And  and it's necessary because it permissions the replacement of this distorted, indeed diabolical  system with a return to reality. Before I ask you what comes next, what's what's the next reality?  Um, can you describe what this system replaced? What what came before liberal democracy and in  what sense was it better? Well, quite a lot of people reference the the wonderful writing of  the long neglected historian AJP. Taylor, and he's lovely, and he's he's written lots of volumes  about the origins of the First and Second World War, which remarkable history, by the way, uh  far better than the slop that passes for history nowadays. But AJP Taylor wrote this piece about  what Britain was like before the Great War. And he said the average Englishman would have absolutely  no contact with the state whatsoever except when he went to the post office. And of course uh when  your team fil me up early on I was trying to go to the post office to have some um tangential contact  with the state which I tried to avoid as well. Uh it's very difficult nowadays because it penetrates  every area of your life but you know we had we didn't have things like income tax, passports,  universal suffrage and so on. And that might sound like a terrible thing but at the height of  the British Empire most of our political arguments at the elite level were about how to interpret  Christianity in the form of the management of the state in the world. and they really were and even  a liberal like Robert Tombs in his history of the the English admits that and his chapter on that is  absolutely fascinating. So what what basically the liberal system replaced after the great industrial  revolution of the uh the first world war was the Christian civilization that we'd inherited from  the monastic tradition of the church a thousand years ago. You had you had um you had a Catholic  hierarchy in Belgium. You had Catholic monarchies in Europe. You you had you had Christian nations  and we had a very different way of living wi which didn't have this this administrative bureaucracy  infused with this mad ideology that taxes us to death to police us with this kind of awful  commissarat lanyard class for example. So it became bureaucratized, managerialized and  formalized and gradually normalized because what that system has done is it's subtracted  practically every historical memory that we had that there was ever anything before it and also  that that there could be ever anything else after it. And so it gives itself this idea of a false  eternity or permanence and that's basically evil. And it reminds me the title of a book about the  end of the Soviet Union written by a bloke called Yurchak. It's a terrible book. Don't buy it. But  the title's brilliant and it says, "Everything was forever until it was no more." And that's the  moment that we live in now. So you you think this is the end of that system. Oh yes. There's  there's another and far more distinguished um Tweedy Northerner called John Gray. I've mentioned  him before. And for years he's been talking about um the end of the liberal idea generally like  liberalism finished. you know, not just the political ideology, but its its economics, its  system, the lot. He could see the writing on the wall um a number of years ago, maybe 10 years ago.  I went to see him personally and listen to him. He's a brilliant man. And uh he's also well, I  think one of the most remarkable things about his work is that he said it so long ago, but why would  he know? He was a student of Sir Isaiah Berlin, who was the greatest champion of the liberal idea  in 20th century. So, um he's been saying that for a long time. It's not just me. And it's very  difficult to persuade people because they they see this total system and they think, well, how can  you ever get rid of it? But one of the major ideas that I can supply to you that will have practical  value to you in your life and probably give you a lot of realistic hope, not false hope, but  real hope is that practically no one ever talks about the central role of belief in the political  technique of the 20th century. That means belief is foundational to the way that we are ruled. And  as you can see, millions and millions of people worldwide every day are losing belief in the way  they are ruled despite the fact that the machinery of manufacturing that belief is more omnipresent  and refined than ever. They have lost control of the foundational political technique that secures  their power. This is how they make belief is the title of one of my pieces on it. And I show you  how they made that mass belief. And I also show you why it's not working anymore. And again,  because it's effectively a contradiction to the awful reality that that same political system has  created around us all practically everywhere we go in what's increasingly international nowhere land.  What do you think replaces it? Well, I think what replaces it is a politics that and an economics  that's actually for us and not for itself. I mean, the economy, what's it for is a good question.  It's a wise question because we appear to be for the economy now. We're disposed for the economy.  We're replaced in our own nations because the economy demands it rather than be disposed of  by the economy. I think we should dispose of it before it dispose of us. But what comes next?  One of the fascinating things that I think is interesting is that it's absolutely terrifying to  elites if ordinary people uh such as suspicious men with mustaches who turn up on streets by  accident. If they get involved in politics, they get interested in it. It's terrifying  to them. Like like for for very good reason. You're painfully aware of this. Most people should  sensibly spend their lives never having a single political thought because it's a terrible business  full of awful people. And why would you want to think about that? People have to think about  politics now because it won't leave them alone and it's ruining their lives. Now in Britain, there  was a study done after the 2024 general election that returned what was effectively a supermajority  to the stricken and well panicstricken looking Dalekvoiced Man Karma. Impossibly. He got he got  hundreds of MPs. How could you vote for this? He looks like an animatronic parody of himself  that's in this perpetual state of terror. Look at him when he's on when he's on these broadcast.  Watch his turn the sound down cuz he's awful. But turn the sound down. Look at his eyes. He looks  like this. He's looking for the exits, you know, like he looks like a man in a hostage video and  he know he's not getting out the room. Anyway, why does he look like that? But there are obvious  reasons why. He knows. He knows the game's up. But the the the real danger for people like him  and the Conservatives and the Liberals and all the other people that have ruled us into this  mess is that in the last election when he won, half the people who could vote didn't. There's  a there's a survey by a an institution called the Institute for Public Policy Research and  they produced a paper called half of us and it showed that around 50% of the people who were  registered eligible to vote didn't. And there are even more people who didn't vote who haven't  even bothered to register. If you can mobilize some of those people, maybe even a majority of  those people, you are going to win because the political system only is only triangulated on the  people that currently vote. But if you give them something that that system doesn't give them,  then those people who don't vote probably will vote for you. And that's terrifying. And that  I think is very interesting to anyone who has an interest in being political successful because  I've said before anyone who comes along and says, "Right, look, we're going to stop the madness and  do some common sense politics for for a chair, you you'll clean up. That's practically all  you have to do." But of course, common sense is is toxic to this system. And they'll probably  call you terrible names if you come out with it. But if you couldn't if you couldn't suffer a few  voodoo curses for being sane in public, then yes, you probably have a very promising political  career. But what if the system refuses to allow that? What if you were to say common sense things  in public and you got arrested, which is happening throughout the West? What if the system wouldn't  allow your political party or you as a candidate to run because you were too extreme? I mean, at  at a certain point, is the system capable of being reformed using the system? Yes, I think it is.  I think I know where that's going. But I think it if if we allow things to carry on for another  good number of years, then nobody will be able to control the collapse that will result. So, it's  time to act responsibly to mitigate the ongoing destruction of our civilization whilst we have  the chance. Why do I think that can happen? Well, I think it can happen for for an obvious reason.  If you look at the desperate measures that the liberal regime, if you like to call it, in places  like France and Germany and Britain are resorting to, these measures are authoritarian. They are  locking people up for saying things which are true and legal. But every act that they take in  self-preservation is also an act of self harm. Now, every time they do this, ordinary people  notice and say, "What on earth are you doing? You're releasing all these terrible people."  Yeah. And then you, the courts admitted about Sam Millia, who went to prison and they refused  to let him see his children. They said that what he put on his stickers was legal and true, but  nonetheless, they imprisoned him. And uh is it Dis Longov? He had a very similar situation.  He's under a similar situation now. what he said was true, but they said it was because it  was true, because it was true, it was liable to cause public unrest and and cause some kind of  invidious behavior because of the awful reality that's happened. Now, they have created this awful  reality and they are now criminalizing the mention of that awful reality. That is not a successful  technique that can endure. That that is a deeply unstable political strategy. You're effectively  saying we have made your life miserable. But if you name it, not even if you complain about it,  if you just state the facts, if you just state the obvious and point to reality, we may lock you  up for doing that. So what they're saying to you is basically suffer and die in silence or else.  And as things get worse for everyone, as people are increasingly radicalized by their grocery  bills, how are you going to lock everyone up for being insensed at being unable to afford to even  live when they're desperately trying to work to stay alive? You can't do this. It's unstable. And  furthermore, like I said, every act that they're taking to do this, censorship, speech crimes,  locking people up, it's ultimately an act of self harm that further delegitimizes their power. And I  would add that the state is no longer legitimate, uh, which is becoming obvious to people  because it doesn't discharge its duties. Yes, it's not doing its part. It's violated its own  terms in the contract. Well, it it it does have what we hear all this talk of hysterical rights  and we never hear any talk at all of duties. And why is that? That's because the states that  rulers do not discharge their duties. The state has duties. Simply the state's duties, this is  very oversimplified version, but nonetheless, is to provide security, prosperity, and meaning  to your life in the way that it organizes the political economy. Right? It doesn't provide any  of those things. And in fact, it it now threatens to lock you up if you complain about the mess  it's made out of your life and how it's robbed your children of any meaningful future and so on.  All the many disasters and indeed crimes that it's committed. And so this is this means that the  state is not legitimate, which is a tremendously grave question. And I'm not the only person to  say this. Again, John Gray says this as well, you the leading British political philosopher. So  if you look at these things, if if you have the time in your desperate life when you're trying  to meet the payments on your endless debts, if you have the time to look at these things,  you can see that these arguments have been made in very closed intellectual circles for a number  of years and indeed from people like me, you've never heard of them because again, the way you are  ruled subtracts practically any useful information from your life and gives you slop instead. So,  it pushes you into a despondent despair where you simply think of like, well, I'll just I'll just  I'll just satisfy myself for the the meantime. Just get drunk. I'll go and gamble my life away.  I'll take some drugs. I'll go and eat overeat something, anything to try and stop the pain for  now. Indeed, anti-depressants, drugs, legal, and otherwise. This is emiserating our people because  and your people because the system basically tells you, "We're going to make your life worse. If  you complain about it, we'll lock you up." And uh there's no way out. There's there's no alternative  to us. This is paradise. This is utopia. This is the best of all possible worlds. You're being  ruled by this. It's as if Dr. Pangloss is is kind of post transane Dr. Panglos now is coming  to you and telling you this. That's the that's the character in Voltz Kandid that said everything  is for the best in the best of all possible worlds when people's teeth are falling out and the  roads are full of holes and so on. It sounds remarkably similar to uh to our world today. And  by the way, I refuse to apologize for my English teeth because I think it's an act of treason if we  ever get American teeth. I refuse to be. I I kind I I find them charming, too. I agree. So, I guess  this is a perfect this is a perfect moment to ask you who you are. You've you're not unfortunately  Britain's most famous public philosopher. What is your origin story? How did you come to these  views? What what have you done for a living? Why do you think this? Uh well, I'm I grew up in a  workingass um household where we didn't have any money. Everybody was on a dole, which is on kind  of social security just because there weren't any jobs. So that was normal. Nobody really minded. Um  everybody had nothing relatively speaking. And uh so that's why I'm not afraid of being financially  ruined by uh by by any it may well happen. I don't really care. So it it's um there's that uh I went  into I was quite good at school and so I kind of ended up worshiping the kind of liberals that  taught me I became a liberal and uh that's what I did and I believed in that belief system.  I abandoned my cradle Catholic faith for the false idols of liberalism and since then my life  has been a series of corrections if you like. Uh I've made I've realized the profound mistakes I've  made uh intellectually in my life thinking I've been wrong. Oh dear. And to recognize that and  to do that is to learn. I learned that as well. And it comes at considerable personal cost. But  I I did eventually develop a sense of principle and also kind of an objection to being ruled by  these kind of increasingly ruthless workplace directives that are totally pointless, needless,  and destroy all morale. So I kind of became a bit unemployable uh as a result surprisingly but you  can't get on. I tried for many many years to get published and I never got anywhere. I even met  a major publisher uh once accidentally who is a friend of a friend and they said they'd help me  and they never did because um I found out that's because well basically because I'm I'm white and  I'm not a homosexualist and because you have to. There were friends that I met in the Army Reserve  who said I couldn't get a job in the fire service unless I take the gay box and and I saw them uh  you know I've I've seen his application and what he did it and said I tried before but once I've  ticked the box they'll they'll interview me. These things are real. You really are. When I say that  people are shut out of life they are you're shut out of any chance of not even advancement or  riches but really any real opportunity. It's not a It might come as some surprise to you, Mr.  Carson, but we don't live in a meritocracy. No, I've noticed. I've noticed. I don't know if you've  met our ruling class, but Richishi Sunnak and Kier Starmer are not anomalies. We We recognize them.  Well, I I I actually gave up my what I laughingly call my career when God blessed us with children  rather late in life. And so I decided to bring them up and I became what I'd like to call a trans  mummy. And when I when I I'd had quite enough of Duplo and nappies and so on one day and I realized  I had to do something else for my life. So I volunteered for the army reserve and when I did  they said what's your occupation and I insisted on putting the word trans mommy in there and the  platoon sergeant actually threw the pencil back over the turb said I'm not writing that. And I  said, "Well, I will then because I thought it was very funny and and it is." And then as he kind of  fulminated at me, I said, "You do realize that if I do identify as this, it's basically a criminal  offense for you to disagree with me." I looked at it very seriously and he realized I was taking  it was a joke. But I did that and then by God's good grace, I ended up writing and I said I said  to my wife, I I'm going to try and join the army full-time and get a commission. But I did and I  went I passed and they they judged me actually of having average intelligence which is a very good  indication of the army. Uh thank you the army. But but I found that the army at that time had become  captured by the ideology that is ruining our our nation. And I I'd signed up to serve the crown.  Uh and I was going to serve as best I could to do that. But the flag that they now salute is  more commonly the rainbow flag which which has that kind of transgender triangle on the side of  it and also that circle which I think stands for the pitiles eye of Sauron himself. So I realized  that wasn't for me. So I came home with my cap in my hand and I said well I had a go at getting a  a real job and guess what? And so I said look you know once again you know and uh I said I'll try  my hand at writing. And so I started writing on a Substack and eventually quite by accident a  fellow came around to my house who I was I was teaching him a bit of boxing because I do martial  arts and he uh he said oh why don't you come and write for us and that was Life Sight News and so  I started writing like little freelance articles for them and graciously they've put up with me  for a couple of years now and now I appear on Faith and Reason and I've made this little series  with them and uh I have tried to get sacked I because it's me but so far they they have uh they  have suffered me admirably I would say that's an amazing story but you left out the key pivot maybe  the point of the story which is how did your views change back you embraced liberalism but now you've  rejected it why oh um one one thing that I did was um I I tried to do good and so I I started working  with violent youth offenders in inner cities and I worked for um a charity and I worked for a  Christian charity in the north of England and I had a bit of a talent for that um because I  genuinely believe you should try and again look into the causes and not just bewail the effects.  Now, some of these people are young men, very violent. They're violent offenders. They would  attack you and so on. And uh I I I was determined to try and keep them out of the criminal justice  system. And in doing this, I encountered, pardon me, I encountered how the basically they  don't want you to solve the problem. You you get four times the amount of money for the less the  less British, the less native, the less English they speak, the more crime they commit, the  more disturbed they are, the more funding you get for these people. And if if you're actually  talented uh academic subjects and your only hope of escaping your sink estate like like I did was  was through some kind of academic achievement, you get nothing. You get rewarded and incentivized  for being the worst possible member of society and a tremendous amount of money goes on iPads and  holidays and so on. And I found a lot of push back from actually producing good results because  I didn't I I told a lot of the cohort these young men 17 to kind of 20 years old violent criminals  some of them attempted rapists and murderers and things like that and drug dealers. I used to say  to them and say I'm not your friend and I shan respect you because you're scum. When you begin to  act decently I will respect you. And they used to I used to go to work in a kind of like a tweed  suit and things like that and brogues looking like this. That's what I look like. And then  they used to look at me and laugh at you and stuff like that. And then they'd say to me, "Oh,  you know, f off." And I say, "No, f off, sir." And then people would laugh at me for that. But then  after a few weeks, they would actually say f off, sir. And then after a month, they wouldn't say f  off anymore. And just sir, and then they'd stop saying unspeakable and beastly things to people  in the street. And then when they did try and stab me and kill me and things, which they did, uh, and  they never succeeded because I was obviously quite um capable, I didn't harm any of them in in  disarming them, by the way. I don't believe in that. And just just do enough. And they  they develop a respect for you because you're not weak. And this is this is something that I  suggested this to someone that I knew in who's in in the legal um establishment. I said to him,  look, it's a culture of crime and he's a criminal prosecutor and he's very senior one and I just  met him in the pub one day and I said to him, that's what I think. I said, I think it's  a parallel culture and when you look at it, they've got their own lingo. They've got their own  kind of thieves can't. They've got their own way of describing the world, but they've got their  own paraphamilial structure where the kind the gang leader or so on is is the dad because they're  often fatherless as well due to social breakdown. And then you've also got a moral inversion  where if they think that you're a good person, what you and I would recognize a good person,  they think that that makes you weak, they think that that makes you prey. And they see a lot of  people as prey as well. And so you there's really no attempt to recognize that that is a parallel  culture. And the reason for that is is that our culture has been dissolved into these antagonistic  parallel cultures. And I think that's partly a result intentionally and unintentionally of the  way that we're ruled by this political technique. It's deeply antagonistic. And why is it useful for  elite power to do this? Because what it does is it dissolves social cohesion. Exactly. Which makes  it easier to dissolve nations into this global standard system, which is why this this word  nealism matters. Because you know, if you if you have no essential value and dignity to human life,  then you don't care about this. All you care about is standardizing things. And so anything that's  destructive actually helps that. And you find that anything that's destructive has also become  a business, even this. And so I I ended up doing a bit of that as well. And that that really cured  me a lot of a lot of liberal delusions because I had to work at the hard end of it. And I went  in there with very charitable intentions. Well, I think it was quite challenging, but it was  impossible to maintain beliefs in those liberal ideas after you'd done it. And and so I began  to profoundly revise my my world view. And the perhaps the most profound revision that came uh  in my life was that my wife was and this is a terrible thing to say, but it's true. My wife  was nearly killed um without any reason by the simple negligence of bumbling migrant nurses in  the London hospital where she was going to give birth to my son. And I thought of actually suing  the NHS, but I don't like to do that because we pay for that collectively. And I think that's a  rather terrible thing to do. But I I actually went outside and got out in front of a petrol station  and got on my knees and did a terrible thing for a once true believing liberal. And I got on my knees  and I prayed to God and I begged him to help my wife and my son and and to deliver them alive. And  and if he did, I would serve him for the rest of my life. And he did. And uh since then I have. And  I try to be a less bad person. I I'm I'm not when when people when you talk about God to people who  don't believe in God, they tend to think you're a bit bonkers, but but sincerely what I believe  is that I the way that I try and live my my my profound conviction as a traditional Catholic now  is I honestly try every day to be less bad. And I think that's very realistic for me. And I think  that's a very practical way to look at life. And furthermore, if you think believing in God is  bonkers, have a look at what not believing in God has produced around us. I I'm not sure. I I  began life, you know, many years ago knowing an awful lot of people who didn't believe in God.  And I'm not sure I know any anymore. I think the world has changed a lot. Oh, I I I agree. I  mean, there was a friend of mine who came out. don't go for full-on um procelitization for  people. I I rather prefer to show them the face of evil and let them make their own mind. That's  exactly right. One of my friends and he is a dear friend now. I'll tell you how I met him in a  minute and it's it's a great surprise. He probably didn't try to strangle me to be honest, but uh  because it is funny, but he said to me one day, he said, "Oh, well um I've looked at the world  and it's basically evil." And he and I said, "Yes, it is." And he said, "Well, if there's evil, then  there's." And I said, "Oh, yes. There it is." Now, I just want to tell you that like I was going, we  lived next to a park in London before I immigrated to England from London. I'm not from London. I'm  from the north. My my my wife was from London, so I had to live there on that kind of vast  roundabout full of kebab shops and so on. So, I we we actually lived next to a park. It was  quite nice. And I wasn't working. I just I said to my wife, "Look, these are the precious years. we  we'll just put it on the credit card and I'll stay with, you know, this beautiful little boy that  God's given us. And, you know, she nearly died delivering him. So, you know, thank God. Thank  God for that. And so, I was over in the park with him when he was a toddler. And you never see men  with their own children at that age on their own habitually. Sometimes it's nice, but I saw this  bloke and he was doing what I did. And he he had the usual expression of kind of if you like, you  know, weariesome duty on his face as he's pushing this scooter around like going bar to the sheep.  You know, you kind of look at each other with a kind of recognition of a silent acknowledgement.  But I wasn't silent. I just marched up to him. I said, "Oh, so you're a trans mummy, are you?"  Just like me. And honestly, I thought he was going to provide the form of customer feedback  that I've become habituated to now, which is why my dentist is so well off. But he didn't. But he  was seething. And uh after that, he I realized why he was seething. And uh I I helped him actually.  And he he he'd been run over by a drunken driver because he used to be a really good cyclist.  And it nearly, you know, he crushed a bit of him. He was in a lot of chronic pain. And I said,  "Well, I've had a bad injury and I I got into weightlifting because one of my Catholic friends  is excellent at it and he taught me how to do it. Coached me for years for nothing." And I said,  "Come around to my house. I've got the gear in the shed. I'll show you what to do." And so I did. And  so now it helps you with pain management. It makes you a lot stronger and you you just get used to it  really because weightlifting is painful and you're used to suffering. It changes your relationship  to it. You just feel a lot better. Now he's not miserable anymore. And he he obviously he's  lovely. And thankfully he didn't punch me in the face, but he came around instead for a cup  of tea. Amazing. Amazing. Your story is amazing. Your views are true and so beautifully expressed,  also hilarious. And I am thrilled uh to know with dead certainty that they will be reaching a lot  of people. Um not just here, but a lot of places. I hope you'll come back, Frank Wright, and talk  again because that was wonderful. Oh, lovely job. Yeah, thank you for having me on. Thank you.  The best. Oh, may I just say one thing before we go? Of course. In in a time of deepening spiritual  and political and economic crisis, I would like to remind everybody that again, you you can't blame  people alone, even your bitter political enemies. That's right. Being the way they are. If we are  going to make to do better, and we must do better, we're all finished. That's the state we're in. We  must do better. Try and develop the idea of being a social missionary. Look at the idea of the 20th  century as a vast revolution that tried to replace everything with itself and it's degraded our lives  completely. And look at these people, your bitter political enemies. See them as casualties on the  battlefield. That's right. Because it's a war on our civilization. where you can, when you can,  wherever possible, try and heal the sick and help the wounded and because we must do better than  universal vengeance and moral degradation. So, thank you for having me on once again. I'll shut  up now. That's the Christianity I believe in. Amen. Thank you. That was wonderful. Oh,  well, again, thank you for having me on.