So we saw Zelensky campaigning for Kamala Harris, the unelected president, like I said, be dictator of Ukraine campaigning for Kamala Harris in Pennsylvania a couple of weeks ago. And it just is a reminder that Ukraine is not just like a foreign policy priority. It is central to this administration and has been for 10 years. You've reported this more than anybody. Why? Well, I mean, that's the central question and the kind of mystery about Joe Biden. And it's the key to figuring out how he got to be president. This very unpreposessing, not for intelligent men. We sort of captured, I think, in his very earliest days in the Senate, he came to the Senate as a green 30 year old kind of part time grifter from Delaware. And he was immediately embraced by the sort of elder statesman who are controlled, the foreign policy establishment basically in the Senate and was elevated to the most powerful committee in the Senate, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which he ended up being chairman or ranking member for over a decade. And that is the place where the CIA meets government power. He had access to the CIA, CIA had access to him. And he was very early on captured by the Chinese or captivated by the Chinese. He traveled as a young senator to the Chinese equivalent of Martha's Vineyard and met all the top CCP people came back waxing lyrical about how wonderful China was, just like Tim Wallace, same sort of capture and so much so that they weekly standard at the time ran a cover story just saying how ridiculous he was. The same with Russia, the foreign policy establishment in America has this obsession with Russia and wanting now regime change with Putin in large in NATO. That was, people don't really realize, but Joe Biden was pushing for the enlargement of NATO to include especially Ukraine and Georgia. So yeah, Victoria Newland and Joe Biden are probably the two most instrumental Americans in Ukraine policy since before the maiden revolution in 2014. Victoria Newland was over there. There's this ridiculous scene that was captured on videotape of her sort of striding around made un-square handing out sandwiches from a big bag to the protesters there and saying, good on you, well done. And the CIA, I mean, it's pretty much an established fact that the CIA was involved in the toppling of the Yanukovych regime there, which was sort of more Russia aligned, but not as much as he said, he was sort of trying to do a European trade deal. But anyway, he was after about two months of phone calls with Joe Biden, then the vice president who would harangue him and make these grandiose threats. Yannick Hovetch finally had enough after the ninth phone call, like, interminable hour long phone call with Joe Biden. He just got in helicopter and left and then Victoria Newland is captured on a phone call that was, I think, recorded by the Russians, but released in which she and it's genuinely her. And she's just talking about how they're going to impose their puppet government on Ukraine and they're going to get Joe Biden involved and he's going to give the new government and Ashaboy on the phone and Jake Sullivan has told them that they've got to get Joe Biden involved. So these very unimpressive people, Victoria Newland's not very impressive and neither is Joe Biden. They ended up being the sort of rulers of Ukraine. But what was the appeal for them? Was it ideological? I think through Victoria Newland, yes, because she's a hawk. You know, Neo-conchi was Dick Cheney's primary advisor in the Iraq war. I remember very well. Yeah. So I think, and her husband Robert Kagan is like a leading neo-con intellectual. I worked with him. One of the dumbest people I've ever worked with, never. Yes, Bob Kagan and a very angry and unpleasant man, but stupid. How did he become so influential then? Because he's part of the Washington foreign policy establishment. And because there's views, his views are consistent and well not like consistent. They are sort of the archetype of Washington's foreign policy, very anti-American, I would say, extremely anti-American. But conventional. Yeah. So I know that's interesting because I mean, I think I don't know about Victoria Newland. She doesn't strike me as being particularly intelligent. Joe Biden certainly is not apart from here as a sort of a cunning political cunning. But the three of them then have those those establishment views. So they're useful. And that's kind of my premise is that Joe Biden was the sort of tool of the blob or the people who are in control from the CIA, the State Department. And they wanted to sort of puppet president as they are pretty much always had. And the same people who covered up for Joe Biden and his corruption allowed it green-litered are the same people that are propping up Kamala Harris and who regard Donald Trump as an existential threat, but not to America or democracy like we're told, but to them and their power. It's just amazing to me as an American. If you told me 10 years ago that I'd be sitting, you know, talking to a reporter on camera about how the CIA controls who the president is and then uses the president's puppets over thought, that sounds a little far out. But it's clearly true. Yeah. I don't know just the CIA. I mean, I think it's the work Obama people called the blob what Mike Benz talks about. Sure. You know, it's the Pentagon State Department CIA. And in the cover up of Joe Biden's corruption and Hunter Biden, the Hunter Biden investigation, also the Department of Justice and the IRS were involved. And so it's the classic what Trump called the deep state. And they couldn't control him. He's always been an uncontrollable person. And that's I guess his gift, what made him so good as president and is allowing him now to do so well, but it also makes him an existential threat to the blob to the deep state. So the impeachment, the first impeachment of Trump over Ukraine should have been the tip off to the rest of us that Ukraine was really the kind of the whole point for these people. And I remember thinking, well, it was just an excuse they were using because they wanted to impeach Trump, but no, it really was the third rail for them. Yeah. In hindsight, it was incredible that Donald Trump got impeached for the sins of Joe Biden effectively doing exactly like being accused of doing exactly what Joe Biden did, which was to withhold USAID, Joe Biden withheld a billion dollars of USAID so that the president, Poroshenko of Ukraine fired the honest prosecutor who was investigating the company that was paying his son a million dollars a year. And Donald Trump made in a conversation with Zelensky, he said, you know, can you please investigate the Biden family stopping the prosecution of charisma, this energy company in Ukraine? And for that and for supposedly talking about or withholding aid for like a millisecond from Ukraine, he got impeached. We only know about that conversation because he was spied on and then the contents were leaked, correct? No, I mean, the conversation he had with Zelensky is public. I mean, it's listened to and there's a readout, but I guess, and he then released a transcript himself. And to have a debate and American people isn't meant to have a debate and transcript, these phone calls for some reason are not actually recorded. They're just sort of transcribed. But yeah, it was leaked by a Ukrainian American sort of, I don't know, he was in the in the state department at the time listening. And the crime was threatening to withhold aid as if the Ukraine is a constitutional right to American tax dollars or something. I don't understand the. Well, because they said that it was a, he was, it was of political benefit to him, even though Joe Biden was not candidate for president at the time, they said that that somehow Donald Trump knew that Joe Biden, who was the least likely to become the democratic candidate, that somehow Donald Trump had a crystal ball and figured out that it was Joe Biden. Actually, I mean, Donald Trump knew that there was nefarious stuff going on in Ukraine. And he'd had his personal lawyer Rudy Giuliani was looking into it. And he suspected that Ukraine was involved in interfering with his campaign in 2016 and getting his campaign manager, a guy called Manafort, basically, ended up being jailed. And I'm not, I'm not defending Manafort. I think he was like a lot of grifters, American grifters in Ukraine, very corrupt country, the most corrupt country in Europe. They're out there with their hands out. So I mean, they were Republicans doing it. But the Bidens were doing it. And I think that Joe Biden as vice president sold out the country in many ways. And Ukraine was part of that for a few million dollars for his family. And maybe 25 million that we've discovered from China and Ukraine and Russia and Romania and so on. But I think Ukraine has just been in obsession by the blob because they think they're trying to weaken Russia. And they think the way to do that is they want to win Europe of Russian energy. And they had this fantasy that Ukraine was going to be able to supply Europe with the energy that Russia didn't once they cut off. But it's impossible because Ukraine has 3% of the shale gas deposits that Russia has. So it doesn't make sense. Why would they care? Why? I don't understand. I've never understood why Russia is bad. I mean, either. I might actually theory. I have two theories. One is that because it's sort of orthodox Christian. And so the now America's always sort of exported its way of life and its democracy. And that's been a benign thing until maybe the last decade when the State Department is now thinks that its role in exporting American culture is LGBTQ stuff, which goes right down to I think in Indonesia, very conservative kind of Muslim country. I think it was Indonesia. Or anyway, it was country like that where they were having like drag, drag queen story time, the State Department was funding that, which just causes great hostility in these conservative countries. It damages America's interest to impose these social sort of bizarre social norms onto these like maybe culturally conservative countries. And I think Russia is regarded as culturally conservative. Putin has allied himself with the orthodox church. I don't think necessarily because he himself is religious at all. But just because it's a source of powerful him. And you see it in Poland, a lot of those Eastern block countries, they really reject this cultural imperialism from America. It happened in Afghanistan. I mean, when Kabul fell, the pride flag was hanging over the brand new embassy that the Americans had built. So that's a pride flag in Afghanistan. Yes. So this is just all that does is antagonize everyone around the world. And I don't think the American people want agree with it. Or why would it be exporting homosexuality? Yeah. And transgender, you know, transignor children. But why would the US government even have that in its portfolio? Why is it the US government's business who you sleep with? Well, because that Joe Biden came in promising equity and he just gave an interview to the blade, I think, just boasting about how important his administration had been in promoting, transgender rights, rainbow rights. So I don't, and it's sort of a sort of a shadow agenda that most Americans aren't really aware of. But you saw it when Joe Biden invited this transgender woman who came to the White House and bared her breasts. She's really a man. Bared her breasts for the cameras in the White House. And the pride flag was adorning the White House at equal status with the American flag. And people were outraged by that. But I don't think- And we wonder why we're getting all these hurricanes. It's not global warming, sorry. Well, the trainees in the White House. We've always had hurricanes, though. Yeah, well, yeah. But you can see why they'd be increasing in frequency after stuff like that. That's just it. I think that's one reason why Russia has resisted and they are trying to impose on the same with Hungary. Remember, America has sent- Hungary's kind of traditionally Catholic and quite culturally conservative. And so what does America do? Send a gay ambassador with a husband and adopted kids to just talk about nothing but gay rights. It's got an IQ of about 80 and it doesn't speak Hungarian and it's lecturing everyone in the country about how immoral they are. Yeah, I mean, send him to Australia. He would be embraced. They would love him. But why would you antagonize a country that's conservative and is having its own- Well, that's the purpose of diplomacy, right, is to make your potential allies hate you. Yeah, that's right. Yeah. So I think that's one reason that the State Department has a low thing for Russia. But also I think it's because- this is my theory. I have no proof for it. But that China seems to be much more of a threat than Russia, which is a small GDP. It really isn't that much of a threat to America. Whereas China is encroaching, it's imperialist. It's very aggressive now in the South China Sea. It's trapping all these little countries in debt traps. The Belt and Road Initiative is an imperialist objective and it's directly threatening to the United States. So I think that the Wall Street or the people that fund the blob and fund the wars don't want the American people to realize that China is the real threat. So they focus their attention on Russia. And so that we just forget about China. It's amazing how many Americans fall for it. I say that was sadness. Hmm. They fall for it. I mean, what was Russia as Imperial Ames? No. What threat does Russia post the United States accept a nuclear response to provocation in NATO? I don't- but people kind of fall for it. It's like the worst person in the world is Putin. Okay, maybe it's a bad guy. But is that- Joe, a lot of bad guys around there. There are a lot of bad guys. There are a lot of bad guys, including in our government. So it's interesting. So but you think the point of Ukraine is to destabilize Russia. Yeah. The point of destabilizing Russia is because they won't bow to American cultural imperialism on the gay stuff. Not entirely. I just think that that gives sort of impetus and passion to those people in the state department who, you know, everyone needs to be on the same song sheet and they all need to hate Russia. And so why- you have to try and understand why do they hate Russia so much? What's Russia done to them? And you know, I do think that the fact that they're sort of, I mean, remember the dramas when Putin imposed some sort of anti-gay law? I don't think it was- it wasn't actually anti-gay. It was kind of what Ron DeSantis is trying to do in Florida is just stop this grooming and encroachment on childhood. Yeah, you can't throw sexual propaganda at children. Yeah. That would be like the, you know, anti-kidtature law. That would totally conventional in any normal country, right? That's right. And, you know, you can't fund hormone replacement and genital mutilation for 12 year olds. You know, you don't want to set kids on the path of changing their sex. So leave them alone until they're 18. I think that's pretty reasonable. But that scene is being anti-gay. Amazing. It's funny how some of the biggest threats to your personal liberty are never discussed in the media. Maybe that's on purpose. Here's one of them. It's called Section 702. What is 702? Well, Section 702 refers to a part of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, FISSA. And it allows warrantless surveillance of American citizens. Now that's against our Bill of Rights, of course, but that has not prevented your US Congress from extending it again for another two years. That means your elected representatives have allowed the United States government to spy on you. They've weaponized your government, which you pay for against you its own citizens. So what can you do about that? Well, you can vote out anybody who made that possible, including the current Speaker of the House, but in the meantime, you can take steps to protect yourself from their spying. And one of the ways you can do that is by protecting your internet browsing history. Yes. Your internet service provider tracks every click you make online and then sells that information that goes to companies trying to sell you things, but it also goes to the federal agencies that want to spy on you and manipulate you with that information. That is happening to you. It is definitely already happened to us. We verified that. No thanks. We recommend a product called ExpressVPN. ExpressVPN is a personal private network that re-routs 100% of your internet activity through secure encrypted channels. Now why is that important? Well, because it keeps what you're doing online private, not because you're doing anything wrong, but because privacy is a prerequisite for freedom. No privacy, no freedom. So if you want to protect yourself, we recommend ExpressVPN. Go to ExpressVPN.com slash Tucker and you'll get three extra months of privacy for free. That's ExpressVPN.com slash Tucker. Nothing this all came in. You've written about this for several years now. Pretty conclusively, I would say, you're an amazing book on 100 Biden's laptop, which should have substantiates a lot of what you're saying. No one has ever been punished for it. There was no effect, really. No, so that's why I wrote the second book, The Big Guy, which is Joe Biden's code name that Hunter Biden's former business partner is like Tony Bobolinski. Had to use to refer to Joe Biden because the family was so paranoid about his involvement. And I think the first book, the laptop from hell that we're at the New York Post wrote about and then got censored by Big Tech. At the time, that was before the 2020 election. And we didn't really understand how this was happening. We just thought, oh, Twitter and Facebook are just woke and they want Joe Biden to win so they're censuring us. But what we found out after the election in part thanks to Elon Musk opening up the Twitter files. And also because of a whole lot of the once the Republicans took the House in 2022 or after 2022, we, they got to subpoena a whole lot of documents and also interview witnesses. Plus, whistleblowers from the FBI told us that the reason that Twitter and Facebook censored us was because they'd been warned by the FBI for weeks ahead of our story, even appearing to look out for a Russian hack and leak operation, likely in October, likely involving Hunter Biden. And so when Twitter and Facebook saw our story on October 14, 2020, they recognized it immediately as the Russian hack and leak. How would the FBI know? Well, the FBI was spying on Rudy Giuliani who was Donald Trump's personal lawyer. They unbeknownst to him, they had a covert surveillance warrant on his iCloud. And so they would have had access to the email that came to him in August of 2020 from John Paul MacEiser who was, I think, interviewed him, the laptop repair shop owner who had the laptop that Hunter had abandoned at his shop. And the FBI had actually subpoenaed that laptop in December of 2019. They had it in their possession. They'd had it for 10 months when they were telling Twitter and Facebook, oh no, this is Russian disinformation. You know, you must censor. So and then a few days after we were censored, outcomes the dirty 51 letter and it was the open letter by 51 former intelligence officials. Most of them CIA, I think 42 XCA, including John Brennan and Leon Panetta and James Clapper. There were five either directors or acting directors of the CIA who signed that dishonest letter that said that the laptop was Russian disinformation. And therefore, our reporting was Russian disinformation. They called it, they said it had all the classic earmarks of a Russian information operation. So now if any of them responded to any questions about it and they just say, well, we didn't say it was Russian disinformation. We said information operation, same thing. And they knew because they leaked it to Politico and then the Washington Post and New York Times picked it up and all the headlines were Russian disinformation, the laptop. So that killed the story stone dead. And two days later, Joe Biden gets up on stage with Donald Trump in the last debate and he uses that letter to basically get out of jail free and the story never became anything. But what we now know is that that letter was not just signed by these former's but that it was cleared by the internal CIA classification review board in record time. And even they saw it and thought it was overtly political just three weeks before an election. So they sent it upstairs to Gina Haspel who was then the CIA director under Donald Trump and she gave it the green light to be published immediately. And so the dirty 51 letter was actually a domestic CIA interference operation with the election. And that just boggles your mind when she's here. What happened to Gina Haspel? Well she obviously left and she now has a job in some, it's either a law firm or something. It's one of the, you know, stables that disloyal Democrat lovers end up going and making lots of money in. But never punished retainers through the clearance. Of course. Of course. All of them do all the 51. And in fact, several of these signatories are not just former CIA people, but they're active CIA contractors today. But why not pull that I've never understood no one has a right to a security clearance period and people have them pulled all the time unpopular people have their security clearances pulled at which point they can't work with the US government. And they can't, they don't have access to information that I as a taxpayer don't have access to. Why not just pull their security clearances like every single one of them day one? Well, I mean, that's what Donald Trump should have done. Yeah. But he had a couple of months, I guess. And it took a while to, for this all to settle in, everyone to really understand what they did that they actually did interview with the election because I mean, we know now from polls that enough Biden voters would have changed their vote if they'd known about Joe Biden's corruption. You know, even if they just knew that he'd been lying to the American people during the campaign when he said, I know nothing about my son, Hunter's overseas business dealings. And yet we had on the front page an email from Hunter's Ukrainian sort of paymaster from that company, Barisma, who had thanked Hunter for introducing him to his father in Washington D.C. that then sitting vice president. We found out after the election that was a dinner at Cafe Milano, which you probably know in Georgetown that Hunter on their own way. Yeah. Well, Hunter organized that for his father, the vice president in a private room to meet with his Ukrainian business partners, plus Russian, plus Kazakhstan. He said he did a three for one deal in April of 2015. Joe Biden denied that he'd ever met these people. He sat down. He had dinner and it was only when the Washington Post just trying to fact check my story about the Cafe Milano dinner. You know, their four Pinocchios people were very Glenn Kessler was certain that, you know, I'd made it up or it was wrong. They're four Pinocchios people. And the White House then admitted to Glenn Kessler, not never to me, but yes, Joe Biden did go to that dinner, but he didn't do it for any nefarious purpose, nearly stayed for a short term, which is not true because someone who was there told me that he was there for the entire dinner. And he might not, like it's not like Joe Biden is going to talk about the finer details of, you know, how much money you're going to pay Hunter, but he just has to show up and be charming and be the vice president for all the money to flow into Hunter's pockets. Has he ever answered any substantial questions about this? No. The only time that he sort of asked the questions is actually by the New York Post, Washington correspondent, Stephen Nelson, and by Steve Ducey, Peter Ducey, sorry, from Fox News. And all they managed to do is shout questions across to him. But in all the interviews that Biden has done as president and four years, no reporters ever said, let's just go through this for a second. No. Someone I think from my opinion, CBS, it was a woman that was standing up and he gets very aggressive. And then the Axios, there was an Axios reporter too. He just, Joe Biden, people underestimate his aggressiveness. He's very good at it. He's very nasty. And so if you ask him a question he doesn't like, it's almost like this narcissistic rage. It's quite frightening and you see reporters recoil and you ask him anything around Hunter's sort of or the family corruption because it's just also Joe's younger brother, Jim Biden. He gets very aggressive and nasty and pushes back. So he's successful in that. Why do the CIA just like Trump so much? It's clearly not because they thought he was unfit to be president. They supported the senile man for president. So that's not an important criterion for them. What's the real reason they hit it Trump so much? Because Trump is uncontrollable. He's always been uncontrollable since he was a child. He's sort of magic strength, I think, that he won't be told what to do by anybody. And you saw the effect of that during the four years that he was president. Suddenly the blobs agenda was to the wayside. anybody. And you saw the effect of that during the four years that he was president. Suddenly, the blobs agenda was to the wayside because Donald Trump treats foreign policy, just like domestic policy, just the way he did when he was a property developer in Queens. He acts on first principles, logically, common sense. He looks at an issue and he goes, oh, this is a problem. I'm just going to treat like for instance, when he became president, Barack Obama said to him, the biggest problem that we have is North Korea because Kim Jong-un keeps on detonating all these nuclear tests and he's a problem. And so Donald Trump neutralised that he put Kim Jong-un in a box and he was mocked mercilessly for it. You know, little rocket man and his bromance with Kim Jong-un, but it worked. Same thing with Putin. You know, Trump's just very belligerent. He just makes threats and people don't know if he means it or not. I think he threatened Putin that, you know, those lovely domes in Moscow shame if something happened to them. And Putin didn't invade any countries while Trump was president, like he did when Obama was president, like he did immediately when Biden was president. So Putin was in his box. Iran on its knees, it was completely broke. It didn't have the money to fund the proxies to attack Israel like it did last October 7. You know, the Middle East, whatever you think, I mean, the Abraham Accords were the promise of peace in the Middle East, which had been, you know, the mantra of so many presidents for decades and suddenly Trump comes in and he kind of starts to pull it and that was anathema to the blob controllers because the agenda, whatever agenda they have, which I kind of think is still opaque. I don't really understand it completely. But their agenda is the opposite of what the American people want. And that's why Donald Trump didn't follow their agenda. And that's why he was so successful in foreign policy. And they don't want that. So I think that the idea that he would become president again is an existential threat to them and their power. And that's why they will do whatever it takes to ensure that he doesn't win. And we've seen they've attacked him with law fair to assassination attempts. They've totally demonized him. So half the country thinks he's Hitler and still hasn't worked. If he does get elected, I think it's pretty clear he can't really govern with a government like the one we have now or the one we had between 16 and 20. Do you think it'll be possible to in four years uproot the rot? I mean, no, I don't think so. Although the thing is, he's much wiser than we all are than we were. I look back even in 2020 and think how naive we were. I mean, this happens all the time. Like in 2016, you think you're naive after the Iraq, or you think you're naive. You really, you can never be too cynical, I think. And so he knows a lot more now. And he knows he knew that the deep state was a problem. But I don't think he realized extent they would go to to cripple his administration, which they pretty successfully did. It's amazing he achieved as much as he did consider him. He had the Russia hoax hanging over him, the Mueller investigation. He's just coming out of it into the clear and then COVID hit. So I think he'll be older and wiser. I think he will not be as naive about the people he puts around if he admits himself that he made mistakes in personnel. And I think that's why this demonization of the project 2025 or whatever it is from the Heritage Foundation has been so effective because they know that what Trump needs is a really good group of 2,000 people to install day one in his administration. And that was really the central premise of project 2025. But I think he's got a good good group of people like he's got Howard Luttnik who knows about how hired 2,000 good people at a moment. So notice because he had to do it with counterfeit sterile after September 11. And now he's got Elon Musk, U, RFK Jr. I mean he's got a phalanx of smart people who are not sort of traditional Republicans but who are wise about the deep state and the kind of existential threat to democracy that they are even though they project that and demonize Trump for it. And so a lot of people Silicon Valley, they see that Trump is actually the answer and not the problem. And so they're backing him. So you would hope with that brain's trust that he's going to be able to at least make a dent on it. I don't think in four years he's going to be able to solve the problem of the CIA, the FBI and the State Department. But he'll probably fire the top three layers and it'll be messy and they will probably stage, I don't know, I mean the worst thing you can imagine. I don't want to jinx it but you know terrorist domestic terrorist tax America has been thankfully free of that unlike England, Australia. Most countries have had Islamist terrorist attacks unlike America. So whether that's because American culture intrinsically sort of allows immigrants to feel American so they don't hate America as much. Or because I don't see I have to be a great job. I don't know. But I would imagine that that'll be used as an excuse and a way to weaken Trump. But he's only got one term. It seems likely to me. Is it? Yeah. I would think so. Yeah, that and pulling the supports out from underneath the economy. Yes, because yeah. Janet Yellen's been dropping up Joe Biden's economy in the stock market. Yeah. That's ugly. I just want to go back for one moment to Biden's behavior as vice president. Pretty out in the open. I mean the sun hunters flying around the world raising money on his father's name. What is Barack Obama the then president think of this? Yeah, that was strange. I mean he was aware of Joe Biden's corruption issues because when they were vetting Biden to be vice president, this was a major issue and Hunter had to resign from various lobbying gigs that he had and was very resentful of it. In fact, he resented Obama and the Obama White House because they kept on putting crimps on his ability to use the White House to make money. And like for instance, when Hunter first joined the barisma board, his best friend in business, Devin Archer, who has is now an anti Biden person, but was then on the barisma board with Hunter. He was invited with Hunter to the White House to meet with Joe Biden and ostensibly for a school project. But what came out of it was a photograph of Joe Biden, the vice president with Hunter's business partner, Devin Archer, just joined the board of barisma. That barisma then Hunter took the photo. Barisma put that photo on their website and that became a problem for the White House when they realized. So the ethics or the White House Council actually contacted Hunter Biden's business partner and other business partner and said quick take it down. So it was an emergency situation, but it was enough. It was seen and it was enough of an embarrassment for David Ignatius of all people at the Washington Post to write a column, excoriating Joe Biden for being so sloppy. David Ignatius being the CIA spokesperson of the Washington Post. Yeah. Yeah. Form policy columnist in like Philip bump. So what about that? You spent your life in journalism or the daughter of a famous journalist. At what point did like the overwhelming majority of journalists become more loyal to the CIA than to their readers? Yeah. I don't know. My father was a journalist in Tokyo in the 1960s and he said it was crawling with spies then. So journalism, especially in the Cold War, was full of, well, those august publications like New York Times Washington Post, full of spies back then. Your dad would know as well from, because he was a journalist in that era. I think it was really journalism and spies were good friends and great sources and also kind of interchangeable in some ways. So maybe nothing has changed. Well, I think that's actually fair. I know that you're saying it out loud. I think that is that is I think I know for a fact that that's true. So you're right. But the difference is that I think the CIA used, well, we used to think, I don't know if I even question myself about this now, but we used to think that they're on the side of the angels. Like they were promoting truth, justice in the American way and that was a good thing. But I think they've turned, you know, they are now not acting in America's best interests. I don't know if a rogue element has has crept in. I don't know if, you know, because of that they recruit smart kids from universities and those kids have already been brainwashed. John Brennan was a communist, you know, like known to be at one point. So maybe just the people they're recruiting have changed the culture of the CIA to be more anti-American. Like, you know, the universities are like the institutions are. So maybe that's just an organic thing that's happened. But certainly they're not acting in the best interests of what the American people natural disasters, wars, political conflicts, the recent threatened, doc workers, strikes, it ports around the country. All of these are reminders that things that we take for granted in this country like medicine are all dependent on a long and fragile supply chain. If something happens to that supply chain, you and your family will not be able to get things that you need to live. So right now seems like a pretty good time to stock up on essentials for when the next unexpected disaster hits because it's coming. We know that. That's why we're partnering with Jase Medical, which can supply you and your family directly to your home with things you need. Quick, easy, affordable solutions for problems that require life-saving medication for ones in your family in the case of an emergency. So the Jase case is a personalized emergency medication kit that contains essential antibiotics and medications to treat the most common and potentially deadly bacterial infections. For example, and then a whole host of add-on medicines from Iver, Mac, Dan, to Epipens, depending on what you and your family may need. How hard is it to get this not hard? The process is quick and easy. You fill out an online form. You consult with their physician and you receive your medications through a licensed pharmacy at a fraction of the regular price. It is all totally above board, completely legit, and in the case of a disruption to our supply chain, which again could very easily happen, it could mean the difference between surviving and not. So we recommend it. Go to jase.com. Use code Tucker at checkout for a discount on your order. That's jase. J-A-S-E.com promo code Tucker. Certainly now, though, it's pretty obvious that there's a massive disconnect between the agenda of the Blob State Department, DOD, CIA, NSA, all the armed federal agencies and American voters. It's just not really a big overlap between what one group wants and what the country itself wants. At some point, don't you all have to say, well, I don't know. I'm supposed to represent my my readers or viewers. They don't seem to have any sense of loyalty or obligation to the people they're supposedly serving. Yeah, but think about the New York Times and the Washington Post. Who are the people that they're serving? Who really are the subscribers of the New York Times? We don't have any visibility into that. Do you think the New York Times really cares if the the CCP buys up a million subscriptions at $1 a pop? The Washington Post, like they're serving the Blob, that's their people now. Do you think it's possible that foreign governments buy subscriptions in bulk to try to influence news organizations? I don't know, but it makes sense. It does. I don't know if it is happening or not, because that's all proprietary information. Why would the New York Times look too closely at the Golden Egg that the foreign goose laid? That's a fascinating possibility. You know that foreign governments, Intel Services are all over social media. That's one of the things we learned when Elon Musk was on Twitter, is that foreign governments, a number of foreign governments had employees working there. One, the CIA and the FBI had, if they were so many, Twitter that they had a support group, like they had their own Slack channel. Remember, James Baker, he was the general council for the FBI. During all the right, he was involved in all that Russia collusion stuff. He was certainly there in the room. And then suddenly eight months before the 2020 election, he gets parachuted into Twitter as their number two lawyer. And he was involved, we now know from the Twitter files, intimately in the censorship of the New York Post. There were people at Twitter, including the much maligned Yoll, Roth, who was the chief sensor. He was actually pushing back on this FBI, CIA censorship. But James Baker, which is asking the post, that's such a smart point. You're author something about him. He was he was easy to hate and blame, but it turned out, you're Roth was by far. He was a good guy. Far for exactly. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, it's sad. Will it is sad if you were spoken to him? No, but I've, he wrote a sworn declaration for a separate court case in which he was just honest. He said that he was the one that told us that the FBI came in and said, look out for this Russian disinformation in October about underburden. So I've always had a soft spot for him. I thought, well, he's one of the few people there who's been truthful. He doesn't seem to have an agenda. You said that the FBI knew, I'm sorry, I'm jumping around with her so much. You said that the FBI knew that the laptop was coming. Your reporting was on the way because they were spying on Rudy Giuliani. The president's lawyer, which is pretty shocking. Yes, they would do that. They might have found anything. Well, I know that we were being surveilled at that, at the, I know for a fact, in October of 2020, my producers and I were being surveilled. By the end of the day. I don't know by somebody who stole a hard drive with images from Hunter's laptop out of the UPS sorting center in New York. Do you have you ever thought that because you've reported on this so extensively for so long that maybe, you know, your communications are not secure? Oh, I'm sure they're not. Yeah. And in fact, when I talked to new people like there was some NYPD former NYPD people, sorry, FBI and NYPD people, they said to me, we're going to meet, we had to meet in person. They didn't trust they said to me, your phones, you know, I know you mean well, but there will be people listening in on you. So I'm just listening to the conversation in the room through the mic on the phone. I don't know. I don't know how they do it. I mean, just the fact we have our phones with us, people who are super secure conscience, including Wall Street people and so on, they leave their phones outside. But I kind of think I'm a journalist. And so if I'm meeting with sources that don't want, so I always mean in person anyway, or we communicate with encrypted apps, which are probably not safe, but there are a couple that may be okay. When you're reporting was censored, did anybody in the White House press corps, any fellow journalists you knew from other publications extend sympathy and say to you, like, I think this is wrong. What's happening? I mean, how did other journalists respond? Well, the usual ones you would expect would did so the conservative ones. But no, I mean, I remember Maggie Haberman, who used to work at the New York Post now in New York Times star anti-Trump person. She, and but she's just a normal reporter. Like she actually has good curiosity still. And so she tweeted our story because it was amazing. And there was another reporter, young reporter, I think, from political or somewhere who also retweeted. Just like, oh, look what the New York Post is going to be surprised. And they were like, excoriated on Twitter by journalism professors for having the audacity to promote our story. What's a journalism professor? Yeah, exactly a propaganda professor. Maybe that's what they are. Is it a job that requires a specialized degree? Do you think I did a degree at North West? No way. I did a I did a Masters in journalism. And it was the best thing I ever did. Oh, come on. No, it was brilliant. It was brilliant. This was in 96. So it was, it hadn't been polluted. And there was some fantastic real journalists there. Chicago, not Columbia. So Chicago was okay. Incredible. Yeah. No, it was wonderful. I learned so much about, you know, just the basics of journalism and there was no propaganda. Well, you just overturned my preconception. But I think it's different. Now look, I think I look at Northwestern. I see what happens, but in Columbia. And the difference is that the new breed of journalists think that they have to change the world. And that's why they're slumming it and becoming journalists are not going to Wall Street. You know, I think if they were smart enough to lend money for a living, they would. I think we're getting the dumb ones. So what what exactly happened to Joe Biden is he still, I mean, he has escaped any punishment for the many crimes that you've detailed at some length. And I don't think that's overstatement to say you've detailed the crimes of Joe Biden. He's never been punished. Never will be. I don't think is he still running the country? Was he ever running the country? Well, that's that right. Of course. Yeah, I mean, if you saw him in 2020 in, you know, on the campaign trail, basically an eyewear and new ham share, it was obvious that he was cognitively shot. He'd have to have Dr. Jill lead him across the stage to make a stupid speech. He had telepromptors dragged into tiny town halls because no one was interested in him just to do basic stump speeches that any other politician could do in their sleep. So it was amazing that things were rigged and that people like Amy Klobuchar and Pete Buddha judge just agreed to step aside for him. But I guess he was the only palatable available candidate that they had that they could pretend was a moderate to the American people. And so, but I think with Joe Biden sort of a mystery, everyone now is saying, oh, you know, he's sent aile. But I think with all these like cognitive decline problems, it sort of waxes and wanes. And remember, he had those aneurysms back in, I think the 80s. He had a couple of pretty serious brain bleeds. I remember very well. Yeah. And brain operations. So you don't know how that fact is in. And because I know people and foreign foreign sort of heads of state who have met with Joe Biden behind closed stores for extended periods in Washington, DC from two different countries. And they said he was completely lucid. This is halfway through his presidency that I'm going, come on, no way. You know, you can tell me it's off the record. No, no, no, they said no, absolutely. He was compass mentors. He was running the agenda. Everyone around him like Anthony Blinken was deferring to him. He only had like a like talking points on a piece of paper that he referred to occasionally. But he was definitely in charge. So that's the good job. But then someone else I spoke to who was there at one of those G 20 or G eight summits in Cornwall in England said that. And remember, there was footage of Joe Biden sort of wandering around aimlessly and looking lost. And apparently, he was completely out of it there. He was, you know, gooseing Boris Johnson's wife and just acting very inappropriately. And so I think that jet lag and, you know, the time of day when they can't quite control his environment that he, the, the senility sort of creeps in. But he still has lucid moments and maybe long moments. And we saw that every time he had to do a big set piece, except the debate against Donald Trump, when it almost seemed like they let him out without a a safety net, you know, late at night when he'd been doing all this traveling. And it was almost like he was set up to fail. And I think now he probably, you know, he's had sleep. He doesn't, he hasn't had to travel as much. He's vacationing all the time in his beach house. So I think he's probably in the best cognitive shape he's been in for a while. And he seems to be pretty lucid. You know, when you see him out giving speeches, when he's undercutting Kamala Harris, as he did twice in the last few weeks, you know, when he said she just picked a fight with Ron DeSantis over the hurricane. And Joe Biden, de seamlessly comes in and says, oh, Ron DeSantis is a great guy. You know, I talked to him all the time. When he cut in, she was going to do a big speech in Detroit, where she was going to take credit for ending the longshoremen's impending strike. And Joe Biden, just that moment decides to make an appearance in the Washington, you know, the press room for the first time ever. And of course all the cameras cut from Detroit straight to Joe Biden, he didn't have much to say other than to say that he and Kamala Harris were joined at the hip that we were singing from this, you know, we're on the same page. And she's trying to turn the page. So I think that he's, and there's been reporting from behind the scenes that he's angry that Kamala Harris is trying to or her campaigns trying to distance her from him and throwing him under the bus and trying to reject by dynamics. She went to, I think Pittsburgh and gave this economic speech in which other Pittsburgh or Chicago, in which she didn't mention Biden, I mean, she did not pay tribute to Joe Biden for the fabulous economy that he's given everyone. So he was angry about that. Apparently in Dr. Jill's angry as well. Do you think it would be part, I mean, Kamala Harris has got to be as controlled as Joe Biden was correct. Same people. They're same people you saw there was a letter like the dirty 51 letter was they, I mean, I got 251 people from the national security establishment. Some of them, the same as the the dirty 51 about eight or nine of them were the same, including Leon Panetta. And they're just saying that that Kamala Harris is the most competent commander in chief that we could have far superior to Donald Trump. And she's so unworthy of that. Incredible that these people would put their reputations on the line. Leon Panetta, former CIA director, former congressman from California, kind of an idiot. I can say since I know him, hard to believe you're in CIA, but he is telling us that Kamala Harris is the most qualified person to be president of the United States. Yeah. Yeah. Fast superior in every way to Donald Trump. But if you'll say that, then you'll see anything like like like that reality doesn't matter. Like that Hunter Biden's laptop is Russian disinformation. They just lie and they get away with it. And they treated like, you know, eminent people. So you're on Australia and who's living the United States for many, many years. I think it's fair to say not to speak for you, but you love America. I think I was born in America. I'm an American citizen. I was born in Peru. I was born in Queens, New York, just like Donald Trump. Really? Yes. Oh, of course my pair. I'm an anchor baby. Oh, nice. So my parents were foreign, my dad was a foreign correspondent. And they were in New York. So I spent my first two years here. So, okay. So as an American citizen who lived in this country a long time, national one of those evil globalists, are you really got another passport? Yeah. And I grew up in a lot of countries. So I'm sort of, I'm one of those people. You are kind of ruthless. I'm a globalist cause of all. But I mean, sometimes people who've lived a lot of places have a clear perspective on this. If you have a country where nobody believes in the leadership doesn't believe that they're morally justified in what they're doing. Doesn't believe they're telling the truth about anything assumes that their lips are moving, they're lying. You know, how does your country continue? Do you need that trust to have a voluntary system and democracy? But the America is the last country that where there is some sort of freedom and some sort of hope that that, you know, the people can take back control of their government again. And I think that's because there's a, you know, residual feeling among Americans because of the revolution because they are untamable like Donald Trump. And they're sort of outlaws in a way. And also because of the constitution, the First Amendment, the Second Amendment, you know, that protects America from the sort of censorship that we've seen to send on Europe and Australia and New Zealand. And, you know, I know from Australia that, you know, people are like frogs in boiling water. They don't actually realize what's happened particularly since COVID COVID like Jane Fonda said was a great boon to the left. She saw that very early on. And it allowed a lot of censorship initially about, you know, to save us health because of COVID to stop nor she scientists like Jay Batter charia and Marnie McCarry telling the truth about COVID that it wasn't actually as lethal as everyone said. And that masks made no difference. And and that the vaccine was not needed for young people and that it was probably bad for them. So all of that censorship that worked so well when everyone was afraid, I think, gave a green light to the bad guys in control allowed them to see that, wow, we could do that in COVID, we can do whatever we like. And that's what's happened in Europe and Australia, you know, England. And in America it had, we see it. The good thing is that it's sort of, they've tried to do it and they sort of succeeded. And I did the deep dive on the laptop. And so it happened there and it happened with COVID. It even means about Jill Biden were being censored. But because of Elon Musk, because of the Twitter files and because enough Americans have woken up and I just, I don't know, in their DNA, they despise overlords. So they're rejecting it. And I think that's what this election is about. You know, you've got the untamed, well uncontrollable Donald Trump versus just another cipher of the blob. One of the reasons this moment is so bewildering is because it's so confusing. What is going on? One of the reasons we're confused is because honest history is no longer taught in the United States, except in a few very small pockets, unless you understand what ideas came from, why they were formed, why they're being spread. What happened in the past, it's very hard to understand what's happening right in front of you in your own country today. We f- It came from why they were formed, why they're being spread, what happened in the past, it's very hard to understand what's happening right in front of you in your own country today. We thought a lot about this. The disappearance of honest history, and we think we have found one place to find honest history to get actually educated about what you're seeing happen in the United States in 2024. The rot in our schools has blinded us to all of this. It all comes from a lack of education. And so we think we have an answer for that. And it's Hillsdale College. And Hillsdale College is an undergraduate institution. It offers graduate courses as well, but here's the point. It's accessible to you for free. You can get an education from Hillsdale for free. Go to tuckerforhillsdale.com and sign up. Again, cost you nothing. You can take online courses. Here's one that we strongly recommend. It's called Marxism, Socialism, and Communism. This doesn't cost you anything. It does not take a ton of time. It's six documentary style episodes. And it will help you understand what is happening to your country because you'll understand where these ideas came from and what the plan is. The class again is Marxism, Socialism, and Communism. It's taught by Hillsdale College. And you can get it for free. Go to tuckerforhillsdale.com, tuckerforhillsdale. H-I-L-L-S-D-A-L-E.com and get educated about your country. What happened to you in 2020? Would it have been possible now with an open X? No. So I do think Elon buying Twitter was a pivotal event in American history. And I still don't understand why he did it. Why do you think he did it? I kind of think it was a mistake in a way. He sort of said that. He sort of got, it was a spur of the moment, whim. And then if he could have got out of it, he probably would have because it's been a terrible burden for him. And he's now the target of so much lawfare and deep state interference. And look, California has just stopped him from being able to set off some of his rockets. I mean, he's such a genius. He managed, you know, it NASA needed him to rescue our astronauts. That should have been a huge scandal that they had two astronauts up there just to band and and they couldn't get them back. Elon's the only person who could get them back. He just had a rocket come back to Earth when that event happened before and, you know, land back in the launcher or whatever it is. But I mean, he's just brilliant. And so they're trying to hobble him. He's hard to hobble. But I think he's public enemy number one next to Trump. I mean, as long as X is open, as long as you have truth telling or free speech at scale like that, it's pretty hard to turn your country to tell a Terian. Yes. So can they, I mean, do you think the people, you know, the John Brennan's of the world, the Barack Obama's the world, people who do want to make it Stalinist to people like that allow X to stay open? Well, see what they've done, which is clever, is that only half the country has been red-peeled and understands what's going on. And the other half of the country, which is the well-educated part of the country that lives in Washington and New York and San Francisco and places and earn lots of money and think of themselves as being superior. What's happened is that they've been pitted against these troglodytes of the right, you know, the ultra-maga, the semi-fascist as Joe Biden called Trump supporters. And so Joe Biden did a very good job of dividing Americans against each other. And there really is now just an accepted view of half of America as that they're fat, that they're morally inferior, that really would be better off without them. They're morally inferior. 100%. So Epstein's clients are calling other people morally inferior. Exactly. Yeah. Incredible. Do you know any of them? Any of the people you're describing? Well, I live among them. I mean, I live in Manhattan. So I mean, I see them. I guess I'm not great friends with them, but they, they, I guess they're not our readers, really. They're not necessarily you're post. So is it your sense that they have no idea what's actually happening? No, they really didn't think Joe Biden had dementia before that debate. Well, they really thought the COVID-Vax stopped COVID. Yeah, I do think that these people, you know, they are so ignorant and naive. You see it when like Martha Raditz interviewing J.D. Vance, I think she genuinely thought to herself, what's a few apartment complexes, a handful of apartment complexes being taken over by Venezuelan gangs of illegal migrants big deal. I mean, she really, that's the way they think it's not that they're making it up. It's just that they live in this bubble because they didn't really know that there was an illegal migrant invasion going on because the New York Times and Washington person never told them. And it's starting Bethesda should be in Bethesda. Yeah, the kind of, yeah, it's creeping around. I mean, it's in New York. It's very hard to ignore it now in New York. But the clever thing they do about that is they, they conflate migrants. They just call them migrants so that it looks like Donald Trump is anti immigration, which is not. He's, what he is is anti illegal immigration. And when you have 10 to 15 million maybe more illegal migrants that you haven't vetted as, as Clinton just let the Canada bag the other day come into rape and murder and pillage and take over apartment complexes in Aurora, Colorado. I mean, that's a huge problem. And that's something that the New York Times, the Washington Post kept from their readers. So they, so wild conservatives or Trump supporters, we know everything. We know reality because we know the real reality via X and and sort of fringe conservative publications like the New York Post. But we also know their reality because it's forced on us. We have to live in their reality. I mean, maybe not in Northern Maine, but certainly if you live in New York or LA or anywhere Chicago, you know, you are aware of the, the contempt with which these people hold conservatives and Trump supporters. And, and that, but they don't, they live in their bubble. They're not aware of reality like the migrant invasion. They're not really probably aware of Joe Biden's senility because because, you know, when those videos are shown endlessly on Hannity, for instance, of Joe Biden bumbling around getting lost on a stage or those things falling upstairs, they don't really see those. And they were, they were trained into thinking that anyone who shows those, it's, it's false. It's what was that fake word they had like, um, cheap facts, cheap facts. Yeah, cheap facts. So they're so naive and so propaganda is, but the journalists themselves are. And you see the CNN panels now where this Kentucky Republican called Scott Jennings goes on and kind of red pills them. And they're all just astounded that he's telling them just these basic things that that any normal are happening in their country, but they have no sense of it because they're all in Newton mass or Martha's Vineyard or whatever. And they only consume the media that propagandizes them and keeps them in the dark. So they're all cut off. I mean, they're what the hippies used to accuse their parents who being, totally out of touch, the latest, living exactly living in a wealthy. Yeah. Yeah. Nothing affects them. But so why wouldn't, I mean, a fair country, fourth Martha Raditz to live in an MS 13 controlled housing project for a few years? Well, she probably will soon. I mean, that's what's going to, that's the effect of this invasion. It's every single part of America eventually is going to including all of this data main for the record filled filled with African immigrants. You have filled this. Oh, absolutely. And that's that been fly immediately, you know, falling apart, displacing the people who were born there. Oh, yeah, landlords are paid to give preference to non citizens from Africa over American citizens in housing, not just public housing, but just any housing in the state of Maine. Yeah. And that's true in rural places around the country. This is the worst thing that's ever happened in the United States, including the Civil War and people just are kind of ignoring it. Well, Springfield are higher. That was the genius of Donald Trump. Yeah. They're eating the cats. They're eating the pets. I mean, and it became memes and, and you know, the fact checkers at, you know, times I'm not sure I'm supposed to just very angry with him for telling lies and they went searching for cats that were eaten and claimed they were none. But the brilliance of that one line was it just brought the focus on Springfield, Illinois and other towns of Springfield are high on other towns like it that have been inundated secretly in the dead of night with plain loads of illegal migrants brought from the border. Like we tracked them into Westchester. We're pretty much the only media that we're there at three in the morning at Westchester airport watching these plain loads of illegals arrive and get put into buses that had their names blanked out and just driven off to the Tri-State area dropped off at, you know, truck stops on the New Jersey Turnpike and taken away by God knows who. And that was happening. That was the summer of 21 and that was happening all over the country and has been. Mallorcus has orchestrated this amazing kind of infiltration of every corner of the country. You can almost see him with a map looking at like red areas and going, literally facilitating the movement of human beings through the Darian Gap, up through Latin America in the United States. Mallorcus himself doing that. So flying them in as well, like from Oh, of course. So now they tell you, you can't say that they're illegal migrants. You get fact-checked to death. They are illegal, but it's just that they've been given this humanitarian parole that makes them. They can't be deported. So they're still illegal, but they're in this sort of nether world that the Biden administration has created so that they can pretend that the illegal migration invasion is sort of slowed down. Total destruction of the country. It's hard to even think about it. It's so distressing. It was such a nice place. So how, okay, so Joe Biden, we're right in the middle of this. So it's hard to get perspective on Biden. And he's kind of fallen out of the headlines because the party decided that he was no longer useful and they replaced him. But how will history understand Biden? Do you think? Well, I hope that the mythology that Joe Biden built for himself over 50 years is completely punctured. He did have like a several of these pet historians used to come to the White House all the time in Whisperer sweet. Nothing's in his ear and tell him he was the second coming of FDR. So they will whatever happened to that there was a kid from new kiddies, my age, who used to be the editor of Newsweek, particularly anxious, a little tote from Tennessee. Yes. He's an epistemalian. I know that. I remember that because I am too awful to creepy guy. Yeah. He's one of them. But so here's the beach rider. That's exactly right. And he was a journalist. Yeah. Do you think, let me just just pause really quick. Do you think when someone like that shows up to tell Joe Biden was effectively an intellectual invalid? You know, you are parakellies, your Churchill, like what do you think they believe that? No, but I mean, what access they have, they're just almost giddy. You see them on MSNBC. They're just giddy with their own self-importance because who gets invited like eight times to the White House? I think they go into his residence. And he just loves that. Like, tell me more about myself and how consequential I am. I don't know. I've been invited more than eight times the White House. I've never kissed anybody's ass. I don't understand to the impulse. I'm controllable. No, but I feel like I'm pretty moderate sensible person, but I don't know. I'm an adult man. I don't want to leave on any. But you don't want to be pressed. Not all. That's all they have. They want prestige. They want to be. It's so low. Do you think discuss it? You've got children. What do they think of you? That's your telling Joe Biden. He's impressive. Like, how does your family respect you if you talk like that? I don't know. I don't get it. Well, they probably die. Well, I think it's probably right. Yeah. Sorry. I interrupted you. Yeah. All right. It's fascinating. They're gross. Those, those historians. But I think ultimately that there is enough. You know, the Republicans, even though they're Christian. John Meacham, that's him. Yeah. Tiny little man in the actual spirit. Yeah. It's just a perfect. And it's interesting. I remember I knew him sort of because I think we're born the same year in 1969 and pretty sure. And I remember in the 90s being at some event, some party, Tina Brown's house, New York. And he was there. And he was like the editor of Newsweek. And I remember thinking, wow, that's a pretty amazing job for a man who's not even 30. Maybe maybe 30. And then I realized over time, getting to, I spent more time with him. He just, all he did was kiss ass. That's it. That was like his whole gig was just sucking up. And it's not good to have a system where that's rewarded. He would have been in his element at Tina Brown party in Manhattan. I know. I shouldn't eat. Well, I mean, I was 29 myself. That's my excuse. But Newsweek is not what it used to be. I mean, I think he presided over the fag end of it. I don't think, you know, they would have put anyone in there. And it wasn't a same prestigious at the time, but it wasn't really prestigious. When you say he presided over the the fag end of it, what do you mean? Just the end. Just the end. Sorry. I'm not calling me. So Biden, we had this period like maybe a year ago when people were telling us that Biden was a true statesman. Probably the greatest press away ever had sharp as a tack. And then in one day, back in June, it became clear that was all I had like this guy couldn't even find his way back to his bedroom. Except when he could, except when he could. Yeah. Let me ask you about that. What was that? I mean, do you show we went in one day from, you know, having to listen to Morning Joe tell us how brilliant he was to Morning Joe admitting that he was demented. Was that a setup? I just think that when Pelosi and Schumer and whoever is behind things decided that he was a liability, Joe Biden, because he was not popular. He couldn't win the election. Trump was trouncing him in the polls. And he's just repellent. People got to know him and realize that the mythology of Joe Biden is honest. Joe middle class Joe from Scranton. All of that was a lie that he is actually an incredibly prideful, boastful, like pathological liar. I mean, we saw that with the plagiarism. But also just those self-aggrandizing stories he tells all the time about, you know, he's there with Nelson Mandela. Like every big historic thing that happened. He's in this intro of it. He's very much like Tim Walts in that way. So people came to see that and see how ridiculous he was. And also the worst, I think, was just how nasty he is. And I think, you know, he's lost that filter in his brain that stops him from from publicly losing his temper. I'm sure at home he was losing his temper. A lot with his, you know, and I think that's partly Hunter's problem. But we saw that on stage. And, you know, when he's wagging his finger and snarling about Ultramaga, I think that's not very American. Americans seem to me to be very cordial, generous spirited people. And I think that who have affection for each other? Who have affection for each other? Yeah. Very much so. And I think that congeniality to me is one of the striking aspects of America that's quite different from other English-speaking countries I've been in. So, so Biden is sort of the opposite of that. He really is, although he's pitched as sort of Mr America, I think he's very un-American in a lot of ways. And he is very admiring of people like Anthony Blinken, Euro files. He's not like that. He's not well educated. But he really admires those state department types who, you know, I've petitioned and went to finishing school in Switzerland. He does. And went to school in yeah, Anthony Blinken, well, Anthony Blinken went to school in Paris as we know. Right. But he finds that impressive. Oh, yes. Very much. He'll secure some of a car dealer. Yeah. So easily won by dumb affectations like, I mean, Blinken's like a good idea. I mean, get away. He dresses. Who? Joe Biden. He, remember, Kitty Kelly did this incredibly insightful interview with the young Senator just after he came to Washington just after his wife and and baby daughter were killed in a car crash that Hunter was in and was injured in. And Joe Biden's there in his office and she described him as dressing like the great gatsby, like very elaborate, very expensive clothes and boasting about his like sex life with his ex, why with his fourth, sorry, his dead wife, saying, you know, all the guys with jealous of me because we had the best sex and and then saying, all these said that out loud. Yeah. Oh, you have to read this Kitty Kelly piece. It's so illuminating. I quoted huge chunks of it in laptop from hell. It's brilliant. And and then he talks about all these women are throwing themselves at him. And then he does this other boast because he grew up just admiring the Kennedys Catholics, Democrats. And he just he tried to recreate the Kennedy compound. He used to go to and tuck it rather, Martha's vineyard. If you look at his political career, he's really modeled it very much on the Kennedy clan. And he wanted to have a, you know, the Kennedy kind of dynasty. So his son Beau was supposed to be the next generation and sadly he died of Frankance. But Joe Biden, I think just in that interview shows who he really is. And it's quite a disgusting portrayal of himself. And he he talks about the Kennedys. And he says, Rose Kennedy's calling me all the time inviting me for dinner, but I'm too busy. That's just unbelievable. So it sounds like, I mean, you really spent a long time learning about reading about doing interviews about Joe Biden. How does your view of him change the more you learned? Well, I mean, initially, I used to like him because I thought, gosh, he's the moderate Democrat. Yeah, he's a Democrat that I could live with. Like he's great. And I went full circle. I find him deeply dishonest, deeply flawed. I think he was a terrible father. You do. Yeah. How? Well, you see the product. Yes. Well, fair. And both his children, Hunter and Ashley have proven like the admitted drug problems. And I think Hunter was a motherless boy. His mother had been killed. And Joe Biden had just got this huge job in Washington. The opportunity of his lifetime, he wasn't going to give that up to stay home with his two motherless boys. So he went to, he said, Oh, I, you know, I was going to, but then people taught me out of it. And so he goes to DC. He gets immediately adopted by all these grand poo bars of the party because their wives were telling them, oh, this poor everyone, the whole of America, their heartstrings were tugged by this tragedy of this young widow. I mean, it was a terrible tragedy. But Joe Biden exploited it in the most cynical fashion. Just that photograph, which when I first saw it, I was like everyone else. Like I just felt desperately sad for these two little bandage boys in the hospital bed in the foreground of the photographs where Joe Biden's being sworn in as center showed by their bedside. Just after his wife's been killed. And you think to yourself, wow, but then when you see other photographs pulled back and you see that hospital room is full of just dozens and dozens of photographers and reporters and everything. And the kids look quite distressed as they would be. And why did he do it there? Why didn't he get sworn in in the corridor outside? You know, or somewhere else? He did it because he knew the power of that image. And it was brilliant and he used it in every campaign sense. But it's cynical. And to be able to have the presence of mine to do that, it tells you a little bit about how ruthless he is and how fixated on power he is. And I think that was, you know, I think that was the experience for Hunter. And you see that in a lot of the private, you know, which I read, but I didn't publish a lot of it. But the musings, he's quite a good writer. He's highly intelligent. I think more intelligent than his father. At least he's not, I think Joe Biden's probably illiterate. I mean, you from the little bit of writing that he's done on the laptop. He doesn't spell, he's got that trademark spelling problems that, you know, boys who never learn to read have. And so I think Joe's probably clever than we think, but he just is illiterate. Like you can't read very well. Get combined. Really? Yeah. I think that's why he has such a problem with like the worst thing you could do to Joe Biden is put him in front of a teleprompter. And I think yes, I mean, cognitively he slipped. But also I don't think he, like you notice when he comes across words that are long or complicated or like people's surnames that you can't guess, he's just can't do them. So and you know, I mean, I've done a lot of stories about phonics, you know, the failure of kids to be taught, especially boys, especially clever boys who they have just like zero something. It's really that a third of boys will never learn to read by that look and say that guessing way they have to be taught to sound things out by phonics. And I think when Joe Biden was being taught by the nuns, they just didn't teach him that way. So a lot of boys of his era slipped under the cracks. And so, and I think he was clever enough to be able to get by by memory and cunning. He's renowned as not really reading his briefs. You know, he can be, he can be told something and remember it. But you look at him in in those Senate hearings. He just fly by the, he just talks in the text and emails on a hundred laptop. How does he come across? Has he come across? There's not a lot of him. It's just a shadow of him. He cares about Hunter, but he cares about him. He's absent until he's about to announce he's running for president. Then he really cares about Hunter. Like, where are you? We've got to get your drugs under control sort of thing and dispatch to his brother to go and put Hunter in rehab. And the reason Hunter was so angry in April of 2019 when he abandoned his laptop was because he felt that his family Joe, although he doesn't say it to Joe, threw him under the bus. And he blames Joe's staff, but it was really Joe because there was a Maureen Dowd column that Hunter was particularly enraged about, which was basically saying that Joe Biden's running for president, but the big Albatross around his neck is his loser son, Hunter, who's a drug addict. And Hunter was furious. And that's where all those texts and emails come out that he says, you know, I've supported this family for years. I've given half my salary to dad, you know, how dare you all treat me with such disrespect. He was absolutely furious. And his relationship with his father is so complicated because he adores him as his only parent after his mother was killed. But he also is like, he's just his hostage because there is no mother, no somebody who loves you more than than he loves that they love Joe, that loves the child. And so he was sort of a victim of Joe Biden's selfishness and whims and the entire Biden family. So Joe's sister, Val, moved in to take care of the boys after Joe left Joe said he was commuting every night from from Washington on Amtrak. But I'm told that's not really true that when he did come home that the boys were already in bed. So maybe he had breakfast with them the next morning, but he wasn't a present dad, but Val was fantastic. His sister really sacrificed her first marriage to look after those boys and Hunter regards her as his real mother. And then Joe Biden comes into the picture a few years later. And she's sort of the mean stepmother that that Hunter doesn't get on with. Bo got on with her because Bo was the perfect child, golden head boy, but Hunter was like a little bit ADHD, a little bit rebellious, bit naughty, and used to get in trouble. And I think that didn't work with Joe. And so he and Joe had a difficult relationship. And so, you know, I think Hunter loved his father, but also deeply resented him and resented the fact that Joe put Bo, the older brother by one year and one day on a pedestal and saw Bo as being, you know, the the inheritor of the Biden dynasty, political dynasty. And Hunter was sort of the spare that was supposed to go out and earn the money that would allow Joe and Bo to be clean politically. So Hunter wanted to be an artist or a novelist. And he's quite a good artist and quite a good writer. But he wasn't allowed to. He had to go and work for his father's, you know, donors in Delaware and this really boring job in his credit card company. And being a hugely inflated salary that allowed him to pay off his Yale law school in Georgetown University fees, but also Bo's university tuition so that Joe he paid off his brothers to the loans. Yeah. So Joe never had to put his hand in his pocket for anything. And that's where people miss the point of how Joe benefited. That's amazing. Hunter Biden paid Bo's college. Yeah. He complains about it to his Aunt Val. He said, dad didn't pay a penny. That's amazing. Yeah. So he has every right to be resentful about that, I think. I think so. Yeah. So is the youngest son's the workhorse paying for the pretty lavish lifestyles and political careers of his older brother and dad? Exactly. And Joe knew that and he knew that Hunter had a at least a substance abuse problem that was evident. I mean, he was arrested at 18 for cocaine, right? And let off. So he had this problem. Joe knew about it. And yet Joe allowed him to take, you know, millions of dollars in unaccountable cash, which was to a drug addict, just an impossible temptation. Hunter actually says that in his memoir. He says that the barisma money when it was coming in $83,000 a month, that just sent him into a complete spin fell off the wagon. And what kind of a loving car that does that to his addicted son? It my read on it is that Joe does love his son, but in a kind of narcissistic. Yes, infantile way, exactly narcissistic way where it's all about the reflected glory of his son, but not really about the son. Yeah. And that's hard if you're a sensitive person. Well, it's awful. It's absolutely awful. And Hunter was a legit drug addict, yeah, you know, tormented by the desire to be high all the time. Yeah. And so what role does Jill doctor pardon me, Dr. Jill play and all this? Well, she seemed actually in one way, I thought she was a bad wife, like unlike Nancy Reagan, who was always at her husband's side to make Well, she seemed, actually, in one way, I thought she was a bad wife, unlike Nancy Reagan, who was always at her husband's side to make sure that he didn't get humiliated. I couldn't understand why Jill Biden wasn't there with Joe when he was getting lost on stage and just looking like a fool on camera. She should have been more present, but she wasn't in a lot of ways because she was out on the campaign trail herself. She was taking Air Force One to Paris and just doing her own campaigning, supposedly campaigning, but she loved it. I think she loves the glory. She's got this factosham working for her, Anthony, Kate McRib's name. He's a sort of gay, one of those men that attaches themselves to... He's sort of gay or pretty gay. I think he's pretty gay. Yeah. But he's Joe's, everything she calls him, her work husband. He's made himself invaluable to her and... Sounds totally healthy and normal. Your wife takes off for Paris and Air Force One with some gay dude while you're stumbling around lost on stage. Well, at least you know she's not having an affair with him. No, of course, right? Every palace has Unix. I think he's very powerful behind the scenes. Yeah. And he was involved at the very end when Joe was trying to cling on to power he and Hunter were there in the inner sanctum. So, and I think maybe he's part of the reason why Joe is so like such an LGBT champion, you know, partly to sort of curry favor with his wife's favorite person. Sounds like the sickest environment imaginable. Like there's no healthy relationships. There's no honesty. There's no peace. I mean, that's what you're describing. Yeah, seems terribly unhealthy, terribly dysfunctional family, which is ironic because Joe's always created this mythology that so many people have bought, that they have got the closest family in the world that he's the best father in the world. And it's just this tragic, you know, circumstance that Hunter has a DNA predisposition to be a drug addict. Nothing to do with his upbringing. And yet Donald Trump is treated like a complete monster and all the everything I've observed about his interactions with his adult children is positive and his grandchildren. Like they adore him in a genuine way, not in a fearful fake way. They really have a good relationship. And I don't think people see that as much. I think the campaign's trying to show a few videos of the grandkids, but it just seems very natural to me his interaction with his family. Did you in all of your reporting on Biden detect core beliefs? No, other than power for himself, self aggrandizement power. No, no core beliefs. He, he was adopted early on by the people who gave him his core beliefs. And that was that he was basically a warm hunger. I mean, he was into, you know, enlarging NATO in being pugilistic about Yugoslavia. You know, he wanted to bomb Yugoslavia. He and we did. I'm really glad we did. It was, I think very important to kill all those people in Yugoslavia. Any idea why we did that 30 years later. Does anyone even remember that? No idea. I bought the lies actually at the time. I never understood what they were. I was so confused by that. Something about slow but on Milosevic being bad. I remember George shall be bush. I know what slow but on Milosevic, always mispronouncing his name. But I remember thinking, I'm sure he's bad, you know, foreigner, whatever, but why was he bad and why should I care? No one ever explained what was that? Do we know? No, I don't know. I bought the same lies that everyone else did back then. I believed that he was ton of Christians over there. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's been a dreadful disaster. I mean, it still is for that part of the world. And Joe Biden just wanted to bomb them. The key was so he was way out there and he'd go on NBC and so on and say just bomb them all. That was what he was like. And I don't think it was, I mean, he was just taking his marching orders and not his marching orders. He's a gender and then he just liked with everything and goes too far. But you know, he's been at the center of a lot of bad policy, foreign policy for America. From the beginning and from for a guy that's not very as ignorant really about the world. He's now put up as some sort of foreign policy guru. Back in 2000, I think it was, he was instrumental in getting the World Trade Organization to accept China, which was detrimental to America, holo-ed out America's manufacturing and middle class. And that was something during the Clinton administration that Bill Clinton didn't want. Republicans wanted it, but the Democrats, Joe Biden had to twist the arms of his Democrat colleagues in the Senate to get it over the line just and convince Bill Clinton. So what does Bush assign to it? Eventually 2000. Yeah. But that was done in the Clinton years and it was the the the Democrat senators that were instrumental in having, if they had stuck to their guns, that would never have been signed and China would never have been. And Biden whipped that. He led the support for it. Yeah. I never realized until I look back at it and I thought, wow, interesting. So, and because I don't think my thesis is he doesn't have any core beliefs, then that must have been his sort of marching orders. I don't know if you've got marching orders, but the suggestions that the people who he owed his career to gave to him was we want China and the WTO. So he just goes about making it happen. He was very persuasive. I mean, he was very powerful in the Senate for many years, which is a terrible indictment of the Senate. Yeah. I mean, he's there are a lot of people like that still in the Senate, you know, a lot. Well, it was best friends with Mitch McConnell. Well, I don't think his, his politics and Mitch McConnell is identical. I mean, Mitch McConnell will be, and I think Mitch McConnell's slightly creepier even than Biden in person, but is that possible? I think Mitch McConnell's pretty darn creepy. Yeah. And even weirder personal life. Yeah. Yeah. That looks like a snapping turtle. Not his fault. Um, but he's like to me. He, he gave beautiful speeches. Oh, he's very smart. Yeah. Yeah. McConnell's legitimately smart. Oh, there's no doubt about it. And he's been great on a bunch of topics, but he's voting for Kamala Harris or no doubt in my mind. Yeah. Um, that's interesting that he was close to McConnell. Huh. So you didn't really see any redeeming qualities to Biden's career. None. No, I think if he'd never exist, well, they would have found someone else. That's the problem. I think he was the perfect cipher because he came in so young to the Senate. Um, you know, he was 29 when he accidentally won against an old time Republican in Delaware. Um, in fact, a guy called his name was Caleb J. Boggs. And the irony is that when Hunter Biden went, um, and was convicted in that gun trial, gun felony trial in June in Delaware, he, it was done in the Caleb J. Boggs courthouse. Amazing. Yeah. So Boggs was a huge, uh, you know, he was a huge influence in Delaware. So it was really a David versus Goliath operation that Joe Biden just fluked by a few thousand votes. And the story that's told is that he did it because the Team's union, um, staged a strike of the trucks that were taking the newspaper out with the, with Boggs, the final weekend. Boggs had this huge double page ad, um, slamming Joe for some sort of corrupt dealings. And, um, and that was going to damage Joe. Maybe would have swung the election, but the teamsters successfully stopped those trucks with those newspapers going out. It's a equivalent of the 2020. Just things like that. Yeah. Right. So that's the 1972 version of taking the laptop story off social media. Exactly. He's an expert at amazing, isn't it? So do you ever fear, you know, when you and I are gone and our generation is gone that our great grandchildren will be reading stories about what a hero Joe Biden is in their history books. Um, they probably will because especially I think part of the quid pro quo for him going quietly for Kamala was that he gets a presidential library and you can imagine the sicker fancy that's going to go on in that library about what a great man he is. So I think that, but I think there's enough on the public record, particularly James Comer, um, who gets trashed a lot because he didn't do enough. They say in the impeachment inquiry, but he actually managed to put on the record a lot of evidence to show that Joe Biden was involved in that family's influence peddling scheme that this is where the money went. Um, that there were two $250,000 checks, 10% of a couple of deals that Jim Biden and Hunter were involved in that went to Joe Biden. That were were the check memo says it was a loan repayment and that's what Joe Biden maintains and James Comer was never able to prove otherwise. So we have to give Joe Biden the benefit of the doubt there. However, it is part of a pattern of money, the money trail and how it gets to the Biden family, 10% of the big guy, you know, that deal never happened. But I think it probably reflected the way, um, Hunter's, uh, sort of businesses worked that Joe would get something Joe, Hunter was certainly paying for some of Joe's maintenance and upkeep on his Delaware state. Um, and Joe, and his state is not too strong. It was a former department house enormous house that Hunter grew up in. Yes, with the ballroom. Yeah. And then, uh, I know from having friends and relatives in that town, Greenville, Delaware that he never paid any of the workmen. You know, stiff, the firewood guy and the landscaper and the caterer and, you know, they're always after him for money really screwed the little guy consistently was famous and then he broke for doing that. It's incredible, isn't it? It is what is incredible. It's very low, the lowest. But how did he, I was wondering how did he afford to live in a 12,000 square foot house on a Senate salary? Well, he will tell you he was just lucky with real estate. And so all the way through even became is just the donors, you know, like he, they buy his houses and a, for an inflated cost and he'd buy houses for lower cost, same with Hunter Hunter bought places, same thing. And, um, just there was just a magic carpet ride for him, whatever transaction that he entered into, he was looked after. And so the house he has now, he built from scratch, custom built beautiful tradesmen from Philadelphia that built the best mansions. And it's, you remember when during the 2020 election, he was always mocked for being in his basement. Well, and you saw the basement a little bit. That basement is the most magnificent hand, custom built wood paneled mahogany, grand study library with books everywhere, pieces of historic furniture that he's bought from the White House. Um, you know, he's, he's, you could hear the honking geese outside in the lake because it's a lakefront property. He used to call it the lake house, but I think people teased him about it because it's a very small man made pond really. So now he, he doesn't call it a lake anymore because oh no, it's not a lake. It's just a pond. Um, but gorgeous house. And it's got a swimming pool and a boat, jettie and a cottage for the, you know, the secret service to stay in. It's all what a poser. What a hollow man. Absolutely. And with massive social anxiety, that's the pathetic thing actually. It's quite, it's almost sad, but I mean, he's done so much damage to so many people. I can't feel sorry for him. I, I love how resolute your own your opinions of Joe Biden since you were the only people in America who has the right to those opinions because you know more than anybody about Biden. Well, Hunter probably has more, but you know, being a son, you sort of brainwashed from a very early. It's hard. Yeah. And a travel with one parent, of course, clings desperately to their parent no matter what the parents like. Yes. That's just the way it is. Yes. Um, what happens to Hunter? Oh, he'll get pardoned. Okay. So he's been convicted on gun felonies in Delaware. And also he pleaded guilty on the first day of the trial in California in September to these various tax felonies, all of which well, certainly the tax felonies should carry a jail sentence. Um, but he used to be sentenced on both of those after the election. And even though Joe Biden is, I don't know, I would never pardon my son. He said that once and he didn't really say it very vigorously. He was just asked in a, I think a CBS interview and he just, he's that will use pardon your son. He goes, no, and that was it after that the White House has been vigorous at all. No, he, the president said he he won't do what he won't do it. Have no doubt that he's going to pardon Hunter. Um, you know, as anybody would, I mean, really, if it was your son, would you want him to go to jail? So I'd pardon my son in the second. Of course, everybody would. And, and therefore Joe Biden will get away with it. Like everyone will say the meat all said, Oh, you know, it's his only surviving son. How can you blame him if anyone criticizes it? They'll be called cruel and heartless. So of course. So Joe Biden's going to get away with, I mean, probably not fraternity will he get away with it. But for the here and now he's getting away with it. Yeah. But I think his reputation has been damaged. And now people know, uh, well, the evidence is there for people to know the truth about Joe Biden. And any honest historian is going to include, um, the fact that he really sold out the country. And you, you can look at his presidency and his attitude towards China and how he unwound a lot of the Trump era get tough on China policies. Um, some of them inexplicable. Like for instance, even Christopher Ray, the, the FBI director has complained bitterly about, um, the fact that Biden dismantled this very good program in the universities that was supposed to stop, uh, China stealing American intellectual property spying on, on our academic institutions. Yeah. And the research universe. Yeah. And I mean, there have been academics that have gone to jail through this program and been busted. Um, and Chinese firings have been busted. And for some unknown reason, there was nothing positive for America about dismantling it. Joe Biden quietly dismantled it. It's bizarre. Well, the only way that it was defensive, not offensive, we were trying to protect ourselves from the theft of research. And I've asked why what possible justification is that they said I was racist because it was targeting Chinese. Really? Yeah. It's racist. Yeah. Just like calling the Wuhan virus saying it came from China was racist. It wasn't. But that's what they tagged Donald Trump with. Just without getting it again to sidetracked, really quickly, it seems like that virus was created in the Wuhan lab in part with US tax dollars. Oh, yes. I mean, I think I don't know that it was deliberately released at all. I think that was an accident, but 100% um, eco health alliance, um, run by this absolute repellent man, Englishman called Peter Dazzick. Um, he, uh, ran this weird little company that has an office in Manhattan, but really does know research of its own, but it gets these massive grants from DARPA, which is basically an arm of the Department of Defense. And that's what it lived on. And and what he did, um, eco health alliance with the help of Anthony Fauci was bypass the Obama era moratorium on gain of function that Frankenstein research on viruses. And he funneled basically this DARPA money, uh, US tax pay money through to the Wuhan Institute of Health, where he co-authored some papers, even though he's an idiot, but he co-authored papers with the bat lady there, the scientist. And, um, you know, all these fantastic whistle blowers who've come out on, and from the scientific community have pinpointed that, um, the work that they did on the viruses, where they humanized, used humanized mice to make the virus more lethal to humans. Um, that was all occurring in that lab. And it was a very low, um, security bio lab. Unlike if that kind of research is done in America, it would have been done in a higher level, even though there's still the risk of leakage. But in that Wuhan lab, of course, it was going to leak. And so it was just a disaster waiting to happen. And it was done because Anthony Fauci was so antagonistic to the group of scientists who were sounding the alarm about gain of function research. And you Fauci loves gain of function research. He thought that was going to make him immortal that they're going to find the vaccine for viruses, right? And, um, sorry. And he, you know, there are photographs of him with Dazzick. There are emails that have been uncovered of him with Dazzick. They, you know, they were, it was obviously a subservient relationship on Dazzick's part. He worshipped Fauci, but Fauci was friendly with him. And Fauci says he doesn't know anything about these DARPA, um, grants, but someone who worked, who's, who's used to work with Fau, with, um, Dazzick at EcoHealth Alliance and left sort of under a cloud. He's become a form of a whistle blower. I don't, I've talked to him a little bit. I'm not 100% certain of how valid he is. But this is what he says. He says that the CIA approached Peter Dazzick about sort of helping them because he was so embedded with the Chinese. And the Wuhan lab apparently was some sort of military, um, research was going on there. So you could understand the CIA wants to have some sort of eyes and ears and Dazzick would have been useful. And Dazzick, so while this whistleblower didn't personally see the CIA approach, Dazzick asked him about it a couple of times. And, um, and the whistleblower believes that Dazzick did end up working sort of as an informant for the CIA. Amazing. Um, and I'm sure we'll never know, you know, the truth about a lot of what you just said. But what we do know, I think conclusively is that it came from that lab. It was loose on the world. And as the Biden administration never sees telling us millions died. Yeah. So whether it was intentional or I would think I agree with you, probably more likely was an accidental other way it happened because of something that China did. How come the Biden administration has never pushed China to pay reparations to the United States or any other country for what that virus did? Well, I can only assume it's because they know that they are complicit and that as long as then I push China to hard, President G is not going to say, well, hey, you know, it was your Pentagon money that paid for this research. And it was your Peter Dazzick, friend of Antony Fauci, who encouraged the back lady to do that particular research. So, um, I think it's mutually assured destruction. Like they both just don't say anything and it goes away. And I'm sure that's in part why Donald Trump's administration didn't really push that hard. And because it's the same people in charge at the CIA and the State Department and the Pentagon who know that they didn't deliberately do this, but it was there, um, you know, incompetent sloppiness, whatever, recklessness that unleashed this virus on the world. And America doesn't want to have its fingerprints on it. And I think the fingerprints are there. We've seen enough already has, um, you know, in Congress, there have been some good politicians who've pushed on this. And there's been enough FY material that's come out to show that there was certainly ecohealth was being funded. So, you know, it doesn't take much to follow the trail. Plus, Peter Dazzick is so protected. I mean, where he lives sort of in the woods, um, just outside of New York, um, any, any reporters who go there immediately the cops are there. Like they're, they're protecting him. He's been, um, really, how do I get that? Yeah, now you won't get that. Oh, yeah, I feel this. You're the enemy. So, okay, since you have, my last question, but since you've got such an amazing recall, remarkable memory for details and people I've really known very few people with recall like yours, um, I just one more thread I'd like to sort of tie into a bow. And that's the whistleblower who did business with Hunter Biden. What happened to them? So that would be, kind of, a bubble in ski and Devon Archer. Yeah. I mean, they're really the heroes of this story. Um, Tony Bobble in ski was working with Hunter on the last, the big China deal that ended up falling over, uh, Hunter and his uncle Jim Biden, uh, got, I think about $20 million out of that deal after they sort of shafted, uh, Bobble in ski and their other partners. Um, basically for doing nothing, but, um, Bobble in ski is sort of a self-made man. And so he's quite, um, protected like he has his own money. He doesn't owe anything to anybody. Um, he's a former, uh, you know, naval nuclear rocket instructor, nuclear submarine instructor. Um, he's a pretty tough guy and he knows a lot of tough guys who protect him. So I think he's, um, been okay. Devon Archer on the other hand, he, um, he's a lovely man and I've got to know both of them and I've called them friends. Now they've become friends. They've have this beautiful romance. They never knew each other before and now they're just rock solid friends because they've suffered both of them at the hands of the Bidens. Um, Devon more so because he was, um, Hunter's best friend. They met at Yale, uh, Hunter called him my best friend in business. Um, they went into business together. Um, Devon did all the work. Um, and Hunter was sort of brought in as the sort of the Biden name. Um, in the end, they did a deal that went sour. Um, and the Southern District of New York charged Devon with fraud over that deal. Hunter was deemed not to have been involved. Even though Hunter was, I think Vice Chairman of the company, um, he'd earned $200,000. Devon had lost millions of dollars. Um, Devon was the one who ended up, uh, basically going to trial. Um, he was, um, convicted and then acquitted or is the, the conviction was overturned by the judge who found that he was honest and found that he'd been unjustly treated. And then that was overturned. So he's been going through, I think, about eight years of sheer hell where he hasn't been able to earn money. Um, he has a close family. So that's supported him. He's remained remarkably optimistic. Um, but he's facing jail. I mean, he could go to jail. Um, like I think for a year and one day. And that's while Hunter Biden has escaped Scott free. Um, with everything that Hunter's done, there's always been this invisible hand that's reached out and, and rescued him from peril. While all around him, all his business partners went broke, went to jail, died, disappeared. Hunter just is like the character in a, you know, a disaster movie where all the cards blow up. And there's one man runs through the flames and he's like, he's the road runner of, uh, you do get the sense he's not going to escape though. I mean, he must be in rough shav and seen him in a while long while, but he must be in rough shape. Can't put yourself through that kind of life without destroying a lot of your brain. Yeah. I would say, I guess, I mean, look, I wish nothing but the best for him. I've actually come to, uh, I never met him. I would have loved to interview. I still would love to interview him, but, um, I know people around him. I mean, all the people around him were fantastic people like his friends. I've met quite a few of his friends. Um, you know, Kevin Morris, the, the, everyone hates Kevin Morris, but he's not a bad guy, the, the Hollywood lawyer, the, his sugar brother, who's funded like his lifestyle and petal as IRS debts. You know, all these people, they have a good heart because they get sucked in by Hunter because Hunter does have that tragic quality, um, women especially rally around him and want to mother, him and protect him and forgive him all sorts of atrocities. Um, and I think men, it's the same thing. They, everyone you talk to say, he's just good hunter is so charming and lovable and vulnerable. And not stupid. No smart. Sad. So you count him a victim of his father. Oh, yes. 100%. I mean, he's a victimizer as well as all victims like that are, but, um, I mean, he's victimized. You know, I sat in the courtroom in Delaware and watched, um, his two exes, a halle biden who was his brother, Bo's widow that he took up with had a turret of there with and put her onto crack. Um, and, uh, she's, she's, you know, pretty broken. His ex wife Kathleen, who I never met her. I mean, I saw her in court. She looked like a broken woman, really, very different from the Kathleen that was in all the photographs. She, she came across in the laptop in all the writings as a kind of naive, very loving. Like she adored Hunter absolutely adored him for gave so much. And then the bitterness that crept in, I mean, it was nothing like art, what I would be like. She was still quite kind towards him. Um, you know, he did terrible things. He betrayed her in the worst way, but she and it damaged her inside. But, um, but she maintained a sort of civil relationship with him, I guess, for the sake of their daughters. She's a good mother. Um, so he, he had a knack for finding these great women that looked after him for gave him and all destroyed in the end. Yeah, all destroyed. Although, how he's remarried. So I think she's a survivor. Um, she's remarried a rich guy in a higher apparently. So she was, she was looking quite happy at a huge rock on her hand. So I think she'll be okay. I just want at least one person to come out happy. We're in a divine congrats on the book. Thank you. Thank you for this. It was great to see you too. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing our show. I know shocking that in an election year with everything at stake, Google would be putting its thumb on the scale and preventing you from hearing anything that the people in charge don't want you to hear, but it turns out it's happening. So what can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. Not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information. That's true. It's not intentionally deceptive. And the way to do that on YouTube, we think is to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. You'll have a much higher chance of hearing what we say and we hope you will. One of the things we wanted to do when we left conventional media television news was not simply to augment or add to traditional media but to replace it because it's so rotten. It's so deceitful. It's so repellent that it needs to be replaced and we want to be part of what replaces it at TCN. And so to that end, we've produced a lot of news content from a bunch of different countries, but we're also producing long-form content documentaries. We have 13 separate documentaries coming out between now and right after the election, that would include more episodes of Art of the Surge, which is the account almost live account of what it's like behind the scenes on the Trump campaign. Line in the sand, James O'Keefe's latest documentary on the immigration crisis where he rides a train with a drug cartels north as the smuggle human beings into the United States. And all the President's men, which is a six-part series by our friend Sean Stone on the Deep States war on Donald Trump and the people around Donald Trump, all of that dropping in the next month. And all of it available on TCN. So go to Tucker Carlson.com to see 13 new documentaries in the next month and many more to come after that. Tucker Carlson.com is where all of it lives and will live going forward. Crossen.com is where all of it lives and will live going forward.