Hello my friends. It's time again. This episode of the podcast This is July 4th weekend So I know you're gonna be out there at the lake or the beach taking your clothes off Trying to look sexy and your swimsuit and it's probably a disaster We can help you ladies and gentlemen this episode is brought to you by on it.com. It's oh and and IT I've always been a big proponent of kettlebells because it's one of the first weightlifting things that I've ever Done that allows me to kind of get like the whole workout in like a lot of times when I used to lift weights Regulared lift weights and another day. I do cardio. I do one day weights one day a cardio But with a really good kettlebell workout. I get a brutal cardio workout and it allows me to get it all done in one shot a My huge fan of them. They just it's fun to do and it's it makes you feel like some Russian savage living in Siberia back in the 1930s and whatever the fuck they invented these things what they are is like a cannonball with a big metal handle on it and you swing around and In doing so in all these various exercises you develop what they call functional strength meaning strength for your entire body not isolated individual movements but your entire body and Do they have no champ? Where's the chance? Something's missing the motherfuckers ran out of chimps ran away Now we must have run out Those fucking things sell it crazy. That's the primal bells the primal bells are these new kettlebells that we had This is the most important thing they look cool as shit They're they're they're we have chimpanzees and then we also have zombies We have eight rather we also have zombies, but the the most important things that they don't just look good But that they're 3d mapped what we have them is we made sure that all of the kettlebells you're getting They're they're not in balance like you can make a cool face But if the cool face wasn't balanced it would kind of defeat the purpose of a kettlebell the whole idea about a kettlebells It's gotta be balanced when you move it so it looks badass, but you get a like I use the the gorilla and You get a really good workout with it. It doesn't feel at all like a gimmick Even when it slams into your arm with a gorilla face first if you're an idiot If you're not paying attention to how you swing in the kettlebells one thing that I can Really not stress enough when it comes to this stuff if you're thinking about doing any kind of physical activity if you've never worked out before You've got to do two things if you can the one thing the if you can part is higher a personal trainer show you how to do the movements correctly Just you know find out there's someone who'll do it for you Probably let you iPhone video it and let let someone you know show you how to do like a clean and press How to do a windmill how to do these things correctly? Then video tape it and then you can do it on your own and you could literally never have to go to a gym again With a chin up bar and a couple kettlebells like you can get ferocious workouts in Daily basses but start slow It's if you're a meathead like me and in your a dummy and you if they go You know someone says take three vitamins. You know like I'm saying fuck it five and see what's up You could hurt yourself with these things Start slow. We have 35 pounders. We have 18 pounders the howler mucky is 18 pounds and We go all the way up to 70 pounds with the primal bells But if you're a real savage one of those bonafide fitness freaks like perhaps one of those keb those Crossfit dudes who enter into those championships that bitch has 70 pounds probably not gonna be enough for you And if that's the case we sell them even heavier the heaviest ones we sell I don't know why they do them in kilograms. I guess that's not a respect to mother Russia or some shit They also they kill a gram I think they don't say poo jenny where would I grab? Yeah, we got rid of poo'd, but it's now it's still in kilogram. Okay. What the fuck is 40 kilograms? Let's find out. Let's tell people. I think it's 88 pounds Let's see here that they would do that. Yeah, it seems odd What is 40 kilograms in pound? Yes, it's 88 pounds. So that's the heaviest one we have if you could throw around an 88 pound kettlebell You are some kind of man Everybody else starts low be healthy and like I said It's my favorite all-time method of just physical exercise just you know without martial arts being the obvious number one But just for regular exercise Kettlebells of the shit and it feels good feels good when you do them. It's just it's like a it's it's you're stretching out a lot A lot of the moments. So it's got almost like a yoga sort of a vibe to it like windmills Windmills are some of my favorite things to do super good for your core and your back and but again do them slow and If you're interested in any of the on its supplements use the code word Rogan and you will save 10% off any and all sub ones All right crash from the float lab is here ladies gentlemen So without any further ado and no more fuckeria foot He ladies and gentlemen for Many of you who've heard this podcast before you're aware of a thing that I'm really into called the sensory deprivation tank The temporary sensory deprivation tank was invented by a guy named John Lily who was a scientist in a real freak like a Guy who was just really out there Really fast any guy and he wrote a book that I picked it up on I think like Amazon calm like the used books of the L'salia like people sellers individual sellers are selling and that's the deep self and In it he talks about the benefits of the tank It detailed construction on how to make your own tank He's got like diagrams in it and just really really fascinating guy and he was into all sorts of weird altered states of consciousness and One of the things that he wanted to figure out was how to separate the body from the senses and He came up with a bunch of different designs. There's a movie altered states It's kind of very loosely based on you know the idea of a guy like him going completely haywire And becoming like a monkey Just that's how I got into sensory deprivation tanks I saw altered states and they they were historically fairly accurate in the design of the tanks the initial one That you saw on altered states showed what Lily at first came up with which was like a glass scuba helmet that sort of suspended them in regular water and He would actually poop it pee into it He had like some crazy filtration system so he could stay in there and not have to defecate or urinate So it would go through some system that he had created I mean this dude was gone. He was off a deep end. I mean he's about as often deep as ever But his his big thing was to try to figure out how you can get the mind free of the influence of the body and the best method he came up to was this idea of the tank and He figured out eventually to put salt water in it and then if you put enough epsion salts your body would float and then he could Maintain the heating temperature to essentially What's the same temperature is your surface your skin and you wouldn't be able to recognize where the water was and it would give you the sensation of complete sensory deprivation and he figured this out and From that point on till like god. I don't mean I meant you and what was like how many years ago is it? Five or six probably five or six years ago before that I had that other gentleman who used to repair tanks for samadhi Who's a great guy? Yeah, and he he told me about you and the guy was fixing my samadhi tank My fasamadhi tank had fucked up something something wasn't the tank to fucked up was the heater like a burnt through the lining of the water bed And it's shorted out the whole thing was a disaster like sometimes those heaty elements They're just the pop you know for whatever reason they just they cook and it just melted a hole through the thing So he had a repair it he'd repair the lining and while he was repairing the lining he goes You know, there's this guy in Venice that makes these like really high-tech tanks And he goes you should contact him his name is crash. She's kind of an interesting guy and so I I asked him about it and he went to depth about all the crazy shit that you had done to these tanks And what they looked like they sent me to your website and I saw the saying this is free the stand-up tanks They were still like smaller like Ones like samadhi put way better constructed You you had figured out how to do it where it was just like this it looks like a meat locker I mean it's so solid and well built and all your crazy filtration system and everything And I realized that you were this one lone dude out there who was innovating in this sort of forgotten business this sort of forgotten aspect of Modern day understanding of the mind. I mean, it's really it was ignored somehow or another I don't know what happened. I don't know how all these scientists and geniuses Messed out on the sensory deprivation tank promotion. They should have been talking about it everywhere It is a mind-blowing Evolution in in meditation. It's a mind blowing next step in meditation where you instantaneously go If you get good enough at it and you do it long enough you instantaneously can go to psychedelic states intense introspective objective psychedelic states that are they they they change your life They fundamentally change the way you think about life and the fact that these people aren't promoting this because it's not a drug It's totally safe. It's totally easy to acquire. It's it's totally It ends anytime you want you open the door to get out and it's over There's no repercussions. There's no weirdness to it. You instantaneously drift back in a normal consciousness No one's talking about it. No one was doing and I and I found you and Brian Created this video Brian was the guy who made that video where we went down to the basement and video tape the the tank and From from that video on we started Hearing more and more people opening up the centers. They started going crazy They started opening up all over the place and you continue to innovate and you haven't said a word yet by the way You know, well, no, I don't have to I'm yours. I I'm just nodding my head I mean you're doing such a good job at the at your appraisal of the situation that uh You know, I don't want to dilute it. No, I just feel like I'm yeah, but really not at all No, I'm really enjoying this because you are the guy that six years ago. Whatever it was it first understood that too Not only was I out there, you know, kind of standing around by myself, but You know, when I found you then that really escalated the exposure in general and that just isn't for me or It has to do with industry overall Once that you know, you became because you're you're an honest guy and your opinion people trust it and When you say something then that It has value, you know, there's other been people to all this that whatever You know, it doesn't have that that sincerity the the true You know from from what you believe type thing. It's a lot of times influenced by this or that But once you you know and you've been like I see even with the device thing was a big thing with this in the Hamilton Morris is great incredible and without you that wouldn't have happened, you know It's just in that these things help out everybody right now because the industry deserves a Opportunity to to expand and become available to people in general like because it is an important thing to a person that's in the process of Considering what it is that they're doing with themselves when which I think is very important for people to Take responsibility for their actions and what what what they do and what they say because you know You can you're free to do that. You know, you're you're allowed to be different. You're allowed to go ahead and say you know what? I don't think this is quite the way that I you know and then this is becoming actually more popular now This is like freaky people that are able to go out and say oh, hey, maybe that and they're going Oh, yeah, they're doing all kinds of weird stuff I don't even know what the Pilates is It's catching on you know, they're right. I don't know. I don't know if it's just our neighborhood or what is it? LA but they're the different yoga spinning all these different activities that that that are that people do You know a lot of the crossover too currently is based on these athletes that that you have contact with or that Respect your perspective or whatever and they show up that guy Jeremy Stevens was here the other day again Yeah, and then I watched him on a clip. I don't know when that is my game It was this past was that when he got the guy down fight he kicked them and then no no That was a knockout that he had the previous fight man. I just saw that the other day he he he You guys in Brazil. Yeah, incredible and he's such a nice guy great guy all those guys smart too. Oh, yeah A lot of those guys are surprisingly nice and surprisingly smart I think a lot of people have this idea about people that are involved in combat sports that they're mean or their assholes quite the contrary Yeah, I find it'd be some of the most level Well adjusted people who come in contact with they're not trying to prove anything because they're already secure with who they are Yeah, they're more level. That's the best way of putting it like because you're forced to get your ego checked on a super regular basis And when that happens you kind of you just have a better view of things, you know You don't you people are constantly afraid of losing and when you're a fighter you lose in the gym all the time And you kind of mellow that out you get an understanding of who you are and you and also the blowing off of the energy in the gym You just see feel so much better more chill. Do you more relaxed about stuff like a lot of people? A lot of what their stress is is that their bodies of battery their bodies building up all this energy and it never gets exerted So you're taking all this food you're sitting in a cubicle you're sitting in your car You're sitting at the movies you're constantly sitting and not do anything And you just irritable your body is just trying to f- dude you fucking move get something going come on We've got all this shit pent up and then someone getting fronting in traffic fuck you Oh, yeah, you know people wonder where that's coming from well that's coming from you're you're all backed up You know you you are backed up. I know there's nothing scientific whatsoever to other triggers Short on some of us. You know. Yeah, it's also you know You're not getting your endorphins kind of calm you down and I think that the tank represents a level of that in some way that I think that it's it's a thing that should not just be Something that people it becomes popular but Something that it becomes popular in a way where people get a chance to do a new thing That they could get excited about which is one of the things that people like with like Pilates or yoga a new thing They could be excited about that could benefit them mentally Which is where I think we're missing out on a lot of this stuff I think yoga does benefit you mentally I think it calms you down and it's very good for you physically but the physical aspect the mental aspect coincide with the tank It's a hundred percent mental. It's a weird weird experience plus. It's available to it for a human being to actually participate in this Meditation where you sit in the room with your legs crossed and you're supposed to check out somehow I can't I can't do that But I go sit in that box for a couple few hours and go all kinds of different things Well, you know the the meditation is possible I know that there's people that do that Kundalini yoga and they have these intense psychedelic visions and I believe them a hundred percent because You you do have endogenous chemicals that the brain produces that can give you psychedelic experiences like we know about Dimeethyl trip to me and we know about five methoxy Dimeethyl trip to me being produced by the human body So if those are being produced by the body there could easily be some ancient method of Stimulating that production of releasing some sort of a burst of that production and so these super Kundalini Masters which seems like it would be something you'd want to do but for whatever reason I'm not compelled I'm not compelled enough to learn it But they can experience natural DMT trips at the highest levels of their art form which I believe I think you just got to get really good It's sitting there. Yeah, you just got a really good at yoga positions. You got to get really good at meditating You get to get really good at just getting good enough at yoga physically that you could just sort of fall into these forms and then when you're Following these forms and supporting yourself in some way by by making your body work like that you like heighten your Expression to whatever it is that yoga is trying to tap into and it's very psychedelic But still not the tank And it's difficult, you know for me. Yeah, I'm too too wound up to I can't sit somewhere and just sit there But if you tried maybe you could force yourself. Yeah, it would have to force me. You know And so it's like what do you think that would be good for you to force yourself? Yeah, I don't I don't have the It's just not in my my the way that I Operate you know what I mean I have a great when I'm awake I'm a looking like even when I'm out snowboarding or ready my whatever I don't wear the earpla your earphones or whatever if I'm right I need to listen to what's happening man's all like all the time so it's a Distractive in general, but in there cuts everything off and I go straight into my head and there's nothing else there Except for that I see what you're saying too about the physical for some folks They just had not interested in doing anything that's really physically strenuous I totally understand that and that energy winds up being they distribute that energy to their work like you do like you're kind of Just a mad fiend with your work and your constant improvements and innovations to all this stuff like you know your energy goes where your energy is Probably best suited, you know, it's not the same for everybody So I'm trying to say something that extra time or they're in the process or pursuit And that's a a viable Method of expression. It's a good way to meet chicks with nice legs. That's what I think that they're probably the the most advantage Otherwise, well why are they going was it beaker and yoga where it's all sweaty there and there's a 400 degrees and you go Oh, wow, this is a lot of fun. You basically having sex with the room full of people It's like it's the strangest thing ever nice see with all these things in mind that the chamber doesn't sound so bad You don't have to say the oh, I just go in this thing and lay down there and all of a sudden you have the ability to Tap into yourself. I like both. I really do like doing yoga. We need to go pump up I'm gonna get me one of those guerrilla couple those Yeah, I like all what you just had to say about that start small though. Yes. Yeah, I think a baby gorilla or something Do you do any exercises? No nothing nope. I go up and down the stairs. That works. That's something. Yeah, and I walk and you know That is a decision that people don't realize that if you get to the airport and every time there's a stairway He forces self-tick stairway every time there's you know Escalator you avoid that and get the stairs that just that alone will make your trip just slightly better Yeah, just get a little blood flow in your body. I like that triple sonic too. You ever get on here. Yeah, yeah I got yeah, I got it from you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You're gonna. I get on that once in a while because I don't like that that donut top Was it the muffin muffin top? I don't like to have that thing. So I gotta make help. They're lose weight It'll get I don't do it, you know, it's too much for my stomach They sit up or something like this to try to get that from collecting down there But standing on that thing it kind of helps I think at least psychologically believe it's something I'm doing for exercise Was that thing invented for Russian cosmonauts to keep them in orbit? Yeah, I think that they were having issues with muscle deterioration and Atrophier whatever so they I guess incorporated this System of vibration into the strengthening of their muscles Apparently, but I don't really know it seems like well, where did they take it? Did they take it up in the ship with them Yeah, it's a good question stop off somewhere at the place You don't you would have to have gravity to use it, right? Yeah, yeah, where's it at? You know, there's a certain electricity Seems like a bulky piece to bring up with you if you're limited amount of space No, I don't know doesn't it all also seem that you If you did use it up in space if it wouldn't work. Yeah, because it's shoot you right up Maybe who knows you don't have any resistance. Yeah, you have the gravity's like half the thing, right? I think that's the principle that it's working with Well, we're changing space then would work fine and check a chamber up there to space You don't have to use as much salt there or something. I think it feels good. That's why I like it The vibrating on it. Yeah, I don't know. I don't know if it's doing anything Yeah, I think I feel it's like a little body massage when I get on there and for folks It won't know what it is. It's like some sort of a giant speaker, but it doesn't make sound It just sends it's such so weird to describe it sends like sonic waves, right? Yeah, it moves you up down like it's a voice coil Mm-hmm which like it's like a you know a speaker has a voice coil and has a cone on it Then the voice call moves the cone up and down that creates a sound wave This those have a cone has platform so it moves you up and down a variety of frequencies So it kind of runs you through a pattern and yeah, then you could dial it up and say oh, I want this is supposed to do this or that You know, I thought it was gonna be a big hit be a big hit You know because it I think it has something to do that fat ass syndrome You know other people they get that going on from too much of the stopping off of the wrong places, you know And I'm so I don't know if the turbo sonic can fix that You know this is to it. I think they should you know eat less of that shit and work out a little bit But what I do know about it is whatever it does it feels good You know, I don't I don't know why it feels good. I'm not sure But it feels like a little when you getting vibrate. It feels like a little massage like oh Yeah, you can believe something's happening, you know, I don't know exactly what's going on But it seems to be something is our end of variations too. It's really cool It's a cycle where it'll go really fast and really slow and then so it keeps you kind of interested in it And it's supposed to by doing that it's supposed to be stimulating individual Gland get your flow going, you know, you're like you were saying about that working up like that and you got to get your body Emotion, you know, I think people they sit too long on a chair all day long without moving around I know it's probably not that good. Yeah, we've talked about it a million times the whole thing is just Sitting in the an office is a fucking terrible way to live your life It's supposed to be super bad for you as I sit in an office Well, you know this we only do it like three hours at a pop and even then I get up and I'm like I have an office I sit in my office every day all day long And I get out of it and go back to it, you know in office It's how you set it up. I think see this is okay to sit around here. There's a fine office So I think this is that they got that they're horrible light and then there's this there's the there's the rules and you got to Sued on you know, I just sat in the office the whole thing represents a bummer Do you think you have to do that to people to get them to work? Do you have to make them wear a suit to get them to work? I mean if you if you let people wear t-shirts and jeans and shit would they take insurance? Seriously as they do if they're wearing that goofy monkey suit, you know what they stick to the company line when they're on the phone Giving those those pep speaks you wonder what's the image they're trying to project What is it you're trying to you know? I'm a no-nonsense guy mr. Crash Yeah, I guess it's why look at my tie and I never swear why when I'm at the office I'm completely appropriate and I'm leaving these guys every time because I just don't think that that's who I want to be doing anything with Is these characters that are not working on their own? You know, there's all there for these guys or those who are you? What do you want? What's your story? Well these guys are those guys you know I mean you're working for somebody and you that's why you're showing up in a tie and a suit or you have a bunch of people working for you and you Want to look the role? I'm a Oppressive I'm here to sell insurance Mr. Crash. I'm a no-nonsense guy look at my cuff there perfect Guys that do that it's commercials or the TV rich person or whatever it is there all the good my boat Oh, I have these houses everywhere. I got it. Yacht look at all my really all this stuff I got yeah, I'm living Just go ahead meanwhile. I'm standing here in this terrible auditorium with a bunch of you and this is what I'm begging for you Maybe to give me some of your money so I can continue on with my maybe maybe not lifestyle that you know Yeah, there's a lot of those weird guys that are like motivational speakers and They motivate you to come to their seminars and they make a fuckload of money from your From your money like wait a minute you had a boat You're still hanging out here this place. This is a bummer in here. I can hardly wait to leave. This is your day You know you're getting Yeah, it's not the best way to live life for me. No, I'm glad someone's doing it If they have to do it, we would not have apple computers You would not have Samsung phones you would not have Audi cars You wouldn't have these things if somebody wasn't out there busting their ass every day in an office people like it Some people are suited for that type of Of a life so maybe if we reach too many people with this message of get your shit together It'd be terrible for civilization as a whole overall. Maybe this would weaken us and like the Chinese would take over all This could be it This could be an alternative factor for that. We're fucking it up. We're fucking it up with these goddamn isolation tanks These medical marijuana dispensaries. Oh, those are horrible too. We can actually Somebody's gonna get a good happy. I don't want to live our unnatural life How you gonna continue to build these buildings and launch these missiles if we don't continue to live our unnatural life The more we tune into the natural life the more we see how ridiculous it is more we wake up It's coming our way. I think that people are coming around right now. Is that is happening? I think it is I think you're right Is it that we feel like America is important? You know even though I don't have a flag or nothing like that But it's where we live and it's kind of like where we're from and it's you know sort of like what we're supposed to be You know proud about there's supposed to say oh I'm from here and I you know and I'm really glad about that because Where it is in the way they operate? I'm I'm I go along with that But it's gotten too far now in my opinion, which is you know everybody's out It needs to get to where the people actually get an overview again where they start to evaluate situations and then make correct decisions based on now instead of like these prehistoric Versions of what's got us to hear need need to be you know, hopefully at some point let go with and get a new evaluation That's that's pertains to where we're at now in the world What what can we do now to get along with people? How can we work together? This even if these military see with the I think that there we sell a lot of guns in this country and Pharmaceuticals so you say oh, I don't think we're gonna get out of the bomb business because it's our business You know so we have to figure out how to get these guys working doing something good You know so you don't like say oh your jobs are gone now figure out how we could go in and do stuff together Use our money and our resources to create situations that are beneficial for people They're not we're not gonna make friends by shooting at people. We all know that. I mean this is you know This is some kind of a fictitious A concept that we can go over and make people happy by by killing them You know, I mean well the concept of war being for financial benefit is still pretty alien to a lot of folks They don't believe it. They don't believe that that's why wars are stars are money hat. Yeah, well But all you'd have to consider is how much benefit there could have been done to America I mean if you're really a pro America person and you really are a patriot think about what a benefit it would have been to America to take a lot of that money that went to this crazy war that no one believes in anymore and Try to clean up inner cities try to fix Chicago try to fix Fix the border towns try to help Mexico We have a dangerous we have a dangerous situation Like a hundred miles from us. I mean what what the fuck is that you go to what it would have how long? How far is it to send you know two hours so what is that 120 miles something like that? 240 I think it's in our neighborhood how fast you go in bitch You're not going a hundred and a way 30 miles an hour. You fucking retard 140 140 140 140 Okay, so 70 miles an hour for two hours That's Mexico. That's crazy to a two-hour drive to third world country that's in turmoil And we don't do a goddamn thing about it and we're sending people to someplace that's so far removed from us They're just coincidentally happens. I have oil. That's not why we're here. That is not why we're here. Mr. Crash We're here to fix things. We don't oil figures a funny one. I got a mess over here We have all these people that killed people in New York City from Saudi Arabia But we need to get over here over here Do you know what I don't believe that oil is fossil fuel? They say oh, it's from a fossil I think I got fossils there rocks, you know, I mean there's pressure under the ground So also in other words used to be the same dinosaurs out in the middle of the ocean But I think they think it's rotten plankton. Yeah, I fit the top of the frozen Alps and it's bottom of the ocean and over here in the desert Everywhere at one time there was plankton all over an hour or whatever to make these gigantic puddles of this stuff that we're pumping out for some reason And then you say oh look step back and see what from a alien say what are those guys doing down there? Well, you know they they're pumping this stuff out of there the oil they call it and they turn it into a plastic material Step back and see what from a alien say what are those guys doing down there? Well, you know, they're pumping this stuff out of there the oil they call it and they turn it into a Plastic material that that litters the plant at the King get rid of it or they take it and then they burn it into the atmosphere and poison themselves And then and then what they do they spend all their money to fight amongst each other to see who gets control of it And you're thinking this whole stuff isn't really that necessary could be done without back to the hemp again Look at that. What it has to offer to be speaking. Well, it's just too too difficult to control You know, there was a book on the process of oil being developed that they were trying to speculate somehow or another that it was That it was developed through a natural process in the earth and they were saying that our ideas of it were Incorrect, but I don't think it was well received. I have the book I never read it. I bought it. I was like I'm gonna read that one day and it's just sad there I never fucking read it. I just could get behind it. It's just seemed it seemed kind of goofy that anybody Wouldn't have figured that out by now Exactly, I mean go wow that thing about the planets too How they're supposed to be circularizing the earth what the Sun let's say the Sun's moving right? Mm-hmm. It's going this way so now they have a believe it though the planets are circling the Sun is it I think that this makes more sense to me And there's other you know, this isn't my thought but somebody showed that you know, oh yeah I mean say this Sun is going this way well what makes us think we're not in rotation in a vortex being pulled by the Sun going somewhere I think we're we're on a trip man. We're going some we're started off where where was the Sun? 100 years ago. Where's it at now? And then where are we gonna be later? I believe the Sun is pulling us through space and we're in well That's not a belief that's a fact that's that's absolutely what's happening the whole galaxy is moving Yeah, no, this is something that Astrophysicists have figured out a while ago. It's that the whole universe is kind of moving. That's that expansion I don't know. I think we're going a galaxy's moving I think we're going in a direction somewhere I think that if we figured out where's the Sun and where is it off to I think we're behind it I think that we're following it and this is the way the rotation. I don't know which way is up or down in here Where's the North that is exactly how it's supposed to be described? I think as it goes, you know, we're circling around it I think we're going around this way. I don't know. I don't know. I don't understand it at all I mean when I watch those scientific documentaries on space It's one of the most fascinating things ever and most fascinating so that it's so rarely brought up in regular conversation That's where some of this money should go into like yeah expansion of the of the reality Situation we're in here. Like oh look at we have this and that we can think about now get these scientists Toned to put the phone down first off put this on down enough on the phone It's a tiger counter is a wind designer tells you the name of the suitoon that's on, you know Which it's like okay. It's a fun and what nobody answers it, which is what really freaks me out man I got like because I got a call everybody at night say hey, don't forget to come down tomorrow I know I made an appointment, but I'm convinced that you're not going to be able to remember it So I'm calling you now to say oh hey, don't forget and then I get 20% people answer the phone Oh, yeah, no problem got it the other 80% is Me leaving a message, you know, which I can't stand leaving a message, but I'm thinking they got it in their hand They had it right here. They got how aren't they answering the phone? It's a phone hello. Yeah, but Don't you think it's good that there's all these capabilities these things have smart phones I think it's like good ever people other people have a Bitcoin on it. You can you kid Check out an email link that somebody sends you you don't think that's good. I think it's good for you know You know people that want to do that. Oh, I think it's good I think it's good I just think the problem is overuse the problem is overuse of anything though It's overuse of softball if you just became a fucking softball junkie and you're out there on the field every day Throw in that ball in the air hitting them by yourself into a tree and people like what is time doing? Can't wait for that fucking game on Sunday Like Jesus Christ time you got a family you got a wife and don't get home You know you're obsessing you're freaking people out man. I think that's bad too But I think the phone in moderation is a beautiful. It's an amazing how much Scientifically advanced means they've done on a phone in the past how many years if they put that kind of brain power into anything We're driving the same car almost a good. He's just let's got a pretty new thing some kind of motorizer But yeah, it's pretty similar to the cars that we had I was just talking with a friend last night about how like the cars of 10 years ago when I was a kid when I was in high school I was in high school. I was 14 in 1984 that's when I was in high or 1981 when I was in high school and There was a 1970 Chivel that this kid had that was in my school and I guess he was like maybe two years old in me So he might have been like 16 but yeah, this 1970 Chivel and everybody was like holy shit Look at that. It was a classic. It's a 70 Chivel SS. That's a three-year old. That's only 11 years old Like how is a car 11 years old like a classic back then but a 11 year old car today It's like, you know, it's not that big of a deal. You know if you got a hold of a would that be a 2003 the 2003 car yeah, that's like that's a modern car like what happened? How'd that have dropped the ball? Something happened They might have hit like some sort of technological they're constantly pushing the boundaries as far as like this the speed The cars can go and the G forces that they can handle and let they get like their track times get a little bit better every year with their sports cars but for the average regular car like at a certain point in time what else can you improve? You can add some rocks that were up there. There's people they got that road. They made those tiles that light up. Oh, yeah Yeah, the solar road panel Incredible incredible. Yeah, lights the city up like Tron and stuff and they're collecting energy in the car and they could that could totally be implemented to apparently that's completely realistic It's crazy We're there already we just have to get get get somebody to say, you know a hike Do you know how weird do you know how weird city streets look? Can you imagine if you lived in the time before electricity and then someone brought you to New York City Times Square Saturday night and you're walking through and you see all these lights all this craziness and the cars with the lights You know like holy shit. I can't believe this that would be like a really intense sort of a change But I wonder if it would be as intense as all the roads being lit All the roads being lit to us right now That might be like we might not be able to we might have to address the fact that we live in the future Like if all of our fucking road, we might at all collectively just go what the fuck are we doing? Look what we're doing? We have solar powered roads That's progress. Yeah. Oh, yeah, they're not breaking down or they have alternative purposes They're not only to drive on but they have other information they change would be so strange though The way it would alter our world like our vision of the world would look totally different If Hong Kong was lit up with those kinds of shit. I wonder what the effect would be. I feel like it would make people more festive It you know, I feel like where I mean you're driving out on this road I read if these cars are just trying to tune yourself out because of the it's such a tedious process to get from point A to point being a car Yeah, it's gray and there's other people jammed up in there and the speed's not what you like or whatever You know, so it's kind of the transportation I think they got some room to improve on that for us You know if they if they put the phone down Yeah, if they put the phone down The car is helping them communicate though. Maybe they can use the phone to make the cars Yeah, this is the roadways. He's a soul roadways. It's a guy's Zach He was over there the days on we saw he looked him up the series that he's on the Silicone Valley show or something so we don't see who he's funny guy, but anyway I want to see was the show silicone down. I never seen the show funny show. It's on HBO I've only I only watched one episode. It was really funny We brought it up and there he was and he's getting the car came to pick him up He looks in there and there's like I say, oh, he's got in the car There's nobody in there and he says oh, yeah, I'm going to wherever it was and then the car took off It's all by itself and driving it. Yeah, well, they're gonna have that. I mean they essentially have that now the Google cars where they're Ceremony with it and they they don't have any accidents They've none of the accidents that they've been involved with the the Google cars fault I think a few people bumped into them jump out in front of them or no no no that they haven't hit anything But they apparently have radar they can sense when things are in front of you I mean you've seen that on cars when you get close to the car in front of you to make like a BPP BPP like I rented a car this weekend. It does it they park themselves now some cars Yes, they can parallel park themselves. Yeah, self which is Ridonculus like they just decided you motherfuckers were too stupid to do this. We have to help you Excellent. Yeah, this is where I want the money for my car that I'm gonna buy to be invested in the ability of it to then park itself But you know what there's a thing that's going on right now where people are trying to go retro with a lot of shit because like There's a lot of people that like old cars now There's a lot of people that like like refurbished things because they don't want anything that they don't want all of that inner Fearrence they don't want all of that disconnect between them and an actual machine where you could work on it You're a car guy you look under a car lid now you're looking under there to go what is under here And it's just it was just a trunk or the motor in here I don't even know which which which on this thing yet, you know if you could pop the hood of a 1970 chivel you get in that work on you got a wrench out of your cap It's right there you can grab it with your hand. There's your oil filter you can hold on to it Yeah, there's the dipstick you could see how much oil's in there with a stick Well now you got computers you have to run it. Oh, you have to have a guy Yeah, you have to have a guy and the thing computer can go wacky on you too that also can happen that that happens occasionally You know obviously there's a mechanical breakdown too, but the computers can go back. That's your guy's guy After you get a guy then he has to have a guy say oh Yeah, my stuff isn't but but on the flip side you have navigation screens you have backup cameras You have all this cool shit that electronics provide too It's I see both sides of it, but I I do see like the appeal of like driving an old VW bug like a VW bug from like 1970 not much horsepower or anything, but man what it what a connection you have to the road with that piece of shit, you know I mean it's not good handling it doesn't have good brakes, but you know when you see one This is like a little bit and driving it. Yeah, I wish I could drive your participated in the project My friend Jimmy had one we were in high school. I was an idiot I always had muscle cars and my friend Jimmy had this VW bug and it was like you know We like I said, this is right out of high school So I I graduated in 85 and Jimmy was ahead of me and so I think that it was probably like 1986 or something along those lines and He had this 1960 something bug or 69 bug this Ugly light blue, you know, but it was great. There was something cool about it It was like we had a big smile on our face when we were driving around in it You know, there was something about yeah first of all he's like, you know pretty macho guy and Is a construction worker just really smart dude too though, so he got himself a fucking VW bug He's like it's great gas mileage like the wind would blow and the car would move Like you can feel the car moving if a good breeze hit it like your fucking cars moving from the wind man Like what do we do really go car? Yeah, they do handle better now cars. Oh What time that's the that's the understatement of the year snowboard race go every amazing amazing prize by break I had to stop from like 65 to zero like like on the freeway the other day and it just was like No, you have the sweet that sweet new Volkswagen. Yeah, that's like sports perfect. I forgot you had that perfect contrast to the Volkswagen We were talking about because my friend Jimmy's Volkswagen was like super old-school like that lawnmower engine You got a lawnmower or sewing machine. Yeah. Oh, yeah, you'd have to pump the brakes But it was like a really light tiny car where is the new one like we're saying looks like a like a fat Porsche Yeah, it looks like like some sort of a spaceship like an Audi or something like that The new VW bug is pretty dope looking. Yeah, they pretty much redesigned it for guys And I got rid of all the girls shit in it like that the flower ponds and shit like that that used to be in the old ones Like more ones that look like bubbles and it's a perfect example of a car that like shows the improvement of today's cars because The performance and handling of a VW bug is better than like a 1970 Porsche if you got a Porsche from 1970 those bitches had like skinny ass steering wheels that were big like hula hoops and yet shitty ass skinny tires like they didn't handle that well They just weren't that good in comparison to like what your car could do if you if you brought your car back in time Like when they had the 1969 Porsche and you showed them your car they'd be fucking blowing you Is that be like you're a wizard from the future? Yeah, this is the 2014 turbo. I have this car But the doesn't it have like 250 horsepower or something? Yeah, they just put a new engine in it Forget what exactly the fast fuck cars like that was a big deal like to how I mean that would be a little bit heavier than an old Porsche for sure but If you could get that kind of horsepower in an old car, I mean, that's ridiculous Like they have these new Mustangs the Mustang GT the new one that's out just just sort of straight Mustang GT has like 450 fucking horsepower something crazy like that. They're selling that to people on oh yeah But that's like their basic car then they have a Shelby that comes out later that's gonna have more than 600 horsepower Like that that wasn't accessible back in 1970 You had a place to go drive these things say hey, look we got a place you can go drive it to get something We were remotely as fast in like 1970 you had a special order shit you had to go to a mechanic You had to find some dude who knows how to put nitrous on a car, but now you get his buy it weird I they allow people to have something like that well. It's just a faction of What we're doing a fact so this can can continual improvement this it's a Process and it's a product of those things. It's a product of this continual improvement And it's a product of our constant desire for new shit We want the car that does zero to 60 and 3.4 because the car does zero to 60 and 3.6 is outdated You look at the specs. Oh, this car went around the Nurburgring in seven minutes and 25 seconds People freak out they go I can't believe that my car doesn't seven 40 my car is a piece of shit You look asshole you're not going around the Nurburgring like what are you doing man? I give you drove my friend Jimmy's VW bug that might make you feel better than driving some Ridiculous car that goes zero to 60 in two seconds and corners at two G's You know, we're driving at though. Well, it's a certain a certain part of that you lose the fun There's like a fun and driving. You know, there's a guy named Dario friend Cheetie I think you say his name. He's a race car driver and He drives his his his car to his fun car to drive his like a 1973 Porsche with like a big engine in it. He put like a more modern engine in 1973 Borsa like he could get like a V-ron or any of these like super complicated cars that they're making today But a guy has an actual race car driver decided to go for like the gritty feel of an old car Combined with modern technology. He's a very smart guy. You know, he's like all these zero to 60 times He goes yes, it's important when you're race car driving but not for the pleasure of driving like so that's the guy listen to Yeah, I mean, that's the guy he does it for a living so if he chooses to drive like an old car that like really you really feel everything That's probably the most pleasure a lot of merit. Yeah Like past the pleasurable point and went to some weird Numb point with cars where the stealing's like this and you don't feel any of the bumps, you know Weird yeah, it's not organic. Yes. It's kind of not organic. It's not very mumper and tons It's not very yeah, that's the trend today the trend today is to go with like a handmade clock You know like oh see that clock it was handmade and people like oh, you know Something cool about that as opposed to like if you lived in 1970 and you got a digital clock you were the pimp of the year Like this guy's a digital clock in a house You go over a dude's house and he had digital alarm clock you'd be like this mother fuckers got a digital alarm clock Microwave over it like that Yeah, yeah, man, I remember going over people's houses and they had that I was I couldn't believe I was looking at it I was looking at like then the camera to watch. Yeah first thing at the clock in your house on it on your hand you watch that pimp 640 Horate that's what people say it what time is it? Oh, it's seven sixty You know, and remember the batteries were such dog shit that you you had to press it to find the time And then you let it go and thought you would go by It didn't just stay on because it was the batteries were dog shit back then You know if it was gonna stay on it would had to be like a foot. Yeah, the battery for that back then Yeah, I mean these batteries were just dog shit. Never thought about that Yeah, I mean those were it's remember the calculator watch For some reason that one never took off it took off and it got to a certain point and people like wait wait wait Wait, what the how often am I counting shit? We got the calculator phone. Yeah, but that's a your phone is kind of a computer. That's a one device choice Yeah, you better off of the compass. What if you get lost all you guys a fucking time. Yeah, calculate Something there's not gonna help you for lost the way. Yeah You have something to make some fire. Yeah, why do you got a fucking calculator? What's not that as our first development here? And it's also the calculator watch was invented would calculate It's rolling like that big like I mean what the fuck are you doing? How often is that coming up? Except this is the one thing that I know people are probably yelling at me right now Said people cheating in school. I bet there was a window. I bet there was a small window where teachers are still fucking old people Who are there? They're out of touch with modern technology in a lot of ways So there's probably a window where these young little rascals went in there with their technological wizard phones with calculators on and they probably I remember doing that Totally doing that. How long was it before they were made illegal? Do you remember? I don't think they ever really were I don't think they ever actually caught on because you were always allowed to use like calculators to cheat in school there was those big TI 81 Texas instrument ones that you had to buy remember those huge calculators And used to be there was a note field kind of where you could just sit there and write all these like Pro like answers to questions in the calculator and the teachers never caught on for us on that Which is open up all everyone would open up their calculators and look at our notes on their calculator Oh, no, that's hilarious. Yeah, so it was like like a note function on a smartphone. Yeah, yeah That's hilarious. It was like the beginning of that But I remember calculator watches like we had them and I don't ever remember being told not to wear it Like I don't think the even the math teachers even figured out well, let's let's Google that to find out Count because I would think that the only way to get good at math if you're gonna really get good at math is you have to actually do it Right, I mean yeah math is something that's fun to do. I mean I think the questions terrible You just lost all credibility. They don't like the man. I don't know who you are. Yeah, you just said I like it is this like always the same way This fell in yeah, but they start getting in the triangles and shit. He needs that well, that's specialized mathematical That's all that I can just like addition. I care about the math. It's like Harry Potter science Like those guys the quantum the quantum deep into the quantum consciousness I like those guys that say shit that I can't understand at all I love when they're talking that kind of math when they show me those mathematical computations And you just go what is that an alien language like what is that I have no idea what that is those guys fascinating They see that there's a cartoon where they're all looking at that there's a big formula on the chalkboarder over there And they're going ha ha ha ha ha because it's a humor somewhere in the inaugural there was the joke in the formula that a regular person's not gonna It's not funny, you know You remember glacial I think they're called glacial glasses. They came there were out around the same time There were like like circle glasses But then they had this little leather piece that went on the side and then like the the the arms were like made out of rubber And they're really popular for like two years in the early 80s and they were like I missed that I didn't hang out with any of those people Look at book Google calculator watch man. It's actually pretty trippy. They came out with one in 1975 man And then nuts One of the one really 80s calculated watch were first it were first introduced in the 1970s and despite enjoying a heyday during the 1980s continued to be produced the most notable brand is Casio data bank series The watches were by time X were also popular Wicky Pedia, but Brian is a wicky Pedia where you could see all the old ones. They're it's a trip man It's really fascinating like I forgot how silly these things were Look at those we look at the one down look at the one even further down look at that thing How do you get your finger on one of us? You got a little memory of all but that is the future man if you had one of those you could totally get Star Wars chicks Chicks are like really in the Star Wars. They would think you were so cool He's got a fucking calculator on his rest It's so future it's so space Yeah, that didn't work out we didn't give a fucking anymore now people went back to dials You know like if your car is fancy your car has an old school clock on it Like if you buy a Lexus or something like that to have like a nice clock in it with an actual Yeah, and it's to show you this is a luxury item sir There's no digital clocks in here sir. This is a luxury item Like what do? Isn't it? Is it just the thing that tells the time like what the fuck's going on here something's going on here? If you have a tick-tock tick-tock tick-tock. It's fancy see this This is fancy This is fancy can't hear this is I know what time We're at it's out. Look at my computer go away They're the computer. There's a you digital numbers. You're exact numbers. I like looking at a court fancy Lock to right I don't know what's in there. I got that shit at Target still going. I don't know what it is It's just a clock but I like looking at a clock for whatever reason It gives me a better sense of what time is then when I look at a number when I look at numbers and it's totally Aological but I look at this number on my computer the upper left hand or upper right hand corner my computer And then I look at that that's more pleasurable to me for whatever reason That's an interesting evaluation. You know, I think I have a more natural sense of Kind of an analog thing. Yeah, you know the way analog is better in tape to you listen into recordings and so forth like that a lot of times But you know it used to record and you know analog and then when the digital came out kind of Then what they would do is they'll go digit analog digital and then back to analog Yeah, try to mix this stuff up towards sounds and I fully understand that for some folks is the opposite some folks They don't like that that's not pleasing to them, but they love the numbers Something I mean it's all different. It's just me personally. That's how I always feel when I I would way rather look at like a I think clocks are kind of cool whenever I look at a watch Part of me goes. Oh, that's cool. Can watch the other part of me Intentaneously goes it is so goddamn fascinating. There's a bunch of moving parts in there amazing that spin and took like I'm not a fan of expensive Watches I'm not I mean I think some of them look really cool But it's not something that I'm like really into because they seem to me like peacock feathers a little bit But what I am a fan of is the engineering behind those watches. I'm a fan of like my watch is not a it's it's It's just not a expensive watch at all, but it kind of like nighttime it kind of glows Like I could see that the the hand very clearly at nighttime That's a good track. It's a fantastic feature. It doesn't require a battery to do that either or it doesn't run on any extra You know something like a thing you have to do press a button or anything you can always see it But I'm fascinated by that I'm fascinated by the engineering involved in it But I think for a lot of guys they wear and I'm not criticizing they look cool as fuck But it seems very kind of peacocky, you know when dudes have like diamonds all over their watch and you know diamonds and they Thing and my buddy likes watches. He just he's showing me a little 36 thousand dollars for it's a watch I was looking at going oh man, you know, I'm at a guy that had one in Toronto I think it was like more than a hundred thousand. Yeah, I'm trying to remember what he he owned like a company that imports them Very very nice guy. We see he loves watches. Oh, yeah, there's people that are into collecting watches, you know And they're very matter of fact about their watches, you know, this is a Hamilton from you know Mm-hmm. There's a they have a it's like cars. Yeah, and watches are another quality, you know like a good watch You like you said Swiss engine. It's a it's a piece of stuff that that lasts Yeah, it's not a piece of junk that's disposable you get a piece of quality You know, it's watch and it's got a lot of work put into it and it's something you'll have forever You know, and I like that and stuff Electronics probably have the the quickest turn around as far as like one they kind of go on Yeah, like I've never had a computer last more than five years But I've had watches that last like 20 years there. I've watched this 20 years old 20. Yeah, it's 20 years old People got their grand I'd like expensive either. It's just a regular watch and it's It's like my battery dies. I just buy a new watch. Yeah, I mean you totally do that You put another battery in that watch, but you buy a new watch you said yeah, every time there's a battery dies I'm just like I don't want to Biggest the one that did that to us. They started the the the lighter you throw it out And then they got the shaver you throw it out then Was it the pen you throw it out? Remember that was all big big started with the throw away stuff And then now it's like the phone goes down you throw it out the TV goes out you throw it out Anything goes out you throw it out. I mean yeah, we should really reevaluate I'll reevaluate that whole throwing out plastic shit You see all the plastic that's in the ocean and all these Photographs of these birds that have been feeding plastics to their babies The babies die and you see that their bellies are filled with plastics. You know, it's fucking shit up lately is these Those facial cleaners that have the little beads in them that just these tiny little plastic beads I guess they're fucking up the water and yeah, they're not biodegradable those things this scrubs and you know what they don't need to use Those scrubs you can use seeds there's seeds that you can get like Appacot facial scrub like it's an apricot seed and it's just as good and it's biodegradable Like all these little plastic things like It's unfortunate man, but a lot of that. Oh, those was gone over this glasses They're not I remember having my calculator watching these glasses were really popular. They're called something awesome like douchebag Google glasses Start start start start gator something Maybe They had leather on the glasses. It was like that. I mean your cars had brawls on them It's like we have this weird leather Yeah, you remember the bras. We should bring that back. But I think some people still do it I saw a guy on a Corvette the other day in a bra on the Corvette I was like wow you're rocking a bra on your Corvette. It was an old Corvette. Wasn't real leather though. Was it? Mmm, I don't know I didn't ask that's a cannon worms. You don't really want to open up. Yeah Is that real leather? I Super I did bra on my super or not that that was the shit. Yeah, I think I had a bra once But I think I got rid of it pretty quickly I was like what is this stupid fucking thing? What am I doing here? That's what I'm saying there was a weird time in the 80s that The leather mmm-hmm like there was no reason to have leather on you like look that big chunks of leather on your glasses Well, I guess the idea is that you want something soft that does that doesn't take light in from the sides But that also fuck up your peripheral may you versus have multiple hooks. Yeah They should bring back a plastic covering for the couches now that was That was a dream when people you go over their house that was covered with clear plastic It said that it's a grab-aw's house. How ridiculous is that everyone's wanted to keep things saving them for so long They've never enjoyed them when they had them shit wasn't disposable That's amazing you come in there the mom's telling you hey you can't walk in that room It's all this way or that you know, yeah people some people still have towels like that That's supposed to use those towels. So get them out of here You didn't use the Apple soap they do there the little frog that was there. Yeah. How could you do that? You know, well you guys are freaks. Yeah, the tower was for freaks say a producter, you know It's a prop. I've been messing with the bathroom props in here. Yeah, they're trying to paint some sort of a crazy No, it's a the cleaver the cleaver What was her name Joan clean was Miss Cleaver's name? I don't remember is Ward Leave it to be Ward. What was the dad June was it June was it June? It was Miss Cleaver's name wasn't she the best barber a billing sleigh. I think yeah, okay June cleaver. I think it was an I think you're right Was it June? Was it June? It was Mrs. Cleaver's name. Wasn't she the best? Marber Billingsley. I think. Okay, June Cleaver? I think it was an end. I think you're right. Remember Eddie Haskell? Yeah. I remember Eddie Haskell? Yeah, it was June Cleaver. She was wonderful. What a crazy fucking show. Do you imagine that there's a show that they made and it's called Leave It to Beaver? And it was an actual show and the kid's name was Beaver. And at what point in time did they realize that that means pussy? Was it like, they started in the 1950s, right? So what, you know, first appearance was, it was a pilot that they made in 1957. So when did Beaver become, when did it become a vagina? Was it the 70s you think? No. Maybe that because everyone thought Beaver was just like a pussy. And so they just put it together. Because he had played it like a pussy character in a beaver. Well, he wasn't getting beat up. It wasn't a savage. Yeah. I thought it was because of his teeth or something. I thought he had like a beaver, a facial look or something. Maybe. I don't know. Really? This thing that he had a tiger. Like the name that after this, Eddie? Maybe there's something to beaver. I don't know. I don't think so. That was the beaver. How'd they call it the beaver? Where did that come from? I think that was just his nickname. Yeah. But I mean, how did he get it? What did they say? Oh, yeah. You smell bad or what? Well, they lived in a time before the internet. It looks like it was a slang term from the 1910 England. Have you ever tried to watch that? Have you ever tried to watch Leave It To Be A River? I grew up on it. Look, we can get back to isolation tank talk in a couple minutes. It's been plenty of time, Rayleigh's and gentlemen. But seeing as I were in the flow of this, I would like to watch a little quick Leave It To Be A River episode just to see how ridiculous the world was in 1957. Even the opening when they have their house and it's all nice. We're probably down as the menace. Remember Mr. Wilson? Yeah. He was over there and he was like, oh, Janice, you menace or whatever. Jim, Mr. Wilson? The way they used to talk to each other was so alien. People hadn't figured out television there. They hadn't figured out how other people were going to perceive them. There was a slow change where people recognized bullshit and they were allowed to do less of it. And if you go back and you watch Father Knows best, here it is. Yes, Mom. Oh, Be A River, I see your home. Yes, Jeff. This is me the home. How was the movie? Like, didn't go the movie. You didn't go to the movie? No, sir. I want you yesterday when I wasn't supposed to. Oh, is that so? Yes, sir. You know, when I raced in by school, the guaranteed other seat and I hated it, Larry's. And I was going to make believe like I wanted today, but I couldn't. So that's why I'm telling you what happened. Well, when did you decide to tell us about it? When I was walking to buy home from Larry's? Yeah, Dad. It's too big for him to ride. Larry? Larry. Well, Be A River, I'm glad you decided to tell us the truth. Of course you realize you can't keep a bicycle to you. One while you were being disobedient. We'll have to find something to do with the bike. Well, Dad, Dad's a stick. The kid came clean, left you with the bike, Dad. You have the bike. Kind of fucking lessons you teach him. Bullshit. He didn't do anything illegal. Yeah, I see. No, I came forward and told him what the story was. That's the kind of stuff that the kids now say, ah, I'm afraid to go tell Pop because he's going to take my bike away. See, that's some 1957 type of psychology. In 2014, I think they would say the best way to make this go away, or to make it never happen again, is to reward him with the bike. To reward him and say, look, you did a good job by telling me in the future you'd benefit much more from just doing what I tell you. In the beginning, don't be lying, bitch. Yeah. Go ride your bike. And then he thinks Dad's cool. Right. Not Dad's some dick, he's going to take my fucking lawfully one bike. Yeah. He won the bike. I mean, that was a bad example. I thought this was going to be good stuff. Yeah. Well, that was a bummer, man. So, pumper, I love the word bummer. I would have heard that a while. Yeah, it is a bummer. Well, it's 1957 logic. They just weren't that good at TV yet. They didn't understand how it was coming off to other people. We just watched that. It looks so ridiculous, right? Well, it was a real ad. You got that one? No, we're forced to. You're forced to. Yeah. I can't anymore. Which go back to isolation types. It's a freaky time and television. But it's indicative of this thing that I think we're experiencing. This thing that everything is constantly improving and one of the best ways to see that improvement. Like, if you wanted to determine the age of a tree, you would chop the tree down and you'd look at the rings of the tree. I think if you wanted to determine the progress of our culture in terms of like the rings on a tree, like in that sort of a way, there's no better way to do it than to go back and look at the sections of our media. Go back and look at like the $6 million man. Go back and look at the fall guy. Go back and look at the incredible Hulk. Go back and look at the evolution of TV. Yeah, Dallas. Watch the dukes of hazard. Watch old television shows. And then go back to leave at the beaver. Go back to this shit. Go back to this craziness that we're watching. And then realize like, whoa, there was this weird, steady progression up to ex-files and then, you know, Game of Thrones. The media has improved like it's a totally different organism. The type of shows you see, if you watch a modern day episode of Game of Thrones, there's not a film that was made in the 1960s that could compare to that. I think Stanley Kubrick was a genius. I think 2001 Space Odyssey was a marvel of cinema for the time, but it can't fuck with what they have now on TV. HBO, Game of Thrones is one of the best movies of all time. And it's like 10 hours every season. It's madness. It was a 4 million, what's the cost on that? I don't know. I don't know. It's got to be expensive. It's a million to die. It's perfect. It's a perfect show. And my point being, if you try to compare Game of Thrones to Father knows best, it's insane. It's hard to believe it. These are made for the same organism. And yet it occupied the same amount of time of a person's interest. Yes. But with how hard it's gotten to hold somebody's interest now. I don't think it's that. I think it's a continual improvement in the understanding of human beings. And I think it takes something really intense to rattle us now. It takes like a true detective. It takes like, you can't just have a normal relationship, like Bridges of Madison County. Get the fuck out of here, Clint. What are you doing? Like what are you doing? Hang out with this chick. You guys are drama queens. You know how much time left. White crime. Get out of there. Go have a drink. Get out of here. Stop. It's nothing. Meanwhile, you watch Game of Thrones. There's fucking dragons. Okay? There's these white walkers. People are sword fighting in the middle of the night. I love those white walkers. Oh, it's mad. The fucking... I like the dragons. How about the giants? They're just so great. It's a madness show. I love that. Crazy shit is happening. Crazy stuff. What the humans do to each other is so shocking. If you try to watch Magnum PI after that, you'd be like, come on, man. The world has changed. We've gotten a much deeper understanding of what really freaks people out. And we require that to get freaked out. Today's trolls. Today's YouTube trolls could start wars in the 1940s. If you could send those guys back at time, like the really sophisticated trolls, the ones where you read their Twitter account, you barely even tell if they're trolling. They're just so... And then you watch some of the arguments they get into. What's the trolls? The trolls and artists. I don't know what that is. Trolling is, say if somebody wanted to reach out to... I should probably not tell you. The trolls would get mad. Like, the fuck, we got a fresh one. We got a live one. They're not gonna call me out. It's not a call you out thing. They would contact you in some sort of a way, either insulting you and trying to get you to respond to them or mockingly in love with you to try to get you to respond to them and then turn on you. They would try to pretend that they were outraged about certain specific issues, just to get a rise out of you, try to engage you in just as a game. There's a group of folks that... Yeah! ...that kind of stuff? It's a sport. It is kind of a sport. If you can get a good one on the line, you know... Oh, my god, I'm a line before me. It's hilarious. Do they get you? Yeah, I can read it. I've been gotten an argument to people before, I was like, what am I... I don't even know you. It takes a lot of time to realize that, because the internet is a new thing. And the interacting with people on the internet is... What's been around? Ten years? If I study your buttons, too. I say something like that. You see what he does when he say that. The longest people were interacting on the internet like this, like in this sort of like instantaneous, like Twitter type comments or YouTube type comments, that's never... It hasn't been more than a decade. This is a new thing. There's a new thing for people. who like to get a rise out of people. If you can't do it at work, especially if you're stuck in a job that sucks, and you have no... Almonds of expression of the evil inside you? You go on to us. I wonder why does the people watch these videos and then say that, like with Hamilton. They watch the video there, and then they're comics. Hamilton Morris? Yeah. Hamilton Morris, we owe him an apology. I mean, when that podcast was made, we both got way too high. Brian and I got him. We took him to the center of the earth. I just want to... I spent this morning. We took him to Moore door. We had this weed that was grown on Pluto and came over here in a time capsule. I don't know where we got that shit from. Who's that? I don't remember. Well, you didn't have to twist his arm. Well, the thing is, we're there with Hamilton Morris, who is the psychedelic converse for. So we went to the bottom of the swimming pool and fucking set up a picnic table. I mean, we went deep. It was rough, man. I don't know what the fuck we were talking about. Half the time, we were in a conversation. We were like seven, eight hits and of some insane sativa. And there was no way we should have been having a conversation in a podcast. No way. We were just... We were way too barbecued. It turned out okay. It was not bad. The interaction with him and the tank was better. The whole thing, you know that. But the comments were evil. Well, you know, even on some of these other ones, they were reading and they said, oh, you know, this or that or this guy. They're trying to make an assumption, you know, an evaluation about somebody. They don't know anything about it. And the fact that you just spent your time over viewing what it is they just did. And now you're going to be mean spirited about it. Why don't you just don't do it? Just don't look. Just, you know. But you find that... I didn't know these are these kind of cats that that's what they're up to. These trolls that they enjoy making, you know, getting a rise out of people, which is a bummer when you don't have a lot of time to get a... Because you're trying to get through life without as little of these, you know, infractions as possible. So you keep your mind in a positive, you know, format. Then somebody's saying something mean or ugly about you and you're reading it and you're going, oh, and that I wish that that thing gets said about me, you know? Right. But I think there's a benefit to it though. I think there's a benefit to interacting with negative people. Is that you understand that there are negative people out there? Because if you don't interact with them in a regular basis, I don't think you'll appreciate the positive people as much. And I think that's just the weird aspect of human beings. We get accustomed to whatever. We get accustomed to all sorts of things that seem unacceptable. Like if you look at the things and customs that people carry on in other countries, there's certain rights of passage for manhood that if you try to implement today in the United States, like the weird shit that they do in Africa, whether it's circumcised in each other, which sharp sticks and they have to go crawl through thorn bushes, naked, like this, a bunch of crazy shit they make these guys do. And if you try to implement that stuff in America today, we would laugh at you. But to them, like this is how they've done it. This is how they've done it for a long time. And people get used to all sorts of weird shit. So I think a lot of people have gotten used to something that just, it rages against their sensibilities and it rages against their body. Rages against their sensibilities because they've somehow done another committed themselves to a safe job that is not inspiring. And they think that maybe if they just waited a little while or thought about it better, they could have eventually figured out how to do what they actually want to do. And when you run into someone who has done that, then you see the benefit of it. And it fucks with people's heads. And I think there's a lot of people that live a life of regret. And it's super unfortunate. And I think the way our society is structured currently, I don't see that changing anytime soon. It just seems like so many people are rushing out to enter into the workforce because the economy is not so good. So everybody's scrapping for jobs in there willing to take jobs. They might not have ordinary ordinarily taken because they want the security of it. It's a very trying time for a lot of people. But if you could figure out a way to separate on your own, sell-in coffee mugs or fucking figure in something out, damn, it'll be so much better off. Well, it allows you to be more independent in your ability to provide for yourself. If you could figure out something you can do, what I find to be a little bit discouraging is the lack of interest in manufacturing products. And then see, this country used to be, like I say, really have a lot of pride and craftsmanship. So we still have a talent pool here. We have a lot of creative people. We have a lot of intelligent people. We need to pool these people together and get back into manufacturing our own products. That's what I believe would be a good thing. Get kids. They took auto shop out of the school, I think. I don't think they do the welding anymore in school. I don't know what they do in school. A lot of schools don't. A lot of schools don't have that anymore. There's a lot of liability issues. Those things too. Yeah, people. I don't think it's very common. It's not something they teach kids how to use a hammer. You go to school. You should teach a kid how to work a hammer or a saw. Well, I think this ebb and flow that we're talking about with technology and people, some folks bouncing back the other way and looking towards mechanical things and being in love with mechanical things. I think that also is going to be said about working for big companies. But I think that a lot of these people are going to get this feeling of, man, I'm just lost in the sea of people whereas I can make kitchen knives. I can make handmade kitchen knives in my garage over the weekend. Start selling them. And then one day or another, eventually break through. I got a website from Squarespace. And I put together this fucking knife collection. And now I'm selling them online. And now I'm independent. And I got kids using them on TV. Chef Luigi's endorsed my... No, you don't want that shit. You want some handmade? There's a couple companies that have sent me crust-trail knives, cestral knives, and vehement knives. And there were companies that did the exact same thing. They just started making knives and started selling them. They were into knives. They loved the beauty of the construction of the knives. Vientment knife. They made me this fucking big, crazy, cool thing. It's like all the handles, all handmade. When you see that someone can make a living, doing that. When you're chopping onions with something like that, are you doing something on a kitchen? You're using it for camping or hunting or something like that. It's like you're feeling like you have a piece of craftsmanship with you. Awesome. I love that. I love that. What is that? A connection to the person who made it. More obvious connection. Absolutely. I give you a handmade... My friend Ari went to China. I got a handmade suit. Yeah, yeah. Fucking handmade suit. It fits perfect. Yeah. And a guy in mind, you know. Like, there's something extra jazzy about the fact that you know that a guy made this for you. It feels good. That's right. He took your proportions into consideration. Yeah. This is your six feet tall. That doesn't mean that your knees are bending here. Your stride is this or that. And he's an artisan. I mean, he's an artisan. He creates a beautiful suit. It's a work of art. He gets a pleasure out of that. See, that's back to that feeling of accomplishment. You could feel like by making stuff. I feel good about that. Like, what we do with the chambers. We really put a lot of effort into the manufacturing of them and the products that we use, the parts. All of them, not that there's anything wrong with, you know, whatever. We use no cheap parts. There's nothing made in China, not that there's anything wrong with made in China, but we don't buy anything that's used in China for our stuff at all. It's either made here or North America is somewhere to. We have a few European parts from German and Switzerland, but the rest of it's all made here in America. Because of the quality. We insist upon getting the best pieces. Now, as the guy you spoke about, Lily, John Lily, they didn't invented these chambers in the beginning. His doctorate was the doctorate or whatever. His perspective was that it was always better to buy or to implement or use the better quality piece of equipment than to create this, what it is that it is. And that is, you know, so I agree with that so much that the better it is, the better it is. And this thing, oh, you can get away with it. Oh, we could do it this way. It's cheaper. Or, you know, second, you know, I find it if you could figure out the best way to do things. That's the way to do it. First class. You got first class or no class. You know what I mean? These people come up with this thing. Oh, it's what I used to mix sound, right? I do monitors, mix those from the stage. I'm going to say, hey, how is it? Oh, it's okay. Pretty good. I say, no, no, no, we don't do pretty good. We don't do okay. We get it's just the way you want. I'm going to have that in a second for you. You just communicate with me and we'll have it just exactly the way you want that, not a problem. Right. Well, that's like many aspects of life. There's some people that are happily half-assing things. Yeah. Just happily get into the end of the day. It's stand-it. Slunk over, you know, slumped over and just tired. And then there's other folks that like you who are fucking crazy, who figure out a way to invest in incredible amount of time to try to renovate and reinvigorate this business that had kind of been forgotten about. I mean, when you came along, there was like some moddy tanks and then there was a couple other ones that you could kind of find online, you know, that were made in Europe. Europe, it had a little bit more popularity in Europe. That pathfinder. And then they had, let's say, oh, Aces has been around since from the beginning. Why was it more popular in Europe than it was in America? You know, any ideas? You know, they were, you know, I really don't know, to be honest with you. It still wasn't popular. I mean, it's still way more popular even now overseas. Like I get letters all the time from, there's a new place it opened up in London. I believe there's one in Manchester that opened up. And I get messages from those guys all the time. So I know they're opening up new ones. Yeah. So it's not like it's already there and established. Well, that's what we were talking about earlier a little bit, you know, on the way over here. We had a chance to have a little brief discussion about the, you know, the future in the industry there. I got a chance to show you some of these rules and regulations now that have been, you know, pinned up by, you know, the various health agencies and NSF, National Sanathletesization Foundation. Well, just explain that to people. There's, there's home tanks and then there's commercial tanks. And, you know, people always, when I tell them, hey, they go, wait a minute, somebody been in that tank before me. That is a very good question. And that is a question that up until now hasn't been like completely thoroughly examined. And your tanks, like when people come over my house, one of the things they always look at is like the back of the tank where all the equipment is set up and they go, what the fuck is all that? And I go, well, that one does ozone. These ones are filters. And like, is that overkill? I'm like, I don't know what overkill is. I don't know. I'm not, I'm not, I, all I know is that tank is awesome. Crash makes the best tanks. If he says it should be like this, then it probably should be like this. But when you talk to people that have other tanks, they go, dude, I got like a little fucking spa pump. I got a little spa pump that's about the size of a basketball. And that's it. And you got like a JPL fucking set up pack there with digital this and fucking just get roleable. Just get more complicated as we get more and more involved with the authorities. Like UL. Yes. And UL is what? Underwriters laboratory. They do all electrical certification for any kind of stuff like this. These people that, you know, what had happened to mine were mine shorted out is fairly common. I showed you the email to about this and these electrical issues. There's, you got an email without naming anybody. There was another manufacturer that makes pods and is pod melted. You know. Yeah. He, you know, made some sort of a thing and it just, it all, it fucking fell apart. There's awesome ones out there. Yeah. But we don't want to, just like, a lot or anything. But for home uses, it's a different thing. And a lot of these people are taking these home use ones and they're using them for these commercial places. And all these different people are going in there and who knows if they're jerking off. Some of them probably. Let's be honest. And where's that going? You know, it's like how you're going to your little spa filter? That's not enough for me, man. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. This is the video that Brian made. Areas where the water is. It doesn't feel. Yeah. I think that that already said before, I mean earlier in this podcast. Your voice sounds so different. That was before I got my nose fixed. My face. And yeah. And top of that, you can't hear anything. So you're underwater. Your face is floating above the water. But your ears are. Okay. We already said all this stuff. But you can watch the video and you can kind of see it. Yeah. My nose, one, I got my nose opened up. Change my voice a little bit. That's great. But I can breathe out of my nose now. Yeah. Oh, for all my, all my life. I had no nose. My nose was a useless piece of shit. It was just bad cartilage scar tissue in there. But now, now I can smell when Brian's been smoking cigarettes too. That's good. That's my phone. My own smile. Oh, that's my motherfucker. So that's the tank from what is that video from Brian? This is a, wow. It's been a while, 2009, maybe. Is it really that recent? I think it's been more than that. Maybe. I don't know if it's because it was tank number one. Yeah. That's a number. Yeah. Yeah. This is like another, see, we're like 12 steps from that. You know, as a, you know, Joe, we want to get over and switch it out for him because he's deserves to have a more updated version. He was okay with everything. But we'll crash against you. Okay. It's that good, you know, I don't want to hear okay. It's not okay with me. Even if it's okay with you, still not okay with me. And so that we're so happy to be able to, you know, get you up to us. We still have some steps to go for you though too. We'd like to. What are the steps? Well, you know, this is the previous version now of what we have. You know, so as time goes by, well, the one I have now is even bigger than the one that's in that video. The one I have now is this weird fucking meat locker. Beautiful. We're working on seven feet tall and it's insulting that. It means more than seven feet tall. And I don't know how many feet wide was it? Six, six, seven and eight I think is what it is. That's a, that's a great chamber there. It's a, yeah, you're using it. See people, that's the first thing that, you know, it's, oh, you know, I joined the gym, you know, what was that? You got to go to the gym, you know what I mean? Yeah. Is it get out membership? Oh, whoa, you know, some of these people have been sitting in their house and they don't use it, you know? People need, yeah, it's hard, but people need something to like jolt them out of their normal, day routine. They need something to jolt them to get in. They'll try it one day. Like today I'm going to go to the gym and they work out in the next day. It's like, fuck it. They just, for whatever reason, it didn't catch fire. But they want to improve. You know, and that's the first step. But the, the, actually, doing things, people, a lot of folks, they, they discuss a lot of stuff. They read about other people, yep, all these things. And instead of like actually sit out and say, okay, what can I actually do today to get, to make me do something that is of a value, you know, rather than, you know, these are the criticizing of other people is really a, you know, it just doesn't really help so much, you know? Well, it's fun though. It's fun. I love to do it. You know, as a criticizing of other people's oftentimes a good sense of a source of the entertainment. It's an output too. You say, oh, man, I can't, you know, but you have to be careful of criticizing too much or getting only into the vein of criticism, like, consistently, constantly, like people that are smart can oftentimes make poor choices or dumb choices. And I think one of the dumb choices that a lot of smart people make is to, like, consistently and constantly look for the negative and things. Consistently and constantly, there's a lot of things that you focus on. The negatives of things are always going to exist. You know, stupid. You see them. But to constantly and consistently, like only rally against dumb things in pop culture over and over again. At a certain point in time, I have to go listen. What, you know, we see it. We see it too. Like, what do you just angry about it? Like, that doesn't help anybody. Like, what is either either be funny or shut the fuck up because we see it's dumb too. And it's not, you know, the funny part is best. If someone instead sort of added, you know, to the good part of our culture, you know, added, you know, come up with something that's entertaining. Come up with something that taps into what people would like to be getting. more in this one. If that one's empty. I don't know. Either way. Yeah. Thank you, my friend. You're welcome. I just think one of the things that the tank provides is this sort of introspective moment that I think a lot of folks are missing. You know, and sometimes people get caught in patterns and you can get caught up in a pattern of negativity. You can get caught up in a pattern of depression. You can get caught up in a pattern of regret. You can get caught up in a pattern of friendships, of kindness. You can get caught up in a pattern of affection. You can get into good patterns too. You just have to reject the bad ones when they come along. Don't indulge. And be ready for those. Yeah. Just make sure that that's where that chamber is. Be self aware. Yeah. And you got to look at yourself. When I first started doing it, I didn't even know what it was or whatever, but I would be in for an hour every day. I would go in there and just beat myself up because I was a damaged good, you know. No way. Crash? I'm not buying it. Yeah. Once upon a time. I'm getting in there every day for me for one hour in the beginning. I didn't even know what it was, but I knew that that's what I was put. So I'm in there. And I beat myself up. I'd come out of there. I'd be beaten up and I'd get out and I'd be like, wow. I feel pretty good. I could sit down and I used to have a PA out there at that. I was in a ranch. I had a ranch or in a big screen and everything. But I would come in there and I always need people around me and stimulation and stuff. And I was like, oh, I'm going to get out of that chamber. I come in all by myself and sit down and not turn nothing on and just sit there and feel actually relaxed without use of drugs. I'm reliant on certain things in the past to make me feel different ways. But the chamber now, it was able to affect the way I felt as a matter of factly without the use of any kind of additives. And when I learned about that, that's quite impressive. That's quite a game changer. You know, you now have a window into yourself. You can now go in and look at you and see what that is and then say, hey, woo, look at that without is over. Same thing because you're aware of what you are and who you are, what you did and where you've been and whatnot like that. But you have to be willing to admit to all that, surrender whatever and then pick yourself up and start to use what it is that you're able to figure out about what to do from here. Exactly. And stand by it. But then compromise. And the tank tells you that. Like, the experience sort of produces you to yourself. And there you are in this box and you realize there's two parts of me. There's this thing inside of me that apparently has better information and then there's this thing outside that wants to get high or goes to go to see chicks or do whatever you're going to want to do. Go out and blah, blah, blah. You eat too much. People do different things. You know, in that gamble gambling. This is all kinds of stuff. All contiguous. And we get a hit from that, you know, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, you know, but the effect that these things have, see what they do is they'll alter your perspective of yourself. Sometimes you have these, they certainly say people are drunk and they're all like, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, you know. And they're really, you know, it kind of gives them an impression that they're more happy to be around or something. Right. Yeah, they're drunker. They get the stupider they seem to be, but they don't seem to evaluate themselves from that perspective. They think they're more fun or something. Yeah. Self evaluation is one of the hardest things to do, right? It's one of the hardest things for a person to do to step away from their, whatever inaccuracies they've been telling themselves to make themselves feel better about their life or their situation and then to force yourself to go, you know, this is, this is not right. This is, this society has an influence on you as well because you don't want to look to like you're saying, you know, I can remember certainly want to get into this and say, start talking about certain things and people go, oh, you know, I don't want to talk about that or anything like that. So you got to have a, it's good to work on yourself. This, I'm big on the selfishism. I think what he, what he's saying though about people not wanting to talk about certain things, like what kind of things? Well, I can spare you. good to work on yourself this i'm big on the selfishism i think of what you saying about people not want you talk about certain things like what kind of things well uh conspiracy theories yes stuff like that you know i kind of a negative thing because i when i was you know in vegas the same place and the guy with load in the show and right director i was all there's the can planes i go what he goes have a look at that and i go oh my god i can believe it just replace fraying as my god i'm believable so i was damaged goods from that that messed me up for years and he said he quit telling people about it because they're on the he's driving a truck and they'll go oh yeah i take another hit on the crack pipe meanwhile there it is right in front of you yeah he should stop telling people about it and you should just go into google and find out what it actually and there was nothing this is like 15 years ago well it's not chemtrails see this is where people are really confused it's just airplanes create artificial clouds and hazy environments if an airplane is going through the atmosphere and there's a certain amount of condensation it creates an artificial cloud it just does the jet engine you i mean you should look into this more than anybody because you've talked to me about this before and i know that you probably have these ideas in your head um about the government spraying things in the sky i'm sure whoever it is airplanes someone may have done that at some point in time most likely has done that at some point in time but that's not what you're saying when you're seeing those clouds that go across those are actual clouds there clouds that be made by jet engines like this has all been proven this is all scientific that everyone agrees on it it's not there's no controversy about this at all when it comes to people who understand jet propellant engines or jet engines and airplanes and airplanes and atmosphere conditions like there's been articles about this since the 1980s i mean this all it is is when in in 2001 when September 11th happened there was an article that was on cnn.com like a couple of days afterwards that was talking about the changes in the temperature because there weren't the artificial clouds that were used to having overhead on a daily basis that are created when planes fly through the atmosphere so it's not something that they were being like secretive about this is just an effect of airplanes the real chemtrail there's one of the things i said on my television show we covered this is that that burning jet fuel in the sky that's the real chemtrail you're we're polluting the sky and we just love it because we can get across the country in five hours and that's where guys like Elon Musk and these geniuses that want to create these incredible high-speed trains that's what these guys are so amazing because if they could figure out how to do that and use the same sort of technology that keeps Google cars safe and if everybody can work together and make these we might be able to change the environment like the amount of jet fuel that we burn there's thousands and thousands of flights every hour all across the country constantly going back and forth another rocket ships apparently take a lot of propulsion to get out there's a credible network on the rocket ships i talked to them and they they say oh yeah the the the biggest thing is the pollution that's created when these things blast off the amount of whatever goes into the sphere look they look you see fire yeah you know never see fire unless something that's not good is on fire you know the fires coming out of the metal tube that's never good it's never good for the world is that people have that opportunity to investigate information that's why right now i think that you know ignorance and negligence or sort of the same thing they're like the people say oh i didn't know well you didn't know because you didn't care enough to look into it that is true but sometimes you get caught in a situation where you don't you know you just still don't understand even after all the facts are in well you you also have contrary opinions back forth which is the things that are very especially when it comes to like certain historical events like there's a lot of people that want to talk about like JFK is a good example so a lot of people that love talking about conspiracies and like that wrap that one up tight and when you have these conversations with them you look at the the contrary evidence on both sides pro and con it's like wow there's a lot of like massive amounts of confusion as to what the actual events were they actually so many people wanted him dad that you can even pit the pit you couldn't pin the tail in that donkey no matter what yeah there was he had multiple people that were upset with his actions boy would they be so lucky if it was just a lone nut yeah would they be so lucky all those other people would be so lucky because then this situation when you have perpetuated to this point now if it was a lone nut back then and the system was actually fail safe from situations like this i think with the the 1960s and the death of Kennedy and you know the can't stay cheating and all that stuff i mean as tragic as it is for then and for those times i think that ultimately that kind of stuff is sort of a reminder in a lot of ways to the people of today about how bad it can get if things get out of hand so when it starts creeping up on these infringements on civil liberties like and people start rising up that's where you see things like us going to Syria gets shot down i mean you see the entire country both that was a lot of republican that was first time that ever happened where they had made a plan to go in and invade something and they did not do it because of the voice of the of the public the voice of the whole public you know it's like how many awesome public ends at this point in time or time i don't care if you got a blue suit of green suit a perfect for us to do it people like on the knees no thank you work broke and we're not invading other country what for exactly we're not fixing the problems that we have at home how about the fact there's no water how about the fact that texas it doesn't rain texas and fucking years you know california had like one rainfall like over the past like three or four months it's terrible this is i mean that's something to consider is it something to think about where the fuck we're going to get our water from desalination plants maybe drain out that fucking goofy ocean tire those fish sucking up all the good water what's happening with the fish all dead off over two everywhere what's going on with that's that a lot of times is deal side effective pollution too or it could be a side effect of certain types of like fish need a certain oxygen level and things can happen and they develop dead zones in the water and there's no oxygen and all the fish just drowned you've seen that on there yeah yeah it's like gazillion some of them the hundreds of thousands here there we've looked all over the world it seems like there's problems but it could be just you know whatever i don't know it was i think it's always happened but it happens certainly because of pollution as well i believe absolutely pollution is bad yeah we don't need to say oh look yeah it's okay because it's only this amount or we get we got a we got a we got a can we're we're containing it see this the containment system see what do they do with that stuff stuff in the ground we forgot zilah the coming in what is that all about we're going to collect this garbage and then plant it in the ground over here well that's what a little kid does you know when you sweep it up you just it's a part in it you pick up the carpet and you sweep it under the carpet and you put that carpet down no one knows shit you know yeah it's very childish way but it's also the people that were alive that implemented these systems i mean they're not alive anymore and they were that when they were our age it was a completely different era and then when you go back to look at there you know the distance between us in the 1940s go back and look at the the 1940s and the distance between them and the same amount of time and you're in the 1800s okay you're in the like the times where people were riding horses and they had a paint their pictures that's that's how much distance has traveled i mean we really if you go back to 1940 and you look at those guys that are running the space program or look at those guys are involved in nuclear program well how old were they in their 40s let's say they're in their 40s let's say that they were born in the 1900 and they were designing and working on all these these crazy technological innovations from the time if you went back from them to as far as us looking at the 1940s you would be what 60 74 years you think it go to the night so 74 years before that yeah 74 years before that is 18 fucking 26 yeah that's crazy they got a horse you know that that stop and think about that they're 19 40 like world to us like when we consider the 1940 world is an early 1800s to them it's essentially two decades or two centuries on the just that you know the regular ratio when you start to consider that what you know the exponential type situation oh yeah how the growth is you know it's a matter of the fight as it goes on it continues to expand itself out no doubt i mean the growth and change between 18 20 and 1940 was nothing compared to 1940 to 2010 i mean it's just this this is madman where does it look ahead and you say oh boy yeah i know it's going to be really weird but it's just so strange that we are still running on the momentum of these people's ideas as far as like storage of nuclear weapons we've stored just a nuclear waste reset yeah reset but fascinating though really kids in i agree wholeheartedly but also as a person who's not involved in creating nuclear technology not involved in any that i find it fascinating just as an observer like looking at it all like wow this is really an interesting scenario because it was created by these incredible geniuses that lived as long ago as 18 20 something to them i mean that is really hard to believe it's really hard to believe what's hard to believe is that we're still operating on that same mechanism exactly it's really hard to believe and it's it's hard to believe that we still have like garbage dumps we have like dumps like what like we have dumps we take all the garbage we throw it over there and then those dump where we always thought it fucking disaster we went to garbage dump we filmed something for the man show at a garbage dump once it was horrible was horrible fucking discuss what did they dig a hole then dump the throw all the shit there and stank just keep digging holes it fucking stank dude they just cover it up with dirt and it's disgusting doesn't that like the the film the methane or whatever build up if you put it under the ground it's a good question i don't know i don't know i mean methane comes from biological waste as long as that this guy took a a mouse and he made an art thing and he covered up the mouse with the with the resin right and then the mouse was it's it's running through the resin apparently until it it couldn't go no further right he was like stuck in the resin the mouse that's an r piece that's an asshole he's got a mouse yeah so it's inside of this thing now and then there were in the hot one day that was up on the inside it exploded that was like made out of a plastic glass stuff yeah and it exploded from the gat the mouse was offgassing from inside of it and the mouse created so much gas it blew this whole thing up all over the place the guy told me whoa from the mouse being stuck in there the gas that was offgassing as it died you know you know the smelly smell he said the house smelled like that too was either for that i forget who was telling me now but somebody was in and they had to come and do the mop down on the house and everything but that seems like an unnecessary experiment you gotta remember that next time you're effect messing around with some mice don't stick them in some plastic you know they don't do well well this plastics that they can make from plant material something a lot of people aren't aware of you can make plastic from hemp yeah yeah it's a biodegradable plastic you can make from hemp that's fordrew but made all the car right yeah yeah ford made the first car the fenders made out of hemp and you can hit it with a hammer hemp is a weirdest plan ever you know i know i sound like a hippie when i start talking great about marijuana but forget about marijuana the the psychoactive benefits marijuana i've gone to in depth i think there's there's a real benefit to people and i you know i hear people saying oh you know kids and what about the kids what about the kids what about the kids with fucking anything kids can die from aspirin kids can die if they have a contest to see who eats more salt kids can die doing a lot of fucking shit you know it's not about kids it's about responsible use of adults if it's your kid you have a obligation to educate your children do the best you can to protect them from the dangers of this world all drugs are a part of that including hundreds of legal ones that are available right now that can kill your children so that's not the issue marijuana is a minor minor minor issue when it health and safety it's a major issue when it comes to consciousness and maybe even more so when it comes to the implementation of hemp as a commodity hemp for paper hemp for building materials hemp for automobile panels that are lighter and more durable henry forward figured that shit out at the turn of the 19th or the 20th century i mean he was doing that in the early 1900s this guy had figured that out we see the the pants they make out of it shirts and everything and they're durable they're way more durable than cotton and now it also has one of the best root systems so they they what they need to do with what would be good idea to do is where you have these erosion problems if they plant weed in there the uh the rooting system happy how to say hemp when they say we they think you're hip and you want to get high oh you know i think that's just you know you do that just get in your own safety of your house yeah this other stuff you could put outside in let it grow and well hemp is a very strange plan there's really no no plant like it on earth and it's incredibly hard and dense but very light as well seeds they they make that that omega-3 and omega-6 uh yeah well the protein to hemp protein is the most easily digestible protein we've been selling it on it we sell uh heavy protein supplement we bought the best hemp you can get it's really fine it's very high in proteins the most expensive but it's the best and a lot of people don't like the taste i think it tastes delicious but i always fix it up with coconut water i i just throw a banana coconut water and hemp force into a blender and that's how i do it yeah you're off to the races it's digest easy the thing about like i like uh a lot of different protein powders but i feel like the vegetable proteins i like pea protein there's a vega that is a um i think it's an all vegan based protein powder all plant based protein powder they're like to i like that i like those because they digest very easily you're getting the impact from yeah yeah i think it's it's also it's very easy on the body whereas i feel like whey protein which is also very effective but it's made from you know whey which is made from milk products it's it doesn't doesn't quite digest as easily feel feel like it makes my fart stinkier too the hemp keeps out so that everybody's happy about that they're saying easy my body has no problem digesting it you know and it's illegal to grow in a miracle it was a kind of unbelievable it's so stupid when i was a kid i used to say my my my my my it was wrong with this stuff and she said oh well it's illegal and that was the best thing you come up with that's not even well that doesn't even work with hemp because hemp can't get you high yeah it's just a point oh i was worried about the other part like growing but growing hemp is like growing pine trees was like what if someone came along and said he can't throw grow pine trees no more pine trees you can't make pine tables you can't make pine bed stands you know no more pine yeah you be like what are you talking about i can't grow pine or rose doesn't create a grody rose bush it's kind of stuff out but the the preposterousness of pine is a good one because it's so readily available well if marijuana was legal it could be as readily available as pine trees the shit grows everywhere if fucking grows everywhere and for the hundred years almost there's been this ridiculous boycott on this magical plant it's a magical plant if it didn't exist and someone told you about it from another planet we would be sending spaceships out to get it if there was if we found that there was pot growing on the moon and they found that if the astronauts went to the moon and they came back with a plant and over the the next decade they analyzed this plant and found it to have a million different uses psychoactively medically to treat pdsd interocular pressure from fucking glaucoma to give people their appetite back with the gaunter chemo they go you go through a laundry list of benefits of this fucking alien plant had they do that fucking what's that virgin guy richy brancin he's be sending spaceships out to the moon with farmers they'd have Mexicans in space flying to the moon to harvest the marijuana and bring it back home that's where we got it here yeah we got it here and he's constantly trying to keep it illegal it's amazing how these dummies like that chris christy dummy i don't understand it it well i understand i don't dummies they were they were all against it they railed they were all that they've seen a lot of pride corporate guys that what we need to do is have them on the right side to get high they need to just chill down and say listen hey okay we we're gonna do it we can do to make things better yes and get on board and then people say hey and the best ways for you to get high you gotta grab them yeah or sell that stuff don't grab make it say listen we use it in our product now we use this stuff because we found it's better than what we used to use well i think there's a lot of things that could be done to make people overall just overall in this country just a we bit healthier just a little bit of a change in the dial and the direction that we're all going like i remember Anthony Robbins who although i've made fun of inspirational guys i think is actually a very inspirational guy i think ganthey robin says some really good advice and it what i've read a bunch of different things that he said in back when i was competing in my martial arts days i actually benefited very much from a lot of his yet audio books i listened to by the pool when i listened to live in a shitty apartment and one of the things that he said was that if you had taken a consideration like two cars that are going in a certain direction if one of of them just has a very slight variation off the line just a slight over the course of time the distance that it goes from the original direction it was going to is vast just a small change just a small adjustment and i think that could be said not just of cars that are driving parallel to each other but of a culture and i think that if something like the tank came along and the tank in conjunction with this new found refusal to accept the marijuana laws there's a new found refusal and now kala rado there was a um an article that was written that came out today at i think it came out today i i found out about it today i retweeted it today from reset me which is our friend amber lion's website and essentially it's it's talking about how kala rado has made more money and had less crime and the tax is just six months read about the school yeah they give a point nine billion or something for the school system the woman who wrote it or her name is uh Laura pegram and uh yeah it came out on a twenty seven so they put money in the school yeah can you imagine that they're doing something on the planet that's putting money into schools and it's empowering people start their own business the right people people who are into weed they're gonna start their own businesses and get rich that'll be a weird thing when weed farmers are like a bunch of rich people running around funding schools weed farmers are paying for the police to have better facilities weed farmers are paying for the fire department to be better equipped weed farmers are paying for the teachers to make more money like this is all it's not just a pipe tree we've got a very cool with the community and the officials in the community to create a situation these guys could be major influences on the entire not only if this part right in the podcast people are listening who are not into weed like that's it that's it i'm fucking hanging up this stuff's a fucking indoctrination yeah yeah oh well it makes you know if you don't want to smoke weed how could you ever say that a hundred million dollars in cash revenue hundred million dollars is not a great thing that you get that kind of taxes from your first year and who knows where this is gonna go can easily double by the second year so then you got two hundred million dollars in tax revenue oh my goodness and then they focus where it went how much of the tax that you paid last month went to the school system who knows how much did the school get to call a ronos about it no i was not that big no i mean it's it's big but it's not like the amount of people as California right now even close so you spread that money out yeah if you got look you add it oh so there's 800 kids and they made a thousand dollars or whatever do you know how much money marijuana would make in California if they just sent it loose to set it loose just unleashed it fully legal let's go i mean just the the medical industry here is so gigantic that there's businesses where doctors just give people weed prescriptions it's all they do that's all they do they have a line of people with headaches out the doors That's their business. Everybody's paying 40 bucks and they're keeping it moving. And that's legal. I mean, it's what they've done legally is crazy. If they made it fully legal, if they just said release the hounds, it would change the culture. It really would. And it would help a lot of people that are resisting it. It would help a lot of athletes. And the big one that would help a lot of athletes is edible. Adible marijuana for inflammation, for injuries, for relaxation, for stretching. Just for your body. Just forget about the psychoactive effects of introspection and self analysis and all that other stuff that comes with the eating it. The really, there's a physical benefit. So it would be pretty substantial. Nutritional benefits. There's the nutrition you already talked about that. You can eat it. It's really good for it. Super healthy. Great for your skin. You can hemp oil is good for your skin. You can cook with it. It's crazy. It's just so far with it. Yeah, you can run a car on it. You can run a car. You can burn hemp oil. The whole thing is so ridiculous that if you looked at it on paper and it wasn't the case. He said, hey, we have this stuff. We just figured it out today. It's called a slippery whatever. And we have it. It would be a great plot for a book. If there was a company that somehow another managed to plot against one of the most beneficial plants on earth and suppress the development and use of it for almost a century. If that was a book, you would like be captivated by this plot. Could this happen? Is this possible that one of the most beneficial plants ever known to man could be stifled? They might have known about it in the beginning and then cut it off. Like I said, uh-oh, this stuff could catch on. I think that what happens is one of the things that happens is when anything is illegal and then you start arresting people for that thing, you make a business and arresting people for that thing. You make a business out of that thing being illegal. And then like we were talking about before, when those guys are out of a job, like they're just out of a jobs, they'll fight to keep their fucking job. And one of the best ways to keep your jobs to keep more things illegal. If you're a guy who arrests people for shit, you want to make sure that more things like marijuana stay illegal because especially the DEA, what would they could do if marijuana became legal? And then people would start have to start considering all sorts of other drugs becoming legal as well. Maybe they could figure out how to direct like the business aspects of it. Just ready to take this money now and we'll have an agency, let's say, that works directly with these people that then maybe then they could have a place in being helpful. Yeah, I mean, obviously, folks, we're not this is not something that we thought on an advance. We're trying to work this shit out on the fly. Yeah, this is not the best way to design a government. But it might be better than what's already in place. You know, what's already in place is just fucking silly. You can't tell people they can't have weed, stop it. You can't you can't tell. It's not very nice to involve yourself and other people's business like that. They're not involved in yours, especially if you're ignorant, you know, I when I was first starting to work for the UFC, I would often encounter these articles that were written that were critical of mixed martial arts. And I could tell by reading the article that the person who was writing it had no idea what they were talking about. They didn't understand the sport like from a fundamental level. They were incorrect about the rules. They were incorrect about what was allowed. They were incorrect about the size of the participants that there were one size against all, you know, they didn't know. They were acting on really old information, really bad information. But yet here they are writing for some. Having an opinion. Well, in writing it in a published form where they're spreading it out to the world. That's what they're doing when it comes to slice it up. I know appreciation. It's like having a guy do a wine, a wine review. This never had any wine. Yeah. Well, you know, I'll do you one better. Anybody that is trying to get anything like marijuana or mushrooms or any of these things removed from the culture and has no experience in them whatsoever is like a guy who's never had sex trying to make sex illegal. It's mean. Well, it's insane. It's insane that anybody allows it. If someone who has never had sex before tried to make sex illegal to all of us that enjoy sex, you'd be like, are you crazy? It's like one of my favorite things. Like why would you cut the sex out? Because I don't get sex. So you don't get sex. I don't like it. I don't appreciate it. It rots your brain. It weakens your knees. And someone could just somehow or another trick people and not having sex. Obviously, sex is a natural urge. Marijuana is something that you learn about. But they're both beneficial and enjoyable aspects of this beautiful thing called life. And for whatever fucking reason, we've allowed these dummies that are obviously like you look at a guy like Newt Gringrish. Dude, you don't get to tell me anything. You don't get to tell me what to do or how to live at all. You don't get to. I don't believe in you. You know, I think you're a corporate puppet. And you don't get to tell me that pot's bad. When I leave you, Chris Christie, you're 300 pounds. You don't get to give advice. You don't get to give advice. Oh, marijuana rots the brain. And this is what about your fucking brain? It's allowed you to balloon up like another animal. You don't even look like a human. You look like some sloth, some walrus type creature that's waddled out of the ocean and put on big pants. You're a ridiculous person. You can't talk about marijuana. You don't experience it. If you don't experience it on a regular basis, you don't know what the fuck you're talking about. And that's the problem that we have in our culture. We have these people that are giving advice on something that they have no experience with. Well, there's other countries. We're over mixed up and other civilization. These people, they are operating for thousands or hundreds or whatever it is. Exactly. And we're going to come over there and say, Hey, here we are now. We're going to tell you guys what you're doing. We need your melody from people that are leading. That's a very important thing. So when someone takes a big strong stance on something that they don't have experience with, or they don't have full knowledge of like this. He was talking about some study that they've come out with that marijuana affects the brain. Yeah, it affects the brain, but they don't know if it's good or bad. Did you read that part of it? They don't understand what the effects are with the negative effects are. But here's other than short-term memory loss, no one's demonstrated anything really bad, but a lot of positive shit, tumor shrinkage, all sorts of medical benefits that deal with inflammation and relieving of pressure and for a lot of people, it's super, very good. Short memory, you got so held up on your eye. Hey, forget it. It's over. Let it go. Short memory. I like that. I got some details there later. They come up with me when I need them. But it's just, it's a carried garbage around your health. Some father knows best shit is what it is. I mean, we're watching leave it to be we're just watching a less, less like ridiculous form of it. It's a more modern person. Yeah, incorrect moral value on you. They've decided what is right. Without having enough information to even have a valid perspective with a goal of a man to say that another man should not be able to legally buy something as innocuous as marijuana is so in raging. Who the fuck are you? Can't smoke a joint somewhere by yourself, especially a person who placate themselves. Obviously, you're not, you're not some militant fucking like the, the, the gunny and full metal placate. I mean, placate. I don't know that word. Oh, you know, plate. What's the best way to describe placate? Like, uh, to make someone believe it for 10 like you that way. No, to try to hear, I'll give you a perfect to make someone less angry. Oh, I think it's based on placid. Oh, okay, to try to calm you down, right, right, right, right, right, right, right. Sorry. That's my train of thought. No, no, I'm sorry. I have a limited vocabulary in certain areas, but you don't, though, you, you have a very high technological vocabulary. I like to ask questions. So now I have that word in my repertoire as well. So placate the masses. You know that expression? You've heard the expression a common ass. I think I've heard the word, but never really understood what was I saying though, what was I saying about the people and oh, that he placates his body. He can't, he obviously he gives in to his urges in order to, you mean, he's in order to be that big, you have to be indulgent. I mean, there's no way. So he's got issues. So anybody that's got like some obvious issue like that, like man, you're not allowed to dictate health and, and, and like, consumption policy. Yeah, it's ridiculous. It's poor. Yeah, it's ridiculous. Control on yourself. It's also against the current data. Like there's, there's, there's no like real consensus that shows any sort of significant dangers involved in the consumption of that plant. Certainly not like some of these other ones that have how many dead this year from, but you know what, those other ones are fine too. I don't have a problem. I don't need to spend being around, but aspirin will fuck you up. You get crazy with it. You know, you're your own, your own architect. You know, a lot of people die every year from aspirin. Aspirin kills people, you know, nobody wants to think about that. But people can die from a lot of dumb shit that doesn't make any sense. It's available everywhere. It's not what our issue is education and honesty. And if you're not honest about something as innocuous as marijuana, then why am I going to trust you about anything else? Like what, where's the dangerous shit? No, oh, you weren't, we're, we're, we're, we're keeping that legal because it's always been legal. Well, I'm not saying you should make that illegal, but you got to let the less dangerous shit in too. but it where where's the dangerous shit no all you were when we were keeping that legal because it's always been legal while not saying you should make that illegal but you gotta let the less dangerous shit into yeah this is what if the less dangerous shit changes the way people look at everything including the dangerous shit right and that's a that's a real possibility that psychedelics offer to a lot of people that are addicted to diseases a lot of people that have PTSD they're addicted to diseases that extreme benefits from psychedelics it's legal crash you know uh... she's asked like i told you to forget that my mom is so what does that mean i don't understand what that i'm ranting too much again i just get upset and i apologize anybody's heard this before but i i can't help at a certain point time just it it hits me and i'm i'm so confused by it i feel like i need to repeat it because it's so it's such it's the worst part of where we're at it's a bottleneck it's one of the worst parts is this lack of understanding about what should and shouldn't be happening to us whether it's our government committing to wars or whether it's the people's emails being spied upon or whether it's people being forced to not consume certain things that would offer different perspectives or people being morality yeah people people telling you what you can and can't do that's not hurting anybody else and i think one of the things that i'm attracted to is altering the current way that i think and altering the current way that other people think and it getting you a perspective of of the past that we just get on we get stuck in these fucking grooves and it's so easy to keep making those same turns over and over again whenever you hit these very similar moments in your life and that's where something like the the isolation tank is so good so good to just get out of that groove i can't you know i think you know it like along is t when i met you and everything i've got you know i i think i went you know if i just got back from coaster eker someone was it thought i know this is never going to happen this is people are never going to get with this and then because it was just you kept trying and now but now it seems as if these people in general have gotten up to a place where they're uh... more willing to uh... experience themselves and then make action on that yeah i think um... i think where people are waking up with a lot things anything what you were talking about earlier about pilates and yoga i think people are just waking up about their body people are really concerned about where their food's coming from now this is something that hadn't really existed decades ago no one was concerned about organics or you know what was concerned about gm-lose product in general this is the fact that i don't know and i'm not necessarily saying the gm-lose are all bad because i don't think they are on i think there's definitely some benefits to uh... to some genetically modified organisms but i think it's important that we have the conversations that people who are really intelligent start dedicating time and effort to researching that's been a thousand pros and cons and then re-playing that information back to the people accurately re-playing it back to the public so we know what we're in for but then money gets involved in those things that's what people are concerned about and they should be outcome and then you what you see you don't even know if it was the uh... yeah but it also snaps people back and makes them more involved in growing their own food and more interested in organic gardens and you've seen a lot of farmers markets are popping up left and right i think farmers markets are amazing you go there you get a direct connection with the guy who actually grows the food this is the woman who actually milks these cows this is the guy that actually picks this salary he's right there this is their their special tomatoes they have heirloom tomatoes you get to meet these people you know i think that is that that sort of connection is exciting to people and that's the blowback away from a lot of the other stuff but it's all because we're getting this information we get a full and we're we're able to make a lot of decisions kind of appealing yes maybe years ago you really don't want to meet the farmer you don't care what's to make okay and from now it's kind of like more interesting to understand you know the uh... the orientation you know how how it's happening or you know what's going on people more like the spray on them that they round up and they like you said eighty-hour mental people back and they just stuff just happened and they really weren't you know uh... they were certain there was caught up in whatever was going on other stuff is coming out of way of communicating about it like we have to internet really someone yes someone could put up a blog about here's the dangers of this particular pesticide on your tomatoes and then you hear about that and you go whoa that that is not good and that's real the pesticides kill bugs why do they kill bugs because they're fucking poison why why those plants not getting poisoned well they are but just not enough to kill them they figured out a way to make a whole tough it's one day and i'm in there and as guy was in their spray on the stuff you know i said that was a was this conventional grown or uh... organically grown what what what what does that mean he goes well he goes uh... against the poor getting it's done without poison and said all right so the conventional means is uh... with it a uh... poison substance in order to uh... well okay let's find out about that in the moment wanted to know what is the official description what is the official definition of organic please i got this from the clinton it seems to be a scientist but that seems to make a lot of sense let's look into wikipedia this is organic foods are produced using methods of organic farming currently the above above above requires countries require producers to obtain special certification order to market food as organic within their bought a boarders uh... the context of these regulations organic food is food produced in a way that complies with organic standards keep saying nothing here what's organic do we go back to the grandi while the organic standards defined differently in different jurisdictions oh okay in general organic farming response to site specifics farming and crop conditions by integrating cultural biological and mechanical practices that foster cycling of resources promote ecological balance and concern biodiversity i didn't know that okay synthetic pesticides and chemical fertilizers are not allowed although certain organically approved pesticides may be used under limited conditions in general organic foods are not processed using irradiation industrial solvents or chemical food additives i didn't know the first part though i didn't know it was defined by cycling uh... the uh... conditions cycling of re-resuses that's what they need to do more yeah yeah the nutrients in the soil there yeah that's that's one of the most difficult things proper patient i guess is uh... crop rotation and also you know when you have enormous chunks of land that are just dedicated entirely to corn or entirely to this or entirely to that you know a lot of times those farmlands become literally deficient and they have to actually add minerals to the ground in order to uh... i think they would use in the old days like they would use like fish and stuff like that to try to replenish the garden fish is apparently really good for that but uh... yeah the the idea that that's a weird thing to want something to be organic and you gotta ask for that's like how did you allow people to pour poison on on food how do you allow people to grow i mean is another way to deal with those bugs can you like hire someone to clean the bugs off and you have to fucking spray death from the sky it sounds ridiculous like my my version of it sounds ridiculous birds and animals do uh... birds eat all the corn to them don't they i don't know and i'm going to bring on it well that i don't know if he's sick well you know i was watching some show the other day on the history channel it was actually about history which is hilarious because you watch the fucking history channel was the last time you saw some shit about history right never it's always like alligator farmers or something fucked up but it was uh... about locus it was all about uh... the early eighteen hundreds in these people were like uh... traveling across uh... the united states setting up farms and stuff and the locus hit these people's farms and they had a send in the army to bring these people food mean these these grasshoppers is locus where just they filled the sky for hours like for hours and hours they filled the sky and just flew by just destroyed everything just tore through people's crops they were talking about how big it must have been the the millions and millions of of bugs that must have been in the air they did a spin straight for the corn though they went straight for crops they just buzz through and killed everything they said you would see it as a storm cloud coming at you and then as you look down or looked up rather you would realize somewhere along the line that wasn't a cloud that was a storm it was a part of bugs they make it that he sounded something pull up pull up video of locus pull up some locus video from the you know when local one of them like it's got a clicky sound when it's flying i don't know i never been around locus i've been around grasshoppers apparently they're in the grasshopper thing yeah where is locus shells that's discussing you just like go outside you want to see this empty shell what looks exactly like a locus oh yeah just like the shell just the outside of those things but if you've um if you've ever heard of like biblical predictions locus was involved in biblical predictions of apocalyptic conditions you know they always talked about locus locus taking the sky yeah like when you think about like old horror movies you know like with the demonic possession things a plague of locus hit Egypt this weekend causing some citizens to burn tires and attempt toward the moth that's when you know shit gets ugly burn tires burn tires swarm of locus respondents several districts of chiro on saturday as they invaded the giza area of the middle eastern nation oh let's see this shit i can't wait it's like a previous for a movie what is it star wars bitch thirty million in sick once about a time in the galaxy far far away let's see this shit i want to see them invade i don't see shit there they are that's it other comment it's not gonna be pretty this is not good film this is terrible uh... guess we're not seeing it in good hd that's what it is we're seeing in this shitty youtube thing via our television but yeah wow wow that's a lot of goddamn bugs there's the noise too whoa that's so weird they're like the ultimate gang and they fly in this huge formation and just cause massive destruction and apparently they've done it you know since the beginning of time they're occasionally get together what's in the firework again and i think that they've been told they say oh locus they come in the uh... that's one of the uh... things that when it signs gay people been fucking each other whoa look at that oh boy this isn't the congo that would have said whoa look at that oh my god that's the same people are freaking a fuck up bitch shut your mouth jesus christ how old is that kid she's over eight total shuttles oh my god this kid with the ears shut this kid down a lot of like that is incredible you know what i might be screaming like a bitch alright i'll be right there with the kid that's been on a motorcycle just trying to get home here just like splats and this said the congo this is in the congo this is the congo some of the things so many of them this mommy's not helping you dude what's she gonna do fucking goddamn storm you should be so psyched that people invented cars that's how you should feel right now you should be like people are awesome look at the cars we invented to protect us from locusts oh that's you should be thinking should be like oh that's amazing thank god they invented pesticides to spray the sky knock those fuckers dead can they um do anything when when locusts come do you think can they like throw nets up or anything we're in there yeah what do they how do they stop locusts you know you do you get like a windmill with like a very large paddle you just put in the center of the town just swaddle just smack them right in the face as they come in just kill them all eventually would i put it big sheet down below so when you chop them up that's a good protein powder there it's very good for you right locusts protein powder lot of people eat bugs in other parts of the other parts of the world where they have to and the tasty the locust yeah crunchy you know you actually eat them well no what are you saying crash stick yeah choc choc choc g never tried it but they sell that shit at a urban outfit actually urban outfit ourselves locusts yeah they sell like these weird bugs that you just get chocolate and you know they're that chocolate caterpillars the thing about chocolate ants is you know they they're actually good for you like ants are actually good for you like if you're not poison ants when you're eating ants it's actually good source of protein so it was a good source of protein covered in chocolate you kind of feel like math not really in candy but you still eat in candy i think we put the windmill up after they hit the the corn field then after all full of corn then we then we make them into the powder and then they have more nutritional value i think even if you put the windmill up you don't kill the ones that are near the windmill the ones underneath the windmill that are like your height and my height it's they they fly like an inch off the ground those fuckers like they're everywhere comicosies yeah there's so many of them there's no room they can't all just be in the scuttle happened how do they all get born that's a good question i think they fuck this all of those at one time it's like i do it's called a cluster fuck hahahaha the biblical cluster fuck yeah wow we're lucky we're very lucky especially here in california we don't need to have mosquitoes dude you know i thought about that when i was up in canada we have to they have a thing called thermos hell you ever heard of a thermos hell it's weird it's like got a compartment in it that you put like a chemical and then you turn these suckers on and then you put it down and this like mist comes out and you can't smell it at all but the mosquitoes avoid you like the plague so we see with sit down outside in the woods and it was really mosquito written like immediately the mosquitoes come near and you're like holy shit i don't think i can do this like this is rough are they were all the way so you put this thermos hell thing down boom ten minutes later they're gone before that i got like a mask on ski mask and hat and i got fucking gloves on like cheese and they're trying to bite me through my gloves like you fuckers everywhere this is the thermos hell you keep it on for ten minutes there's no mosquitoes boom no it sucks is those uh... i don't know if they have a minute-long sanjulas is the japanese beetles that in the midwest we used to get so many japanese beetles that would have to have these bags that you put in your front and backyard where the beetles will come in and get collected there you know just like every week you just have this humongous bag of just sweaty bugs we're trapped in the state out yeah it's like a beetle uh... hotel yeah it's like a beetle trap just bags of beetles wow i saw some of video the day of nothing we don't have to deal with there was a hail storm somewhere that fuck this guy's car up oh this guy's entire car was like covered in like dense like everywhere as if it had like a really bad case of chicken pox and script off all of its scabs like the whole car was just popped in windows are broken that the the the hail was so big it shattered the windshield for the situation that had to get your dad maybe people died from hail over here but more than health a lot ten more than coconuts for real i don't know i know some people do they say they died from coconuts what's how excited i got well and 150 people die every year from coconuts really okay how many people died for a year about hail how many would you say yes uh... 50 hundred die before i left uh... for california my house got the golf sized hail went in the whole columbus area and everybody's car got ruined everybody's house was ruined people moved to columbus just to be insurance agents for like a year because everyone's house were fucked and so everyone got new cars like it was so weird that like the whole city almost got new cars at the same time oh my god there's a hail storm a hail stone in nineteen twenty eight that weighed one point five pounds what is that how big is that it is seven inches weighed one point five pounds and it came from the fucking sky it's believed to be the largest known in the u.s. at the time man the captured that bad boy on seven inches oh my god okay there's another one that in nineteen seventy that was one point six seven pounds so it was even bigger jesus christ a labor day thunderstorm costs three hundred forty two million dollars worth of insurance damage and calgary all the years out there like looking for the bigger one you know all the other there's a there's a that was a twelve ounces over there you know not over here's a bigger one you know somebody's a running around in the uh... there's this uh... ice balls flying around the place every now and then it can't in a kingdom can's this one in nineteen ninety two two batches of severe thunderstorms for six hours oh within six hours of either dumped hail stones up to four and a half inches across this area including city of which it all surrounding counties uh... south central can's this and over ten thousand homes were damaged the hail left wheat fields in a near total loss property damage told five hundred million dollars with crop damage at a hundred million i don't know how many people died though they can't find it i can't find measure you'd be the first dummy that died from hail they stay in when that's a certain nobody dies not who fucking fine you know stock a week doesn't hurt that bad let's see hail storm i tried to get hail storm for the fatalities how many people die a year from hail twenty seven people died uh... from tomato turnados and hail storms in the midwest what's up says you're nine hundred people a year i mean it's a from the coconut again what you say one fifty hundred fifty is it where's the say that nine hundred a year where's it say that it just came up how many people died from hail nine hundred a year it can be very dangerous thing that it's of its instances of death there's only one here that says they know of of any United States nineteen thirty nine in love a texas a farmer got caught in open field and died from uh... hail and last time death for columns and infant lying its mother's arms is killed by hail nineteen seventy nine can you imagine that doesn't seem like yeah it's not you could do man if you're caught in open field and it started coming down hard kills your kid uh... that's gotta be the world is not many people man i don't believe it's nine hundred a year it's actually says the last known death was caused by hail in the u.s. was in the year two thousand yeah that makes sense it was nine hundred total well you know what today people know so much about storms and if you live in an area where you might you know you live in some Kansas type area where they have hail storms on a regular basis we get in yeah the car is getting paul molt you know her can't stay here her can't get the most scary you ever you're you're a show this old house yeah i remember that kind yeah uh... bob veal and it's uh... they still have that show on i watched it uh... some PBS this weekend and they were rebuilding the jersey shore and they were showing how i mean it's destroyed it's destroyed so what they've had to do is go under all these houses and like lift them up all ten feet so all the houses are going up ten feet to make them taller and talk of the water comes in there okay right and have to take these mongas like like uh... like these like calls you know they look like uh... telephone poles and they'd like push them into the ground like twenty feet or something like that just put on it made such a pain in the ass it's not going to be it's a uh... jersey shorts probably not going to come back for another seven to ten years can put in it's back to normal that's incredible i can't believe that they're going to do that and make these polls then just sit there and what if the water's under you can actually put it sit in your house and the water comes up to the top of the pole yeah and you're like oh my god why don't i build a house here again what am i crazy i got the ocean under my house i have to put the boat on the roof see the ocean like slowly coming up closer and closer to the bottom of your house like why would you just go twenty feet why would you just go twenty feet because i need to get all the way up there in the ship would be swaying the breeze you'd have to dig deeper holes for the columns you'd have to worry about me i don't know how strong the ground is there we had a house in hawaii it was on a pulse it was a said that right at the beach it got washed away in sixty nine what three houses that the waves came up so high is it between pipeline and why maybe the other than sunset there was it there's three houses there on polls because they've been washed up on the cam highway when they brought him back down they put them up on these polls and we lived in one of them wow it's pretty cool but the waves never came up that high i think they're only counting on tsunamis and shit i think that's what that poll thing but a tsunami the thing is if the water comes in it's not coming in by itself k jerry was to tsunami that hit in japan yes it bring it in both house and how to forget about how you're gonna get you're how you're house is gonna get hit by a boat you don't want that to happen man you want to get out of there just a fucking count on that ten foot bowl that's fucking yeah this people that stayed in uh... you know many storms i remember glory when i was a kid when i was a kid and i lived in boston is when the hurricane glory hit i want to say boy i finally guess i'd have to say i was in high school so i'd say it was in the eighties it but uh... it was a huge one and it hit way the fuck up the east coast and uh... it put knocked the power out in a lot of places okay um... do do do do do do do do it was nineteen eighty five so is when i was uh... in high school and i was graduating that was like the my senior year of high schools eighty five and that's when this fucker hit and it hit the first major storm to affect new york and long island directly since hurricane donna in nineteen sixty so people went a long time they went twenty five years when they hadn't had a hurricane hit them this motherfucker came down wiped out everything and power was out and i lived in boston which is pretty far away from the epicenter of the storm but i remember it being utterly humbling i remember we were in my house we were looking out the window and the trees were just fucking like they were like that leaves they were blowing back and forth like they were just leaves like there was no weight to them and you would see you go out afterwards and just trees would be fallen everywhere just collapsed over streets collapsed on houses collapse on cars just broken trees everywhere and just the feeling like whoa like you know i've been in storms before i've been thunderstorms before i've been snowstorms before but there was something about a hurricane and even a hurricane that you know i was way away from the center i lived in boston i lived in newton mass chucy techs so that was like you know a suburb of boston like man we didn't you know we didn't get enough to do all of that just the residual of the incredible i mean it was i couldn't imagine what it would be like to be in one of those Katrina ones the ocean is so powerful that that water which you know when i was out there i started to learn out surf too about the same time near death i don't know how many time you hit by one of these waves yeah though that the water possesses so much power you know you you really have to have a respect for it you know once it gets riled up like that coming at you there's a not a whole lot gonna be done to slow it down i don't think why think we're basing our ideas about what the atmosphere is like like what the weather's like what the you know the safety of being around volcanoes the safety of being around the ocean we're basing it on the few hundred years of people have been paying attention and taking notes you know how many people have been here before that the native americans only really what happened to them yeah well that was us most of it but it's a non-mere but there was certainly people that died in that way as well you know we just didn't hear about it mean they had to be people if people have lived in north america for the past you know x amount of thousands of years like they have evidence it goes way back to ten thousand years ago if people living in north america so that's the case for sure something during that time like there had been a bunch of events a bunch of things happening we just we're not aware so when something like Katrina comes or something like Gloria comes and i was in high school like you you go wait is this possible this this can happen to like this can fucking happen like shouldn't we be preparing for that how often has this happened on the last time it happens 1960 so just relax okay but it can happen right this can happen you should prepare for this now that you know that this can happen there should be no houses that are built from here on out that can't deal with this because it might not happen but it could fucking happen it has happened it you got two of them on record you got one from 1960 you got one from 1985 don't fuck do i have to tell you we're waiting for that these bitches are happening they're coming let's get ready you don't know what can have you get three of them in a year like the the ones that existed before people measured things they still existed the giant fucking storms that killed people before meteorologists were invented were still valid and this idea that we're basing it off on this tiny little window that we bit alive you know i'm fucking i'm in no way since 94 i haven't seen a single fucking significant earthquake does not worry if everybody's supposed to are you crazy this fucking things on a piece of moving ground it's you don't live long enough for it to move that much because the the perspective that you're looking at it in terms of a human life perspective you got to look at it in a fractal sense yeah the earth and there's no guarantees yeah this could help you there's nothing it could be right now it's time to be up we'll just think about what we're talking about before the difference between us and the people in the 1940s the difference between the people in 1940s and the difference between them and the people in the 1820s at all that stuff up together look at it and just go back a few times like that a few generations like that and that's what we have that's the amount of information we have it in that that time in those time periods we have a bunch of them we have the earthquake and fire and San Francisco we have floods we have hurricane Katrina we have Gloria we have the the most recent ones the the tornadoes that the one that fucking town in um what was that town that joplin mrs. sippy like almost completely wiped off the map i believe it was joplin i should probably say it or mrs. sippy joplin mrs. yeah you're right you're right you're right joplin mrs. one favorite places are you really hang out in joplin all the time tornado they are you joking he joking bro yeah in 2011 in joplin a tornado struck joplin Missouri uh it was a large a larger late May tornado outbreak and it reached a maximum with ready for this of one mile a width of a mile a tornado that's a mile wide no no no no no no no that's the devastation path oh mile wide when it comes through the terrace number five it isn't i don't know what's it f5 classifications i don't know what that means i just know it means death uh yeah what's it got reached a maximum width of nearly one mile during its path through the southern part of the city it rapidly intensified and tracked eastward through across the city and then continued eastward across interstate 44 into rural sections of jasper county and newton county it was the third tornado to strike joplin since may of 1971 the tornado killed 158 people with the additional four indirect deaths injured some 1,150 others and caused damages amount to 2.8 billion dollars it was the deadliest tornado to strike the united states since the 1947 tornadoes whoa since the turn in in 47 there was a multiple yeah there was the emis state of the glacier hit the glacier higgins woodward tornadoes in 1947 yeah and these uh they traveled 125 miles from texas to Oklahoma destroying everything in its path because it was originally thought to have left a 220 mile path but it's now believed to have been a part of a family of eight or nine tornadoes a fucking family of tornadoes these tornadoes although deadly did not match the astounding death toll of the earlier event nor did they match the record speed of that tornado or the although at over 40 miles per hour they qualified as a fast-tracking storm wow did could you fucking imagine looking out your window and seeing nine tornadoes coming at you and just thinking about all the times you jerked off and with the Bible told you and you're like thinking it was you you know if you lived in 1947 then the locust are coming on top of it you know it's over if you were in texas and it was 1947 you could convince yourself those tornadoes were coming for you because you jerked off if you were 60 if you were some kid who's just resisting church so bad but you couldn't you couldn't stop beating off and you still go to church you die with scrimmage and you're off. If you were 60, if you were some kid who's just resisting church so bad, but you couldn't stop beating off and you still go to church, you doubt what's screaming, and you're in their beating off and you look out the window and you see 920, you're saying you're late? And you're fucking convinced it was you, convinced it was you that killed everybody. Fire and brimstone, Brian Red-Ban, masturbating to devil, sent his henchmen to take you out of the path, and out of the path of righteousness. And you have to become a priest because everyone in the town died because of you, you and your beating off, you fuck. Family of tornadoes. Yeah. That's a terrifying idea. There's a lot of heavy vibes on that man. Mm-hmm. You know you're behind a zombie. A mile wide tornado. Shh. What the hell, man? Nine of them, man. I want a little patch. I wonder if I'm a cracker tornado. I'm wondering if I'm correct saying the mile of destruction because it sounded so much better than just the actual width of the storm. I'm so happy we don't have to deal with tornadoes, man. That's I saw one the other day. I saw one the other day. Where? I saw a tornado of leaves. Oh, yeah. I don't know where. Yeah. It was tornadoes. Weirdest shit ever. I mean, it wasn't tornadoes. It was obviously I was driving and I stopped my car to watch it. Yeah. Crazy. You ever gone through like the desert, like driving to Vegas or something. You'll just see on the side of the red, like a San tornado. You're like, what the fuck is that? Is that going to hurt me? Yeah, right? Like, um, they can get them. I mean, they have gotten them in California before. We looked that up one day. What is it? I don't know. Anyway, some sort of weather condition, something that weather stops and it starts to spinning. I believe it's like cold weather mixing with warm weather. Yeah. It's like cold friends and warm warm weather. Is this a spin? Just I don't know. I don't know. Okay. Let's look it up. Let's look it up. What causes the tornado? It is a tornado. This is like a cyclone too. You're a cyclone. We learn today. We learn every day. Hopefully. Well, I'm not going to go along with that. I'm so hold the camera. You are. It's more sexy. Black helicopters. A tornado is a violently rotating column of air that is in contact with both the surface of the earth and a, okay, ready for this one? Whoa, how do you say this? C-U-M-U-L-O-N-I-M-B-U-S. C-U-L-N-M-bus. Come, you learn a m in. Cumul- two, you, cumulonimbus. Cumulonimbus. Cumulonimbus. Cumulonimbus. Cumulonimbus. or in rare cases, a, uh, the base of a cumulus cloud. And they are often cumulus. They were often referred to as twisters or cyclones, although the word cyclone is used in meteorology in a wider sense to name any closed, low pressure circulation. Tornadoes come in many shapes and sizes, but they're typically in the form of a visible condensation funnel whose narrow and touches the earth and is often encircled by a cloud of debris and dust. Have you ever seen the video from Dallas, Texas from two years ago, where semis were flying to the air? Pull that up. Pull up semis flying through the air in Dallas, Twister. It was the co-razyest shit. I was watching it on TV. I was in Texas at the time too. I was in another part of Texas. And the, wait a minute, that's not true. Now it was in Texas during another one, but it wasn't this one. The one where they had it on the news, I'd think I was in another state, but I could have been in Texas. I was on the road and I was like, I could have been in Texas right now. I've been in Texas. I've been in Texas. Anyway, point being, I'm watching the news. And here it is. This is exactly the footage. And there's a Twitter, this is on the fucking news. And the guy's talking and you see actual semi-like tractor trailers flying through the fucking air like paper cups, man. Like as you're seeing this funnel spinning, look at that. See that? Those are tractor trailers, man. And look, they get, are we logging? Look, you see the things crackle, see all the electrical fires? Because they're removing them, they're removing electrical cables and shit from the ground and shorting things out. And eventually it picks up these tractor trailers and is they're flying through the fucking air. Is this the same video? I believe it is. OK, there. There's one flying through the fucking air. Look at that. That's a tractor trailer, bro. It's flying. What is that way? What is it, but it's got a way a few thousand pounds? Well, it depends if it's got anything in it, too. Yeah, but even if it doesn't have anything in it, look at the air's one. Yeah, that's flying through the air and landing on shit. Boom, it's throwing it through the air. Those are all like cargo boxes and tractor trailers. It's great. Look at all those tractor trailers. Just jacked, picked up and tossed and twisted around, like an aluminum foil. Amazing. They landed near the highway. It's fucking crazy. Other natures. That pitch doesn't play. It's on her terms. Yeah, it is on her terms, especially when we're fucking around, lighting shit on fire, and sending rocket ships into space, fucking with the air, and airplanes, burning fuel and carbon-spurned fuel, and adding to the pollution. Yeah, it's weird. But even if we didn't, even if we didn't, even if we didn't, the place that got damn horrifying mess, even if we didn't do a goddamn thing, if we lived our lives completely eco-centric, if we lived our lives with organic farming, if we lived our lives in a completely harmonious way with nature, we could still get smushed by a big robber space, clobbers, boom. Not to say that we shouldn't be loving to our mother Earth. And we absolutely should. Absolutely, 100% without a doubt no argument for me. But it's possible for us to get fucked up by a super volcano, even if we did. And Ice Age can come, even if we did the best we could do. Well, the dinosaurs are all dying. Yeah. Were they hit it with a meteor? No, they were using their cell phones too much. Shoot myself for the brain now. The fucking cell phone drew in. Neither they found old cell phones that dinosaurs used, and we realized dinosaurs were super fucking smart with cell phones. They had a picture that guy on that line at the beginning of a movie, and he was walking by with the phone on his ear. Mm-hmm. Is there a front of man's theater? What was that movie? There was a lost clip. They found off of an old movie. Charlie Chaplin movie? Oh, no, no, no, no. He had a, he had a, he had, he had, he had, he had, he saw that guy walking by with the thing. Like, yeah, it's not what it was. There was an invention that they had come up with for people that were hard of hearing before they had hearing aids. And you'd hold it up to your ear and it would magnify the sound. That's what it was. And so, to, in a blurry image, when you're looking at it, you know. Yeah, it's like a future guy. Yeah, it's on a cell phone. Well, you know, to this day, people have ear problems, and they get hearing aids. Oh, yeah. You see them a lot. They stick out of their ear. Well, back in those days, they just held it up to their ear. Right, right. So that was a sound, yeah. I just sort of like, sound amplifier. Yeah, you wonder. Yeah, if someone's gonna do time travel, I don't think they would go to the Charlie Chaplin days. Yeah. Yeah, we're gonna hang around here and do that for us. Did you imagine if we did find out that some dudes been fucking traveling back in time from the future? And we get up to the future one day, we meet them. You're like, wait a minute, Dick. I've seen you before. You find out he's Jimmy Hendrix. He's fucking, he's been a bunch of different people. He's just been going back in time and being a bad motherfucker, but really it's just some guy from the future. You never know. You know, you do know. That's ridiculous. And I'm stoned. How dare you, guys? Don't you never know. I'm a hope and Hendrix shows back up, man. I think he was a guy all versed in here. And Hendrix here. Listen, it was already here. I got a Hendrix shirt on, man. I did a Hendrix behind it. That's a very good. He's got a poster here. That's a cat that left the, you know, something behind that. He was awesome. I'm a huge fan. But he doesn't need to come back. He did this time. Yeah, I did this time. Yeah, now you got Gary Clark Jr. And I'm not saying Gary Clark Jr. is equivalent to Hendrix, but I'm saying, look, there's always going to be honey honey. There's always going to be, you know, new bands that come out. There's always going to be like cool, new sounds, black keys. There's always going to be, you know, there's always cool shit, man. It's always coming out. I'm glad. Fuck yeah. This is the best time ever. I agree. Anybody that doesn't think this is the best time ever on earth is silly. We're not thinking advantage of the situation then. Yeah. Here's what we have. All this stuff to keep us happy and keep us occupied. Calculator watches, you know, cell phones, tons of, you know, things that occupy our time and give us. There are things that occupy our time in a negative way. They can take your time away. But they also give you the opportunity to do things. It's up to you to decide what you do with your time. Exactly. That's that thing again. Is it so they say, oh, it's bad to be selfish. And I think, oh, it's not because if you're conserved with yourself and what you're up to, you turn out to be a better product for the other people around you. You're saying, oh, wow, this guy's actually spent some time with himself. That's a weird word though, because I was thinking of self as I think of like, you know, like, you know, those movies where like people are trapped somewhere and it turns out one dude's been hogging all the food and lying about it. Yeah. That's guys are selfish fuck. That's the way they present. Right. Yes. Do you know what I mean? You hear about that guy and you're like, you dick or one guy like, shuts the door. You know, like, stop, don't shut the door. Yeah. Mm. He runs away. Yeah. That guy's selfish. Right. That's a selfish person. Then you hear the people get killed by the monster. All right. And then you find out that he shut the door. You're like, you dick. That's a selfish guy. But there's also self-aware and self-awareness and concentrating on yourself. And some people are uncomfortable with other people concentrating on themselves. Some people are uncomfortable with people that are really into their bodies. They're uncomfortable with the people that are really into fitness. Are people that are really into health? They get upset at them. They don't like it. It makes them feel bad. Remember these to look at the label and the store? And you look at these people in the shopping store? And they're looking at the label. What are they? These are words you don't even know what they mean. And many years ago. Now everybody's now looking at it. Hi, fructose corn syrup. Look at that. It's high in change. You can't tell you how many times I put up an ingredient. Oh, I fucking know. Look at it. I can't say it. I'm not going to eat it. You know, I can't even read what this stuff is. I'm not going to put it in my mouth. I mean, are you kidding me? You know what I started looking at recently? That I never looked at before. Grams of sugar and drinks. Like grams of sugar in like a sports drink. One of those sports drinks type things? It's crazy. It's like more sugar than you're supposed to have in a day. What is it sugar even? Now this is stuff from the beets and there's this stuff from the corn. It's the beet sugar. You know, the beet sugar? Yeah, it's good. It's good. Well, you know what you're bad for? It's good. You're supposed to have been modified or something. I don't know. Once you're good. Cam trails. Yeah. You know, it's tried not to get too upset by all this. But try to get, when you buy the sugar, get the cane sugar, organic cane sugar. Yes. You're reading this with the labels. Now I understand that. I know really. Your body doesn't want sugar like that. I mean, you can have it in cookies and you can have it in cakes and you can have it in moderation. And you'll be fine. But your body doesn't want it like that. Your body wants sugar that's attached to foods. Yeah. There's a lot of yummy stuff. That looks like stuff. I love that stuff. Orange just didn't exist. OK? If they didn't exist and he had to go to some crazy exotic location to find an orange, like a real good ripe Florida orange when those big pump ones, that's easy to peel. And he bite into that fucking like, oh, so delicious. It would be an extreme luxury. It's so much better than caviar. It's just caviar is hard to get. But caviar tastes like dog shit. It's gross. Oh, it's the choir taste. No one needs an acquired taste for all of this. I think oranges are delicious. Orange is you like caviar? Yeah, I do. You're one of those motherfucker. I just live with some Russian people. And I got to. You acquired the taste. I did acquire the taste. But I can appreciate the, nothing wrong with it. But my point is the orange is right there. Perfect. It's delicious. It's very different. I get it. It's a sophisticated palette that recognizes the subtleties of our caviar. Our caviar is from a very particular type of sturgeon. Yeah. I can't even tell if it's green. I mean, if it's black or the red or whatever, it's all tastes kind of like the same to me. Stock shit. It's like wine. I never used to, you know, like I can't really tell the difference. Oh, this is a taste like a wine, you know. I can taste good wine. Like wine, it tastes good. I just don't. It's good to a sommelier. That is a real job. Like someone who actually understands the wallet. The guys who are really good at it, they really, it really is an art. It's just weird out and stuff. They don't even swallow it. Otherwise they get fucked up. They could tell what it is by swirling it or somehow in their mouth. They, yeah, well, you still get drunk, but you get drunk less quick than if you drink it all. Yeah. It tastes good and you're tongue. And some legalyer. Yeah. Some of them drink it, though. They just go old school and get that fucking horse and well spot belly and keep rocking it. Keep it in Sonoma hard every year. Yeah. Fucking pound that that's sanny and as wine. Yeah. I never got one of those. Those wine tasting points. You're just saying Brian's where it's going. Oh, it's great. It's fun. I don't want to be around a bunch of stinky drunks. Are you eating your bacenin' or you cultured? Where in your fucking boat shoes? Get away from me. Dudes with those moccasins with the fucking, those weird yellow shoelaces in their moccasins. Get out of here, man. I don't know what you're doing. And yeah, exactly. Those weird things. I know what you're doing. Get out of here. We used to do gigs on there. The Gany winery. Gany want you to hurt that? Gigs. A band big? Yeah, you know, it shows. Yeah. Gany winery. They have gigs at a winery? Yeah, yeah. Outside, it was to be fun. It's like a party. Well, we're running out of time. So let's talk about your tank center and the new place that you guys are doing. And what's the difference between what you're doing and what a lot of these commercial places that are using these home tanks. There's a real problem with that, right? As far as like infections and forest safety and as far as everything needs to be moved to a higher standard. That's certainly our opinion of the situation. You know, we've been working with NSF and the other state and local authorities then to get in tune with what's required as far as rules and regulations. It's where it's testing the water and stuff. That's our certification. We've been certified with that. Which have a three log kill what they call, which had 99.9 of all the microorganisms that are in fact, they infect the water, then they see how long it takes to eradicate this infection. And obviously this is a big difference between someone who just has one that's only for them, only for their own personal use, which is like a lot of these more low-hand ones and someone who is running a commercial business. Sort of like the difference from your home pool and you're swimming pool with the GI. I always like to say, you know, it's like opening a restaurant with an easy bake oven. You know, it doesn't appropriate. For appropriate, you see, this is not up to us to decide anyway. All that we've had to do is adhere to these standards and codes that have been set up by realistic people that understand and you've helped with these, these setting up these standards. Absolutely. It's a very important thing for you, right? Super important is more important to us than anything else is this disinfection, this ability to disinfect this solution correctly between usages because we don't use chemicals. And we're all tested, you know, to do this three log. We actually did a seven log in a vessel. The vessel itself generally contaminates this specimen, but we have such a small body of water and such an intense system there of cleaning that, they tested the material in the vessel and we've still got the three log in and surpassed that. But that's within one cleaning cycle, without any use of chemicals. The problem with chemicals now, which is what everybody else has to do due to the fact that they don't earn willing to spend the money on the disinfection process, which is this, I told you about this UV lights, like nine grand, 7500 for the generators and so, it's a lot of bread to get it right, man. You know, electrical stuffs are UL listing as well, underwriters laboratory. This is electricity and people. You're in a water and electricity. You can't, you know, scooter McGee said it's okay, or shifty Williams over here. I mean, what do you think? What do you think? Yeah, who are these people? What it makes them un-shifty? Yeah, the fucking shifty's got us before. You know, I mean, we've heard his story, but the facts are the facts. You need to go into a laboratory and evaluate the situation correctly. We utilizing, you know, methods of their ethical, not, you know, pouring this chemicals, the chlorine and bromine and products, whatever it is, you're pointing, there's a breaking down now. This material, and creating a by-product, this by-product then, you know, you're getting in there with it, and you're sweating or pissing or spitting, or whatever, then you're mixing you with this, you know, the ammonia nitrogen. That's what a lot of people have an issue with. When I talk to him about the tank, they always say that. Like, I'm gonna get in the water that someone else has been in. Thank you. That's fucking weird. It should have an issue with it. There is an issue with it. It is like, you know, if these things are not dealt with properly, there are, you know, it's an infestation. And as the popularity of these things grows, this is something we really need to consider, because this is something that could become an issue for some folks. And I know that you're very conscientious about this. This is very important to you. And this is like one of the main focuses of conversation that we've had over the years is about this need to make sure that everything is like, it's the same standards that the tanks that you have. It's important for the people that are doing this, to have a product then that is credible, that has been designed correctly, that's had a lot of time and effort spent to verify how it actually works and what it does, you know? And then it does all the good and none of the harm. Right. And that's all the potential harm out. All checked out, you know, and documented. And like I said, this new and UL stuff too, the amount of adjustments that we've had to do with the electrical aspects of this thing are tremendous. You know, but by the time we've been working with them what now, four years within SF to try to establish these guidelines then for effective purification. Yes, for people then to do this, because if you don't have it, and people come away from it with a bad, you know, how long is it gonna last? Right. The industry, you know, it needs to have guidelines and standards set up to adhere to then to become a credible, you know, industry. Well, I commend the fact also that you're, you're meeting it head on before becomes a big issue. Like there's not a lot of people that are reporting like infections and a lot of people that have become sick because of it. No. But if this industry continues to grow, the potential instances of people not taking care of their water can rise. And that could potentially damage their reputation that you fought so hard to try to let people know about the positive benefits of this. I know you've been working on this for a long time, man. It's catching on now, right? Yeah. It's been something I've been dedicated to with all of my everything I have, you know, it's been involved in trying to get this right because it's important, you know, that this technology has not overlooked right now. We need to get a whole, you see, if it's set up with these little Mickey Mouse second rate rigs, the authorities are not going to, okay, they're not going to allow it. We've already been, but they allow it right now. What now is unregulated? Okay, so it's going to eventually be regulated. Absolutely. That's what this, we showed you this. Right. But I know, but to people that are listening, when is this all going to take place? It's happening now. We have a task group that's been formed with both the Canadian Ministry of Health and several health and safety officials here in this country, statewide, local-wise, and NSF, National Sanitization Foundation, to set up these guidelines. So they're realizing that this industry is growing and they're stepping in. Absolutely, absolutely. We were at a task group. What was that thing called? We went to a thing and they had callers calling in. It was the most asked about subject, a topic that they had conversation about at this, it was called a task. What was the meeting call? Do you think that it's possible for you to make two different tanks to make a commercial, fully sanitized unit and make a unit for the home that's less complex and more affordable? We see we were thinking about that because naturally that would be a good business sense, but we got back to the point again, it's like in order to do it right, this is what it costs. I mean, we could make it Mickey Mouse or whatever. But is it Mickey Mouse for the consumer? Like, say if it's just you. Okay, Crash lives by himself. Crash loves to do the isolation tank. It's not going to jerk off or pee in his tank. Or if I do, I'll be in there with myself. Yeah. And I mean, it's like, yeah, I'm saying. Yeah, I'm saying. But if you're going into some place and it's these people and those people, it's not, you know, right. But what's happening then, what we were doing was trying to, you know, people, they're cheap. So they're going to say, oh, I'll buy the cheap. Well, those were possible. People are broke too. Bro, it's also, it's fucking super expensive to buy one of those things. That's correct. I mean, I know that the equipment is really costly and it's really high end. But what I'm trying to say is with our last five minutes of time before we turn into a pumpkin, all I'm trying to say is, is it possible that it could be made into a consumer unit? Yeah, it would be. But back to the liability. See, in order to get this right and not harm anybody by this, you know, different things, it's not easy. Like, it's telling you something. How much more do you have to say about this stuff? Do you want to do another hour? Want to shut this off and do another hour? You know, are you cool to talk about this? Are you running out of gas? I'm not running out of gas. I don't run out of gas. OK, let's just wrap this up. Because we're running out of time. So we'll wrap this up. We'll be right back in about 10 more minutes. So have nine minutes. I always give you an extra. That's what's happening next to our five minutes. We'll wrap it up. We'll wrap it up. I'm going to come right back. All right. So thanks to on it.com, go to ONNIT. Use the code word, Rogan, save 10% off any and all supplements. I just want to give you a chance to go into a lot of these issues that we talked about before. So we'll be right back with crash. It probably won't be a full podcast, but it'll probably be like 40 minutes. That's what I recommend. I recommend another 40 minutes. We'll be right back.