The general gun experience did you see the the new footage his new footage is a Jeremy Corbel leak there was a 2021 there was a bell that covered over an Air Force Base The UFO 50 guys observe this thing Corbel chili or Mel or How was like am I missing that? It's a cultural reference. I'm not sure which name that core wealth is it that like because there's an article about him from We just came out like a day ago I think that's about how Instagram that's definitely Shoulder on the solar lunch whatever this thing is it's they've got 50 different people I think he actually released photos of it. Pull it up. JMO does it what about his mom? Lights up a billion miles away. That's why it's fun If you get a really good evidence then you would be all in fair I don't want to be all in I like to be like half in I look at that background I think that's here that's it. We see weaponized. That's the craft. That's it So okay, so it's a video so this thing what this thing is they photographed it it's half of a football field size and it was hover over hovering over this military base Then it just disappeared just jet it off interesting 50 people saw it 50. Yeah, who these people? I'm some military guys Who are these people it's the whole thing is it's the most exciting thing to me It's the most fun at all the stupid shit that I like to concentrate on you think they would have been here I'm gonna have to crap but when the flares got close to UFO vanished into thin air Well shot It's probably just a jetliner Water's in the thin air. Why don't we finish the thin air? I'm not just go that way. They use magic. Oh, what? Never thought of the fucking CNN. That was jett. Tell me that's nothing. I mean vanished in the thin air You dream and it probably just shot off in the same rate of speed like they always do Stop Love a full invasion. How about like how about us we go camping. We're doing mushrooms aliens land. I'm dying for a probe put it up by us Don't think they do that anymore. I think that's like courted phones We have MRIs why the fuck does an alien need a fingering your ass good point good point That's just for fun. Sure something to go tell the friends back at the farm. Yeah I've got a probe or definitely just sexually assaulted. Yeah, very impressed memories Yeah, I'm just fucking alien got in there some fucking lumber. Don't go in the forest and then let you right in front of that gay bar Yeah, and they're fucking Somehow they're connected Did that Sort of bitches this guy was on my podcast. Yeah, this is the dude Travis Walton from that movie fire in the sky There's that movie fire in the game. He looks like the Michael Yeah, that guy there's a bunch of witnesses. They saw him get hit with some sort of a beam They saw a craft land. They knew loggers. This guy jumps out He's a crazy fucking logger dude jumps out with the focus it goes running towards it and he gets hit with his beam He falls down. They drive off. They they get like You know half a mile down the road and they're screaming at each other We got to go back. We got to go back So they turn around and go back. They go back to the spot and he's gone Five days later the guy shows up with this crazy story Mmm, he shows up makes a phone call. He calls the police calls his family He said he got abducted by that craft and they fixed him They said his body was broken for the beam and they took him aboard and he had these encounters and there was a movie called fire in the sky That's a the movies obviously, you know, they took a lot of liberties with the story. Wow Was it DB Cooper is that the guy who's in it? Oh, I know that's a different. Yeah, did he swing? Money they don't know that guy's badass. I got fucking died Two broken legs The middle of the woods with no parachute is survived I guess The craziest is though of this the cows that lose all their skin. Oh, no, no, no, you're talking about catamutilation. Yes Yeah, they don't know what no They cut organs out with legs up like laser precision They remove the blood from the body with no stupid method. That's what no Weird stuff does happen to cows what about those images appear in the Yeah People gay I think people gave up on that does it did Oh No, you know dudes are doing it. Well definitely dudes were doing it. Yeah, yeah But also some of them were a little more interesting. Yes I'm okay There was also they were they were folded into place in a way Where it seemed like a great deal of energy was in the like the husk Yeah, the autistic men and they had blown out. No, no, no They there's some of them that they were trying to say like they had There was a way that you could do these things, but it's very clear when someone did it that way Wow Yeah, crop circles were made super natural named Doug patterns carved in fields across England in 1980s were of viral phenomena long before the interest fed us such prankster curiosity's daily yeah What these the people that believe that some of them are they have something else to them But what about the cows cuz that they would get One drop not one drop of blood cattle mystery me That's that's the weird one just sounds like faulty reporting when they found the cow Yeah Don't think that is more likely people have done things each or body parts precisely removed Like someone is someone has cut the organs out of that cow a weird Now if it was a person that's doing it, but the way they're doing is very unusual No blood come on. Yeah, I mean, I don't know why the fuck aliens would do that doesn't make any sense But it does make sense they're weird they want stuff they want to learn a lot of people lean towards humans Why would they do that the same reason they're fucking alien would but why no blood you want to add a cow blood and Why would they really get one cow blood a pleasure about our about our cat house? Yeah, I gotta start somewhere I think that's like imagine if it was demons, but they couldn't quite they couldn't quite They didn't have the authority to go after people yet So they let them have a few cows every now and then just to keep Give me the wheelies They lived a thousand of years these demons and they have to really just want to torture They got them and suck their blood out and leave their fucking Little mouset carcasses X good call of here Yeah Yeah, we're blame it on aliens when it's demons just demons demon Who is the same like okay, go take a cow you fucking freaks Invasion who's go practice for what they're gonna do to us once they get the green light once people are like Too bad. Excuseably evil Yeah, once there's just like every like hey, there are Every country is rolled by evil dictators Well, I probably that close back a little more sodomy a little more that unleashed and we find out that Satan's real Sodom and good more get some good comments after this one the Satan is real people Going rights or a course of catamute relations began in 1973 mostly in the Western Midwest It was often small-scale ranchers who reported them when local law enforcement agencies investigated They frequently founded the cows ears eyes Rectums and sex organs have been cut away with search for precision according to the newspaper reports more than 10,000 of the incidents occurred by the end of the decade. It's demons You're fucking right do your fucking right demons to bring up two covers. They just have to practice every now and then Demon way and they want to they want to do it to people but but God won't let him yet Right just when they need to be she says Christ dude your machine