Joe Roman, fine. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. Eight. Good live. Eight. Yeah. Gentlemen, what's happening? What is going to see? I'll see you guys again. Both. That team brothers. Yeah, we're just talking about the mountain line that we have in the lobby and how insane that thing is. So Adam, you shot that mountain line when? I think it was about six or seven years ago, and you ate it and I ate some of it. You sent something to me. It's really good. Believe it or not, ladies and gentlemen. You wouldn't think so, but it's incredible. Everybody says it's like the way they describe it as, like I think Ronaldo said this, a superior pork. Yeah. Yeah. It's like I think of it as a cross between venison and chicken. And then, and I did a quick on the barbecue and I'm not a great cook, but it was that tender and that tasty. But the story behind the mountain line's nuts. Like that was like a murderous mountain line. It was, I felt a bit funny about it to start with because like the dogs do all the hunting, right? The dogs smell it, dogs find it. They put it up in a tree, but the furver I looked into it and like, well, you need the tree because you want to sex it and you want to age it. You want to make sure it's a lion that's old and it has to be a male to shoot it in Colorado, at least at the time you had to anyway. So it was actually the perfect way to hunt, but then seeing how destructive that individual lion was at least, I was telling the cam about this and we got here that it must have grabbed the cow, like a beef cow, must have grabbed it on the neck. And the cow couldn't move, you know, but it was still fully alive internally and vocally it was still alive. And when we got there, the mountain line was like eating it from its rear end. And it'd been there for at least an hour or two because there was quite a lot of meat that had been eaten out from the cow's arse. And kicking its hooves. Yeah, and it just, but the cow couldn't get up. So it was literally eaten at while it was still alive. And as the dogs are running down there, you could hear this cow off in the distance just like screaming, like moon flat out. And you could tell something was wrong. The dogs got there, the lion ran off, wound up calling the rancher in, the rancher coming out, put the cow out of its misery, still screaming on the ground right in front of me. Oh, hey, I was teet up, like, you know, like I don't like suffering, like the next person. So it was a very horrible moment. So then it was like, now I'm into it. Like now I'm into finding this lion. It's like a werewolf's loose in your town. You know, having that, how much did that cat weigh, by the way? I, by the way, I held it up for size and I could hold it for maybe 30 seconds and I literally couldn't hold it up anymore. And I was trying to show the size of, you know, how big that lion was. It looks like it's at least 150 pounds. It's giant. So it's like, 170, that's what you think would be on the, on the paw, as it were. Yeah, life. Yeah, that's a big animal. We were standing out in front of me like going to imagine if this thing jumped on you. That's a live in monster. It is a monster. It's a real monster. And it's like, oh, they, they kill their animal, they're prey first. No, they don't just make sure it doesn't move anymore. Yeah, just whatever's good for it. I just start eating it. Whatever's good for eating it's on. They, like, were the only thing that has compassion in the wild. You know, like they're putting out of the misery, like the rancher did. You know, that's one thing about hunters ranchers. We do appreciate life and death. And there is a time where, hey, let's put out of it's misery. But it's, yeah, it's man is the only one who thinks about that. An animal, they'll just start eating. They could care less about, they don't even know about pain really, or being merciful or anything like that. It's just what we do. Yeah, I always say like the lion in Africa, like it's drives a zebra across the back end. And the zebra gets away and it's just got, like, blood pouring out of it. And it's got these horrible wound that it's going to have to live with. That lion has not lost any sleep over that ever in the fly. It's not even a thought, you know. It's just fascinating that all these different creatures exist with us. Because we're so insulated for the most part, like most people, are so insulated, living in cities, traveling on buses and planes and cars and never. Never seeing a thing like this in real life. And you realize like at the same time where you're going to Starbucks, and you're picking out the new iPhone, there's a lion running full speed at a herd of zebra's right now. Like right now in the world, there's a lion full speed at the zebra. And it's going to tackle it. It's going to grab it by its face. And all these animals exist to keep each other in check. That's the real beauty of nature. And you really see it when we saw that we were out yesterday, Kam and I were, we were hunting for pigs and we saw a feral cat make a pounce on a mouse. It was one of the coolest things. Because even though it's a kitty cat, like a little tiny kitty cat, little fluffy too, it's kind of cute. We watched a predator in the rare moment when you see him executing a kill. I mean, it was only a feral cat, but it was still. We saw, we saw his little butt wiggle. We saw that thing that they do with a good thing. And then up in the air, you know, like that is cool. It was so wild. Which and that's going on multiple places throughout on our planet right now. Right now, as you said, everywhere. Yeah. That's like if you could have like zoom in on a little camera, all these little interactions, a predator prey or I mean, that's happening. Well, if you could see it all at once, like if there was a camera on every single predator prey encounter, simultaneous in the world, and it was broadcast on a screen that was like 700 feet high, you would think, oh my god, where it was. There's a war in the natural world. It's a constant war. Just cats alone. Have you ever seen the numbers of what feral cats alone? Just house cats kill. It's literally in the billions in North America. Billions every year. Nonstop killing. But imagine how many rats there would be if the cats weren't out. Yeah, under with them. Like it's all there's a balance to it. Oh my god, these cats are killing everything. Right. Imagine how many of them. They fucking mice would be out there. There's a word of cats. Yeah, that's true. It's all balance. Yeah. That to Adam's point about his lion and Colorado, it's so managed. That animal actually probably could have been killed off, like because it was killing livestock. Yeah. But when you kill a lion and Colorado, it's very detailed, very documented and tracked. It's like you can only take, like in the unit, I was hunting lion. I didn't kill one, but you could only kill 35 in the year. And every time a lion comes in, they catalog it, check it, get it, you know, all the information in there. And then that's one of the 35. Once you reach 35 quota, you're done. You're done. So let's put this in perspective because if that doesn't happen, and by the way, all that money goes back to the state, goes to game wardens, it helps everybody, helps conservation. If you don't have that, you know what you have, you have what's going on in Japan. Where Japan is having massive brown bear attacks. So just last year, they had a kill. I think it was 1,000, it's at least 1,000. I think it was more than 1,000 bears last year. Right. And this year is projected to be even higher than last year. So the bears at the fucking military has to go in and they're having a war on giant brown bears that are killing. I don't know how many people already this year. Oh, shit. Taught. Yeah. Yeah. Shit. Taught. They, they, we put that into perplexity, our sponsor. How many people have been killed in Japan by grizzly bears? Or whether or not grizzly bears, but they're essentially brown bears. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Brown bear. Record surge of brown bear attacks in 2025 with at least 13 fatalities and over 200 injuries. Holy fuck. Make making it the deadliest year for bear attacks in recent history. Majority of fatal attacks have occurred in Hoda. I call it a Hokkaido. Where brown bears are more prevalent and the number of attacks has prompted emergency responses, including the deployment of military personnel in some regions. Dude, I've been hearing people in Montana and people in Wyoming that have been saying, we're seeing more brown bears than ever before. Guys are going on elk hunts and get it freaked out. And like they have to de-list these fucking things. Like they are totally fearless. They've never been hunted. So they have no fear of humans. How many guys have you heard where the gun goes off and the bear shows up after the gun goes off? Cause it knows that the elk is down or the moose is down. Like a dinner bell. I flew into Hikkaido, Japan had a period where they would let foreigners hunt and I had to be of a bow. And I was chasing sea, sea castags over there. And I had no idea they had a brown bear at all. And I was going through this big, greedy area like, you know, the reeds are up above your head. And there was just a game trail going in there like that the deer had been using. And as I was going through there, I could see that it would start in the open up a little bit more like a flattened out section. Maybe like where the deer had been bedded. And I got in there and there was a sea could deer just like the rib cage all chewed out. And it was just a big muddy clearing where this brown bear had got in there and just like rolled around with this carcass. But the prince in the mud were like that. I had no idea there was even bears there. So when you get what years is it? It have to be 10 or 11 years ago now. But Google was still around right? Yeah. You didn't check. You didn't go, hey, what's in the area? I was even worried about the massaging the outfit off. And then like dude, there's bears here. Look at that bear. Yeah. And then he started telling me that it's some of the biggest brown bears there is. Bro, that bear fucked up that guy. Oh, yeah. That's a big bear. But the police force, because I believe there was an unarmed police force at the time, they had an issue with a bear where it had killed two hunters there. And he had to go in and shoot this bear. He had photos on a tractor. And I don't do the gruesome photos, but he's just flicking through his phone. And the next photo is a guy with his face missing from this brown bear attack. And another photo, the bear when he went in the shoot, the bear, the bear was in a stream holding the guy down in the water, eating him in the water. And it like, so yeah, pretty gruesome. So it's pretty full on. But up until that point, I'd never even knew there was a brown bear in Japan. Probably before you go some place or the bow. That makes sense. To a grocery internet search. You know, even if it's like, come on, you guys have the internet shut the book up. You were telling me some startling things going by. They're way behind and let's really talk about that one. They just got the internet. This guy is a traveling bow hunter and he doesn't check to see if there's enormous monster swimming in the same name of the online. Oh, that's cute. That's cute. Like there's plenty of unknown out there. You know, you don't need to add to it. It's all disappearing all on the unzdice appear because it isn't that little bit. Another layer to that Japan story is the reason why they have to deploy the military is because all the hunters are aging out. So there was hunters there. But because hunting is kind of like this dying bang or this next generation, there's not enough hunters. So they have to get the military involved. Otherwise it would be hunters like, you know, you going over there and they've talked about like, I mean, I know there's Americans who had volunteered to do it. But that's another part of it is this next generation just is a hunting. I have another question. Jamie, put this into perplexity, please. How many mountain lions were killed with depredation tags in 2024 in California? Cause what I had read on a forum, so it has to be correct. Cause those guys are all experts. Oh, yeah. I had read that an equal number of mountain lions had been killed with depredation tags by like experts with dogs like the bringman. Then if they gave them tags out. So if they had given tags out and let people mount line hunt, you would have the exact same amount of mountain lions that they had to kill. And instead of that, you would have revenue. Yeah. Money go. You pay the opposite. Yeah. Right. And then a pain and the collection of the made over California is not yet published a full 2025 total. But the best available data as of a July 2025 shows at least 167 mountain lions reported taken under depredation permits in 2020 and 166 in 2022 with annual totals of over 100 in recent years. So every year they have to kill at least 100 mountain lions. Yeah. Probably quite a bit more. It looks like 67 more, 66 more. And I would say it's only went up since then. Yeah. Well, the thing is like they're doing nothing to curb the population. And this is the thing is like people go, Oh, it's okay. Let nature do its thing. No, it doesn't do its thing. It kills your dog. Okay. One of the things they found out in San Francisco in the Bay area was when they do shoot these mountain lions, they've done an analysis of their diet. It's 50% dogs and cats. Wow. 50% of their diet is eating people's pets. So they're hunting people's pets. That means you are, if you're a dog lover, you're allowing a monster to eat your dog because you think that's the right thing to do and to be kind with nature. Hee, hee. No, you have to hunt them. You have to get them the fuck away from you. I keep a healthy population of them. And if you don't do that, it comes back to bite you in the dick. Here's here's one other search, Jamie. Can you see how many mountain lions were taken in Oregon, legally? Cause that would be like Oregon's of course, just right north of California. Let's compare the legal harvest in an estate that we can't use dogs, but you can kill them when you see them. You can buy a tag and see that's very difficult to kill them. Right. If you can't use dogs. The season to do that, they have to have the season open all year and they just hope enough for getting killed, but then they still have to kill a depravate depravation. And is that a situation where you buy like a mountain lion tag, like just an extra tag and you just have it just in case you run into one. So if you're out in the wilderness and you're hunting elk, but you have a mountain lion tag, yeah, that's it. So we were hoping, you know, if you see one, basically I have a bear tag, lion tag deer and elk. This is Oregon kills far more Cougars each year than California, but those Oregon numbers can come mainly from sport hunting and agency control, not from depravation tags. Oh, wait a minute. Agency controls what we're looking at, not depravation. So what is the numbers here? 160. We were the question. Yeah. Let's reword the question and ask how many were killed in California from agency control. Put that in there. How many mountain lions were killed in California through agency control? Because we were just looking at depravation tags, which is like what a hunter or excuse me, a farmer gets. So it says an Oregon that we could kill 970, but that would they never kill that many? Okay. They do not publish a clean statewide tally labeled specifically as agency control mountain lion kills. And current official tables group most lethal removals under depravation permits rather than separate agency control category. As a result, there's no single publicly available number that states how many mountain lions were killed through agency control alone. Let's just put this in. How many mountain lions were killed in California in 2024? Just period. Let's just ask that question. Yeah. I don't even know where we get this data. I don't know. It have to be fishing game. Hmm. That doesn't make any sense. Oh, so they're saying these figures, this figures not include deaths from vehicles, but that's not true. Because they just said earlier that it was 100. Okay. 480 depredation incidents in 222 depredation permits. Out of those permits, 52 authorized lethal take and 20 mountain lions were actually reported as lethal taken on depredation permits. That's weird. This is totally different numbers than it was given us before. So now it's only saying it was 52 authorized lethal ones. Yeah. Huh. I don't know. The holidays are in full swing and so are the Grinch's out there trying to steal your data and personal information. But there's a simple and easy way to protect yourself. And that's with Express VPN. Express VPN is an app that hides your IP address and re routes 100% of your online activity through secure encrypted servers. They're best in class encryption ensures that your online activity remains invisible to greedy data brokers and keeps hackers from getting a hold of your sensitive financial data, even on unsecured public Wi-Fi. And right now the VPN that's rated number one by the experts at the verge and Cnet is offering three different plans allowing you to customize your experience. Their basic plan starts as low as $3.49 a month. That's less than 12 cents a day. You can protect your online data for cheap and still have money for gifts and eggnog. So if you want to get Express VPN at its lowest price ever plus four months extra of service, just tap the banner or go to express VPN.com slash Rogan. Again, that's Express VPN.com slash Rogan for a price as low as $3.49 a month. Plus four extra months of service Express VPN.com slash Rogan. And if you're watching on YouTube, you can get four extra months by scanning the QR code on screen or by clicking the link in the description. I think it says, oh, okay. It says of the permits, 52 were authorized to kill them. So it says lethal take. So it's authorized to kill them and 20 were actually reported as lethally killed. So they're saying it's only 20. Yeah, so, but that is that's for like a ranch owner to do the killing. Okay. So they they say, hey, this line has been killing my calves 480 times and 222 of those they said, okay, go ahead and kill the line. Okay. Right. So this is permits that were released rather than the agency doing the depression work. So you you would add this total to the other number we had, right? Because the depredation thing too, you got to think it's ranchers. Right. So these guys are all out in the middle of nowhere. A lot of the depredations though that they might be listing is what we're talking about with San Francisco, where they found that they're eating people's cats and dogs. So maybe they get depredations. It's not like, but you can't give it out to the fucking homeowner. No. Yeah. So you only give those tags out to ranchers. Right. It seems like to people who have livestock this. And the rest of the depredation is probably done by some sort of a government. God. Yeah. They would call it, they would call it something other than depredation. Do you think he uses dogs? How do you think they get them? Yeah. Or snare. Like an Oregon, Wayne has done this where people, they're losing their goats, their calves, something like sheep, something like that. And then they'll let you snare it. So you can go in there. You take pictures of the animals that are killed. And another snare is brutal. Yeah. Or trapped. Trapped. Like a cool trap. It's a it's a foothold. Yeah. And Texas, they treat them like coyotes. Yeah. He's just whack them. Yeah. Wow. I think that's the way to go because I think they're so hard to see. They're so hard to find different politics. I've seen maybe two in all the hunting that I've done just naturally in the wild. And you would have seen more, but it's not a big number. They're out there, but they're just so sneaky. Oh, they're so fucking sneaky. We saw why I told you the story. We saw the one in Utah with cold. Yeah. Huge one. Like that one. He was like as big as yours. It was fucking terrifying inside of a car, 30 yards away. And I'm shit in my pants. I'm not even. Yeah. And we're armed. Yeah. And we have bows. We have the difference between Oregon and California and Texas. You know, Texas being able to shoot them like coyotes is that's politics. You know, yeah, of course, West Coast is liberal. But Utah changed it, though. Utah has it now like coyotes. Perfect. Yeah. That's how it should. I think that has to be like management behind it. I don't even know if you have to have a tag in Utah anymore. Let's find out out. Put that search in. Do you need a tag to get a two hundred mountain line in Utah? Maybe they just give out over the counter tags. Anybody who wants them and they're still collecting revenue, which is ideal. That's the best way to do it. Yeah. And if the numbers are great enough. Yeah. Yeah. But Cal State Texas doesn't even do that. I go, no, we don't want to get involved. Just you go ahead and shoot them. And it's a fucking monster in your backyard. Yeah. The business coming from someone who loves them. Yeah. I love them. I love them. I love them. Yeah. I'm just there. Amazing. Okay. Yes, you must have a valid Utah hunting or combination hunting fishing license to hunt mountain lines. But you do not need a separate cougar tag. Okay. So it is like a coyote. Yeah. So it's year round harvest for licensed runners. And you just have to get it checked in after you kill. Right. With all your eight hours, which is also smart. Yeah. Because they want to know what it's needing. Yeah. I do. That's what I'm done with. That's how you do it. You talk way to go. Good job. That's the right way to do it. And of course, you should have a hunting license. Yeah. You think you have to have one in Texas as well. Don't know anything. This, uh, talking about this. Actually, it's not true. Right. What? No, I'm thinking that. No, I think in Texas, you don't even need a hunting license to hunt exotics. No, not if they're on a private. Right. I think you just go hunt them. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Okay. Talking about politics in different areas, it reminds me of NBC. They outlawed grizzly hunting and just just recently maybe last week, you know, a grizzly attack at a school group. Yeah. Yeah. That's another thing. So we're in the cities who control a lot of the voting power of the, that's a province, but states here is the city's determinant and people living in the cities don't know what the fuck's going on at wilderness. So they vote. Oh, I love lions. I love grizzly bear. I love wolves. We need to have more of them. Meanwhile, the people out in the mountains are actually dealing with this shit. Yeah. And so Vancouver, you know, for talking BC specifically, Vancouver, pretty much makes the decisions for, for British Columbia. Yeah. They said no more grizzly hunting. And now it's just, you know, grizzly bear out of control. Did you ever meet my friend, Mike Hawker. Yeah. We went to dinner at that. That's right. After a fight once. That's right. One of those state houses in Vegas, right? Mike's great. And he in Beno Bryant took me on a moose hunt once and he was telling me that this was before the grizzly bear, man. He was like there's so many of them. And he had a shoot one from six feet away. One was breaking into a cabin and he had a shoot it from six feet away. Two, like they're terrifying up there. Yeah. They have so many of them and they have wolves everywhere. We stumbled on a wolf kill. We got there, you know, it was probably a day old. I don't know, but it was nothing but hair. That was the thing that shot me. It was, did it use the moose calf? Like a, and there was nothing but hair. That was what was weird. It's like I didn't anticipate seeing so much hair. Like the moose hair was everywhere. I thought it'd be like a dead animal, but it was just basically bones. And there was like a tiny bit of meat on, you know, corners of the bones and hair. Mm. Everywhere. Yeah. It was just like the like, like, like a cat. Like the cat. Like the cat. Like a cat. Just tearing into this moose calf and coughing up hair. Yeah. I didn't see one when I was up there. Although I think we did see one in the distance when we were at John and Jen's place. We saw one with thought it was a bear or we thought it was a wolf run across the road. I was either with you or I was with Ben. Yeah. I don't remember who it was, but I've never seen a wolf in a wild. Right. Like absolute, like look at him. Holy shit. Yeah. Yeah. They look at you in a certain way. Oh, bro. Like one of the first trips over to the Canada was up in Northwest Territories. And I actually thought it was Caribou coming down the river. Like just the color of the wolves. Just similar to a Caribou. And then I worked out that wolves and the guy that I was with, he's like, that's a pack of wolves. And I'm like, can I call him in? Oh, God. And he's like, yeah. And then I got up against the tree. And I just started doing like a call that would do for like a fox or a wild dog back in Australia. And this whole pack come in like a wounded river. You never seen him come in. They were like up in our vision up there. Yeah. Like a rabbit called distress rabbit. And the next minute, they were just like, they were fully surrounded. And just come in. Yeah. It was freaking cool. But I just remember they could fully see me at that point. And that was still just like looking for me. I was like, yeah, that's it. But you ever hear a Dudley story? When Dudley, Dudley and some guy that he was with in BC, I think it was BC, pretty sure. Or no, it was Alberta. They killed a, I think it was, I think it was an elk. But when they killed it, they killed it essentially on top of where the wolves then, like right there. And wolves started circling around them. And the guide had like one round in his rifle. And Dudley had like two arrows or three arrows left. And they're surrounded by wolves and Dudley shot two of them with a bow and arrow and the, the, the guide shot one with a rifle. They shot three wolves, three wolves. He said there was like, they were surrounding. He said it was the freakiest fucking thing he's ever experienced. It wouldn't have been a great feeling. He told the story on the podcast and it was just like, fuck that man. You're, you're two bullets, you fucking asshole. Like what is wrong with you? Two bullets in one life. What do you, what the fuck are you doing, man? You know, there's no, there's no, there's no. I'm here. Killed a bull in New Mexico one year and I killed it late in the afternoon. So we did a pack out. This is just going back to the mountain line story. We took, we did a pack out with me, went back in, in the dark. We've had torches. And as we're walking in, I seen a couple of eyes or whatever. And it was just like deer, meal deer or something like that. And then I'm like, oh, there's another deer up in front of us. And as we got closer, the, the eyes were too high. And it's just like, no, that's not a deer. And it was a mountain lion up in the tree. Like it was right up in the tree. There was the kill there. That lion stayed in the tree while we grabbed more meat and packed it out. You grabbed his meat. Yeah. The mountain lions meat. Well, it was his kill. I was your kill. I was your kill. I was your kill. And I was going back in for it. And just thinking it was a set of deer eyes and as I was walking up, my eyes were like up in the tree. And that's like, so I've only seen two, that's one of them. And it was in the dark. And I swear if it was daylight, I would have seen one of my whole entire hunting trees. Did you see Cam's brother's story on Instagram? Oh my God. Cam's brother was running late at night in California. At night in California. And should we play it? Yeah. Did we ever play it on the show? I think we might have. We might have. Did you? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I know you mentioned it. Fucking terrifying. Yeah. Yeah. He's terrible. I've never seen that in the story, by the way. What's your brother's name again? Taylor. Taylor's it's like T spike. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Taylor. So it's my stepdad and mom had two kids. Taylor and Megan. Oh, okay. Those are my brothers or brother and sister. And then he does altruists too. Yeah. He's actually really good. Yeah. He seemed like one of them dudes who had to get it in. Yeah. He's still here to get it in and die. He's done. He, uh, he did a 300 mile race just last year. He got he's competing trying to win the thing, of course, but got second. Wow. The Arizona monster, 300. That's all mine. God. So that hurts my hips. That's joints. That's a level he's at 300 miles of 300 kilometers miles. That makes it so much worse. You didn't think it about kilometers. I thought you're an American now. You can hurt you. We're trying to teach you inches. Yeah. My lip for some reason. An American. You guys are actually being, it's probably illegal over there. Probably. Let's take it away. Government connection. Yeah. How's that working out? You can, you can do that, but you have to wear a mask. Did you find Taylor's video? I think it's on his Instagram. Yeah, it is. It's definitely. Did I send it to you at one point down, maybe? I just want to be able to be talking about it. No. It's unless you took it down. I don't think you took it down. What is his Instagram handle? It's T-Spike, something like that. T-Spike, something. Yeah, I'll find it at T-Spike 300 miles. Coming in second place in 300 miles is but on the sign. Yeah. Meanwhile, how much difference was ever between him and number one? I think a couple hours probably. Oh, God. Oh, God. Oh, God. But it took a good thing he did in 88 hours. That is nuts. That's a serious effort. Yeah, that is a serious effort. There's some, there's some freaks out there for sure. I'll do a one day. He's one of them. Are you going to do it one day for real? T-Spike, too. Couple more videos. The world will be good. What Jamie? I don't know what the video is. Okay, I'll find it. I'll find it. Yeah, he's, oh, it's me talking about it. That's right. Oh, he must have re-shared that or something. Mike too. Couple of things. The right of will will be good. What Jamie? I don't know what the video is. Okay, I'll find it. I'll find it. Yeah, he's, oh, it's me talking about it. That's what he must have re-shared that or something. Yeah, here it is. I found it right away. Which is. It's just his face. When you see his face down at the camera, it says line. Oh, you got it? Okay. It says line update. Yeah, this is it. Give me some volume. The rest of us tonight is a really curling dream of these green eyes hot on my tail. I was coming down the trail last night. Just after dark. And I see these green eyes off to the side of the trail. I mean, right on the side of the trail. When I thought was a coyote, I just kind of yelled. And then when it stood up, I realized it was a fucking mountain line. I took off rotting as hard as I could. And I looked over my shoulder and it was right behind me. I ran for my 100 yards and realized it wasn't giving up. And I turned around and I kicked rocks and I jumped up and down my screen to the top of my lungs. And this thing did not care. I did that a few times to the point that at one point I almost thought I'm just going to lay down here and die because I'm not going to outrun this fucking thing. Another time it got really close to me. And I thought I had no choice but to try to scare it. And I turned and I screamed and I kicked rocks. I mean, to the point it was right right there. And I finally decided, well, you just got to run for your fucking life. I've done some crazy shit in my life. I've been pretty scared. But this, this was next level. This was next level. It terrified me. You know, I think maybe if I had a gun, I could have done something. Pepper spray. I don't think that it was so close that I would have probably pepper sprayed myself. So I don't know. I was a half mile from the city in Lake Forest, California. I mean, like straight up, I could hear dogs barking. And at one point I thought maybe that's what kind of detoured it. But it's in good care. So it's more than a red bike. Probably won't go back out there in the dark. I did wager off the Sheriff's Department in fishing game. Because there was other hikers on the trail that were above any of the way that I had to have come down. And I just don't know how other people would have responded. Like I said, I've done some scary shit. I've been in the woods my whole life. But this, this was next level. It was terrifying. But I'm all good. Back at it, right? I guess if this only happens one time in your life, I got it out of the way on the lucky fucker. Have a good day. I'll keep at it. Doesn't work like that. Ooh. Oh, yeah. What I'll do is. There's the consequences of letting monsters live in your neighborhood. Yeah. That's real. And ever all these wilderness loving people, like I guarantee you you're not out there as much as that guy is. I guarantee you not out there as much as you are. You are. That's the difference between people that really understand what we're talking about and people that are looking at this from this knee jerk, love and compassion for nature perspective. Well, back to what Cam said, it's like the majority of the votes of people that don't get in that environment. You know, and it's not just about hunting. That's for farmers anywhere as well. There's people in the city that are making votes for people that live in the country and the lifestyle is completely different. And they don't understand what they're talking about, especially the BC band. Like we're going to ban trophy hunting, trophy hunting spad. No, but what about monster control? Isn't that good? I'm on fucking team people. Okay. I love animals, but I am on team people. Imagine if they knew how soft we were. they don't have to spit out here. Like the flesh is right here. It's soft. He's going to get in with it. Because they usually go in at the stomach, you know, or the soft. It's like our stomach house off those are straightforward. Yeah, it's right to the good stuff. Yeah. And it's like no, even I don't think people like even a dog can turn into like I killed a buck, you know, before we went on that last time I killed a buck and like for the treat for the dog, you cut off the nuts, give him the nut. So it's got hide on it. It's got the the bucks and nuts. Basically, dog takes off. They're just like ripping into it. It's like delicacy, right? That's just a normal dog. So a lion who's born and bred to kill. I mean, that's just the level of what animals do your your liver is a ribeye and they have an eating a week. You're like, oh baby. Look at that liver. Yeah, right there. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And those are the dogs there. So scary. That that deer camp, you give them like a part of the, I don't know, there's some skin. It's not the flank steak, but it's just some skin there that sometimes you cut off that goes over the stomach and run off eat that eat pounds and pounds of meat, a regular dog. So a lion. Yeah, they'll eat what they do is they just eat as much meat as they can and they just kind of lay around. So that's the time to actually run from a lion is after a big meal. You know what I mean? Because their stomachs are full of meat. Maybe that's why Taylor, maybe that lion that chased him had just killed a deer and was full of protein, but you know, they still hunt. There's what they do. So they're instinct, but sometimes you can time it right and maybe that saves your life. Yeah, that's crazy. That's not a risk we should be taking. No, this is if you can avoid it. It's always that it's like they're so hard to find people don't understand. You're not going to put a dent in their population. It's just not like any other. It's not like deer. You can deep populate a deer like an environment of deer. If you went crazy and hunted it all and you said, what's a radicate all the deer every hunter you can shoot as many deer as you want. Just let's go do it right now. You can get rid of all the deer. You ain't ever doing that with cats. Yeah, that's a nice thing. Not now, not now. Even in Australia with Buffalo, you can fly and eliminate a lot of stuff pigs here, deer, buffalo down there, the water buffalo, but you're not doing helicopter killing of lions. Yeah, you can do wolves. No, they'll lower wolf populations. Yeah, and they do. They're doing some parts of the world. They do an Alaska, right? Yeah, they do wolf kills from helicopters. Yeah. And yeah, I mean, lions are just tough, but I did. I didn't even realize this, but Oregon, as we're looking at those numbers that Jamie pulled up, Oregon, the goal is 970 lions a year, but we never get to it. Right. So what that means is we're not meeting our objective of lion kills. That means there's more and more lions every year. Don't they factor that into the amount of tags they give though that there's going to be a limited amount of success, so they'll give more tags than they will be like than they actually need to kill for lions or for for lions. They do that. Oh, yeah. I mean, I'm not sure how they how they do it. It's supposed to be like a balance. You know what I mean? If, if, but the what happens is not enough lions are getting killed, so there's too many lions. So that means the lions are killing too many deer no, because there's the lion numbers too high. Right. And that's what's kind of happening. There's areas in Oregon that were great hunting at one time that are terrible now. Well, here's a perfect example where I used to live in California. You guys been in the mouse. A lot of land, a lot of woods, a lot of like there's a lot of like wildlife out there. Good luck finding a deer. You might find two, three in a month in a month. I see deer every fucking day out here. I see him every day. You know what? No mountain lions and you could shoot him. California has a mountain lion problem. Like it's a real problem. Yeah. The place with the to-home ranch that place, they had a camera out in front of one of their ponds and they got 16 different mountain lions on the camera. 16. Yeah. And what the people in LA that they have no idea what's going but they're voting. Right. That's who controls what's. And they're talking with their hearts. Yeah. Yeah. Well, they're in there good people and I would have voted with them. Right. Okay. If I had never been hunting and I've never been in the woods, I would have voted with them. Maybe not. Maybe not because I'm a little fucking skeptical of people's wisdom. And I probably would have looked into it a little bit and thought about what it'd be like to get eaten by a mountain lion and go fuck what are you talking about? Right. Well, these goddamn things. If fucking crazy, don't kill them all. You don't have to kill them all. But they're going to exist in the woods where they're supposed to be. They're not supposed to be in Pasadena. Right. Okay. They're not supposed to be wandering around the fucking Hollywood Hills. Like that one that I have the big picture of. No. That one's crazy. That line. That picture is insane. Insane. The Hollywood sign behind him and he's wearing a collar. That picture to me embodies like everything that's wrong with California. Like you know where he is. And he's in the neighborhood where people live. And you just put a collar on him. Yeah. So you could track him when he's fucking killing dogs. Like what? What are you saying? You know, many. Look at that photo. Yeah. That is a sick photo. That is. That's one of the most amazing photos ever. Never taken. When as soon as I saw the photo, I'm like, oh my God, we have to buy a print. What do you think he's thinking? What did it from the photographer? What is he thinking? What am I going to kill next? What? What is this? What's the greatest thing on my neck? What is the most tastiest? What are the above where a Hebrewman used to live? Oh, it's right there. By the way, that's like we filmed fear factor out there. A punch of times. Yeah. Look at that. Oh my God. Look at his face. He's wandering into that. The thing is so big. How's sick of a photo is that? Amazing. Yeah. And it's all camera traps. Yeah. But here's what's so critical. And you know, hunters, we can be our own worst enemies. But part of what discussions like this and talking about how it actually works is so important. It's not for other hunters. It's for people who don't hunt, who do vote. You know, it's like, hey, let's just educate people who don't understand. It's not your fault. You don't understand. You haven't hunted your whole life. That's OK. But just listen to what we're saying and just say like, hey, when that vote comes up and it's like we're talking about, you know, being able to hunt lions with dogs or black bear bait, let's think about, hey, there's repercussions if we don't allow this. You know, they don't just don't know what it is. Right. That sounds cruel. Lions with dogs. I go, that's not even fair. Yeah. You want to hunt it with a spare. If you want to hunt it, like we used to hunt them. Yeah. With a spare man. No, bare hands. That's what I see. Kill with your bare hands. That's the dumbest argument. That's the dumbest argument. How do you think we got to the point where we don't have fangs? You fucking dolt. And we got there. We evolved to pass that because we figured out weapons. OK. And that's why we have cities. We never kill shit with their hands. We say, how the fucking wooden spear. So what are you talking about? Bear hands. The dumbest fucking argument of all time. And the people that don't understand that we would have never had civilization if we didn't do this. Exactly. And the conversation doesn't come from a want perspective from me. I've got no desire to hunt them out in the mountain line again. I don't. But as someone that's in the know, because I have before, you know, and I wanted to educate myself prior to that hunt, I was doing as much reading as I could to find out. Do I feel good about this? Is yeah, so it's not like I want them still on the list to hunt because I want to go and do it again. I don't have a desire to do that again myself. But I do see that it's good management. You know, instead of a necessary. Instead of them being cold and not utilized, you know, and it actually costing money, you know, there's money going into conservation at that point from the hunter. And the meat noodle lies, you know, and as you mentioned in that case, I gave that meat to a lot of people because I wanted people to see it as a food source as well. You know, it's in because you do. You sort of think of the mountain line, you're like, the meat was amazing. Some of the most incredible meat I've ever had. Yeah. I mean, even if, so just say, they didn't require you to take the meat and you didn't and you didn't eat it. Still, they need to be killed. Yeah. There's all those two just to make the deer and out population is to make it work. I could have to work because humans, people will always say, well, mother nature will take care of itself. It's like, no, humans have encroached on this habitat. That's why we need to control this. This isn't like the wide open west that it once was where, yeah, maybe it would work out eventually. It's not going to work out. They were here first. Yes. They were here and first. Great. The system 100%. Adam, you know, he said he's killed one. He doesn't plan on killing another. I've never killed one. I've never killed a lion in my entire life. But I know it's important. So it's not like on this big lion hunter that I just have this passion for doing it. I want to kill as many as possible. Never even killed one. But I know that we have to kill him. And in Colorado there, that's one thing you talk about. Sex and the animal up on the tree. Because you can see what it is. Male female. You don't when I hunted him, I did hunt him. I didn't kill, but you could kill any lion, essentially if it didn't have, it couldn't be a female with cubs. But or kittens. But you look at him in the tree and you can decide, oh, that's a female. Probably not the best kill. That's killing old male because it just works better that way, taking old males out. But you can do that. And same thing with baiting bear. A bear comes in, a bear is really tough to tell, whether it's a boar or a sow, a male or a female, for those that don't know. But when you're looking very closely, you can, that's an old male. That's what I want to take. So that's why that's why it's not just random. Like I'm rifle hunting, it's 400 yards away running. And you kill like a bear and it has cubs. You didn't realize it had cubs because it cubs are in a tree somewhere that the sow left. So that's where baiting is actually the best way to manage these numbers. And it might seem like, oh, you just throw out donuts and this and that and the bear comes in. I mean, yeah, you could term like that. Or you could say no, we're targeting the right animal to make this worth the best way it can. Well, people need to understand that wildlife biologists and the numbers that they put up and the rules that they apply, especially the rational rules like that, they exist because it's the only effective way to hunt these things. Like you don't use dogs to hunt elk, you know what I'm saying? It's like, because it doesn't seem right. There's one effective way to get these mountain lions and you got a tree. If you don't have that option and you're bow hunting, you have to stumble upon one. And they're not going to know you're coming forever before you know they're there. For ever, hundreds of yards away, they're going to smell you, they'll hear something, they'll turn and look at it, they have amazing eyesight. You know, like you're not finding them. And if you want to keep the populations in check, there's like California's got a bear problem too. And part of their bear problem is you can't use dogs anymore. And it was the only way they could really control populations in a lot of these places. Dogs are baiting. Hey, Jamie, I got another project. So cam can today. You start a spell with a K. As we were talking about, he had a deer tag, he's deer hunting. This in Oregon, this is what you do. You just buy a bear and a lion tag just to have with you. But he killed this giant lion. He was deer hunting. This lion came up sat on this rock 40 yards away. And he's just like, I got a lion tag. Perfect boom. Got put it, perfect arrow in this giant lion, but look at this thing. And he's a big deal. He played for the Steelers for like six years in the NFL. And yeah, so that was just like a happen chance. That's how you get him in Oregon. Because you can't use dogs. You can't do anything else. So that lion just just jumped up there and he made a perfect shot on it. That's crazy. But look at that big thing. God. Yeah, pretty nuts. And like I said, cam's like 64. I don't know, 30. 31 Derek Wolfkill. Yeah, that was a giant one too. Giant one. So the Derek Wolf story is a great one too, because he took so much heat online about it. People are so angry in him that he did that. And it's just people that don't understand why it's necessary. And first of all, if you know Derek Derek's a fucking legit Viking, he's a legit Viking. That guy's a giant human being. So for him to be, hold it. Is there another picture we see like the full? I think that's true. That's it. There's the full like 180 pounds. Look at the size of that fucking thing. Yeah, so you and I don't know what the numbers are, but you think a lion kills, especially a lion that big, has to basically kill a deer every week. Right? So that's 365 deer a year. That thing is killed. Or no, not. No, this is 52 deer a year. Imagine it is a deer every day. No, but do you know the wolf thing? Possibly. They say lions are killing more deer now than ever in places where there's wolves, because the wolves kill the lion off the kill. The wolves deal on them. They steal them all the time. So the lions just give up and they go kill another one. They can kill way easier than a deer kill. They're way more effective killers. So think about, say 50 deer a year for each lion. How many lions are in Colorado? A lot. A lot. I mean, that's a lot of fucking deer or elk calves or something's being killed. Yeah. Australia's got a real bad problem with shark population now. And it's like, and I'm taking it there because what's happening is for like a really good eat and fish like a red emperor, you'll only get like five red emperor. That's your quota for the day. You can only catch five. And what the sharks are doing now is your hook or red emperor and the sharks will just take it off the lion. So you don't have a red emperor in the boat anymore, but one's dead because the sharks got it. So you keep fishing. And then so now the red emperor numbers are declining because sharks, that's their favorite fish to grab off a lion. You can catch a card. You'll get it to the boat because the sharks aren't going for it. But if it's a red fish, the sharks are taking it constantly. And then so what's happened is because there's been a ban on shark fishing, shark numbers have got now to control. So now red emperor numbers have plummeted because the sharks are just eating them cons. How many people on Australia do you kill by sharks over here? There's been a few of this year already. Yeah, I actually just had, I had my girlfriend out a couple of, or maybe a month or two ago. And I took it as this beautiful beach. And it was awesome. As soon as we got there, there's dolphins jumping out of the water and whatnot. Anyway, we never went for a swim just because of how the conditions were. And a week later, a lady was taken from that beach. And her partner may have died as well. I didn't follow up on the story, but a partner got attacked as well, but got out of the water. And it's great why it's mostly on the east coast. They seem to be running pretty rampant at the moment. Yeah, I'm still there. It's a blading hot that it might in the boat. Four confirmed fatal shark attacks in 2025 so far with some trackers listing four or five deaths, depending on how many incidents are clocked, or how incidents are classified. And but think about how much less people are out there on the water than the ground. Oh, yeah. That's the thing. So people go, there's only four shark attacks a year. Right, but how many people are in the water? Yeah, out of 500 people. It's not a lot of people in the water. It's women out there. We're part of a way to go. Oh, yeah. Good Lord. It's an absolute monster of the ocean. Oh, yeah. Isn't it weird to think that, I mean, most society doesn't know anything about the wild these days. You know, I mean, we're domesticated. Yeah, so it's, but even like, I don't know. I always say that, I mean, we talked about this. I'm pretty sure because I talked about it all the time. But like, I always think that society like this regular life here is fake. It's like it's not even not even real. It's not even how humans were designed to live and survive where the wild is actually where that's how, that's what we're designed to do, live in the mountains or hunt and survive, things like that. And so the fake life, I don't know. It's just crazy to me to think about that. The fake life is what we think of as a whole life. Yeah, is a real life. And it's not real. It's like, what we're doing. Yeah, it's just real life. Yeah, we're made to live in a society that's not by mind or your design. Right. And it's sort of like, and that's, I always feel out of it in society because I just feel like it's not for me. But it is it's here and we're going to live in it. I do like going on the waste of wells and getting a good injection. So, but I just want to go when I want to go. Yeah, that's the way to do it. Attack it from the outside. Go in, go to a nice restaurant, get back out to the country. Yeah, just work and relax. It's better for people. You ever see that, the old days of vice, when vice, you do really cool stuff. The advice guide to travel. And this is one guy who lives in the Arctic Circle. And this dude is, he's been there since the 1970s. He got a job up there and got permitted where he's like, grandfathered in to allow to live in a small cabin up there. Like the last guy there. He has like a permit on his door. And this guy has been living up there ever since he saw 9-11 in a photograph, like a year after it happened. Had no idea what was going on. Very smart guy, like intelligent, interesting guy. And lives up there with his wife. And all he does is hunt caribou and fish. And he talks about it. And he's like, this is how people are supposed to live. Like we knew he's not like he's a very intelligent guy. So like when he's talking about, he's talking it from like, an internal programming. Like this is like this feeling that you get living like this is how people are supposed to live. And when you live like this, you're very fulfilled and it feels normal. Whereas most people don't feel normal. Most people are depressed. They have anxiety. They're worried about their career. They're worried about all this stuff that is like human created. They're worried about our, their social status, whether they're ostracized for the neighborhood or people like them anymore because they're political beliefs or whatever the fuck it is. There's none of that out there. There's none of that because it's what, it's the way we were designed. But if we want all the things that we enjoy like fucking Starlink and cell phones, like you have to have this weird fake world that we've created, the human created world. But it's not conducive to like a healthy mindset for most people. It's not normal. And so all the, I have this thought about why exercise is so important for people's mental health. Because I think at the very least what it does is it gives you like the physical exertion that your body requires. But I think your body requires a connection as well. And that's what we're missing. We're missing the natural world connection. And you can get some of that out of the physical exercise. You can get some of that out of like doing, but your body is literally designed to have to move and to complete tasks in order to survive. And that task could be like that guy out there hunting caribou, building a house, surviving like making a homestead, growing a garden. Like this is a normal way we are, but we're moving into this abnormal way. And along the way, people are losing their fucking marbles. Everyone's crazy. No one knows what a woman is anymore. Like everyone literally, out of their fucking mind. Out of their mind with the left wind, the democracy. We're all right. When we're all going to be Nazis. And it's just chaos. Yeah. And none of it is normal. None of it is natural. And the reason why it's so incompatible with most people is because we're not designed for it. I feel it. I know cams the same, but like it's just like time doing those things that are usually in a quieter environment, in a more natural environment. Like I mentally feel better every time. And then I almost feel myself slipping when I come back to the city. You know, and it's just like, you sort of start letting your guard down, you just slip back into it and you're like, this is, I'm not enjoying this. And then you go back out hunting for us or camping or whatever it is. And then I do. I feel revitalized. I feel healthier mentally and physically. I feel healthier. And then, but adding all the other things to it, like you talk about like exercise and yeah, it does touch on it. And I think all those little things help, but to really get out and fresh air is the big one for me. Where it's just, I do. I feel more flow state. I wonder if like, I'm sure a, like a primitive man felt emotions for sure. But do you think they felt depressed? No. I think you know what I mean? I feel like they're too busy. I think that's a vibe. I think people, I think this is part of this fake society is like, are you happy? Are you happy? It's like happy. What the fuck is happy? I want to be useful out there. I want to do something. I'm not happy. I'm nothing. Right. What is happy? Right. Yeah. I'm just being. I'm just being. Right. I feel contentious being. Yeah. When you're in the, in the mountains, carrying your bow, glassing, looking, drinking, eating, looking for places to sleep, what is that? That's what I want. I don't know what it is. But that's like purpose. Like I have a purpose. I'm, I'm trying to kill something. That is that happy? You're trying to find food. To me, that feels, because I don't know what happy is. I see people, they laugh and they're fucking around. Sometimes it's alcohol induced or drug induced. Or it was like, is that supposed to be happy? What is that? I don't know. I don't know what, what are we, what are we calling happy? Because that's not like a little kid laughing at a birthday party. But are, are those both, are they both happy? The fight. No one saw coming. Jake Paul versus Anthony Joshua live on Netflix December 19th. Two worlds collide in the ring and Draft King Sportsbook has the action covered. Bet on every round, every punch, every knockout moment with live betting and fast payouts. You're always ringside for the action. Download the Draft King Sportsbook app today. New customers bet just five dollars. And if your bet wins, you'll instantly get paid $200 in bonus bets with the code Rogan. That's code Rogan in partnership with Draft King's The Crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1-800-GAMBLAR in New York called 877-8 Open Wire. Text Hope in Y-467-369. In Connecticut, help is available for a problem gambling called 888-787-7777. Or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly on behalf of Budhoe Casino and Resorting Kansas has to have per-wage your tax may apply in Illinois. 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction, void and Ontario restrictions apply. Bet must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven days. Cinnamon ons required. Four additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio limited time offer. Well, there's that. There's different kinds of happiness, right? Yeah, I mean, as you get on a fun date, you know, there's happiness you get when you, you know, you do fun stupid shit like you go play like sandbox games, you pretend you're shooting zombies with VR. That's happy. It's fun. It's silly. You get it out of it. Everyone has a smile. You had a good time. That was wild. That's happy too. There's a bunch of different kinds of happy. Some of them we've created, but there's content. Like are you enjoying your existence? Yeah. I mean, that's a real struggle for a lot of people. Right. Because there's a giant percentage of the people that are listening to this right now that are forced to do something they don't enjoy doing most of the time. Most of the time most of their day they're doing something they don't enjoy doing because they have to do it in order to do the things that they do enjoy. So if you want to go on vacation, you got to make enough money to afford the trip to Hawaii. If you want to do this, you got to do that. If you want to do this, you got to do that. You're like, so you're just working in some stupid cubicle punching keys, just planning all the fun stuff you're going to do with the money that you make doing this thing you hate doing. It's pretty nuts. I've never felt happy in that. That's what I'm saying. I don't have to do something to get the somewhere. Sometimes you have to be unhappy. That's true too. And you're a role person to be commenting on this because you're extreme. You're never going to be happy because you're going to continue to chase bigger and better. Yeah. That's what I say. I don't know. I mean, and I mentioned this before, I'm happiest when I'm suffering. Yeah. That's ridiculous. It doesn't feel like we just lived in each other. It's not crazy because when I'm suffering, it's because I'm doing something that matters to me. Right. Yeah. You like that. And you know what's on the other side. I think you both, yeah. You sort of programmed yourself to be like that too. You know, this is like similar to Goggins, right? Goggins always wants people to know that he wasn't always like this. That he used to be fat and lazy. And he shows pictures of himself at 300 pounds. He always talks about it. And you know, it's like, this isn't, I wasn't born like this. Like I turned myself into this. And I think one of the reasons why you've been able to struggle so much is he figured out a way to enjoy struggle. And a lot of people avoid struggle at all costs. They want the couch. Oh, I want to relax. It's cold out. I want to get in that fucking cold plunge. Are you crazy? What's wrong with you? You know, I love struggle because you know what's on the other side. Yeah, because I've done it. So it's like once you've done that, I think that's where a lot of people struggle. If they quit or they don't get to the other side, then you don't know the reward on it. Well, you just said it's perfect. That's why they struggle because they don't struggle. It's like the. where a lot of people struggle if they quit or they don't get to the other side, then you don't know the reward on that. Well you just said it's perfect. That's why they struggle because they don't struggle. It's like the thing you're avoiding is causing you to have the exact same thing. It's just you're getting a slow dose of that poison and you never get out of it. Whereas if you voluntarily struggle, then you get this beautiful feeling when it's over. But you're not doing that. So you're just getting the same amount of struggle and these weird little slow doses all day long. So you're never getting like, oh my god, I'm an agony, I can't breathe. But if you did, then the rest of the day would be easy. Instead, you're getting, oh my god, the world is closing in on me and I don't know why I'm so freaked out and I'm riddled with anxiety all day long for no fucking reason. I'm having a panic attack and there's nothing wrong. That's what's going on. You're suffering in little doses all day long and it's driving me. You're fucking crazy. And that's why you get on SSRIs and that's why you do this and that's why you do that and you join a cult and everyone's just trying to figure out a way to feel better. Everyone's just trying to figure out a way to feel better. And one of the ways to feel better is voluntary struggling. You got to volunteer to put yourself in stressful situations, difficult situations. Do it on purpose. If you do that, then the regular world is easier. Yeah, I think I'm always of course biased towards hunting in the mountains but also think that men specifically, where I grew up and in the environment I grew up, hunters were respected and if you killed a big buck, you're like, that meant something in the small town. Because it's very difficult to do. Right. And for men, respect is such an important thing. Yeah. It's like, where we say women need love, men need, if you have to choose, men love doesn't mean shit really but respect does. And like, hunting was a way to earn respect from the community. And that's why for men like, as hunters, I think that's appealing for people who don't hunt because they see that image and they're like, I'm missing that. Because they see that there's respect earned there. And that's what men, whether they want it admitted or not, that's a big driving force. Like, even at work, whatever job you have, you wouldn't be respected. His breath example, that story you were telling me about shooting that bull in the Oregon backcountry and you terrible place to kill a bull and you call up that dude. Yeah. That guy out. Cal holiday. Which sounds like a fake name. We're talking about that. You got some sling or his. Cal holiday sounds like such a fake name. That's the perfect badass name. You call this dude and ask him to help you. Dude drove through, he told him, okay, he said, I'll see you there at 8 a.m. This guy drives through the night. He shows up like how many hours did it take him to get there? He had a high gain. So he had to round up three other guys. So he brought four of him and three guys and they live. God, how far away. I mean, at least a couple hours, I think. And so they had to get together, drive a couple hours, get up on this old like logging road essentially into the get to the access point of the wilderness to the trailhead. Pack in miles, right? So this is like nine or 10 at night. They said they'd be there at 8 in the morning. So that's what it took like to get there and then miles back to this remote middle of the wilderness, hellhole area by 8 a.m. So yeah, it was hours and hours and hours. Just to get there. Can't time that. The way you can time that to be did. Talked about it. The way you talked about him, that's what every man wants. Yeah. Like that was a fucking man. Yes, but you answer to, you know, that's and you're talking about, you know, respect so important. But you do have to earn respect. Right. Right. And that win. So in that moment, so there was me, Wayne, Tanner, my son, James, my camera guy, Gideon, and then he brought four guys. So we had eight guys. In that moment, there's not eight other men I would rather have or seven other men besides me that I'd rather have there because those to do that is special. That's not everybody can do that shit. But those guys, that was their purpose that they could probably never be quote, happier than in that moment, Elkmead on our back, miles to get to the trailhead out and hundreds of pounds of meat. Yeah, 300 pounds of meat. So we waited at the at the butcher when I took the to get processed. 300 pounds of bone down meat. That's not not a bone on there. So not including your camp, not including everything. So you're right. And ahead, I took the head out. So 300 pounds of meat plus everything else that we had. But eight of us packed it out and it was a great, the greatest day, I can remember probably this season, you know, I mean, it was that that was, that was real. That's what I say. That's real. That's what the other shit. I don't know what this is. But that was fucking real. I killed a bull. We have to get it out to take care of this meat. Here's some badass mountain men who can help me. Does it get any better? No. Yeah, I think I've known you for 13 or 14 years now and you've always been like that. I've never changed in that sense. Like those things are important to you. Those things are meaningful to you. All right. It's incredible. No, it's a thank you. But yeah, it's, yeah, I mean, that's all that fucking matters. Most people never experience that. That's what's wrong. What's wrong is most people never experience that, that insane, challenging experience where your, your characters tested, your will is tested, your commitment is tested. Just think so. The video on this hunt came out last night and it's called the bow hunter, but there's a moment there after we had called after we'd got my bolt process. So it was that, at that time, it was just me, Wayne, Tanner and James. And we're just sitting there, we had our tent set up. The bolt, the meat's all hanging up middle of night, sitting there talking, eating, um, we're eating, uh, peak, uh, meals. I'm like, why are we eating peak meals? That you have. Well, we didn't have a fire. But, uh, the meat was processed. It wasn't time to eat or like to, to break down the, the bowl, but that would have been great. Tender ones over fire would have been amazing. We just didn't do it. But the point is in that moment, there's no other place on earth, no other time in my life that I would rather be that that is, that was the pinnacle of life for me. That's a normal natural experience for primitive man. Yes. That's what it is. And it's how we stayed alive. And the way I describe it to people, there's a feeling, most people have caught a fish. There's a feeling when someone catches a fish like even a child when I took my daughter bass fishing. She was like six. I think she caught a bunch of bass. And the feeling that she got when she hooked it like, oh, her eyes light up, it is built in us. It's inside of us. But catching a fish, bow hunting and in the mountains, killing an animal, cooking it over a fire with your boys is that times a thousand. Yeah. It's a crazy built in. We did what we have to do and we're looking forward to doing it again. So that that that intense experience, the difficulty, all of it, you're sitting there relax, you're eating and you have no doubt you can't wait to do that again. You're not like, man, I don't want to do this again. This was nuts. Yeah, I'm fucking tired, but that was awesome. Yeah. That was awesome. He takes the pack off. Oh, dude. He's sitting there by the fire like holy shit, your drenched in sweat, your legs are gone. Everybody's around smiling. Like we fucking did it. We did it. I just don't know how. I mean, you hope the films can show that and, but gives you a peek to feel it. Oh, yeah. I would I wish everybody could feel it. So they know. Yeah. It'll never happen, but it's so it's life changing. Do you remember Israel, Adesanya speech after he knocked out Pereira? Yes. What do you say? He goes, I wish he goes people of the world. I would play it. Let's play it. It's fucking amazing. So this is Alex Pereira. This is a guy that had beaten him three times. Three times, yeah. Knocked him out and kickboxing, knocked him out in MMA, and then finally he knocked him out. And this was like everybody was like terrified of him taking this rematch. Pereira can't be stopped. Pereira is a destroyer. He's the scariest guy ever, but he asked me to give him the microphone. What a human. I love style of Tinder. Oh, he's the best. He's the best. He's the best. He's the best. He's the best. Hey, sure, sure. Just listen up. I want to say something. People, Earth, I need to say something. Listen to me. I hope every one of you behind your screens on this arena can feel this level of happiness just one time in your life. Can feel how just one time in your life. But guess what? You never feel this level of happiness. If you don't go for something in your own life, when they knock you down, where they try to show you, when they talk about you, and they try to put their foot on your neck. If you stay down, you will never ever get that resolve. Fortify your mind and feel this level of happiness as you rise. One time in your life, but I'm blessed to be able to feel the **** again and again and again and again and again. That's the greatest post-fight speech of all of you. You know what I love too is like even in that moment, there's a little bit of blood starting to trickle out of his nose. Because he looks really good for just fighting, but there's little, you know, the sweat, the blood trickling. Oh, he's getting hit man. He's getting hit. And his left leg was very destroyed. He didn't take many though. No, he was talking to me about it afterwards. He's like, that mother **** got me again. I was thinking that before that he got my **** leg again. Because that was a part of the problem with the first fight. Yeah. First time I may fight. His left leg was destroyed. He couldn't move his left leg. So even though he's like, Bobby, he's like, I was okay. He goes, but I couldn't get out of there. He goes, I couldn't move my **** leg man. He goes, I was getting hit, but I was still there. I was moving, like he was still moving around, but he couldn't go away. Like his leg was destroyed. And that's what people don't think about when he like, this is God damn calf kicks. Yeah. He probably knew after the first one. He was like **** he got me again. He destroys people's legs and then you're a sitting duck in front of the scariest punch in the history of the division. Hands of stone. Oh my God. He's **** terrifying. And for him to catch him with that perfect right hand off the cage like that. Oh my God. And then shoot the arrows into him. Greatest fight celebration. Greatest post fight speech of all time. Of all time. Does not even a second place that really except Rose Nama units. That one time which we say, I'm the best. I'm getting good. That was pretty powerful. Jamie could get one. Could you find that tent scene at the end of that video? So but here's what I was curious about is, oh, he did find it. Yeah, look right here. So the difference between Israel's happiness and this happiness. You know, you go until you're sick of the weight and you get it under the tree and the shade and you get all kind of energized come back, drink some water grab and then mentally you're not coming back to here. I mean, you get it all across the creek and that. I mean, it doesn't get anymore in the bottom. That was a pack out, but I wouldn't want it any other way. Wayne, he had a horse packer set up and then I had also talked to Cal holiday and when I was in there by myself on an opening weekend, he said, Hey, if he kill a bull in here by yourself, he goes, let me know. Send me a tax or something. I'll have, you know, four or five guys here within five hours to help pack. No, it wasn't opening weekend, but I'm like, I told Wayne that and I said, he goes, what do you want to, who do you want to get hold of? If you want to get to hold a cow or do you want to get hold of the horse packer? And I'm like, I think I'd rather have cow with some other badass, you know, mountain guys and just share this pack out with them. Yeah, but it's only for you. The last of a jungle too. So these guys right here, but there you don't want any other people and Tanner's got so much weight on this. They got up. I don't know what time. Three in the morning made it all the way there. They said they'd be there at 8 a.m. They were down at my bullet 801. And I don't I mean, this is miles and miles and miles. Just, you know, just studs. And so yeah, it's like I'll never forget that. I'll never forget the whole, obviously the whole hunt, but that morning was a special one. Cal, Eric, Keith and Ryan, just for a massive. Yeah. So it's like, here's it, but that's a juxtaposition is to me, that was my Israel, a Sonia moment about I will never be happier. But look how different those moments are. One's in front of a huge crowd, millions of people watching being, you know, getting all that attention from all those people. And then I'm, I guarantee just as happier, happier right there. Isn't that crazy? That's your thing in your family, I think. Yeah. I always talk about that like people just trying to find your thing. Yeah. My things out doors and bones. So Israel's thing is fighting. So for him, that's the pinnacle. For us, whatever your thing is, get to the pinnacle. Right? That's the lesson. Find happiness in that. Do you think whatever it is, whatever it is for you that you're talking about your daughter catching that fish and it's like this primal instinct inside of it that just flares up that fighters have that same feeling. Like it's a primal feeling. Oh, 100%. Yeah. It's a little more conflicted, depending upon how bad you hurt your opponent. When you heard them really bad, it's a very conflicting moment because you know that could have been you. Some guys don't get that feeling. Some guys they do like good fuck him. But a lot of guys it's like, woof, there's some guys that knock a guy out real bad and then they almost want to retire afterwards. They're just like, I don't want to do that to anybody anymore. You know, especially guys that have killed guys like Rayman Sini when he killed Duck Cook him. I don't think he was ever the same again. There's a few guys like that in history that have had boxing matches where they killed a guy and then they were kind of never the same after that. Yeah, that's some scary. Yeah. Because you realize like this is what you're doing. Yeah. This could lead to that happening to you. When you think about your kids watching on TV and crying or even worse there, while you're getting beat up, I always freak out when guys bring their kids and like, oh man, bring your kid to a fight. You know, yeah. I've seen guys getting knocked out in front of their kids and it's particularly devastating, particularly devastating, especially when you really like the guy. It's rough. It's a rough way to make a living. But those guys when they get that belt strapped around them, when their hands get raised in the whole audience, screams and cheers. It's like, that's a special moment. A special moment that very few people ever get the experience. Unless they kill a bull in their wilderness. I don't even know if it's the same. They're all, it's a different kind of happiness. I think yours is more sustained. Yours last longer. That's what I say. It's like, I don't know. Like Israel said, he was happy. Is that I guess that's what it is. But you know what the reality is after the happiness dies off for a couple of days, then you start thinking about your next fight. You immediately start getting that anxiety. I think that's a good driving life though, right? Because you don't just do that elk hunting bait like I'm done now. You know, it's like not what's the next one. And it's like that constant pursuit. And it's also like constantly recognizing that you're always going to be at least trying to get better. You're always trying to get better. Anything that's going to give you like real happiness is going to be very difficult because you're not really going to ever be able to master it. Whatever it is. It's like that's where it is. The real, it's in the pursuit of it. And along the way, recognizing that you consistently keep getting better. But it's like there's a dream that you're chasing that you're never going to get to. You're never going to get to bow hunting perfection. It doesn't exist. You can get really close. You've gotten really, really close. But we're human and it's the wild. And there's all sorts of weird variables that happen. Because branches and sticks and wind and this and that and it's impossible to be perfect. And that's part of the magic of it. Part of the magic of it is that when you're in the moment and it's all happening, it's all so open ended. Any result can take place. You really do not know how this is all going to go down. You haven't seen it all play out and you might have imagined how it's going to play out. But it's going to play out in unique situations. Some of them will be similar. Some of them will be completely different. And you've got to figure it out. Well, you were telling me that crazy story that I was talking to you about the podcast, where you're shooting down at this bull, like from like a cliff straight down. Yeah. San Carlos this year was a, so I arranged the bull is a huge cliff. And what I thought is I'd get up there and I'd be able to see the flat. And there was some bulls down. There's a tough year in Arizona as the drought. But from that cliff, I thought that'd be a great vantage point to see where these bulls were in plan of stock. Get way up there. Actually they're sheep right above us too. It's like crazy rugged country. But get it there on that cliff and I'm looking, kind of looking out over the expanse there. And then I look straight down below me. There's this big bull and straight down. I'm like, it's like, if you're hunting a mule deer, you know, they always bet I'd be a kiss. Because so they're backs protected. The winds coming up, they can monitor the down below them with their nose. They know nothing's coming from the back. That's how mule deer bed to survive. Well this bull had done that same thing. And it was, it had just stood up from the base of the cliff. And I looked down, I range at 42 yards, which people who know if it's the range finders telling you to shoot for 42, that means straight down. That means it's probably close to 60 yards, you know, because the range finder does a calculation if you shoot flat, that's the gravity effects. One thing, if you shoot straight down, gravity has less effect. So it's saying even though it's further, you would shoot for less distance is how that works. So it told me to shoot for 42, that means it's probably 60 straight down. And that's a long shot with a bow. And then I had to shoot in straight down. I had to, I thought that I was like, going to go straight through his spine because I was straight above him. I'm like, well, I'm going to come right behind the shoulders. Right through his spine into his vitals. I thought that should do it. So I shoot, I hit that bull. Like about, I would say an inch off the spine. I show it, there's a video of it on that, the video we just watched for people who are interested, but about an inch off that spine into his chest and the bull went about 100 yards. But yeah, it was, I never, I've never done a shot like that before in my life. You know, you think about different scenarios. I had never even thought about one like that on a bull, at that distance, at that angle. So that is even so where it's back. This is the, that's the win a hot bull, but it's back Jamie about, I was talking about getting ready for this hunt. And it shows like a few clips of the bull I killed in Colorado, then the Arizona bull, then I did another hunt in Utah. And I killed a bull there to get prepared for the, the Oregon hunt. But yeah, it was just, I didn't even really thought that that shot would be a potential hunt. It's crazy because of the wilderness is so dense. Yes, Oregon is not far. It's a, it's like a rainforest. It's like Jurassic Park. And that's an Eastern Oregon. That's the dry part of the state. That's crazy. But it's such, it's such a hole there so much water moisture down there that it turned into like Jurassic Park without bull coming in, bugling. And it was like a dinosaur. I guess. But there's nothing that matches that, that aspect of L. The country makes it so much cooler. Yeah. Because the sound they make when they're coming in, it's just like that's all of your fucking pores pop up. Yeah. It's like you get goosebumps all over your body. You back your neck, the hair stands up. It's like the scream is like, whoa. It's so, it is my favorite sound. It's amazing. It's my, the father and critter linen. When you hear, when you're close and there's an elk screaming through the woods and he's coming close towards you, that the thrill of that is like, nothing else. Like not the notes. No. And people who haven't heard it, they hear that and they're like, what the fuck is that? Right. It's weird that there's an animal on this planet that makes that noise. If we hadn't done this our whole lives and we heard that would be like, what is going on? Yeah. If you had done what Adam did in Japan and not research, like what kind of animals are in the area and you were camping out and you heard that scream, you'd be like, oh, like we're surrounded by demons. Now I've had people tell me stories like there's something really weird in the woods there. And then, but you find out it's like fellow deer or red deer are living in there and it's like just they're breeding porridge and they're just roaring and just people like, what the fuck is that? Oh, it's like actually it's just the deer. Stag, have the craziest rewards. It's such a weird guy. They'll actually make a real pussy sound. Compared to it. Yeah. Yeah. For the world. Yeah. Well, like an African lion, because I heard those when I was hunting over there, like there by the river. And so we're like an African lion in the middle of the night. There. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, my God. It just like reverberates through the whatever we were jumbles. If there's anything that lights up your DNA, it's a sound of a lion must just chill your fucking sound like that either. Nothing like that either. But you know, here's one, here's an exciting thing. So for people listening that maybe didn't grow up hunting. We were talking about this in the green green middle of last night when we were getting high off all that. But we were smoking. But we got high. It's what's crazy is nowadays, you know, we're 58, you're 45 right. But we're just getting even better physically. So so you say you can't master bow hunting, right? Because you only had a certain window, like normally how hunting works is you're young and strong, all the endurance in the world, but you don't know shit, right? You don't have the experience. So by the time you get the experience and you're old and broke down, you can't take advantage of the experience. So you have to have a wisdom, the wisdom you gained when you're young, you utilize when you're old to kill. Well, now we can gain all that experience and wisdom like I've been, I've been, you know, hunting for 40 some years. And I'm also at the best I've ever been physically. You married those two up. Look out. What is that? That didn't exist before. Right. So like we go as ways to well today and get stem cell and get, you know, the IV treatments and get everything else to build an operate at our absolute prime at 58 years old with 40 years of experience. Yeah. That's it. That's tough. That's, you're going to have success if you do it right. So yeah, not everybody's going to be in that situation where they grew up hunting like me, but you even think about jelly roll at 41 years old. So he just started bow hunting. You started bow hunting in your 40s and now you've been doing it for, you know, 15 years and you're getting better. So there's hope for even people, 40, 50, whatever with this new science and treatment and supplements and things like that, you can still be very active and still take on new intense endeavors like bow hunting or hunting just hunting in general and have success. And it might change your entire life. Like jelly roll is a different fucking person. Yeah. Yeah. And two years he's a different person. Totally. That should be exciting for people listening. Yeah. They should learn that you could do too. And it's that and having more energy like say if you're not into bow hunting, you say if you're not, you know, like I don't want to be a marathon runner, what own, whatever it is. If your body is healthier, whatever the thing you do, you can be better. You're more energy. You're going to be better at it. You're going to be better at it. You're going to have like what, why do people like cognitively decline when they get older? Well, a big part of is you're declining overall. Everything's declining. Everything about you is declining. Of course, your brain is declining as well. Like your entire existence is fading. But the more you can have energy, the more you have vitality, the more you can do what. I don't care if you play chess, whatever the fuck it is that you like to do. Paint, whatever it is you like to do. The more energy you have, the more energy you'll be able to apply to that thing you do. The more enjoyable it is. Yes. The more ability of life, the happier you are. Including all the other stuff. Being with your family, you'll have more energy to do stuff. You'll have more life. You'll have more life energy. Here's one mindset I've tried to take on with, especially with hunting, because that's all I really fucking care about is improving and learning on every time. I could even think about, I was telling somebody, I don't know who, but on every, I try to learn something on every stock. When I think about when you kill the save of the other day, you have to weigh out so many things on the stock when you get ready to kill an animal or potentially kill an animal. We're thinking about, okay, we have the wind. That's the biggest thing with bull hunting. I knew where the wind was. Then also it's like, well, do we go, stay in the shade so the sun wouldn't blind you as it was going down. If we stay in the shade, we're not perfectly downwind. I'm like, well, the sun's going to set the winds change because thermal's change. If we're to the side in the shade, so you don't have to deal with the sun, then when that wind becomes unstable, it's more likely to smell us. We should be all the way downwind, but that means we're going to have to shoot before the sun gets too low towards not blind you. To get to the side, then you have to figure out what's a path to get there to where we're not making noise for the animal to hear. Well, it's straight to the, I don't remember that tree. I said, head straight to that tree. From that tree, then I was thinking, you should have a lane because there was brush all around, but it looked to me like from that tree, you would have a lane to shoot at 28 yards. You're still factoring all these, the wind, the sun, everything else, what's the animal going to do? It's just so fascinating to think about, but I know some people hunt and I don't think they think about it in those details. You know what I mean? They're just kind of like, oh, there's an animal, what do I do? But that's not how you mastered the moment. You mastered the moment. I said this a lot of times too on many of these hunts. I was telling Joey Roll this. I was like, everything matters. Everything. The little thing matters. The big things obviously matter, but everything matters. And that's what hunting teaches us. And in life, you can make it through regular life on this fake world that I keep talking about by ignoring a lot of things, not on a hunt. Yeah, we had to think about a lot of things on that stalk on a hunt. Everything matters. One of the big ones that we had to think about was as that sun was dropping. So we were standing there waiting for this, able to get up. It had bedded. And it didn't know we were there. And we creeped into the spot we were slowly got up. Do you remember that tactic? Yeah. Remember what I said? Yeah. If you move slow enough, they won't pick it up. Right. Because they look for movements. We were moving like, you know, like an inch every 30 seconds. We were like barely moving. Because what I've found is animals, I've been in the wide open on a caribou. Went right at it. But so slow, it was just like, that can't be anything. Yeah. Sideways movement. Nope. But steady and slow and they just won't spook. Yeah. And we had to figure out where to stand. And then when we got where we were, as we were standing there, we were standing there for quite a while. I realized, oh, this sun is going to be impossible. Because it's slowly lowering in the sky. And it's literally above this table's head now. And I'm like, OK, we don't get this thing to stand up. I'm not going to be able to see it. Because I had my hat on, right? So I blocked myself from the hat. And then I was trying to train my eyes to just look at it through just like the haze of the sun. I was like, this is going to be a real problem. So we decided let's get them to stand up. So Cam took his arrow out of his quiver and started tapping on this branch and then started like moving towards it and saber or beasts bro. Yeah. First of all, those motherfuckers, they killed lions occasionally. They get attacked and their their fears like they're not so. Sable or beasts bro. Yeah, first of all those motherfuckers they killed lions occasionally like they get attacked and they're their fears Like they're not so it wasn't exactly easy to spook right so you had to kind of like move towards a little bit And then it started grunting at you like fuck off fuck off bitch and then finally it stood up and when it stood up we got him Yeah, but it was you know it was a shot where I was like I got to do this real soon because otherwise I'm not gonna be able to see yeah fortunately I could and I can get the pin right where it needed to be but it was like I Was and I was telling you afterwards I was like I avoid shooting into the Sun. Yeah, when I have my targets I always put a target in the other way so and I'm like I can't do that anymore now I'll start shooting into the Sun sometimes Yeah, you got to get that feeling because that had happened also on a hunt with Tom land we were up in Utah and This bull was a nice bull it was about 60 yards and it was coming across this ridge The Sun was right in my eyes and he's like why didn't you shoot? I was like I I just couldn't it was too too blurry It was too the Sun was right fucking there and I remember thinking that at that time This was years ago thinking at that time I need to shoot into the Sun and I Just won't take the shot of what I did that I won't take the shot and if you're not comfortable You don't have to take the shot. Yeah, in this situation. I was like I know it's not a long shot it's only 28 yards and It's a big animal and I'm Pretty confident. I got this. I was like I had a factor all these things in and then not let doubt creep into my head Yeah, stay totally calm. Mm-hmm. So there's all these things going on simultaneously It's a lot. Yeah, it's a lot to manage a lot But but also a lot to a lot of factors to consider and then learn from yeah Oh, I learned a lot from that hunt. I learned a lot first of all learn how fucking tough sayable are That's the same experience like I told you I had with Neil Guy that I shot that Neil Guy in South Texas And ran like I didn't even hit it. I hit it perfect the arrow went right through him It was the arrow. We found the arrow 30 yards past where I hit it was covered in blood So we knew he was dead, but he ran like he never even got hit He ran full speed like a cheetah. It was crazy And the guy that was with like come in they grew up around tigers like things evolved around tigers Like they don't just take get and hit and go oh no, I'm in trouble. They fucking run They're so tough and they barely bleed That's the other thing about these these animals that grow up around big predators But why they clog up their holes really quick. They don't leave much of a blood trail. It's not like an elk or a deer It's different. Yeah, I think Adam attics explains this well sometimes You talk about when you hit them if they're stretched out and when they're not stretched out Yeah, it's like it just changes that that the interest wound and the exit wound if there is one It just changes there's different layers of muscle and hide over it where it just blocks up that blood It seems like they clog up quicker to just period like whatever their anatomy is the difference is when you hit them They don't they just don't bleed much. Yeah, I got a buddy that always You know someone's like it was the perfect shot and it's like well actually it wasn't because it'd be dead already So it's like and I know what you're saying but the truth is double lungs is double lungs and there's so many variations Like that reaction they close up the gap or what brought it to use and if the animals breathing out when the arrow shoots through the lungs or wherever it's just taken a bunch of oxygen in you know, there's a larger target. Yeah, and there's all those different a plus just more energy to run on and then You know, you'll see certain hunters that shoot something it's not even dead yet They're like yeah and start. Yeah, who on it's like what shut the fuck up because that brings on an adrenaline rush Animals can run for whereas you just want a nice relax set up, you know And yeah, I hear they don't know what's going on the beauty of the bow because it's so quiet There's not a lead gun shot behind it or anything and then you know just so they relax They don't want to run as fast they want to give up earlier because they've got nothing to spook from or fight from so You know, they don't know what happened. Yeah, yeah, sometimes they think they got jab by another bull or something like what happened Yeah, I said everything's crazy. They're all rutting and screaming at each other and clashing antlers and all sudden whack like what the fuck is that? Right you know you tar this year the bull that I shot he'd just been in the fight with another bull So he was all revved up from that other bull. So I literally hit him and he just he thought he got poked by an antler from another bull You know, and he went 20 yards was standing for 14 seconds drop dead nice beautiful peaceful right in front of me They don't know happen like that, but that's what we're after that's what you're after that's how you practice That's why you shoot so many arrows I have a drop right in front is the greatest thing ever And I think that does impact the taste of the meat too if you don't have them shoot that adrenaline back through their body Where it's a peaceful death. I think it does impact the taste as well. They say yeah, yeah, it makes sense They mean don't they do that with when they want to call animals like like what if they want to shoot animals rather Not call them shoot them for commercial purposes. They shoot them in the head right. Yeah, they put a bolt in their head But yeah, I mean no, I mean like like in Right like access to your yeah, yeah, they shoot them in the head definitely no, but like even like when they kill cattle They're not getting those things right of course. Yeah, of course. You want them to be as calm as possible. Yeah The opposite of what that mountain line did to the cow Imagining that yeah, imagine you eat that cow In the meat itself Yes, she's taking it back to the health journey how you were saying like you know where we are now with you know Modern treatments and wellness is is incredible like I feel like My I feel like my body's the best it's ever been You know, and I'm obviously the oldest I've ever been which is crazy to think of like how can I feel better than I do? How can I feel better now then I did in my early 20s? You know, we've probably had any injuries and stuff like that So it's cool and I've got you to thank for that by introducing me to bring them and waste the well so oh my pleasure I want more people to know about it. I want everybody to be healthy. It's possible Yeah, you can get healthier like look at jelly roll the guy was 500 plus pounds and now he's running now 10k the day before he came to the studio and then when we went to the gym together and he ran 2.6 miles on the treadmill while he was talking real laughing. He's just joking around. They don't know me son He's having a good old time and you know, he just seemed so happy. We got in the sauna together We're laughing. It's like he's just a different guy. He's got so much and he's so And he's so excited about this journey that he's on this journey of self-improvement this journey of health You know, he's gonna be there for his kids. He's gonna be there for his wife now He's worried about dying before you know, he told a story about Faunt like laying on his arm and he couldn't get up. He was trapped and he didn't have him bad in bed He couldn't get up. He couldn't couldn't and thought he's gonna die He's like I'm so big that I'm late on my arm And I know how that strength to get out of this position because I'm so big what a change and now he's running and bow hunting Yeah, he's substance now like that's like that's substance will just keep him going You know the fun of those things and it makes him happy And you know the problem is a lot of people oftentimes compare themselves to other people that are already on that path This is another thing that we talked about You just get on the path. Don't worry about how people are ahead of you Just you be ahead of yourself next week. You're ahead of where you were this week the week after that You'll be ahead of you. It's just a path. Yeah Just get so so what if other people been on the path Further than you like that's how you get better at stuff and that that is what's exciting about life is This path of improvement and whatever you do and and actually being a human being be a better human you can do that Everybody can get on that path. Yeah. Yeah. It's just let this what I told jellies that you know You can wander around off the path for your whole life and never really have like fucking never never really figured it out But once you make it like like where he's on you know being healthy Eating better exercising. He you know the mountains have given him I would say the mountains heal or nature heals So he's there now. It's like yeah, of course There's people who are way ahead because they've been on a longer there's people not quite on it Maybe they're gonna be faster than him and they pass them but all on the alright right path head in the right direction That's a beautiful place to be and that's where he's at it is in one of the things that I said to jelly when we're on the podcast I was like what you're doing is inspiring millions of people to live a better life 100% what you're doing is so beneficial to human beings all over the world because now Millions of people have seen that podcast millions of people have heard that store Millions of people have seen those clips that have been shared all throughout social media and how many people got Excited by that and it gave them fuel and energy to want to go do something It gave them that inspiration that we all desperately crave to want to go out and take those first fucking steps And then once you do that Then you're operating on momentum and it's so much easier This is another thing that people have to understand the first steps are the hardest It's so hard to move. It's so hard to get going But once you get going then you operate on momentum once you have a good day Then you go I did it. I had a good day Let's do it again tomorrow and then you get excited about it You look forward to waking up and then you get through it that day like we fucking did it again And now I'm looking forward to now I'm eating healthier now I cut off the sugar and now I'm drinking water with electrolytes and now I'm feeling better I've more in it and and just keep going. Yeah, just keep going and momentum is so much easier Yeah, in that first step the first step of changing your life is so hard Because we're just so afraid of pain. We're so afraid of suffering. We're so afraid of like just the discomfort We've been programmed to think that discomfort is a bad thing. It's not yeah It's not it's necessary. I think that Joey role might I mean, I think we've talked about this But could he impact more people than anyone ever has in that regard 100% we were talking about that today 100% because it's like it's not like You know even Israel or your favorite NFL guy or NBA they're they're elite right? So when they succeed You're like now fuck of course, you know, he's 6 8 260 of course. He's gonna be great, but When you see somebody like Joe Earl who came from 540 pounds That's like he's already at the furthest end of like You know make like what you'd have to overcome. Yes, and for him to do that Anybody else is closer to the to the goal that he's he was at that time. So it's like Nobody's in worse shape really right. You know, you heard really morbidly. You can't be in worse shape You know, right and if he's doing it Everyone can do it everyone who has who has that some something inside him and maybe he's gonna give them that something 100% and he's way more famous than anybody's ever done this before right that's the most important aspect of it He's loved by so many people so how many jelly roll fans Loved him because he was like them. He was big like them super talented amazing guy who's also big like oh my god I thought I was a big slob and no one's gonna love me Meanwhile everybody loves jelly roll so they love jelly and then also jelly rolls changes life like how many people are Sitting there watching him and listening to him going. I think I could do it He did it. I think I can do it. Yeah, and he just do it the way he you know like he didn't start out running marathons He tried to go for a walk. Yeah, you know I mean he would call his walk his run because he couldn't run right, but he'd say tell his family's wife and that he's gonna go out on his run There's not one step of running, but the the mindset the Story he told himself was he was running so it's that self-talk. You know how we talked ourselves Important so he would tell himself. I'm gonna go run even though there's no not at step of running involved But that led to running That mindset that that approach of like I'm winning today I'm winning the snot a run as a walk, but it's gonna be a run that's that's gonna be a massive mental Achievement for him too because I'm sure that he had a lot of mind weight to lose as well because He was in jail right substance abuse no doubt Probably a lot of like that's a lot of negative stuff in someone's head So to lose that as well and you told me that he's such a positive person So to like you know, he lost a bunch of weight which is incredible, but what he's done to his mind Which we may never know is really incredible to like like That's why I was saying to you this morning. This might be one of the best modern-day stories of a person changing their life When you look at jellie. Yeah, yeah, and and Couldn't be a better representative of Someone who has gone through the struggle and then come out this amazing person like he's an amazing guy Like this very few humans that are so kind and friendly and warm and When he hugs you, how does he with his soul like he hugs you with his whole body and his soul and he's Like a perfect person to Be the inspiration for people to improve their life Well, and that was so touching Like when you shared the uh Grand old opera. Yeah, I'm inclusion for each other role from Craig Morgan and he said Joe, can I get a hug? I mean To to me and that to me that was like so endearing but also so Important to show that it's okay for men to say yeah. Yeah, can I get a hug? I mean it was a man crying. It was one of the most inspirational things you could ever watch me But it takes a certain type Or it's one of one who does stuff like that like him his heart That's what I say his he's a big man, but he's got the biggest heart of anybody I've ever met and that was an example of it like he just wanted Love yeah, he's uh He's a very important figure in our culture. He really is it really is you know Especially now me always was his music just alone It's important because it's beautiful music But it's a beautiful music is expression of a beautiful soul You know and now he's also on this path of self-improvement and it's amazing Yeah, that title of his album beautifully broken. I mean, it's so perfect. It is and he's he was broken Probably will always be broken in some ways we all are but he's putting himself back together and man. He's We all broken or do we all have negative thoughts from the past? Are we telling ourselves for broken? Yeah, maybe that's it Maybe that's our self-talk. Obviously we're functional so we're not broken You know it's not what that were broken. It's just a doubt the self-doubt. Well everyone's gonna you gonna You're like you're a human being the only way you figure out how to get good at something is you have to it has to be a puzzle Puzzles include doubt. Yeah, it's always gonna be there Hmm, there's no getting around it But it's part it's not been the beauty of it, right? Yes. Yeah, that's it. It's the beauty of it And then whatever you do doesn't you don't have to go on it's like you should probably should But you don't have to yeah, it could be anything else. Yeah, but yeah, just any struggle in life You know, that's how I look at anything like that. That's testing or trialing or And it should be it should be interesting for you to should be an interesting thing. That's the people also have this weird habit of Looking at the mind in terms of only being valuable in human created endeavors Like the mind only being valuable in mathematics The mind only being valuable in your ability to recite literature and your your your knowledge that you've gained through schooling Like no, no the mind the mind Manages stressful situations too. That's an important aspect of intelligence as your intelligence and being able to navigate difficult things That is all your mind. You're using your mind like bow hunting has so much so much so many elements of Intelligence that are woven into it and the difference between a successful person who bow hunts and an unstick as well person is Experience in practice, but also The mind being able to learn from each individual situation and experience and get better and accumulate all this knowledge over time You know, it's got a deep deep learning curve. It's very deep and The people that don't experience it and then have this classification in their head of what Intelligence is intelligence means you got a PhD. I know a lot of people with PhD that are fools They're fools. They're emotional children. They're they're they're filled with ego and resentment and their shitty and nasty to people They're fools so they're not smart. They're just they have a functional mind. They've applied to human endeavors only right and they've never Never done the big thing never done the whole package never put it all together Yeah, and I think I think another key to being Intelligent I don't know if the key but having kids I think is a big part of growth and to me it's like I I lump I can tell just just just life experience into the the package we'd call intelligence, but like Hunting teaches us that of course, but also raising kids and being responsible for a family. Oh, yeah I think that's another it's like yes school doesn't teach you that shit and like the the degree you got doesn't signify that but I Don't know. I think that's a big part of it too It's it's a giant learning experience. That's for damn sure and it also teaches you way more compassion It's it teaches you do we way more loving and kind and and he also just You you understand from watching a baby become an amazing adult human being you get to understand all the elements that are involved in this child's development and all the Trials and tribulations how he got a lot like let him fall sometimes Yeah, and then help him pick themselves back up and talk to them through it and when they're down explain like I'm down to I'm Always I've fucked up everything I was whenever my kids would do anything wrong One of the things that I always have say to them if I was upset at them I said listen I did everything that you did I've done all this stuff. It's okay But you can't do it and this is why yeah like I've screwed up everything I've done things I shouldn't have done I'm doing exactly what you're doing right now I've done it even worse you're a better kid than I was yeah, I always say that So they don't think that like I'm without fault All right, so we say I've done it all but I got through it on the other side now I'm your dad and the reason why I'm telling you this is because I love you and I'm not tell I'm not I'm not trying to like Be upset at you because I mean like I'm trying to help you live a better life and that's how I try to communicate with them about it So in in my head that perspective opens up other lanes of Intelligence that's that's what I'm saying It's like you hat you can't be that your highest form without that right? You're challenged your challenge And you're also challenged by the discipline of it And you know you you have people that rely on you and that is you can't fuck that off You can't just like not show up for work. You can't just you know I just feel like sleeping in today fucking I'm taking a month off like you can't do that If people that rely on you and also you're setting an example for them that they're gonna learn from The people that in your kids are great example that the children of people that are very disciplined Almost always have a higher threshold of discipline. I notice it. I see it in your kids for sure I see it in my kids they they have more of an Understanding of what's necessary in order to get things done and to be successful now if you're a Person who's a parent and you shirk every responsibility you lie You you steal you you do things. You're not but you take shortcuts You you're not truthful. You're whatever you're doing where your kids get to see like oh My parent is a kind of a fuckhead, you know my parent is kind of a One of two things happens either you emulate your parents and you be kind of a fuckhead or you go I don't like that and I'm never gonna be like that Like some of my friends that grew up without hog parents They've never had a drink in their fucking life and they never will they're like I am never touching that shit I see what that's like because I saw my dad Loses fucking job loses house lose this lose that get arrested for DWI get a bar fight my dad's a fucking loser And I'm not gonna be that guy so but it's it's a toss up or some might emulate emulate that so I'm gonna emulate yeah, yeah, I mean some you see your dad's drug addict. Let me try it I grew up like that was a couple of close of friends and These close of friends were like I'm never gonna be like my dad like we'll to the core We'll like that we're never gonna be like our fathers and and that's one of the reasons I don't drink because my father was a horrible alcoholic and even though when I drink I'm happy I I'm just turned off it So I don't want to do it and I guess I've gone long enough now that doesn't interest me and then I had another friend that I cut off because he turned out to be exactly like he's dad and Even though he the whole time he was like me. I'm never gonna be like my father I'm gonna be the opposite for some reason some people just Go down the same path. I think it's also the stress of life It's sometimes it's overwhelming You know this this thing that we look forward to and bow hunting this like not knowing what's gonna happen like you get out there It's early in the morning you put your pack on you know what's gonna happen and who knows some people hate that feeling right They hate that feeling of not knowing what's gonna happen and the uncertainty about your career and job is a weird uncertainty It's it depends on so many factors that are sometimes out of your control and people just they get overwhelmed And they just want to escape they just want to escape and maybe they're doing a job They don't enjoy doing and then the only time they feel good is when they're drunk So they just get get off work and they can't wait to meet their boys and have a laugh and next thing You know you're drinking and one day turns into a month and that's your just that's distraction Mm-hmm. They want to be distracted off their life or whatever in this world will give you a lot of distractions You could play video games if you get hammered Do or love yeah, whatever it is to fill in the blank man, you could find a lot of stuff that's not gonna be beneficial for you Yeah, it's a one thing that I think the well so drinking and whatever but I think the biggest negative thing a parent can offer their kids is Blaming other like all it's always somebody else's fault like so it's like this Discussion at the house, you know because kids hear everything right so when the dad's coming home And he's bitching about his boss or the guy at work or he's getting fucked over for this or I could do that too But that guy kissed ass. That's why he got that or the must be nice. Whatever like these excuse makers You just fucking sabotage you know It's just that you never get anywhere by blaming other people for where you're at and so many people do that because they Won't accept personal responsibility for their actions or for their place in life And I don't even think it necessarily it's their fault I think they a lot of them have never seen the example of an extraordinary person who doesn't do that. They're not there's it's rare to find a person Unfortunately in this world especially in society. It's rare to find a person of great character a person who's just got impeccable character And is always truthful and his work works really hard and his love by a lot of people. It's rare It's rare and so they've never experienced it. They haven't been around it. Yeah, so they don't even know what it is Right they don't know that they're sabotaging. Yeah, and sometimes that's one of the real places where a guy like jelly roll Can can change people's lives? It's because he does talk about all of the negative shit that he's experienced and all the negative influences and all the Bad people that he was around and how he was living that life. He was trapped in that way and now he's not anymore and and he's so the big thanks substance criminal lie overweight All those those are usually the big thanks and he overcame all of them all of them So it's like that's where that power comes from work to influence so many people it's because so what was your issue again? Yeah, well jelly roll. Yeah, yeah, he overcame that. Oh wait. Where's there something else? Oh that too I mean yeah, it's everything all the big things. He's overcome. Yeah, so what what else is there? What else are you gonna blame? You just got to find a thing find a thing get on the path. Yeah, get moving on the path Maybe I'm gonna get the bathroom sorry. Let's all right. See I told you It's upside down. No, it's IV. I told him I said I said hey put all that shit in like this much Whatever fluid because I don't have to take a piss Whatever works is good that way made it super concentrated Yeah, it's the lary. It's why would it just like wait and pee? I don't mind peeing But I ever time I've done that when I come here after an IV I did same thing after pee. Yeah I know or after the sauna because after the sauna was drink this giant 64 ounce Thing of water and electrolytes and then like an hour and a half in the podcast. I'm like oh no That hits Joey role hat he learned that lesson in the blind because we were sitting for hours and like if you haven't Ever been in position where you know you you can't just get out and go pee or whatever Then you're like oh, I didn't know what this is holding. You know he said he was gonna piss his pants He's like had to make a hole in the blind and pee and to cover it up because I was like okay Just make a little cover it up a dirt whatever and that's what he did, but uh Yeah, it's pretty when you got a piss it could be miserable But there's a mental challenge of sitting still for long periods of time like I've only tree stand hunted once I did a Dudley's place and I oh yeah and the thing about Iowa is first of all It's in November that you're hunting and it's so fucking cold It's so cold and you have to sit still right You can't fucking move a muscle and you're out there for hours and hours and hours Just hoping a deer gets within bow range and the only reason why they do is just they just happen to be wandering Right and it's total luck. It's complete luck. I mean that's why those guys like a lot of those like real psycho Lee look oscar's you guys they they they'll out there out there for months at a time Yeah, they'll hunt a single buck for like 38 days or however long the season is and they're in that damn blind every day Are there in that tree stand? Dark the dark They're digging their dick off just huddling up with mittens and shit And then when the and sometimes when if you have a like a powerful bull like you pull back like when it's zero degrees outside And you go to pull that thing back like I get a back Yeah, oh no, and that's a helpless feeling. Oh no Now date so back in the day Back when I used to you know, I still tree stand hunt, you know for black tell sometimes but phones have changed like how long you can stay because you could just fuck around on your phone now Oh, that's true. Yeah, then also there's heated vests heated socks Yeah, so you can have like it's still Just standing in a tree or sitting in a tree for 14 hours terrible still terrible terrible even what all that's a little easier But pretty terrible well thankfully gears a lot better too like layering systems and you could stay like you could stay alive Let me put it that way. You're not gonna be comfortable, but you could stay alive out there. Oh, yeah I didn't so I You know signed on to sit canal, but I hadn't I'd other things I was you know under armor different whatever and I Guess I had never had good gear my entire life I didn't fucking know I didn't have to be miserable in a tree stand and So the city can send me I don't know what it is It's like some side was sideways zip jacket or yeah, it's a jacket. It's I can't remember what it's called But it's polar fleece and I was like up there going This is a fucking feel good I had never so like I said I bought 100 my whole life I guess always just had like shit that wasn't the best and just thought as part of the deal Not just that it doesn't restrict any of your movements. No. I fucking seven hoodies right trying to pull a bow is seven hoodies on but that's how I had to stay warm So with the sickest stuff with John John bar clothes and he's kind of in his design and he's a bow hunter himself but I can have the shit on and it's not restricted I can pull my bow and you know it's not this isn't like a fucking ad for sick And there's if there's other stuff out there that does that too great I just don't know about it because I'd never had it, but man that that shit works good This a bunch of I don't like a fucking ad for sick. There's if there's other stuff out there that does that too. Great. I just don't know about it because I'd never had it. But man, that that shit works good. This a bunch of high level gear that's out there. But it's like whatever they've done with sicko, they've made it so that everything works perfectly. They've dialed it in perfectly. The pants that the built in knee pads, which is fucking huge, I love those pants. So when you're crawling on, like they're the perfect knee pads, they're super lightweight, but you could sneak around on stuff on your knees and not being fucking agony. Right. And it doesn't restrict your movement at all. The level of detail they have now on these clothes is. And it's more fitted, you know, I remember like stuff that we used to use, we used to complain about it together. But it's like who are they making these pants for when the legs of that water, the bottom still. So you're walking along hunting and it's just like, bell bottoms and they get wet. They're fucking flopping around and shit. It means me so pissed. I would take pictures and send a gift when he's an under armor or like the pocket or something like what the fuck is going on. But yeah, this stuff fits good. Yeah. Well, it's just, I mean, that's one of the reasons to give them props so that they stay open, stay alive because it's like that kind of gear is so fucking important. Yeah. You know, to have gear that doesn't restrict your movement totally keeps you comfortable and warm makes you like so you can move around very quietly. The, the, whatever fabrics they're using, they got it dialed in. Yeah. Yeah. When you're walking if your fabric rubs together, you don't hear a fucking thing. Yeah. And again, time is precious. And we're doing stuff in this time. We want to enjoy it. So we're in gear that makes us enjoy it. Right. But it's just the market for this. This is like one of the things that really is, I think important. Like the market for these things that are so impactful and important to us is not a low. Do I just touch the microphone that I fucking up. It sounded weird on my hand. Um, that it's not a big market. There's not a lot of us out there. You know, so it's like, God, I'm so thankful that someone put so much research and development into these products, whether it's Hoyte bows or whatever you're using that you like, you got to think like, how many people how to work tirelessly to figure out how to make this thing that is so critical to your success. You know, fill in the blank, binos, like whatever it is, whatever you're using, who's fucking figured out how to make binoculars? How about the SIG ones that have image stabilizing now? Who figured that out? What wizard, what wizard scientist? I got a pair of those 16 power SIGs, the Zulu's. Yeah. You hit that switch and turn on the image stabilization. And normally if you're holding for people who don't know, if you're holding 16 power binos in your hand, you're image that you're getting on the other end is all wiggly. Cause it's 16 times larger than what you actually see. So every micro movement is a giant jiggle in your eyesight and your eye picture. But with those things, it's like you're watching a movie. Yeah. It's like fully locked in like it's on a tripod. It's crazy. Yeah. I was looking for friends and I'm like, and I was like, uh, look, the, uh, the glass isn't as good. You know, and I'm saying that to him, you know, and then, because I'm looking for my, I'm not a crystal clear. And maybe the glass isn't as good in them, but because the image is dead still, so I'm doing this, I'm putting mine up and I'm like, it's bad. Really clear. And then I put that up and I'm like, they're not as clear. No, you have to turn the button on and I press the button on. I was like, Oh, fuck. They're better because the image is still so you have really getting the look at it's going to be the, it's the future. So we're off skis now doing it with spotting scopes. So they have a handheld spotting scope that completely stabilizes the image. And it's just, you know, I apologize now. No, try to, I mean, you hold like a 65 power spotting scope and you, you could look around like this, which is crazy. Well, crazy. And the reason why that's so critical to a hunter is we look for movement, just like an animal looks for us moving too quickly, but we look for movement like an ear flick or a tail lag or something like, or they'll sometimes are high just if they got a fly lands on them. So you're looking for like a small, little bit of movement. You can't do that if you're, but not if you got movement in the year optics, but with that stabilization, it's dead solid. So you can see when it, that ear flicks, where you were it'd be flicking before. You just didn't notice it. So that's where it's like so critical. But if you think about all this stuff, this top of the line stuff that we talked about with the bows, the camo, the binos, bo hunting, fucking still was so hard. So that's what's so beautiful about it is it's so challenging. I don't care about all this stuff is great. No matter what you do, you're going to stink. Yeah. And if the wind catches the back of your neck and you see that animals head pop up, it's a wrap. They're designed to get the fuck away from any funky smells of things that eat meat. Not interested. I'm out of here. They smell us. We must stink. We must fucking smell like hot death to them. Oh, yeah. Because when you see an elk or a deer catches a wiffy in there, there has a hole. Oh, no. Oh, what is this fucking? They don't even have to think that long about it. And you know, they keep making these rules to try to make bow hunting harder, like eliminating certain things like that Garmin site. I used to love using that Garmin range finding site. And then they made it outlawed in Utah. I'm like, oh, guys, come on. Like this doesn't make it any easier. It just makes it so that you're going to wound less things and have more effective shots. But you know, when you get to that, like, it used to be there was no range finders, right? When you started out, was there any range finders at all? Nothing. There's no sites when I started out. No peeps, though. No pick. Crazy. Oh, we shot fingers with compound. That's crazy. So you'd have a little glove, three tab glove thing. And you shoot that. What year did they invent the archery release? Well, I got one in 89 finally. When did they first come out? Like who was the first guy that invent who's the first guy that goes, you know what? This is bullshit. The first thing that I can. I like how it came. It's like I got one in 89. I was nine years old. Well, I did know the word elk. But you knew the word cut because they say it all the time. It's not going to be a baby. What if you had a little cunt? Yeah, who was the guy that figured out the archery release? Like, well, is there Jim Fletcher was it the Fletcher release was the first one I had? And I had a little rope in it. I remember you'd have to put the rope around and it hooked on the trigger on the clasp and then you'd hit the trigger and release it. And I didn't get I had to replace that rope because it started to wear off. So you'd have to have the right knot and then you kind of burn it to get it to hold in there. I didn't have a good enough. So I didn't do that not right. I go to pull the bow back. The release comes off hip by side face. And so I first started buying releases. They would come with a little string. Did they? Yeah. The first something releases would come with a little rope. And I was like, what the fuck is this for? And it must be for guys who had kind of always done it that way and didn't want to not do it that way anymore because that was like a part of their thing. Maybe. Did you find a Fletcher release? 1971. 71. Oh, yeah. One. Look at Stanislavsky. Yeah. Still, they make awesome releases today. Look at that. That is awesome. That's crazy. Yeah. Oh, so that was just like a thing that went around your feet. Yeah, and it just turns to let it go. Like a hinge. Yeah. Wow. May revolution. Look at that image. May revolutionize archery. Look at that. Go back to that. Look at that. May revolutionize archery by contributing to unprecedented accuracy. I mean, that's essentially like a hinge. Yeah, it is. Well, there's fought back on it at the time. 66. 60 feet. Wow. It touched about before. 64. It was like, I got some. I got that different, you guys. Wow. Using the six gold bowstring release to improve their speed and accuracy. Wow. Oh, his two sons, Glenn and his two sons use this release. I never even heard of this guy's name. Glenn. Look how it works too. Like you hook it with your index finger and then you pull your index finger through and it pops off. That's crazy. So when you draw it, you have it like that and then you release it. You let it go. You just let it go. You let it up on your with your index. Yeah. Like a hinge and it turns. Yeah. A lot of guys shoot a hinge that way. You know, some guys shoot a hinge by pulling down with their peachy finger. See, see that piece of rope. Yeah. Hand released from 1950. Wow. So there's certain release. It's like hands crazy. Look at that thing. Wow. Look at that thing. It looks like a gun handle. Yeah. That's so weird. Yeah. It's. Huh. $595. $5 and $95. Can't change the Chinese. They paid for a million. That's for a million. That's shipping right now. I mean, you can't even ship for that. That's helping. What a cool looking release. Imagine what a gang street have to be to use that today. Yeah. I wonder if they get I love all this stuff though. Look at that one up there in 1977, a sear type release. Go up. I was looking at all the girls. Yeah. That's what you get. That's what you get. You get to see that's bony. Get over there. Look at this. This is the first hinge style release. Yeah. So this is in the 70s. Huh. Look at where that thing looks. Yeah. Because it was always hard to get a consistent release with fingers. Right. Of course. I think it's a big deal. Yeah. No, your fingers get cold and shits wet. Totally makes sense. Yeah. Wow. I was like at the other ones real quick. There was always a big fight in Australia whenever something new come in like sights on a boat. Oh, it does. That in the edge of that guy. Terry Raggard girls. Yeah. He shot PSE. Yeah, he's a legend. He is the baby. Look at the girls around their knees. Oh my God. You shoot that stick so good. And that's still how it is pretty much. That basically times. That's how the people are releasing. Yeah. They hop out of the trees. The little is there. You're amazing. He was a stat. I remember Terry and Michelle Raggardell. Look at that. He was the wild. Yeah. He was the wild thing when I first started. He was the man. Well, that one has a trigger. That might be one of the first ones with a trigger. Well, see that one's with a string. Like, yeah. If you would buy old Carter releases, they would come. Some of the releases would come with like a little string. Yeah. It was, I was like, what is this fucking stupid string for? I never get it. I never even asked anybody. Oh, really? No, it just like didn't make sense. I see that. I remember that. We had two thousands. That's the get newer. The win release. That's nuts. Yeah. There's an over drawer up there. Yeah. That's cool. Over drawer. All right. Wow. Yeah. So that's a 1990. Look at that funky looking one with wood. That's kind of cool looking. Wait. That does. So it gets us a thumb button. It must be. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Wow. Wow. And see some of them have strings. Yep. So in case people were like old school. Yeah, pretty cool. Wow. Our tree is going to be. So how would you when you first started, how would you measure distance? Which it was at all just in your mind. Instinct. Instinct. Yeah. Just like throwing a ball. Yeah. So you just have to, you know, it's just like now they have unmarked 3D tournaments. Right. They don't have it. You just have to get out there and kind of judge. It was definitely harder back then because the bows weren't as fast. So you're you could only be off by like a yard or two or you'd miss. Now with a faster flat or shooting bow, you can be off. You can't be up by five yards. We're out for people to don't know what we're talking about. The slower the bow is, the more it's going to drop by the time it gets to target. The faster the bow is, the flatter it's going to shoot. We learn your cast on the bow too. So you never wanted to get rid of that bow. Because you would literally learn the cast of an hour. Yeah. What Adam's talking about is the trajectory. So we used to practice this all the time. Like you'd have a target out there at 60 yards, but halfway in between you and the target, you couldn't even see the target. So you put like you could put a car. And so you're looking through the car window because you can see through the glass. And line of sight, you're going to go right through, break the windows and everything else. But you just know that at 60 yards, that arrow is going to be 10 yards above that car halfway there. So 30 yards, arrow has to go up to come down at 60. So you could just aim right or to car. Arrow is going right over it. So we do stuff like that just for fun to figure out the arc of the air. Right. But not even that. It's like just an elementary example just so people could get what I'm saying. But when we'd get in the woods, then there'd be a branch like I said, I shot with Levi Morgan. He came out and did lift her on shoot. I'm like, OK, I'm going to beat this fucker. He's 16, 17-time World Champion. So I had all these shots where it's like, OK, this branch, is he going to know this one shot was like, I think it was 90 some yards at a deer up on the hill. But there's this big branch halfway in between it. And I knew it was kind of hard to tell is your arrow going to go over it or under it. Right. It was because you didn't know that I think it was about 25 yards away. I knew what my arrow is going to do because I practiced over and over and over. And I'm going to be like, Oh, Levi's going to fuck this one up for sure. I'll beat him on this target. Sure. Shit. He knew exactly what his arrow is going to do. But that's he practices at all the time and done it his whole life. And this and that. But just fun games like that. And it was only just to make us because when you're hunting, that shit happens all the time. But where I would kind of screw myself up is I loved the challenge of shot so much. Like, and I shot between trees so often because that was like my thing. I could just like, even if it was just like like four inches, I'd be like, Oh, I could do that. So when I was hunting, if I'd see a challenging shot on an animal, I'd be like, where I could have maybe taken a step to the right and got wide open. I'd be like, I can make the shot. And like, fucking like making my hunting shot more challenging because I was just young and in idiot. Now I'd be like, I'll be stupid. I just go right here and shoot. I would do that. But we'd practice that all the time because it was fun. Yeah. And then you'd like have you'd want your, I mean, I had so much confidence in shooting. I would shoot hours and hours and hours every day. I remember one time where it just hints and these guys who used to ball hunt with us, me and Roy were there. And there's a bail out there at 77 yards. And then a piece of foam that was like a broadhead target used to be just a square piece of foam, like two inches, maybe maybe three inches wide, but like by two foot, my two foot. And that was your broadhead target. And that would stop an arrow with a broadhead aren't it just that two or three inches of foam. Well, the foam target, the broadhead target was laying flat on the bail at 70 yards. So it was only like two inches. And we'd like have these competition all the time. I'm like, I said, see that broadhead target on the Cedar Bell? Yeah. I'm going to hit that broadhead target. And I would hit it. And that so we were the best shots ever with no range finders. So then Bushnell finally came up with a range finder and it was like a kind of like a, I mean, I'm like, yeah, like a, yeah, kind of longer like an eight track tape almost, like sort of size. And then it had a dial on it. And the images it'd be off. And then if you lined up the image like this, that would be, you look at the, then you look at it wherever that image lined up, that'd be the yardage. So then you'd be like, okay, that's this close to 50 yards. Then you'd notice you for 50, but it wasn't very accurate. It was close. And did you have a side tape? You had pins. You had pins. Yeah. The sites didn't move. So your pins would be set up at like 20, 30, 40, 50 something like that. Yeah. And they just had like, we called them T-DOT. So it was like a little plastic sort of like fiber, but it's like a red plastic that would sort of like have light on it. Like a little, just a little light up. That was a fiber off the X or any. That was a fiber, but it was light up a little because it's red plastic. Yeah. I heard people talking about this the other day. They were talking about Josh Jones and that Josh and Tim's fireside chat. Yeah. It's great podcast. Yeah. But they were talking about how a site that you buy today for like 25 bucks is so superior to anything that existed in like 1990. Yeah. Like they still made it. It's fiber-optical. It still might be a lot more successful. You know, it's like it was still a big advance at that time. Yeah. But the think about where it is now. Well, the garment site, like I was telling you about that I, it had a few flaws. One, I had one that worked perfectly and then I had a second one. You know, when you get you one of the things you said, when you get a new bow, you don't want to put old shit on the. Yeah. You want to put new shit on like, I did that too. But unfortunately, my first garment site worked perfectly. My second one didn't work so good. Like there would be times where it worked perfectly. And then times where I couldn't get a range. I'd press it. It wouldn't go. I'm going to have full drop. Press it. Won't go. Press it. Won't go. Press it. Finally. But when it does work, you get this like a red dot. You get a clear screen. And on that screen is a red dot. No pins, no wires, nothing. And oh, I love it. When it worked perfect, because then it saved you hit an elk at 50 yards. And then he stands out at 80 and he's still standing broadside. You don't have to re-range. Just press a button on your, on your grip. And it instantly gives you a new range. Yeah. I think I we talked about this before. And I think I mentioned that the goal is to try to protect an integrity of archery, like keeping it primitive. So it's like, where's that line? Right. And you talk. And you talk they decided that that garment site was past the line of primitive. You know, so we want to we want to honor archery in the history of archery. And yes, there's been advancements. But it's always it's a moving target on where the line is to keep it primitive. I get it. But if you've ever, I don't think, I think it's ignorant. Because I think if you use one of those things, you realize like all it's doing is taking a step away. It's still the same exact thing. You're range finding either way. And then you're dialing to 50 yards and whatever, you know, you have to do to execute the shot then. But this way you're a full draw. And the range finding is a part of that. It's just smarter. If it worked perfectly, it's smarter. And I think they're going to get better. And I'm sure the software is better. I haven't used it in two years. But when it worked, it was amazing. It's like this is really what you want. What you want is to absolutely know the exact distance. So you can make an ethical shot. So if you range at 50 and they take a few steps and then you're guessing because you can't rearrange, look, we already have less than 10% success rate anyway. It's not like everyone who gets a tag is going to get an elk. It's a small number of people that are really successful. All the time. But that would keep you from wounding. And that should be our goal. Well, I don't think it's, I don't think it's any easier. Well, it's just more effective. I think there's more room for error in it though, isn't there? Because like my binoculars are the range finder. So I can definitely get the dot 100% on the animal. Right. Whereas I think with those sites, it's a little bit more difficult to definitely be ranging that animal and not a branch five yards behind it or five. No, when you're at full draw, no, they're really good. So when you're at full draw, when it worked at full draw, you're steady like your pin, right? So you have a target and the target is like this little red thing. And when you put it on there and then you press the button, then it gives you your pin. Like, yeah, well, what if you're not on it? What if you're like, because you said it would eliminate wounding, which it would. No, no, it's I didn't say to eliminate wounding. If I did, I misspoke. What I meant was you're going to get less of that because you're going to have more effective exact ranges. Right. But you said like, if you needed a follow up shot, that's where people, we know adrenaline goes crazy for sure after the first shot. So if they're wound up and they're shooting too quickly because that side allows it, would that could that be a negative? But it's a follow up shot. Yeah. But why are you shooting too quickly? That's a mind management thing. You know, you should figure out how to manage your mind and calm yourself down and make that shot. You wouldn't freak out on a second shot. Oh, that's what I'm saying. And if you had that and you 100% could count on it, the same way you'd count on your range finder, that would be the best thing for everybody. Best thing for the animal, best thing for you, best thing for everybody. This is some more. And it's a way better site picture. The site picture is amazing. So red dot is just like a red on a pistol. You know, really red on a pistol. Yeah. What it looks like that thought is just sitting there. And you're not, you just can put it right on the vitals. It's a beautiful feeling when you watch through that range, through that range, finding site and you put that pin on and then the arrow releases. Then you watch that arrow soar and bike right in there. Oh, yeah. I don't hunting. Oh, it's nice. I don't doubt that enough. Like I'm just devil's advocate, but I get it. Look, I'm a fan of like a company that does something like that. I'm a fan of garb. I mean, we got a Garmin watch on right now. Yeah. I'm a fan of Garmin period. They make awesome shit. They make awesome range finder. I mean, awesome GPS equipment. They make awesome watches. They make great shit. They make great, the chest straps, the workout things. They make awesome stuff. So I'm just happy that someone put the research and development and the money that must have taken to put together a fucking range finding, binocular range finding site rather that actually works. Yeah. I agree. I mean, I just want a better one. I want it perfect. I'll get there. I want it like my, like I have that one of the things that I fucking love. I have a loophole full draw five. That's my favorite range finder of all time. Because it gives you the arc of the arrow at its peak. That is so huge. That's cool. And I use it to kill a bow once because and when I had that garment site, in fact, because I had the garment site and I arranged this elk and it was at 50 yards, but there was a hole only like this where I could shoot through and I was like, oh, I don't know. So then I pull out the, the loop hold and I hit the button and I see the exact arc of the arrow where it's going to be at its height and its height was six inches below those branches. I'm like, we're good. Yeah. We're good. So just keep the pin on them and was perfect. See that thing? Ah, fucking love that thing. Yeah. That thing's so huge. So you know exactly where it right there is a little sketch, right? Because that could hit it on the way in. Right. So that's the height of your arrow, but that doesn't mean where, where's that tree? Yeah. I mean, that tree might be 20 yards ahead of you. You might smack right into that fucking thing. So you have to take that into consideration. But having that extra indication of the height, the high point of the arrow, huge, on this huge, just take a step to the left. Exactly. Then you, or if you're me when I was younger, you just shoot, shoot, shoot, right. Or would you get on your knees? Yeah, get on your knees. You're not going to shoot on the shot. But it's like having that knowledge, what it's going to keep is that arrow whack in that branch and then sticking in his ass and wounding him, you know, whereas you might have made a perfect release. But because of that high, a high point of the arrow indication, now you know, and you can make a more educated decision. It's all about making the ethical shot. And so for me, anything that allows you, it's still going to be really fucking hard to do. It's always hard. Here's here. Okay. So I'll just do a list real quick. The biggest help in bow hunting has been the laser range fighter. That that changed the game definitely. Um, now that was back in the day. Now. Now, well, some people, yeah, some, some people don't do well with sight tapes in the heat of the moment as far as diving the same. Right. But it can make, it's made me more accurate at longer range for sure to build a dial the site and hold right on. Yeah. Right now the, so that a positive has been on X or the mapping system as far as for hunting the mountains. That has helped so many people and so much confidence. Huge. That's a giant one. It's like, that's one reason why the back country definitely has more people in it because more people are confident used to be like you start after read a 7.5 minute per angle, uh, topel map. You don't have to do that shit anymore. So now and you don't have to figure out where your car is anymore. Yeah. Put the, you mark your car. You're good to go. That's been huge. There's a huge negative, not too many people are talking about. And it's, um, it's, uh, using optics with, uh, they pick up heat signature. Yeah. What are those called? Thumbles. Thirmal's yet those dude, it's not good for hunting. You don't. So glassing is an art. We've talked about glass and having good glass and movement. Glassing is an art. These thermal optics. You don't have to be good at anything. You're like talking about it or you put them up. Yeah. And it tells you where the animal is. So I've never even used one, but I've talked to guys who have used them. And I, and I know that it's not great because what would take hours to glass and you probably would miss, you know, a bedded mule deer buck. Five minutes. You know where every animal is on that hill. That's a good argument. There's a good argument that that's too far. That is, that is way too far. And is that legal in most states? It hasn't even hardly been covered. It's kind of a new technology that they don't even address really. But I'm saying, California is outlawed. I hope so because it needs to be outlawed everywhere. It's, it's so many big animals are getting killed. That shouldn't be getting killed right now. Like guys, he's in thermals. And is it a loophole? Or are they doing it when they shouldn't be doing it in some states? Or is it because to catch people's tough, you know, hunting is about honor, honor and respect is what we talk about. We police ourselves. We do it right. You know, I mean, yeah, there's people who get busted for doing shit. But most people are just out there policing ourselves. Well, it's because they want that same respect that you talked about. Yeah. What's how they's first name again? The Cal holiday. Cal holiday. Yeah. When you talk about that guy, they want you to talk about everyone wants you to talk about him like that. He's not around like that. And they're not going to if you're in corners and you're using some shit. You're not supposed to. Or what is that? What is the law on that though? Because like every state has different laws, right? Like Nevada, you're allowed to use walkie talkies and at least you used to be able to. We can tell people, hey, he's right above you. It's a little bit probably like the e-bike thing where it's so fresh that they haven't come up with. You can or you can't right now. It's a bicycle now. It's not a motorcycle. It's optics now. It's not it's thermals. Right. Yeah. When it was through with the laws are put put that into perplexity. What are the laws? What states allow thermal binoculars for hunting? Thermal scopes are not universally allowed for hunting. Yeah. But not thermal scopes. Thermal binoculars. Yeah. Is it say thermal optics down below in Europe, owning thermal optics is often. Yeah. But what about America? Yeah. In America, what states allow thermal binoculars for hunting put that in there? Not scopes. That's the problem. It's the word scope is for a rifle scope binoculars. Let's see. How crazy is this AI where it just does this and immediately gives you the answer? Thermal imaging devices, including binoculars and binoculars are legal to own in the United States. And many states allow them in some hunting context, especially predators or nuisance species like hogs or coyotes. However, several states either completely ban thermal for any hunting or ban profession possession rather use of thermal devices while taking or locating wildlife. So examples of state rules, some states explicitly allow thermal optics for night hunting. For example, Texas, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Missouri, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Authorize thermal devices for specific predator or invasive species, hunts in their 2025 regulations. Other states such as Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Tennessee, prohibit thermal optics for hunting wildlife altogether or for most game species. Yeah. So a lot of states. So it seems like a few states are on the ball with this. Yeah. I mean, it's a big deal because those animals to get to trophy status for these animals are old. Right. They've survived. They know what it takes. They've they've done it. They've they've outwitted hunters for years. And now in their best bed, where a man would never be able to find them by glassing those that they've behind a tree, but the near showing out. Show it. It's like, it's not it's not hunting. It's not right. It's not use it's not the art of glassing, which is what, you know, how we've developed these skills. It's using technology. That makes sense. It makes sense. Cause it's like you're saying there is a line. Yeah. And you know, and you are actively campaigning for something that's going to make your job easier to go away. Yeah. I wanted to I wanted to keep keep the challenge there. Well, it's also what he said when you like you said in the town, you grow up. If you kill the big buck, like people respect to do why? Because that's really hard to do. Yeah. Those big old bucks are fucking smart. And they are tuned in man. They hear branch snap. And it's like, fuck this point. They're that big for reason. They're that big for reason. Yeah. Yeah. It's a and I know when in Utah, I was going down this creek this year. And I saw it like there's some. They're that big for a reason. Yeah. Yeah. And I know when Utah was going down this creek this year, and I saw there's some cedar trees, like a patch of them there. But basically, there's a tunnel in there and then a deer bed. And it's like, you couldn't see it from anywhere. And I was thinking, man, if a buck was bedded there, you'd have no idea. But you would now, if you had the thermopics. And that's like, that was a perfect example of a buck that found that bed. That's where he's safe. And that's how he survived now that that taking that away. That's probably tried guys listening to this podcast. Oh, no. Fuck off. You tried for people that don't know what that means. Try guys are guys who hunt with a regular old school bow and arrow, like a recur bow. Which is good. It's just challenging. They're just guessing where that arrow's going to go. You know? Well, hopefully that's probably the practice. Oh, there's a practice. There is a lot of guessing. You're guessing the yardage. You're guessing where your arrow's going to hit. I mean, some of those guys that tried boat hunt, do they use rain trinders? No. No. So all of them are just guessing. It's instinct. I tried to do a couple of tried boat instincts. Because it's like when you throw a rock, is that guessing? No. It's instinct. Yeah. It's just like to get good at pitching a baseball. Right. It's the same. Some people are really good. Except the pitcher's mound and the batter's box is the same distance. Every time. That's true. That's the difference. Well, if you're disciplined, you would know that it's under 20 yards every time. And that's where you'd take. Yeah. But there's a lot of guys that can take a poke with a recurf bow. Yeah. Well, pretty accurate with it. They have some different ways of measuring where the tip of it is. Yeah. 40 yards. They know that that's when it's going to hit dead on. Yeah. They look down the arrow instead of like we do through a people. They're looking down the shaft of the arrow. They call squirrely and shit like this. They put it on their eye or put it here. And they use it the point of the arrow, as you said. But yeah, it's like most people, though, like you talk about discipline, like I'm going to shoot if it's 20 yards or less. That's the only time I'm going to shoot unless it's huge. That's all guys. We're not. It's 70. I had to once in a lifetime. It was the biggest thing of the bull that I've ever seen. I had to shoot. Sometimes you think she see things and you're like, how do I get to that? Yeah. How do I find them? Even if it's far away? Yeah. Yeah. Normally, like you see stuff, here's what would be the technology that would really hurt. Because you see something a mile away. And you know that animal's there. If I could just get to that tree line, if you could just be there. Yeah. Well, that's where those long range rifle guys. That's a whole different argument, right? Because there's that to some of those guys. They'll take a poke seven, 900 yards. And they're real accurate with it. These guys are so good. They're shooting. Yeah. They're taking into account the wind across the canyon. I saw this guy. I'm pretty sure the other tanner was showing me this because so much wasted time shit on Instagram. But this is kind of cool. He was shooting so far and he's so good. So he's prone down, has his long range all this shit, all everything they do. That's a whole art. But anyway, he shot. And I think he was, if I remember right, he shot and it was so far. he put another shell in and got another bullet on the way they both hit steel. That's crazy. They both hit steel. That's great. That's great. So he he racked another round in in the time it took for the bullet to get there. Yes. And sent the other one on the way. And so it was like a dong dong. That's crazy. Yeah. This guy's a machine. I wish I could remember the fucking page. But guys on machine, because you can see he's down in his gun. Just like fucking in and still on that scope. Did he move boom? That's a whole nother art form. You know, that's a whole nother teaching your shit together. It's crazy long range shooting. I know a lot of guys that get into my friend Justin got really into that. Once you get into long range shooting, you start just fucking craving it. They just want to hit that steel at 1500 yards. It's nuts. Somebody's guys, they shoot insane. What is the record for the longest shot ever taken in a competition? Like those long range competitions? What do you think it is? Uh, I mean, it's 2000 yards for sure. Really? Yeah. That's so crazy. I would think that people are shooting at 2000. Oh, how many? Yeah, you see it? 30. 30. 30 miles. Wow. Wait. Really? Did I say yard? Water did I mean? Do I mean yards? Yeah, I mean yards. Actually, yeah. 2.4 miles. Yeah. Wow. Look, how'd you guys eat motherfucker? You look that up some time. How could you know how you know that? They're not allowed to know this information. I don't even know. If you even search this online, please show up at your door. Holy Smiles. 4,224 yards shot at the Clark, this guy Robert Brantley at the Clark's knob E-L-R match and Kansas describes a new world record and long range shooting achieved under match conditions. That's credible. That is so crazy. On competition almost doubled. Look at that. Oh my God. In 2022, Wyoming, a team recorded a 4.4 mile 7,744 yard hit on steel after dozens of tries. Wow. Wow. But not a standard scored competition stage. Wow. Some guys see that. 4.4 miles. They're like, oh, I could shoot at 1,000 yards then. Right. Look at that thing. I'm carrying it in the fucking practice. Yeah. I mean, the amount of no moving you have to do. Oh my God, dude. It's crazy. But yeah, the guy out there with their by-mart 30-osick. Do you guys have by-mart's here? We've heard of by-mart. What's a by-mart? It's a store. Oh, no. Like a sporting is stored by or not a sporting is. Anyway, they got their $250 rifle from by-mart 30-os-6. And they're like, they see that. And they're like, oh, shit. Then I could shoot at 600 yards. They shoot at 4.4 miles. That's the problem. That is part of the problem. But people say that about me too is like, oh, people will say, I always talk about shooting animals at 100 yards, which I have never one time. But yeah, I practice a long range. But they try to let me in like, I'm ruining and promoting long range shooting. Now you're just amplifying if you're off at all. Or it's good practice. Yeah, no, it's good. What I always said is- All right, for the 4.4 miles. Whoa. Look at that thing. Fuckers are heavy too. Oh, yeah, look at it. I mean, it looks like a long bow. Just need to string on that one. Like a barbell. It's probably, I mean, I bet it's 30, 40 pounds. I don't know. Does it say the weight on those things? God, look at the size of that gun. Look at the barrel. Yeah. That's nuts. Yeah. First confirmed and verified world record. Yeah. This is the actual one. This is 2018. That shot was taken in 2022. Oh, so is it- does a world record before the world record? Mm. Wow. Yeah, I know those guns are heavy. That's the government tells you? I do AIDS. Let's try and come. You don't want to touch a gun. You might get AIDS. It's exactly what we say. It's only if you stick it up your ass like this. Now you get us sticking up your ass after somebody's talking about their ass. All right. Yeah. I got a second. It's like dirty needles. I hate that. I don't know. That's it. Yeah. But that's another thing. It's like bow hunters look at rifle hunters like, oh, that's kind of easy. Traditional hunters look at compound hunters. Yeah. That's crazy. And then there's guys out there. I use a fucking spear. Ace that they're on too. Yeah. There's a lot. Yeah. For sure. As long as you're ethical, as long as you could do it, I mean, I'm sure there's probably some guy out there that knows how to hit a target with an out of battle. Probably. I mean, if I'm using a spear, I don't do anything past three yards. That's like this. This is my favorite. I speak to him in his speed of Buffalo. We try to figure out who's pretty cool. And did you really? Oh, god. They probably had it that out. We were trying to figure out if we could get it out of his pit. We were trying to figure out the other day like when the actual bow and arrow was invented. And it's kind of difficult to track down. But it's the weird thing is it seems to have been invented. Or at least seems to exist simultaneously at many spots all over the world at the same time, which is really interesting. Yeah. It makes you think like, I wonder, we really don't know how much people were traveling back then. We really don't. There's a lot of guessing. And they keep pushing back maritime travel. They keep pushing back like the age of what when the first maybe even primitive humans were using some sort of a raft to get across lakes and rivers and maybe even oceans. But sharing that information, like who is the wizard that looked at a stick and goes, if I could just put one of these fucking things into that stick. Oh, cool. And pull that's the one. What do you have that? I always have that. So we're sitting right here. Oh, yeah. They had in your pocket. I did. Was they put it in my pocket sometimes? Well, I'm fiddling with it. Yeah, I play with that thing. That's a real one. That's from here. Whoa. That's a fucking good one. Yeah, I found one in New Mexico. Yeah, that's a good one, right? Remy said that one was probably used for fish. He said because it's so big. OK. That was his guess. But maybe, it might have been used for bison. Sort of. I mean, it's not. I mean, it would cut. So I mean, it's sort of sharp. Yeah. I mean, in the sharp as you can get it, that's cool, though. It's not like modern broadheads. Modern broadheads that you shave your arm with, you know? I cut your eyes when you're looking at them too odd. Wow. Yeah. That's what you want. You know, it's a better thing. Like, is that too good? Is that too easy? It's too sharp. Go back to Flint. Go back. Maybe you should make your own arrow, it's pussy. No, arm. It was like eating. That's a guy that I went to high school with. But he would say his dad would shoot his arrows down the road to make him a huge, like, want to make the dot broadhead door. So it'd go in in a ripper, bigger hole. What? So it's like showing thought. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's a big thing. People come up with some crazy shit. Well, they don't know. That's one of the things that's cool about when I got into bow hunting and especially learning it from you. I already knew so much just from talking to you. You had so much information. I didn't have to like figure it out. Nearly as much. Yeah. I said, listen. You know, like so many people have already figured out metal bride has. So like we were having a conversation about laid at Noxis weekend. And I'm like, damn it. I think I'm going to stop using laid at Nox. Yeah. Sorry. The weed and no, I think you got a really good point. Like that additional 10 greens at the end can't be good for accuracy. It just can't be. I think you got to pick the situation. I own it's a little bit, you know, like if I'm going to the arctic and there's no sunlight. And I want to see where the arrow hits. OK, a lighted Nox going to override the little bit of of inconsistency. Because it's a dull environment. It's hard to see. It's almost like you dusk all day long. Yeah. And I think like hunting pigs in their beds, you know, you're under the trees. It's dark. It might come in the play a little bit more there. But if it's not required, then yeah, why why interrupt even a little bit of accuracy? Because you get to a certain point in bow hunting where we're talking about the arrowshoves. The the better the match grade of arrowshoves you can use, you don't notice that the start with, because you're just shooting, you know, and you're not super consistent. You're not super accurate. And then all those little things end up bringing a group from that to that. And there's the difference. And you'll notice that at this point in your archery. Yeah. Yeah. Makes sense. It totally makes sense. But it's just again, thank God somebody figured all this stuff out. It's like if you had to come along and do it all by yourself. Like, oh, it was a hard learning curve. Like in Australia, that like we didn't have the, the sort of figures and probably knowledge that you guys did because it's like it's party or pastime, right? I was talking to Evan about this. It's like part of the American pastime, a bow hunter, where is an Australia? It's not, you know, and it's not there's not all the information out there. And it seemed like Australia was probably about 10 years behind the US on sites, release aids, the knowledge behind it. And yeah, I think the fact that you guys have, like we're talking about Fred Bear, you know, like paving the way for bow hunting in America. And, you know, Australia's had its, it's, um, idols as well. And people that have paved the way, but a lot slower than here. Um, to have all the knowledge for you to have someone like Cam is absolutely brilliant because you are, you're probably made those mistakes yourself or learn them yourself. And then so you go straight to Joe and be like, this is a good setup. This works, this doesn't. And then in Australia, the first things also were target sites for bow hunting, you know, and it's just like, and we didn't know any better. So as well as waste and time, you wasted a lot of money. You wasted a lot of effort. You wasted a lot of heartache, you know, on, on finding your way in bow hunting. Yeah. And there's still guys right now that's shooting a instinctual with the compound. Yeah. It's, it's, uh, the internet has definitely helped, like, educate people. You know, we used to have to learn it all on our own, which is like, I think to Adam's point where it's nice when you have a resource or a mentor. A lot of the times we didn't have that. We had magazines. We didn't have internet. So we just have to figure it out. But when we talk about like the light had not lighted knocks specifically, you mentioned the weight, the weight is one part. Also the inconsistency of having those electronics back there on the back of the arrow. And you just can't get as good as a knock or so that's the connection point from the arrow to the string. It's just not going to be as good with electronics in there with, it's trying to serve a different purpose of lighting up that knock where to, in my opinion, that's going to help me maybe decide on when to go after the animal knowing where I hit it, but it's not going to make me any more lethal. It's going to make me less lethal. I want the most accurate arrow possible and where that goes, whether I see it or not, doesn't really matter. I'm going to have to get on that blood trail and recover that animal regardless. So just knowing where the arrow hit isn't making it anymore deadly or not. It's just how that might impact how I react to that shot. But I want the most accurate. That's why I shoot those, you know, the X10's $50 an arrow because it's the straightest, most accurate arrow. It's what they've used in the Olympics since 1996. So you can use other arrows. They're not as straight, not as good. You can put lighted knocks on. You're giving up accuracy. You can do it if you want. And you can say it's going to help in these other arenas. It's not going to help with accuracy. So all I care about is that arrow going where I want it to go. That's how I get the things. It's the most important. Yeah. It makes sense. It makes sense. And the amount of times where the lighted knock would help you is dwarfed in comparison to the amount of times where accuracy is critical. Right. Accuracy is always critical. And it's only a small amount of times where that lighted knock is really going to come into play where it really helps you. That's what I mean. It's cool and it's nice. It looks, I've never used one. So I mean, maybe I have a few times. But I just was like, just thinking about it. Like, no, it's not helping me. I always think about it when I take the regular knocks off and put the light ones on. Like the regular knocks are solid. Yeah. And the lighted ones, there's a hole in the center of it. We've got electronics and a light bulb and a battery. I know. Like there's a bunch of shit in there. That's got to have some sort of effect. Right. Yeah. Didn't Tom Miranda used to have something we had to wait on the back of his arrow? Didn't he have something crazy, some weird setup? Or he had a not the bread crumb like the tracker? Oh, remember what he had? No, it wasn't that. It was like a thing that he did to the back of his arrow. I was like, that seems counterintuitive. We had additional weight on the back. I don't know what I'm talking about. I can't remember. I don't know, but Tom Miranda, that's old school. Oh, so you're looking at, I mean, he's still out there getting to down. Yeah. I mean, that's history. Oh my God. I was talking about that, I would like with the Tom Miranda. Oh, he's had those TV shows on forever. Yeah. Adventure bow hunting with Tom Miranda. Yeah, no, I didn't know we were talking. We were talking. Oh, I got you getting around the world. Bro, that guy went all over the world. Yeah. All over the world. He was one of the first guys that ever heard about using a sauna to help his hunting. Really? Yeah. He felt like, because he was living in Florida. And the guy was like, why do you want a sauna in your house? You're in Florida. And he's like, because it makes you have more endurance. Yeah, it's better for hunting. Yeah. Yeah. Pretty cool. Like, time around. Yeah. Yeah. Old school. Okay. It's cool to introduce all that stuff in the hunting. Like, if you're that passionate, you know, I've got the ice bar for home idea, the hypoxic wellness, which is, I think I was telling Joe about this, where I decked the home gym out. So it's basically a gym at altitude now. And that's what I was using before I got to Utah. And it actually made me be able to go from the bottom to the top without stopping the take a breath, which is incredible. So it's altitude training. It's altitude training. Or no, it's the whole room. Oh, but this company called Leonix now, they make say it could be the size of this. And it would have a red light therapy in here. It would have a sauna in here. It would have the hypoxic conditioning in here. So basically pumping nitrogen in the room to drop the oxygen levels. And so you could have gym equipment in here. You could sit near and read a book. But the way that I've got it set out, I'm doing a workout in it now. And I've got to target in the corner. I literally shoot my bow in there at like 14,500 feet. And then to step out of that and like I live at sea level back in Australia, to step out of that at sea level, like you feel absolutely incredible. Yeah. And then that's so what was Utah? 8,000 sometimes see seven something seven or eight thousand feet. And I've been trying at the highest. Okay. And I'd be training at 14,500. So I felt amazing when I went there. Yeah. It was all technology technology. That is that is useful. Because I mean, that's what athletes do. They go to train high altitude training in the mountains. And then they come down to lower elevation where there's more oxygen and there's more oxygen available to push themselves harder. So their bodies used to that it created more red blood cells, essentially. I think it's like a natural, I think that's what EPO they say does. So it's a natural way to do that. And yeah, I mean, so it just doesn't stay very long. Yeah, only stays in your system. Like your system eventually acclimate to whatever the altitude is. But before it does that, you have a nice advantage. Like there's that's why they I miss. I think it's like a couple of weeks. Okay. I think that's why they probably put the Olympic training center in Colorado Springs. You know, they want to make these people to train it and totally make sense. Yeah. Totally makes sense. Training altitude. I found mentally I felt a lot better too. And then so I've now done a bit of reading up on it. And it's like the plasticity, the brain improves under those conditions as well. And then, man, sense, the daptor or die. Yeah. I just feel so happy afterwards. I was sleeping in there in the end because I was trying to fit in as much, which can be detrimental as well. Like you don't want to overdo it. But I was sleeping in there in the end. And I'd wake up in the morning and I was just like on a high for like four, five hours. Why would they say not to overdo it because when they go train it altitude, they're up there the whole time. Just to get acclimated, I bet initially. Yeah. And I'll do it initially. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. And I also think that that part of it, you know, would be like overdoing your muscles. If you just kept doing arms every single day, you know, that's what he does. I don't like you doing it. And like, you can't help it. Can you? Oh, that bike that you sent me is fucking awesome. Oh, it's a step of course. Because I love the, you know, the air dine bikes. I love those things. Just like my favorite conditioning thing. And I love the Echo bike from Rogue. But I think that one's even superior to the Echo. Like how consistent the, the drag is on it. But even more importantly, it's harder. Yeah. It's harder to pull back. Like the Echo bike is easier to pull back. That one has more resistance. Yeah. And when I, when I first started using that one, I was like, whoa, this one's tough. Like whatever you're getting out of the Echo bike or the Air Dine bike, that's that times too. Really. Yeah. What is it called again? Step are. Step is STP art, right? Yep. Yeah. That thing fucking rules. Yeah. That thing rules. I'll get in the deck. Yeah. Cause all the equipment's like that. Well, that, that bike is the shit. Because and it's also got different grips, different hand grips and difference. Yeah. I'm changing that up. Yeah. I'm doing my guitar. You can mix it up. You can mix up where the resistance is coming from. And I actually lift the seat right up. So it's nearly like I'm in the standing position. Oh, nice. Like this. With the seat up and the legs are right down. And it burns me. Yeah. Absolutely burns me. I love it. Well, it's a, it's a great low impact cardio too. It may really conditions the shit out of your legs and your lungs. And it's, you know, you're not taking any pounding when you're doing it. Yeah. I think it's hard. I'm stoked. You like it. Oh, I love it. Yeah. Because when it was in there, I didn't know when it got, it got delivered. And I was like, oh, what the fuck is this? And then when it was in the gym, I started trying, the moment I got on, I was like, oh, and it's easy to crank up to like it's right there. There's no reaching down the handles right there. Mm hmm. Just, woo. It's good. There's so many different things you could use now. But what we were saying about earlier, it's like, you have the opportunity now to be better than you've ever been before. Yeah. Because of all this, you know, hormone optimization, the ways to well stuff, peptides, nutrition, understanding exercise science, and then equipment. Because you could condition your body and you could be in amazing shape at 58, which is crazy. The knowledge of knowing that actually out there is, I'm grateful for you. Oh, yeah. Just the knowledge and knowing that we can be better every day. We can be healthier physically and mentally. It's great. And I see, I do see a lot of doctors who kind of shit on BPC or shit on stem cell. And I'm like, whatever you're saying, cool, but I've never felt better. So there's a lot of doctors who hate the perc. You could say it doesn't work. Yeah. There's a lot of doctors. I've talked to doctors that shit on it. And I had this one conversation with a doctor that I like. He's a nice guy. And he's like, I think it's a lot of a placebo. And I go, there's peer reviewed studies on BBC 157. And like you're saying this. And you haven't done the research. Like this is not debatable. Like BBC 157, there's a very clear pathway. They show why it works. It naturally exists in the human body. And you can enhance your body's ability to recover from soft tissue injuries. It's important. It's good. It's good for you. The idea that somehow this is horseshit. Like no, you're horseshit. You know what? You're spitting out some nonsense. And the problem is a lot of doctors in particular, a lot of very educated people that are specialists and whatever they're in, like you got a doctor. You went to school. You got a medical degree. You went to school. You did your residency. You want to be the one who has all the information. And when someone comes along, it says, actually a better way to do it is through stem cells. Like, well, stem cells. Like, what do you mean, oh, stem cells? How much do you know? There's near real, real, real, and there's written many papers on stem cells. Like, there's a documented efficacy on neurological conditions, soft tissue injuries, joint rehabilitation. It's not guessing. For a doctor to say, I wouldn't mess with stem cells. It's unproven. The FDA has an appropriate. It's because the FDA sucks. It doesn't mean that it doesn't work. Like, there's scientists that are studying this stuff. And there's people that are using it. You got shit tons of anecdotal evidence from world-class athletes. It'll tell you the benefits of it. The reason why the UFC is partnered up with CPI down in Mexico. But they have to go to fucking Mexico to do this stuff, which is crazy. But now, you're in the viable. Yeah, but ways to well, is Brigham in particular, is really working hard to make all that stuff available in the United States. And it's only good. It's good for everybody. It's not bad for medicine. People are always going to need doctors. Yeah. It's crazy. It's just more advancement. And the problem is, it's going to, for sure, it's going to interfere with people who want to sell you pain pills. It's going to interfere with people that want to do unnecessary surgeries. And unfortunately, that's a real thing. That's where they make their money. And that people like to say that, well, it's not FDA approved. And I'm like, have you seen the shit that is FDA approved? Yeah. Like that doesn't mean anything to me. I might not want to take it if it is. Something like 30% of all medications get approved by the FDA get pulled. Yeah. It's like, that doesn't mean shit to me, because- What is the percentage? Fine, I'll put that in there. You look at all the fucking poisonous food they sell us, which is FDA approved. Yeah. So that's your argument. And not approved in other countries. Yeah. Like other countries have banned it. Outlawed it. So we're like, boy, that's fine. Yeah. It makes your cherry oil. I was saying the difference in ingredients between countries and it's like crazy. America has so much. Cheerios is a bad example. Fruit Loops is the best example. Like the fact that they were like, oh, we can't do that. Well, you do it in Canada. You sell the fucking, the same stuff with different dye, with natural dyes. Yeah, it's not as bright, but it also doesn't kill you. It's not poison. Yeah. It's just so gross. I know. They're so bought and paid for. And here's the real problem. A lot of these motherfuckers, they go from being, working at the FDA to cushy jobs in these major corporations. It's like they have this golden pound. It should set 100% compliment. 2.9% of FDA approved new drugs from 1980 to 2021. What was drawn specifically for safety reasons out of 1,310 total approvals were 210, 16% were discontinued for all various reasons, including marketing factors. It's that low. I thought it was higher than that. But look at down below where it says antibiotics face higher rates at 41%. Whoa. Okay, so all told, I wonder what the pharmaceutical drugs they get pulled are. Yeah, and I had an antibiotics 41% it's nuts. Yeah, well, in 23% of oncology, I mean, indications were drawn. Wow. It's like what the fuck? I mean, we're just like guessing on this shit. Wow, it's not going to work. It's like the one of the problems with some of these studies is they're getting information from the pharmaceutical drug companies themselves. Like I had this lawyer on that was explaining to me how he litigated a case against pharmaceutical drug companies and that one of the issues that they found was that these guys would run 10 tests and they would find no efficacy. But so they would rig a test in a very biased way to show the smallest amount of statistical significance. And then they would say it's statistically significant. And they would push that. And their only motivation was profit. They weren't saying this is going to cure cancer. This is going to stop blindness. No, it's like we can make money on this. And there's even one of the cases with vioxx where there was emails exchanged with the pharmaceutical drug companies talking about all the problems that it was going to cause. But we think we will do well with this, which is crazy. I remember we looked that one up before. It's like, it's, yeah. I mean, it's nuts how this medicine stuff works. But it's like they're still like with COVID vaccine. Still things coming out. This whole last night on TV about in a small number of cases it can cause heart, some, whatever the fuck. But we've seen a number of these announcements like all these finally this negative stuff about the vaccine. Did it do any positive? Probably not. But all this fucking negative. And that was just going to be that years later. And we were bombarded with propaganda that it was necessary to stay alive. There was one, I think it was the Atlantic, that had one headline that said, if you're unvaccinated, it might be time to make your end of life will. And then the same same magazine years later, COVID vaccines may cause heart damage. Same exact magazine. Fuck you. Because you guys only said that because you were being pressured by your advertisers or you were being pressured by culture or society. You didn't look at the history of pharmaceutical medication and how much they're full of shit. They've paid some of the biggest criminal fines in US history because they fucking lied. And the same companies are still selling you shit. You think they came to Jesus? Do you think they're different now? And they don't just try to make money? And if you question that, you're a conspiracy theorist and a cook and you're taking horse medication. It's fucking, it's so infuriating how many people buy in the stuff. And how they don't even get in trouble for lying to everybody for so long for years just lies and propaganda, face no recourse, not financial, not social. Nobody's responsible. Not reputational, no recourse. It's disgusting. I'm still waiting for Fauci to be strong out. It can't be. He got a giant bar. He got a giant bar. So show nobody's responsible. No, no recourse. Let's discuss thing. It's still I'm still waiting for Fauci to be strong out. It can't be. He got a bar of giant garden by the auto pen. Well, but what's what's so frustrating too is that so they basically said, Hey, you have to take this poison or you know, leave your job. Yeah, or you won't be able to do this or you won't be able to do that. So take this poison, but then something that we've shown works, stem cell, BPC. That's what they'll shit on. Yeah, they just like what? They're just worried about losing control and the worried about losing profits and the worried about compounding pharmacies making this stuff. And they want peptides. They want all this stuff, but they want to be able to market it only under their brand. They want to own it. You know, they want to have patents for all this stuff. And that's where the real problem comes. A lot of these really effective things they can't patent. Right. It's that. Yeah. I'll tie it to the money. I have a code for peptides that weighs 12. I wish I could remember it's a weekend. So we could use it. It's probably good. Sam. Is it CAM? It's probably Dave Fogg. You don't know what your code is? No. Really? We should call Brigham. What's the end of this podcast? Well, we might I don't want to bother. We'll figure it out. Figure it out, Fuckers. I'll put it on his Instagram. My Instagram story. I'll get it on the actual post. Okay. That important. Okay. We'll put it on whatever. Do it over the Fuck you want to do. Okay. Well, okay. So here's what I wanted to end the podcast with. What's one thing you learned in the season, ball hunting. Hmm. Or wait, is this my call to how we ended? Yeah, we do. You do it. You're on the show. What I learned in the season. Um, I was learning one thing every year. How important leg conditioning is. So Fucking important. Yeah. God. It's what maybe the most, especially Elkhani is the most important thing. Leg conditioning is Fucking everything. If you can't get up those mountains and be fit and be able to do it over and over and over again over like five days of miles and miles and miles, like no matter what I did, I need to do more. That's what I learned that for sure. That's a big one. And never being too good to shape. Never being too good to shape. Never being too, never have your legs conditioned enough. And you can over practice archery. I learned that too. Because I started developing this low back problem that I've been going to this trigger point massage. I told I went today. Oh my God. Help. I get so scared. Every time I go into this guy's office. Fucking tortures me. It's horrible. Especially when he does the IT band with his fucking knuckles and his elbow. It's horrible. But it's super effective. I just I got essentially I got a tendonitis in my lower back overuse injury. Just overuse because I'm pulling back an 80 pound bow a hundred times over and over and over again days after days after day. And every time it would hurt, I would be an idiot and I would go, I'll walk through it. And you're obsessed. That's not bad. Yeah. I'm a little obsessive. It got bad. But that's why you're great at things too. Yeah. It's a double edged sword. But you got to learn like you were talking about not overdoing it in the the hypoxic thing. You got to learn and I don't learn always. But I try to. I learned those things. Yeah. Those are those are huge. So, so okay. What are you going to do for your legs and continue not stopping with leg conditioning ever until September? Okay. Like the like there was a lot of times. One thing that's wasted well has helped me. I got a fucking weird left knee. But the latest round of stem cells that I had did real, they did a real improvement. Like I'm really noticing it. And I'm protecting it. I'm not doing anything stupid in the meantime. You know, like no jujitsu, like no getting heel hooked, nothing that's going to aggravate it. And just build up my conditioning and maintain it over the year. That's that's a big one. Yeah. That's a good. Would you learn Camines? Me? Yeah. That's Adam's turn. You got lots. I think I learned a lot this season, but just like more about life than just, you know, by wanting scenario. But I think the biggest thing that I took away from it is health as in mental and physical and that you can always like step it up and you can always be better. And I think like I just, you know, like family life, whatever excuses I can come up with, you know, business and not having the time to put in the extra, but finding the extra time because of how valuable it is. And what the payoff in that is, you know, being physically healthy makes it a lot easier to be mentally healthy. Because you went for a while where you really didn't work out much. I didn't. I just, I bow hunted a lot, you know, and I was on the tools a lot like being in, you know, the building game. But it's not, that's different. It's a different sort of health, you know, whereas in actually targeting, you know, losing weight, eat and clean, you know, because it's not just about the gym. It's like everything that else that goes with it. So I learned to eat a lot more cleaner. I started doing the hypoxic wellness studio. And I think a combination of those things and seeing the payoff in two weeks, you know, not talk a month. So it was like in two weeks, I could see a massive difference when you lined everything up, eating healthy. That made the mountains a lot more easier and a lot more enjoyable. I'm not saying I did more of the mountains. I think I only covered the same sort of miles, but it was just a lot more enjoyable. And the, that example that I kept saying to you like going from the bottom of the mountain to the top without having four or five breaks in between when you're like, and hurting, it was just a lot more enjoyable. I'd stop, you know, and it's just like, I wasn't even taking deep breaths. I was already scanning the mountains for a bull, you know, I think it just become a lot more enjoyable. And then getting the headspace from that too, whether it's from me feeling better, whether it's from better plasticity of the mind, I just overall I just felt a lot better, a lot more connected, a lot more grateful as well as in because you feel good. So it's easy to think of things more and be more grateful. I like that. That's well, what I took from that is you said climbing the mountains more enjoyable, to me that means you're going to make better decisions. Yes. You're going to be when you're hunting, you know, because when we're fatigued, there's this famous saying, fatigue makes cowards of us all, but it also, we make poor decisions when we're fatigued. So you being at a higher level just physically allows you to hunt better is what I was thinking. Because we're not taking shortcuts for making better decisions. We're reading the animal better. We're instead of like looking for because we're gas. So we don't want to kick things or looking at the ground more instead, our heads up and we're reading the situation better. So it results in just better hunting. And you enjoy it. I love that. What I learned is that I think I enjoy the success of others. And this has been reinforced over the years, but this year specifically, I enjoy being part of the success of others and taking others like new hunters and just sharing our lifestyle with them. And just what's important to me and it gives me a chance to share when you talk to somebody on the phone, you're not like getting deep. But when you're on a hunt, you get that opportunity. And they're more, I don't know if they have to listen because they can't go anywhere or it's just they're more interested in listening, but it allows me to really like share why nature and the mountains and what I do is important. And it seems like it really resonates with people. And it's that has given me so much strength. And I don't know. I just in purpose, it's just sharing our lifestyle with others. That's what I've learned that drives me. You've been like that for a long time too. Like that first buffalo hunt that we went on back in Australia and you killed a bull and it was like, I was just happy for you as if I killed it. And then when I killed my bull, it might have been the last day, like it was the same. It was all like hugs. And that was awesome. And I could see it glow on in your face, you know that you want, you, you relishing other people's success as well. Gentlemen, this was awesome. Thank you for having me. Thank you. It was always great to hang out with you guys. Thank you. It's pleasure, but I love you too. Bye, everybody.