Joe Roman reagan. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Pleasure to meet you. I'm very happy to be here. I'm actually quite thrilled. I'm quite thrilled to have you here. This is your book. It's called Tripped Nazi Germany, the CIA, and the dawn of the psychedelic age. First of all, how did you get involved in studying this? Well, this had a lot to do with my previous book, which is called Blitz Drugs in the Third Reich. And I mean, the Nazis were really into math, basically. They were the first ones to understand that methamphetamine can be, can change the war effort. They basically doped their soldiers. So that was an interesting story that I told in Blitz and also I spoke about Hitler's consumption, which is quite outrageous, actually. And while I was doing the research, I was in many archives because I'm not a historian. I usually write novels. I started out writing three novels. And then suddenly it became a nonfiction writer. I was trying to understand what does that mean. And I thought it meant to historical writing to actually go into archives and look at original documents and not just lean on other books, which is what many historians actually do, which I found out later. They just read books from colleagues and then make up their own shit. To actually go into the archive is very time consuming. But I thought everyone does that. Actually no one does that. So I was looking at all the archives. And at one point I was in the archive of the memorial of the concentration camp of Dachau, so very serious archive because they host like all the documents, what this, as did in Dachau. So it's an intense experience to go to that archive and actually look at it because they wrote down everything, like every experiment that the Nazis did in concentration camps was written down because it was pseudo-science. So I found documents while I was researching Blitz relating to tests with psycho-active substances. And that was not what I expected because the Nazis have been enthusiastic about methamphetamine. But I had never, that was the first time I saw something that related Nazis and psychedelics. And I thought that's quite strange. That's quite interesting, obviously. I need to get to the bottom of this. So I asked the archives, can I see all the documents what did they ask actually do with psychedelics? Which ones did they use? Why did they test them? What were they looking for? And he said, well, I'm very sorry, but all documents are in America because when American military liberated Dachau, one of the things they do is they take a lot of documents and they took all the psychedelic research done by the Nazis with them. So I knew I had to go to America probably to the national archives and in college park close to Washington, biggest archive in the world, find it there. But I didn't have time while I was doing blitzed. And blitzed was also already a complete story. So I thought I saved that psychedelic theme for another book. And this other book is now being published as tripped. Wow. So before this, you'd had no understanding that the Nazis had used psychedelics. You know, you only knew that they, we all know that the meth thing and we've seen Hitler at the 36 Olympics or is rocking back and forth or he's a little cuz he's jacked out of his mind. I mean, the joke about blitzed is that I was actually the first one to write about this. I mean, now we all know about it. But before that, no one knew about it. Before 2015, when this book was published in Germany, the Nazis were still seen globally and also in Germany as this like pure movement that was like, I spoke to my grandfather when I was a teenager and I was, you know, obviously criticizing him for his involvement. I wanted to know what did he do and he did some shit. And then he always said, under Hitler, everything was in order. Like he praised that law and order aspect. And that law and order aspect of the Nazis obviously doesn't correspond to like a drug using society. So no one knew that the Nazis were taking drugs until I found out, until I found documents for blitz. So, but this, so I was not surprised to find more and more stuff. What they were doing with drugs. But then I was surprised that they actually also used psychedelics because psychedelics were totally new, you know. 43 LSD was invented. So it was, it's kind of, I really was wondering whether Nazis are already getting their hands on LSD, which was just so new that partly anyone in the world knew about this. So this is the story of tripped. So Hoffman, he synthesized LSD in 43. Correct, right. So was there any evidence of anyone using something similar to LSD before that? I know they've studied some of ancient pottery from Greece and they've found ergod in it and ergod, which contains a very similar compound to LSD. Well, ergod is the alkaloid of the fungus, which grows on rye. And so LSD, LSD, like this, ergod, LSD is made basically. So actually LSD is not a synthetic drug, as many people believe it. It actually is based on a fungus extract, which grows on rye. And the Swiss company Sandos, they produced only ergod-based medicines. Like they started after the First World War. It was like a startup. Sandos was a color manufacturing company. And they made a lot of money after the war because everything had to be rebuilt in Europe. Stuff had to be repainted. So companies that made paint made a lot of money. So they invested in a pharmaceutical branch. And they hired one guy to kind of come up with an idea how to make money in the pharmaceutical world. This guy was Atro-Estol. He later became the CEO of Sandos. And Atro-Estol was the first one to crack ergod because this fungus is quite poisonous actually. In the middle ages, this created mass hallucinations in Europe, unwittingly people were eating contaminated bread. We're having horrific visions, actually limbs fell off because this ergod is a very, very poisonous alkaloid. But as we know from Poncellus, the dosage makes the poison. So if you, that was Stauds' idea. You take a very poisonous thing, the ergod. And you extract, like you're still able to use the force that's within it as a medicine. This is how biochemistry, that's basically the foundation of biochemistry. So Stauds was able to crack the ergod. And the first medicine he made was a migraine medicine, which came out, I think, in 1923 by Sandos, very successful. So he immediately hit the jackpot. He became the ergod god of the pharmaceutical world. So he developed more and more medicines with ergod. One of them, for example, is still used today when in childbirth it contracts the blood vessels after the birth, so you can stop a bleeding. Otherwise, I guess bleeding would go on much longer in childbirth. So Sandos made the first effective medicine because ergod kind of makes the blood vessels contract. Were they trying to develop a drug to induce labor when they initially created LSD? Yeah, this is all the ergod's kind of research. I mean, the whole company was just doing ergod. So they were looking at all kinds of things that ergod could be good for just to have new products on the market. So an ergod before, I mean, this is a company based in Switzerland, which is known as the farthest, something like the fourth biggest pharmaceutical company in the world or something. I mean, very successful company still, they bought Sandos and now it's an artist, but it's kind of the same thing. So Sandos at one point needed so much ergod that they started manufacturing at in Switzerland. Like they went into a specific region called the Emantal, which was famous for its cheese. And it's also famous for its bad weather. So mold grows on rye, anyhow. So they thought this is the right area to industrialize the ergod manufacturing. Like the growth of ergod and the farmers were like, we're always trying to get away from the ergod. The ergod is poisonous and suddenly they had to make it. And this was company paid 20 francs. I think a kilo, 20 francs a kilo in rye was only like seven francs a kilo. So the farmers switched to it, basically producing poison. And then, I mean, not poison, but a very poisonous mushroom. You could say like a fungus, like, you don't want to eat this thing. You know, you don't want to, that was the problem. Your harvest rye, you make bread out of it. And then there's like a little bit of ergod because on some of the rye ergod grows. And then the bread is poisonous. That was the problem in the middle ages. So farmers don't like it. Now they had to produce it. And suddenly, sandals in Basas, Switzerland had huge amounts of ergod in their storage. And they needed to make more and more products to use the raw materials that they had so expensively produced in the emitter. So store hired further chemists. One of them was Ibad Hoffman, the famous discover of LSD. So he was not looking for a mind-blowing drug or anything. He was looking for actually a stimulant because this was late 30s in Germany, Nazi Germany. A stimulant that was made from the nicotine acid. Nicotine acid diathlon. No, it was actually a Swiss product. But from another company, nicotine acid diathlon was, I don't know the brand name. It had a brand name. It was quite successful medicine. And he thought, if I take a allergic acid diathlon might, allergic acid being the acid within the ergod, maybe we'll also have a potent stimulant. But they weren't looking for a stimulant actually for the mind. They were looking for a physical stimulant. Something like pervoting like meth, something that keeps you going. I mean, this was at a time when stimulants were sought after. They didn't have coffee like we have today. We just go, we drink coffee in the morning. They didn't really have that. That's why methamphetamine was so successful in Germany. Because you could just buy it anywhere and you take a tablet in the morning. And it's like drinking, like being on coffee the whole time. So the stimulant was what he was looking for. And then like something came into his bloodstream. And so it's a bit, he tries later. He tried to make it a bit mythical sounding. Like somehow the substance got into his bloodstream. And he felt like weird sensations and different. He saw different colors. So he thought this is actually a very different type of thing. Like what is this, like, surgical acid, the ethylamide LSD? What is it? So he did then the first self experiment, which was kind of normal at the time. He took a very, very low dose. What he thought 250 micrograms. But as we know today, that's actually quite a high dose of LSD. So he had an extremely strong experience. And he told us to struggle to see, oh, he said, I just took this 250 micrograms. I mean, this is a Swiss chemist in a Swiss lab. And suddenly he's like full on tripping. He tried to get home somehow. He's a system like brought him home on a bicycle. He was at his house and the walls started collapsing onto him. And the doctor came and he said to his doctor, I think I'm going mad. I'm poisoned myself. I don't know what's going on. The doctor's feeling his pulse normal. Like on LSD, you don't have a strong physical reaction, but you have a very strong mental reaction. So he had this, and the doctor just couldn't see it. And before actually, Hoofman had tested LSD on mice and at sandals. And the mice also didn't show anything because they didn't run around excitedly. Like if you give mice cocaine, they're like, you can see the difference. But if you give them LSD, you can't see it because you can't get into their mind. Maybe they don't even have a trip because they don't have a conscious like us. But certainly on humans, it works very polynately. And so he communicated this with his CEO. And then I always like, I don't believe you. I think you made a mistake with the dosage. Then they repeated it. And then they actually created at sandals. And I think this is kind of funny. If you picture a conservative pharmaceutical Swiss company in the late 40s in Basah, they created an intoxication room. Like they made a nice room within the company. They called it a house, some house, meaning intoxication and German. And Hoofman said, I had a very strong house with this stuff. I don't know what this is. So they invited like secretaries and bookkeepers and chemists and people working in the cafeteria. They all could come into this room and take LSD. Like the secretary is actually sitting there typing, but they would relate. And they all had a great experience. That's the funny thing. They had never had any bad. Today when we take LSD, we have so much discourse about LSD in our mind automatically. They didn't have that. They just took a strangely named substance like LSD, 25. They took like 50 micrograms. And they wrote down. I write about this in trip. Like for the first time, I feel connected to my human being. Some looked out and saw the clouds and had ideas about connectivity and how we are part of the universe. Like this kind of hippie, LSD thoughts that we classically associate with. They had them very purely like from that they just had them. So this was all noted down. And then they were thinking, and this was in 1943. Imagine the situation in Europe in 1943. It's at the height of the world war two. People are dead, injured, traumatized. So they thought at Sunnus, maybe this is going to be like a blockbuster. Then they tested it also on sick people in a hospital in Zurich. They gave it to a depressed patient. I also studied these reports. Like the depressed was farmer. Like chronically depressed. He takes LSD. And he took it like three times and they released him out of the psychiatric ward because he was cured. He was good. He said, I'm fine. I'm not depressed anymore. So Sunnus really thought they had a blockbuster. They thought this is LSD is going to be the big thing. And the big question, obviously, is what went wrong? That is what interested me, and tripped what happened. Because also why I researched LSD. And I had been interested in LSD for a long time. But then I decided to write a book and I researched it. And I found a study by a company called Yilusus, which is an American company. Their name referring, obviously, to the Greek ritual. And they had done low dosage tests with LSD on Alzheimer patients. And they found that the very same receptors that Alzheimer degenerates and kills, these receptors are being stimulated by LSD. So they are study, which I then discussed with an leading Alzheimer research on Germany. And he also is looking at this white paper. And he said, this is actually quite good. And I said, so when is it going to happen? He said, well, this is a bit more complicated than you think, because LSD is illegal. It's not even in America. I guess you have a university can do research. But this is also a new thing. When Nixon illegally realized LSD in 1966, all the research was illegalized. So it couldn't even research, whether it's as dangerous as government said it would be. So let me just finish this thought. I bring this white paper to my father, because my mother suffers from Alzheimer. And I'm saying to him, I'm writing this book as you know. And I found this. And shouldn't we have a look at this? Because he takes care of my mother. And he's quite frustrated that there's no potent medicine available to him that his doctor basically says, sorry. And he's a former judge. He was quite a high judge in Germany. He sent people to prison for drugs. So for him to even consider giving an illegal drug to his wife is a big leap for him. But he's a rational thinking man. So I looked at this white paper. He studied it. And he said, you know what? In court, when I was in court as a judge, I always, you don't know what is the truth. But you know what is a good story, like a credible story. That's how I determined as a judge what I believe. If someone tells something that rings true to me. And right now, I'm having a study that LSD is helpful. But also I'm having the law that it's illegal. Can you please find out the true story now? What is LSD? Why is it illegal? So from that point on where I did the research that is in tripped, which was supposed to be called LSD for mom, actually. That was my working title for the book. And I think it's a better title. That's a good title. Yeah, it's a great title. LSD for mom. That was my who picked tripped to the editors picked tripped. My German editor didn't want LSD for momma, which is the German translate, which I think is the perfect title. It's not even, it's even better in German as a day for momma. He somehow convinced me to use a different title in Germany. And all that, you know, this is translated into many different countries. And they always go to the German. If the Germans would have called it LSD for momma, it would be called LSD for mom in America, LSD for momma and friends. But because in Germany, a different title was chosen the strongest stuff, which is a little bit different in German. That's the stuff. Then every country was thinking, what should we call it? And I guess they call it tripped because of the success of blitz they wanted to have. But I think LSD for mom is a better title. I like it. Yeah, it's great. Because it's true, you know, I was then really researching for my father and my mother. And I came back after all this research with the Swiss company and the Nazi connection, which will come to I guess in a second. I came back to my father and I presented him the story. And then he decided to actually try it. Because he said, I understand now that LSD is not illegal because it's dangerous that there are different reasons why it's illegal. And these different reasons I explained in trip. So we spoke, obviously to my mother also because you have to get consent. So she gave her consent. And she started using LSD once in a while. You know, not chronically, obviously. But like twice a week or maybe the next week, only once, only low dosages and my father also took them. He never felt anything because of my clothes. You're not supposed to feel a trip or intoxication. It just works in your brain. But my mother actually did feel it because their brain is attacked by Alzheimer. So for her, that was like, her cheeks became redder. She would look at us one time. We also then did mushrooms, which is a very similar molecule. Like she's still alive and it's very similar to the LSD molecule. On Mother's Day, we gave her a little piece of mushroom chocolate and she took it. And there was a newspaper on the table. And she hadn't even looked at newspaper as an object of desire for her for about a year. My father then later told me. And she picked up the newspaper when the chocolate was working and started reading the headlines. And my father was like, this is a medicinal miracle. My father's really like a rational skeptical guy, but it was amazing. So that is also what I write about in trip AK LSD for mom. But it's so fascinating that there's so many people suffering from Alzheimer's in the world. And it's illegal basically everywhere, except for countries like Portugal that are decriminalized everything. But yeah, I mean, dementia is like the pandemic of the future. If I want to use that ugly word pandemic, but to not allow our scientists to examine this properly, for example, in the pandemic, a lot of during the pandemic, like regulations in regards to developing medicines, a vaccine, especially where lower, because we wanted the government, society wanted a vaccine quick. But so this is what has to happen with psychedelics now, because we are moving like in 2050, I read the numbers. They also in the book like a lot of people will have dementia. Like we will all know someone or we'll have it ourselves. Or I was, it's going to grow exponentially, or at least a lot. So I think our society should actually shift its focus towards preventing that, because when I spoke to the Alzheimer expert, he said, yeah, of course this could prevent Alzheimer. If you would know how to stimulate the brain, and so far, like 20, 50, 153 million people expect to be living with dementia worldwide, from 57 million in 2013, 2019, rather largely due to population growth and population aging. Don't they believe that Alzheimer's has something to do with diet as well? Isn't that what they're calling type three diabetes? Yeah, and I think it could be true. I mean, the reason for Alzheimer is, you have to see it separately from the cure, the reason I think I've come actually to the conclusion that sugar is quite bad for you. And I was quite a sugar addict. I really was, like I could not put down a bar of chocolate, I could not eat one piece. I just couldn't, because I love it so much. But then I just realized it's not good, and I stopped it, and it's actually possible to stop. I eat now, like a little bit, and it's actually no problem. So I think, well, there's a few reasons for dementia. One is also the so-called neuroinflammation of the brain, and that could be caused, obviously, by sugar, by imbalances in the sugar diet, I think. And the inflammation of the brain, and that is scientifically proven, is being decreased if you take psychedelics. So if you take psychedelics, every time you take psychedelics, your neuroinflammation goes down. So that is something that needs to be examined. Maybe we should all take, maybe once a week, a low dosage of, let's say LSD or cilos first, the family suffers. If someone in the family has, I'd say I'm on the whole family suffers. And of course, our medical system is very expensive to treat dementia, I could put them in homes, whatever. So I think we're making a big mistake by not examining this. Absolutely. Well, it's just a stunning amount of ignorance on our part, all the, at least anecdotal evidence of the positive benefits of some of these things, particularly in microdose usage. Well, it's just not a focus of politicians, like to legalize drugs has not become a very popular, a meme among politicians in the 20th century. This is also what I examined and tripped. I kind of looked at where did it actually start? Where does this prohibitionist approach come from? Because it's kind of weird. As a child, I watched Star Trek. It was a TV, an American TV show even on German television. It was called Rameshif Enterprise in German, like space ship Enterprise. And I was always very touched by the beginning when they say boldly go where no man has gone before. Like that was for me, the American, like the Western philosophy, to always transcend where you are. And that is totally contradicts our prohibitionist policies. It's like a chemical wall that the government is setting up in our brain, saying like, you can go this much with stimulating your brain, but you're not allowed to go further. Like you're not allowed to use LSD, which does stimulate the H2TA receptors. You're not allowed to, I think it contradicts the Western philosophy. And actually also I think it contradicts the idea of democracy, which I always was hot for. I grew up in a small town in West Germany, which was actually occupied by American forces. So I was very much connecting with American culture early on. And I always like associated Western culture with freedom and transcendence and boldly going where no man has gone before. That is for me the strength of the West. And that is, this is for example, not what Islam offers. Islam says you're not allowed to intoxicate. You can only believe in this. You cannot go further. This is actually the problem of all monotheistic religions. But for me, the West was always going beyond that. So I was curious how did this happen this prohibition? Like who was there one person that decided, no people cannot use this anymore? And actually there is one person and his name is Harry J. Anseling. I'm sure you're familiar with the guy. So I, for this trip, that also went to the Harry J. Anseling, an archives at Penn State University, which was quite interesting because you can see in the archive and in the way like it smells and what he collected and the letters he wrote and the language he used, you can, it's a very closed mindset. And he was actually able to convince democratic and republican presidents. He was like serving under, he was bipartisan basically. So his anti-drug regime that he was able to create and he created it because the alcohol prohibition failed and his federal bureau of narcotics was about to be extinct because he had completely failed with the alcohol prohibition. And then he thought, I have to find a new enemy and the new enemy for him was actually cannabis and he coined the word marijuana. Cause marijuana sounds foreign, it sounds Mexican. It sounds something that we don't want in our clean, white American society. Well, it was a Mexican wild tobacco. It was slang for a Mexican wild tobacco. It wasn't cannabis. Yeah, right. Yeah. So that is, so basically what we could say is that and unfortunately, answering it was quite a racist. He was like, he openly used words to describe Afro-American colleagues that shouldn't be used by white men, I guess, in like memos. This went all the way up to the president. So they always kept him because he was the man that defends America from the scourge of foreign influences which is drugs in this case, from China, the opium, from Mexico, the marijuana. So he was very good politician, basically, like an anti-drug lobbyist that everyone in Washington loved. And so the reasons for the prohibition in America is not that this ancelinger was actually studying LSD and finding out that this is actually dangerous or marijuana is dangerous. That's we really, even though we're free in our society, we have to, we have to curb this. We have, like this is not how it went. It's where like he wanted to attack the jazz scene and he knew that the jazz musicians were smoking a lot of weed. So it's, you know, it's very hard to make it illegal to play jazz, but you can make marijuana illegal and then you can target jazz musicians. So it's got racial profiling. Why were they going after jazz musicians? They hated jazz. He thought that, he thought that, I think he had a, I think it's a sexual thing actually. Because he actually said once, when black men smoke, reefer, they think there's good as white men and they're gonna sleep with a women or something like that. That was kind of the world that he was living in. So living in. Because the jazz musicians were on stage and people loved them. They were cool. Yeah. And they all, they were only cool because they smoked the weed, you know, that gave them that diabolical power like over the audience and the groove, you know. They were cool. Yeah. And they all, they were only cool because they smoked the weed, you know, that gave them that diabolical power, like over the audience and the groove, you know. If you take the weed away from them, they're just going to be like boring people, you know. That guy, that guy really did a lot of damage in my mind to be in the American society. It's just stunning that 90 years later we're still dealing with the aftermath of that, you know, and also in conjunction with his union with William Randolph, first. Yeah. William Randolph, first who owned hers publications, had a vested financial interest in keeping marijuana illegal or making marijuana illegal because of hemp, right? You know, the whole story about the decorticator. Yeah, you're talking about the wood now? No. Decorticator was a device that was manufactured, it was created in the early 1930s and it was in the cover of popular science magazine when they called it, they said hemp, the new billion dollar crop of the future. All right. So because hemp was a very difficult plant to take the fiber and convert it into paper and convert it into textiles, things like that, the use slave labor for the most part until the cotton gin came along. When the cotton gin came along, that became more effective to use cotton than to use hemp. It was easier than in the early 1930s, they came out with the decorticator. The decorticator was this machine, see if you could get a version of that, Jamie. So the decorticator allowed them to effectively, that's the decorticator. So this machine, they would run the hemp stocks through it and it would break them down far more economically, much, much easier, more effectively than the way they would do it by hand previously. All right. So hemp, the new billion dollar crop, so hemp, you know, find the cover of that magazine. So hemp was a far more effective paper, it's much more durable. I'll give you take hemp, very difficult to tear. In fact, the earliest drafts of the Declaration of Independence run hemp. So this is a billion dollar crop. So this was popular science magazine. William Randolph Hearst didn't just own Hearst publications, also own paper mills. So he had thousands and thousands of acres of trees and forests that they were converting into paper. And now all of a sudden there was this new product that was going to destabilize his industry. And so hemp is a disruptor. Exactly. And they made marijuana illegal. A lot of the people that were voting on this didn't even understand they were making cannabis illegal. They didn't understand that it was the same thing. They didn't understand that it was the same literal textile that created canvas. All the great works. Like if you look at, you know, Leonardo da Vinci's paintings. It's on hemp. It's on hemp. It's on canvas. It's on cannabis paper. It's on a very durable form of paper. Have you ever touched cannabis paper like hemp paper? It's crazy. It's really hard to tear. My friend Todd McCormick, he was a early grower in Los Angeles when marijuana was medically legal. And he wound up going to jail because in federal court you couldn't say that it was for medical purposes. They just prosecuted him based on the fact that he was a drug dealer. Instead of someone who was legally in the state of California growing medical marijuana. He had a stalk on his table of hemp. I don't know if you've ever felt a hemp stalk. Have you ever picked one up? No. It is crazy. It's like styrofoam. You pick it up. It feels like nothing. But it's hard. Like oak. But it's not heavy. It's very strange. It's like an alien plant. Very, very weird. So that stuff converts incredibly to clothing. You can make building materials out of it. There's a thing called hemp creek. That is this incredibly effective building material that you can make houses out of out of hemp. And it's incredibly sustainable because if you have an acre of trees, if you chop down that acre of trees and make paper out of it, it takes forever to grow enough trees in that acre to grow them to the point where you could harvest them and make paper out of them. And if you grow hemp, if you grow hemp stocks in the same field, you've got new hemp in a few months. And now you have paper again. So you think so? We are Randolph Hearst, demonized cannabis for the particular interest that he had with paper, with his paper mills, and to stop the hemp industry. I mean, they were quite close allies in a way. Yeah. And Hearst, and in his publications, the word marijuana was for the first time publicized. So they kind of... And with a racial element, yeah, with a racial element. Blacks and Mexicans were smoking this new drug and raping white women. Right. Right. And then the reframatinous movies, which are fantastic pieces of propaganda. They're absolutely hilarious. If you watch them today, especially knowing what we know about marijuana, like these people were just crazed, it was more meth-like than it was, you know, what they were depicting. Right? Absolutely. So, Anselinger, 90 years ago, the propaganda that he pushed out into society, the way that infected people, like a mind virus, the effects of that still today. When people find out that you have taken marijuana or that you regularly enjoy marijuana, people freak out. They're like, oh, what are you doing? What are you doing to yourself? Oh my God, you're out there taking drugs. Meanwhile, this person's on antidepressants and they drink alcohol, smoke cigarettes, and take Xanax, like, there's a sanction drugs that are far worse for you. It's not a drug-free society. Yeah, I mean, I talked about the sugar thing that I thought. It's crazy drug. And that actually made me realize that we, as humans, take drugs every day. Like every human takes drugs every day. I'm drinking coffee. I got these little nicotine pouches. Yeah. Which is interesting, you know, that we don't acknowledge that really. We think, like, people who are against drugs, they kind of vote. They kind of say we're stand for a sober society, but it never is a sober society. No. We just have some legalized drugs and some drugs that are illegalized. My friends are doing alcoholics and animals. They all drink cigarettes and drink coffee and smoke cigarettes. They're all doing a drug. They're just doing a drug that doesn't completely destroy their life. I mean, I thought about this, you know, writing, having written blitz and trip both on drugs and history. I was now trying to come up with a larger narrative. And I mean, at your podcast, a lot has been talked about the Stone-Ape theory, right? Yes. I think it's very interesting. And I think it's time for a kind of a new world history, as you may. I think because we, I think we actually are stone sapiens. I think that this cognitive revolution that happened in Africa, it's as dammit said, it's not a theory. It's a, what is it? A theory is when there's already proof. It's a hypothesis. It's a hypothesis. But I think that a lot speaks for this hypothesis. I think it makes sense if you see that early humans were, for example, depicting mushrooms in drawings that these mushrooms have some kind of relevance to them. And our edge, which is something that Harari writes about over other homos, like the Neanderthals, or also just monkey's large monkeys. Our edge was that we, that we had this cognitive revolution, that we had a neo cortex forming and that we suddenly had an understanding about time. So we're not just living in the moment where we know there's a past and there's a future. So that creates a different language and the different language and more abstract, more complex language. And for example, the apes, you know, apes can organize up to like a hundred. Then that language kind of fails them. But humans suddenly, not suddenly, I mean, this is over long periods of time could develop a language that enabled them to form larger groups. That's how they became dominant, also dominant over other homos species, like the Neanderthals. And we know today that they had these plants at their availability. So it makes sense to imagine that actually we found maybe it was a mushroom, maybe it was Ebola, which is something still used in African societies, in which now is again being examined as the new psychoactive hot drug. It could be a mixture or some groups could have had this, others could have had that. But it seems to be pretty clear that like the founding moment of our races actually, this transcendence, like suddenly realize this moment where I'm in is not all there's more. Like there's a future, there's a past. That is what transcendence is. So we are basically, that's why I call our species this with stone sapiens. Like we were stone from the start. So drugs, which transferred into language, into also music, into rituals because we wanted to keep the drug also secret from others who are not, you know, from apes or Neanderthals. So rituals start existing like a person who kind of has the drugs and hands them out. So this is at the beginning of our race I think. And we were so powerful because we could develop that larger language than the apes would only organize up until 100. And now we have the problem. We pour stone sapiens that we have created global problems, but we don't have a global narrative. Like we're falling into the Western camp. We have China. Like we have, we don't have a global narrative. Like our narrative usually stops within the national context. Like there's the American narrative. There's the Western narrative, which also includes Europe. There's the German narrative. But there's no human global narrative. And that's what I intend to change with my books, Don't Sapiens, which will be the next book and kind of conclude the trilogy of these like how our drugs and humans kind of symbiotic in a way. Well, there's a, for lack of a better term, there's a consciousness that exists in mushrooms. There's something that you interact with. And we don't necessarily understand what's going on. But if you could imagine a lower primate interacting with a higher consciousness on a regular basis and then adapting, this is the theory of why the human brain size doubled over a period of two million years. And if you ever listen to Dennis McKenna and describe this, Dennis McKenna describes it brilliantly because he's an actual scientist in the way he explains the effects of syllas I've been, how it would have, you know, with the effects it would have on the mind in terms of developing language and just expanding our creativity, expanding our ability to see things. It makes better edge detection. Makes you have better visual acuity, makes them more, more horny. They're going to more likely to breed more community. Because there's also this potential for a type of, you know, for lack of a better term, a type of mind-melding. You know, there's a type of consciousness expanding energy that happens that it seems to be connected, you know, in a way that we can't measure or human beings interact with each other without words. You know, telepathy was exactly what they would, when they first found harmene, they when they found some certain trees that were part of the components of ayahuasca, they try to call it telepathy. But due to the rules of scientific nomenclature, that substance had already been identified as harmene. But the researchers that were taking this are saying we are experiencing these telepathic melds. There's something that's going on with these things. And we want to get to the bottom of it. Let's call it telepathy because it in parts a type of telepathy. Well, for a trip, it became very interested in that question that you just articulated what actually happens in the brain. Because that is quite hard to figure out actually how do they work and what actually changes in the brain. And there's one researcher in Zurich again in Switzerland, they're really experts on psychedelics actually. Because they didn't sign all the UN treaties because they're like a neutral, more neutral country than others. So they actually have a little bit more freedom for research. And there is a professor called Franz Follenwider at the University in Zurich. And he was able to start in the early 90s, giving his patients a psilocybin and LSD and DMT. And then he put them in like examined their brains in brain scanners like imaging like high tech, imaging technology. And he found that actually is that you can actually measure it. Or you can see the changes that happen in psychedelics. And what happens is that the so-called default mode network that is a term that brain scientists used to describe what Freud would call the ego, like the center in our brain, like the boss in our brain, like the guy I guess it would be other women in our brain that like says, now I'm on the Joe Rogan podcast and everything's cool. And I'm a writer, whatever. And you like, this is like we have always this controlling force within us. Otherwise we would go basically insane like what's going on here. What's this is cool. I mind danger, you know, basically in mind danger, like there's a thing that goes with the rifle is going to shoot. The default mode network makes sure that this doesn't happen that we function and it makes a lot of sense. And actually, under psychedelics, he could measure that this part of the brain gets a little less energy. So it's a little, it's not switched off completely. I mean, if you take a lot of psychedelics, it might be switched off completely. Then you have what's called like a full immersion experience. But if you take a little, it's also switched off like a little, like gets a little less energy. And that other parts of the brain peripheral parts that are usually like following the main guy, they can communicate more on psychedelics. So what happens in your brain is actually, it is actually a change in, you know, the brain chemistry. And what also happens is what is called the neuroplasticity is enhanced. Neuroplasticity is the term for basically the brain is not obviously like a fixed, like non-moving object like my fist or something. It's constantly kind of moving the brain, you know? And neuroplasticity describes that ability to constantly adapt to like the situation and be flexible, make new connections. Neuroplasticity. And he could also measure that neuroplasticity is enhanced when he takes psychedelics. That's why also it could become dangerous if it's enhanced too quickly and you're not experienced. I mean, we're on the Joe Rogan experience. So we're, we're, we're all experienced. I hope we have an experienced audience. But if you're unexperienced, that could be too much, you know, then then the stimulation of your brain or the change or the disruption of your day to day way of thinking could be overwhelming. And if you, if you handle it properly, it's actually that is, that is I guess what is the beneficial aspect of the psychedelic experience. You enhance neuroplasticity in a way, I don't know if becoming smarter is the right term because what is smart, what is intelligence. But we, it's a fact that neuroplasticity is enhanced and because of this kind of orthodox thought forms like depressed people always think the same thing, like I'm not worthy or I can't, depression is a loop or loops in your brain of always this. And LSD, especially still alive and they just rub that because, you know, other parts of the brain suddenly come into play and the default mode network, which has, you know, this disease of depression suddenly is not, you know, the calling the shots anymore. That's why psychedelics have proven effective against depression. The first study that showed this clinical study was done in 2015, actually in America at Johns Hopkins University that still alive and helps against, you know, very severe depression when nothing else helps. So we know a little bit about what happens in the brain, but obviously the brain is still a black box. That's why so many scientists when LSD came out in the late 40s and early 50s, especially in America were enthusiastic. They thought finally we have a tool with which we can, you know, shine like a torch shining into the black box of the brain because it works in such small quantities. There was actually a lot of hope in the beginning that original enthusiasm by Sunnils that I talked about when they thought we have a game changer, we have a blockbuster. Everyone will become, you know, will heal from LSD. That many scientists actually believe that. And the interesting question is and we're like making a long circle of what went wrong. Why wasn't it developed into a medicine that you can get at your dispensary like you can get cannabis products now, for example, in the state of California? Why we can get them here too, which is weird. Okay. You get him here. Like I said, there's like different deltas. So we can get legal cannabis. Society sell it. Society is still very insecure when it comes to drugs because we have been bombarded with drugs are horrifically dangerous. But you know, this propaganda. When I was in high school, this is your brain on drugs. You know, it was just say no, Nancy Reagan. Yeah. Everyone was just say no. I was also in America actually in high school. I graduated from Flint, power Catholic high school in Michigan, class of 88. And I had been taught because I was sent from Germany as like a German exchange student. I was taught before don't mix with the drug people. They will be drug people at the high school. And they will approach you and they will try to draw you in and then you won't get out again. And I really believe that. I mean, I was like, well, there are people like that that is true. Look, you fall into the opiate crowd. If you fall into a crowd and people are. Right. Well, we deserve very different. But the problem is the blanket term, right? The blanket term of drugs. Yeah. But also if you fall into a low crowd in high school, it's very possible that you'll fall into a crowd of near duels who will ruin their lives and they just get high all day and they wake and bake and they abuse it. Just like you can abuse sugar, right? Just like you can abuse alcohol. I actually think that cannabis is a dangerous drug because it is quite addictive. Yeah. I can't be. Unlike LSD, LSD is not addictive. The guy who invented a AA, he himself had made an LSD therapy and got away from alcohol using LSD and he wanted to incorporate LSD therapy into the AA program and then didn't do it because I guess it was pressure or whatever will come to the pressure in a second. So LSD is actually non a non addictive drug. For example, in Germany, now we legalize cannabis. It's legal everywhere in the country. I think they should have legalized LSD and not cannabis because cannabis is actually harder to use. I think it should be legal. I think it's good that it's legal but I think it's a little bit of a more problematic drug actually to legalize because it's also so easy to use. But to legalize LSD, which is like I think it should be legalized all over the globe because I think it's a brain food. That's what I think after studying it. But saying this sounds like completely outrageous. LSD, so many people are afraid of it. I hope with trip to take a little bit of the edge of to actually show where it comes from. I would like to tell that story where it comes from. Yeah, for me. Please. Because that's the core story because when I had found these S records that they had used, because you asked before, was there another psychedelic substance? Yes, there was masculine. Masculine was already kind of investigated by scientists since the 20s. It was also a German scientist called Beeringa. He was at the University of Heidelberg and he was really into masculine and he was like doing it with his students and making tests and how does it change consciousness and what happens. So he was basically one of the pioneers of psychedelic research, you could say. So the Nazis knew about masculine and the Nazis wanted to find a truth drug. Hitler was a paranoid person. He always thought, and it's actually true that people are conspiring against him. There were quite a lot of assassination attempts on his life. He survived them all. But there were a lot of people who didn't like him. I mean, Germany was a totalitarian dictatorship and most people supported Hitler, but there were also people who did not. There were people in the resistance, even within the army, who thought he was an idiot, high ranking officers who were like, were a bit more brilliant than him and who knew that he was running things to the ground. So he gave the order to find a truth drug. Like, it's the wet dream of intelligence. You give someone a substance and then you can control that person. You can extract secrets from that person. You can kind of, you can control a person. And the Nazis, the SS, even with their torture methods, had been unable to extract all the secrets they wanted to extract from prisoners, especially Polish resistance fighters had been very resistant, even against SS torture. Like they wouldn't say, I got the job from the British intelligence or what, you know, they just wouldn't talk even when you torture them. So Hitler wanted the drug that would solve this problem. And one man that was put in charge with this is a chemist called Richard Kuhn, who actually received the Nobel Prize for chemistry. He was a brilliant mind, but he was a Nazi. So he didn't like many scientists left Germany or writers left Thomas Munt left Germany when the Nazis took power. But some people stayed, some writers stayed, some scientists stayed. And this Kuhn actually became, you know, he's really working for Hitler. He was developing a nerve poison, Zareen, which was deadly for Hitler. He was, and if you worked for Hitler as a scientist, obviously you got all the, the grants you need the money and you were, you had a great time, basically, if you sold your soul to the devil. So Richard Kuhn was in charge with finding the truth drug. And then the interesting thing is, because I was in the Novartis archive of Sandoz, because I wanted to find the link between a Swiss pharmaceutical company who develops LSD and then the SS who tests it in Dachau, like how did, how did they as, as no like, and did they really test as LSD also in Dachau, or was it just masculine? Because they write in the reports that are then found in the US, masculine and another odorless colorless substance was being used. And LSD is that famous odorless colorless substance like I could put a, put a drop of LSD in your coffee, you wouldn't even notice it, which is good for seek for intelligent service. You want to, though someone without that person knowing it. So LSD was kind of perfect. But how did the Nazis, did, did they actually know about LSD? Was it LSD that was kind of what I wanted to find out? And when I was in the archive of Sandoz, I wanted to find like papers like did they sell LSD to the SS? I was curious to find something. And the archivist, he was very skeptical of me because he sensed that I was onto something. like he was protecting basically the archive because the archive at Sandoz is not a public archive. If you go to the National Archives of the United States or the federal archive of Germany, it's a public archive. The archive is want you to find information. They will reveal like the fine book, which like has like it's a database. It has, it shows you everything that's in the archive. So you have a, it takes sometimes days or weeks to actually figure out what's all there. You have theoretically an overview of everything that's in the archive. But a company archive like Novartis archive, there was no fine book. The archive is said to me, just tell me what you're looking for and then I will find it for you, which is basically shit, you know? Because in a way you have to, it's basically under his control, the documents that he gives to you. You know, you have no, you don't even know what's in the archive behind that guy sitting in front of you. But and I wanted to see like, I knew that I but Hoffman wasn't a Nazi. Like I had learned, I had known a lot about I but Hoffman and he, I never heard anything about him having Nazi connections, like giving LSD to Richard Kuhn or something. But I wanted to see what is boss, story the one we talked about before had the whole, like the ergod god, like who is this guy because he has the CEO called the shots for Sandos, the pharmaceutical company. And then the archive is didn't want me really to see these papers. I could sense that and I wanted to come again to the archive. I heard you sense that. Well, the first time I was there, he said, why is everyone always so interested in LSD? You know, we have so many beautiful products here and there was like a showcase with all the products that Sandos has made. And LSD wasn't one of them. I said, LSD is actually missing from that showcase here and he said, well, it was never a product. I said, it was a product. It actually had a name. It was called de luzite. That was the brand name of LSD. It existed, you know, and he's like, yeah, you know, but we are not so, you know, it's illegal. So they don't, they have a difficult relationship with LSD. And what the only thing he gave me were the original lab books of I but Hoffman and it's very easy to flatter. Like it stuns you. Like if you're interested in LSD, you see like the original lab book. You see like his handwriting when he for the first time takes LSD and then his handwriting. Like he can't hold the pen anymore and you see like this line on the paper. That's exciting, you know, but it's not new. You know, people have seen that before. But so he kind of tricks you into like you see that saying, oh great, thank you by by like after you go home. But then I was on the Swiss mountain. I was actually visiting a scientist that had researched this ergod producing and the M. and Tala visit the sky on the mountain. He showed me the form of fields of sandas. And then I had the idea, I must go back to the archive and look at the papers of the CEO because the CEO calls the shots. Why wasn't the CEO able to turn this potential game changer into a lucrative medicine? What went wrong was probably on the on the CEO level of the company, not on like the chemist level of the company. So I wrote an email to the archive and said, I'm going to come back tomorrow and I want to look at the papers of the CEO and then he wrote back to me. Well, sorry tomorrow. I have too much work. You cannot come anymore kind of like that. But I just showed up, I just showed up at the archive and he opened and he said, well, you hear, I don't have any time. And I said, well, I'm here. I mean, it's an archive. I can use it. And then I was sitting there and I was thinking, what can I do? And I actually at the time I had some LSD with me because I already, I was already getting it for my mother. So I had it with me and I said to him, I suddenly had an idea and I said to him, have you ever actually seen LSD? And he's like, in his Swiss accent, like no, it's illegal. I have not seen it. And then I asked him, do you want to see it? And he said, sure, I would like to see it. But where could I see it? It's no one has it anymore. And I said, well, here, here you go. This is LSD and he's like studying it. He was quite interesting. I suddenly became interested. Like, oh, this is actually LSD. That's how it looks. And LSD I had received had printed on it like this papers, the old logo of sandals. So like the chemist who had made this actually in Basel, it was made in a black lab, obviously, kind of made a joke and put like the logo of sandals on it. And he said, this is the logo of our old company. How is this possible? And he said, well, maybe it's like an homage by the chemist who made these. I said, do you want one? He said, what do you mean? I said, well, I give you one as a gift. You know, it's been so helpful. Maybe it's like a homage by the chemist who made these. I said, do you want one? He said, what do you mean? I said, well, I give you one as a gift. You know, it's been so helpful to me. And he's like, oh, this is, yes. OK, I'll take one. And I gave him a trip. And what is the dose? That was like 100 micrograms, which is quite strong. I said to him, I said to him, it's legit. I said to him, take it like when you're in the beautiful Swiss mountains. Like you want to walk, then maybe it's a good time. And he's like, interested. Yeah. And then he gave it back to me. He said, I can't. I can't. For legal reasons. I don't think I can accept this. I said, OK, fine. Took it back. And then he said, but is there something you want to see maybe today in the archive? Because he was, you know, we had formed a connection suddenly. Right. And I said, yeah, actually, I would be interested in seeing the paper of the CEO of Atro Stuyle. That's not a problem at all. And he just went and he brought me to folder. And as I'm looking through the folder, I can see that there's one man that Stuyle was communicating with all through his career. And that one man, he, Stuyle himself had learned under Vilshteta. Vilshteta was the Jewish German master of biochemistry, who was later. But he had to leave Germany. You know, the Nazis were prosecuting him also because he was Jewish. And Vilshteta was this genius who also received Nobel Prize and who had found out that, you know, Stuyle's idea from potent plans to extract and then you make medicines from plants, basically, because plants are very powerful, obviously. So Vilshteta was like the scientific father of Stuyle. And Stuyle had one other prodigy child. And that was Richard Kuhn, who, by then had been the leading Nazi biochemist. So Kuhn and Stuyle, which I saw then in the letters in front of me, had been best friends because they had to say, had had the same like, you know, teacher. That exchange already in the twenties, all their research in the thirties, especially the Ergod research. Kuhn was very interested in it. So now he has the job by Hitler to find the truth drug. And then Stuyle says, we found this almost magical substance that even in microgram, those such as has this strong effect on the mind. And Kuhn obviously became very interested in it. And I found a letter. Maybe we can pull that one up. I don't know if you can find it from 1943, October. We're Kuhn and I found this in the ark. This was the smoking gun, basically. Kuhn thanks Stuyle for sending agotamin, which is the precursor to LSD. It's like from agotamin, you do one step and then you have LSD. And we received agotamin in October 1943 from the Swiss company. And then, you know, the Nazis had their hand on LSD. And then it becomes very interested. Interesting what happens when the Americans find out about that. Because when the Americans liberated Germany from national socialism, when they won the war, basically, certain units had attached to them the so-called isos unit, ALSOS and the alsos unit was responsible for finding German nuclear scientists and interviewing them about their research for the nuclear bomb in Nazi Germany. Because not that the Germany was also trying to develop a nuclear weapon. And the Americans thought they're probably quite far ahead because they're good in science, like everything they do, they fucking rock. Which in this case actually probably wasn't true. I don't think the Nazis were so advanced. It's still a bit obscure like how far the Nazis really were with nuclear technology. But this alsos was in place and the second job of alsos was to find out about biochemical weapons because they also thought rightly so that Hitler had biochemical weapons. So one of their first scientists, the interview, it was Richard Kuhn because Richard Kuhn was the leading Nazi biochemist. So in the spring of 1945 and liberated, heided back after World War II, Kuhn is being interviewed. And for Kuhn, it's a question of will I cooperate with Americans? Or will I go to the Nuremberg trial as like a war criminal? Because he could have ended up on the bench for developing Saarim and Nerve poison. So he decided to rather extend his career. He later came to America, I was teaching in America. So he told them about LSD. He said we were very interested in LSD. And those experiments in Dachau could not be finished because there was not enough time. Dachau was already liberated. They were in the middle of finding out if I give a psychedelic to a prisoner, can I extract his secrets, can I fully control him? These tests take a bit of time. You have to do it with several. So you don't do it in a day. So these tests were not finished yet. But these findings then were very interesting to the American military. Because after the war, what started immediately the next war, the Cold War against the Soviet Union, which was what the then CIA was founded, which CIA called the CIA Director Dallas. He called it, this is brain warfare. It's a totally new type of war. And we have to know. We have to get ahead of them. And they probably are working on brainwashing techniques. So we have to be ready to defend ourselves against the Soviet onslaught with their brainwashing techniques. So the Americans learned actually a lot from the Nazis. I once met in Florida on the beach, together with my father in S. Marine that was in the 80s when I was an exchange student in Flint, Michigan with the certification met my parent, my German parents in Florida. And we spoke with this marine and he said, yeah, we learned so much from the SS. And it's true. They as S the German system was a very was evil system, obviously. But it was a very functional system. There was a lot to be learned from them in terms of warfare. So the Americans, because the Nazis were so interested in this truth drug, thought this must be this must be interesting. We have to look at this. So they started now first the American military then the CIA started now to investigate can LSD actually be the truth drug, can it be like a pharmaceutical weapon. So this is actually what went wrong. So what went wrong was the Swiss CEO sending samples to the German Nazi biochemist from him. The knowledge goes to the American military and then intelligence apparatus that LSD could be abused as a weapon. This is what really put LSD on the wrong foot in a way. Because there was there was also at the same time in the early 50s, a lot of hopeful research at universities in America like brain scientists where they were looking at LSD wasn't illegal yet. Because it was an interesting thing, but the CIA took over the military research. First it was the US military. They had a professor at Harvard University called Beecher. Beecher was like the drug expert of the American army. He had also been in the war. And then he looked at the S.S. reports from Dachau and he made a report called report on ego depressant drugs which he sent to Washington. So he was kind of the knowledgeable guy that would interpret how could psychedelic molecules be used as drugs. And then in 47 the CIA was founded. Basically the CIA took over this truth drug research from the military. And then Beecher was sending his reports to the CIA. This was done by a guy called Sidney Gottlieb. I don't know if you've heard that name. He was the head of MK Ultra, MK Ultra is basically a program first to see whether LSD could be used as a weapon. And Gottlieb traveled to Basel Switzerland because he had heard that Sandus was also selling LSD to the other side of the Iron Curtain. There was rumor that the Soviet Union had purchased like 20 million dosages of LSD. So he flew to Basel with a suitcase full of cash and put it on the table of stol, the oil. And said I want the whole the world supply of LSD. And he said your supply, his intelligence told him that Sandus had produced something. I don't know. It's in the book. I forgot the number. For kilogram of LSD and he said I want to buy the whole, you know, for kilogram is quite a lot, you know, because it's already potent in microgram dosages. Well, we only made 400 grams so far. They hadn't even made that much. But so he bought the 400 grams and he set a mechanism in place that Stoyl would always inform Stoyl would not sell to the other side of the Iron Curtain. That's what the Sandus had to, you know, basically assure him. Of course the payback is Sandus can still sell all the other medicines in America. It doesn't have problems with the FDA and the American, you know, that's the pressure. And then Godly takes, you know, the 400 gram back to the States. And it's now from now on always informed when like a scientist in an American university acquires LSD from Sandus because they would not sell it openly in the beginning. They would only give it away basically to scientists. They were still in the product development phase because they still weren't sure what can LSD like what do we write on the package basically? And it is what's the indication. So Godly was basically in the driving chair of LSD at that time. He got all the information from Basel Switzerland who had LSD in the country. He had the most LSD and then he had the idea to really look at how LSD can be used to manipulate people basically. That was, that was like the big goal. And that's not an easy thing to achieve. And the way he did it was he let all the universities in the country, I think over like over 60 institutions like, you know, the big universities of this big country, he let them all, you know, in their, in their special, you know, departments investigate LSD. But these tests are expensive. And what God, the idea Godly had was university tests are often funded by foundations, let's say the Rockefeller Foundation, like a university wants to make like some pharmaceutical test series that goes over two years and involves all these people that, you know, have to be paid and it's expensive. Like, cos like, let's say $200,000 to make like one serious clinical test. So that money comes from the Rockefeller Foundation, for example. And the money first goes from the CIA to the Rockefeller Foundation. So he used not only the Rockefeller Foundation, but also the Rockefeller Foundation, but other other foundations as like go between. So he gave them money and they would finance research done in universities, which are supposed to be, I guess, neutral, like just trying to figure out like what is, you know, sciences. You know, you don't want to see a guy to finance your science and then kind of manipulate through that money, how your research is being done. And especially all the results going back to the people, you know, bring the money. So that he was, he was very efficient in setting up this program, which then I guess was called MK Ultra. And that's also that's that's that's that's how LSD really that's what really went wrong with LSD. MK Ultra. Yeah, because it dominated controlling force over the research and a lot of research then was tailored to like there was crazy stuff happening like there was even in Canada at a university. I write about this in in trip to this guy. And it sounds a bit like a Stanley Kubrick movie. Like he put people on constant LSD and then had speakers under their pillows, which would tell them like single sentences like he was he was trying to see can you break can you like really drive someone mad with LSD for example. Can you deprogram a brain with LSD? So these these are very creepy experiments. These are actually human experiments in a way they were a continuation of the what they as started in Dachau but much more sophisticated and they were done on American citizens. Like the part of MK Ultra were so called safe houses. The safe houses there was one in the West village in Manhattan, one on telegraph hill in San Francisco. And in these safe houses people would be you know would be approached on the street or in bars in in lower Manhattan and you know invited to like a party come we want to come to to my pad you know I have booze and and it was like a cool apartment and but there was one large mirror and behind the mirrors said an operative who was filming and listening in and recording and then they checked like what happens to a person if they receive unwittingly a dosage of LSD. You know so this is quite unethical work that you've done. They also did operation midnight climate. Yeah that's in telegraph hill. Yeah so that was a brothel. Yeah it was it was an apartment they called it the pad but they hired sex workers which then you know got an additional fee from the CIA for giving their clients from them also they received their fee obviously and then giving them LSD. It was kind of I think it was a stupid actually experiment. I mean it's kind of spectacular operation midnight climax looks great in a film. Sounds good. Yeah I mean it's it's it's it's just show it's but it wasn't very effective you know what do you what do you gain what do you see like right someone of course has a little bit different sex on Ellis I guess I'm going to say sex on on LSD but it's it's kind of stupid and never let anywhere basically. Sydney got like wasted a lot of text money and he brought a lot of suffering to people who were subjected to these unethical tests and he had no result. It's definitely not a good thing that they did but if you put your mind into their perspective back then trying to understand the effects of these drugs they probably had limited resources and without making these things legal and without like opening up the research to everybody to this potentially powerful life changing drug I mean this drug could be something that could be used by foreign governments it could be used against us so they are probably very secretive and they're approaching we kind of had the benefit of of you know 2020 hindsight because we're looking bad. Yes it was the Cold War and I think that they really believe that these threats from the Soviet Union and they were threats from the Soviet Union and obviously and brainwashing is a specialty of communism you know so it's it's clear that they wanted to be from his perspective it makes sense you know right so but it didn't help LSD to become a medicine because that was a time when there were no anti-depressants yet developed and no anti-psychotics so I think LSD would have had a chance to actually become a very helpful medicine instead of being kind of an unhelpful weapon because it never worked as a weapon so. Right no it's definitely unhelpful what they did and it might be understandable but it went the wrong way. It went the wrong way but it was also indicative of the kind of control that those people wanted over society and population especially coming after World War II there's a whole new order in the world the United States emerges victorious and you know then there's this clamoring for trying to figure out okay what are what is the enemy up to what are these powerful tools that could be used against us and some of them could be mind control I mean this is obviously at a time where you know the red scare right there are the McCarthy era they were worried about communism and communism infiltrating our society and they're probably very terrified of things that disrupted which is what was going on in the 1960s you know I um Jim I'm going to send you this this is a video of hippies in the 1960s and what it kind of shows you that a lot of the stuff that we're seeing now with the disruption of society this is it's very similar to what was going on in 1968 with the anti-war movement the free Palestine movement has a lot in common with a lot of other anti-war movements of the past where these people want peace and love and and back then in the 1960s in particular they were dropping acid this is the Timothy Leary days and you know tune out and drop out and so play this 1968 I'm going to climb a tree I do that you have always young kids coming from a very rich affluent middle-class society where they've been taken care of since they've been babies and never really had to do anything for themselves in a serious way and now they come here and they want to be taken care of one of the first questions they'll ask is what do you do and so I say I live and they say no I mean do you work or what and I still know I just live a lot of people say to me what are you doing you're not doing any work you're not working at a job you told them that you don't do anything and that you come to the park it's like they can't believe you we're doing the hardest work in the world because we're growing we're trying to change we have a group of young people from upper middle-class families who have moved into a physical environment that is an effect of reversion they're living in gross and sanitary conditions with a great deal of overcrowding there is a very high incidence of infectious hepatitis about one fourth or one bit of our total caseload in the vernier disease clinics appear to be hippies now I'm going on the appearance of it and we have one case history in which the young chap has been into the clinic 12 times in three months with 12 different cases of gonorrhea okay so so that guy that last guy with the salt and pepper hair and the tie and the nice suit those are the people that were from another generation and we're seeing this younger generation that was completely dropping out of society and the what was causing that there was a lot causing that the anti-war movement but a lot of it was fueled by psychedelics and they wanted to stop that they wanted to stop this this radical shift in society they were seeing for the 1950s to the 1960s yeah there's an interview with one main aid of Nixon afterwards when he was already retired and he said that they couldn't make it illegal to be black and they couldn't make it illegal to go on rallies and be against the war like it's an American principle that you're going to go to a demonstration but they could make it illegal to take LSD and then criminalize yeah people say it's kind of the same thing that answering a started much earlier yeah I mean it's a cycle that repeats itself over and over again whenever there's a powerful disruptor that might be ultimately great for the human race but bad for the power structures that are in place currently they step in and they do their best to throw water on it and what they did from the late 1960s into the 1980s they radically shifted culture everything changed music sucked car sucked everything sucked there's there's direct evidence that it had a huge impact on our creativity if you look at the music from the 1960s it was so radically different for the music from the 1950s something had happened I mean that's why John Lennon said we have to thank the CIA because they gave us LSD I mean it is kind of interesting also a young guy called Ken Casey was working at a psychiatric ward in Menlo Park California and he was part of MK Ultra basically I mean he was a guinea pig he received 75 US dollars for taking LSD and then he took LSD and his default mode network was default mode network was you know had less energy and he had like he said suddenly understood the crazies you know he was walking through the psychiatric ward and understanding a lot better like what's actually going on in the brain and that's when he had the idea for one through over the cook-oose nest which made him so much money that he then decided to stop writing and buy a bus and drive around the country with his friends and dish out LSD so it's kind of he made like it a career change yeah I could see how the powers it be I could see how the CIA in the government like we have to stop this we have to put a stop this is going to be the downfall of society certainly downfall of the people that are in control of the government currently and these people are necessary to being controlled the country because we are in a cold war with Russia we just got out of world war in the hot war with Vietnam I mean that that war was taking a big toll on the American society and suddenly there's like young people sitting on it you know saying what the fuck I'm not going there right so that that creates that created a strong counter reaction by the regime yes which is to legalize LSD but poor LSD and poor LSD and what's really unfortunate is that if that had not happened who knows how transformative those substances would have been to society globally if there was a great reckoning in the United States if we understood things if we got our our act together we we really cleaned up all the problems in society and did so on an egalitarian plane we like recognize that there's work that can be done here where we can make life better for everybody have everybody recognize that we are literally all in this together and we are all connected we need each other we are a part of each other and we should treat each other all of us like we are a community I think that's the globalized narrative yes we need yeah that is the only way we survive yeah I mean this is the perspective that astronauts have when they go to the space station they look down at this ball and they go this is so crazy like that we are we're fighting over imaginary boundaries that we've created lines in the dirt I think it really is a problem of our language and of our communication skills because we can only create a discourse within the United States possibly of the media you have to Joe Rogan experience you have you know you have a discourse and you have discourse in other nation states but there is no global discourse I mean maybe when there's like Olympic games that's a type of global discourse that's happening maybe right now that's why people kind of like to watch it right now because they feel we're connecting like from all over the world without being like total assholes we're all sports together isn't that nice you know I'm like when the opposing teams hug each other and yeah like friends yeah we we need positive global communication because we have a lot of negative global communication we have two I mean two very prominent wars right now and a lot of other conflicts and we have global problems like the heating up of the planet which leads to refugee floods and crisis and migration I mean we have we have a global theme but how do we talk about it there's no there's no global government not that we need one I wish you'd have on but there's no global basically there's no global end there's not there's nothing you know right but I don't necessarily think a global government's the rule because the problem is whenever people have control over people they just want more it's just it's like everything else it's like if you have money you want more money if you have power you want more power you want control you you want more control and it makes it easier for them to stay in control and if you had a global world government that could tell people no you can't move to switch or in where the laws are different you can't move to Costa Rica you have to the laws apply everywhere it's a global world order we decide what you can and can't do and we're not deciding it based on empirical evidence fact objective analysis of reality we're doing on the basis of what's the most effective way that we can control and govern I think it's like a horse in the area that's a horse we might be moving into what we're in it right now we're battling it you know there's rational logical people that understand the consequences of these things that are fighting against it against it and then there's people that are saying we need centralized digital currency to compete with China like Jesus Christ and we're relating ourselves into a position that's very similar to many other positions that have that societies have faced in the past including ancient Greece where ancient Greece where they developed democracy the ilesinian mysteries and then all that stuff got made illegal and then society crumbles things fall apart it's no longer the center of intellectual discourse in the world everything goes away they threw water on it in the 1960s with the psychedelics acts where they made everything schedule one they they lock people up that were anti war protesters they they figured out a way to squash this sort of new movement of thought I think yeah I think it would be a step a step into the future if psychedelics were made legal and if we kind of move more towards you know because the psychedelics as we said before are and humans are about transcendence yes it's about basically including the other and not being afraid of the other and that fear of the other leads to violence against the other the psychedelic is is is moving in the opposite way right so it is you know obviously not a surprise that Nixon would illegalize court of the psychedelics they're dangerous yeah I really dangerous to power they just dropped so but it's great for everyone that's the crazy thing the people that are making it illegal are the people that haven't experienced it that's correct that's where it's crazy because it would be beneficial to them they are human beings where they finite lifespan their experience on earth would be greatly enhanced if they had the perspective of the psychedelic encounter well if I was a chance of Germany which I will never be but if I was I would make a psychedelic year like after high school you have the opportunity to actually experience these substances I think it would be very good for societies to think about rituals or mechanisms or discourse like what you said about the mysteries of you loses that was the defining ritual of ancient Greece the essence the Athens society would move there in September like yeah it would go there they would have this experience they would talk about this experience yes because of that experience they could relate to each other they could relate to there to the planet that they live on so that was a very healthy thing and we today because it's illegal we can't we don't have we don't have this and I don't know what I mean some things like burning man obviously are like attempts to create like ritualistic spaces and I've never been there and I heard it's it's it's kind of stupid because it's so expensive and kind of elitist I don't know if that's true but basically we need we need something we need a legitimate structure because there's also a thing like that is described called spiritual narcissism where you you start doing these things and you think that you have all the answers and then you have people that are the ones who speak to these groups of people and they have all the knowledge and we're all in this together and it's essentially a cult and it's really easy to run a cult if everyone in the cult is naive and they're looking for a leader they're looking for an answer maybe they've had a list list life that's that lacks in direction and then also someone comes along and through this ritual we can all transcend and you know becomes so what do we got up what we need real shamans we need actual legit shamans and the problem is that term is in You know, it becomes a lot of we got to do what we need real shamans. We need actual legit shamans. And the problem is that term is in our society is much maligned. Right? That term is silly people that are in the jungle that are doing, you know, voodoo. But we need someone who is a legitimate psychedelic experience or who is who has a genuine, genuine goal of advancing consciousness and advancing consciousness and doing it in a very responsible way. One of the things that we would have to be careful of if you have something like a year of psychedelics is schizophrenia. We don't understand. I didn't I didn't say wish they young people should take psychedelics for a straight year, but maybe it could take with a possibility with that possibility of some kind of structure. Maybe a place you can go and go. Well, I think media structure for everybody, I think that's really the goal of this thing is to develop a sensible objective structure based on actual research based on a real knowledge of real clinical data on dosages, a real knowledge on which compounds are more effective for which particular ailments, I beguene, which you talked about, I begu, very effective for addiction. My friend Ed went over to Mexico and he got into an I beguene clinic when he got hooked on pills and cured him of it. Well, just one one experience. One experience. Yeah. I know many people that have had real problems with pills and have knocked it with one I beguene experience. So there's there's a lot of different things that can be done that can benefit society tremendously. But it has to be done responsibly. And it has to be done with real knowledge. And that real knowledge is only going to be available if they open everything up to real research. And instead of being biased about this and so like let it be open to everyone to have an objective analysis of what is actually going on, have the naysayers and the the the people that are converted, everyone debate this and try to have some sort of an understanding of what is good, what is bad, what's the right dose, what can be done and what is the most effective setting? Because satin setting, the part of the ritual aspect of is important too because you're setting an intention before you do these things, which is why a lot of these people that are serious users of psychedelics, they don't like the concept of micro dosing and they don't like the concept of recreational use. They don't like to they think these things are sacred and they should be used only in this one particular way. And I think this conversation would benefit everyone in society, including the people that wanted illegal. That's what's ironic about it. The people that want it illegal, they are just human beings. They're just human beings that are trapped in this paradigm, they're trapped in the the world that they live in, they're trapped on the momentum of their actions and all the life that they've lived up into this moment. And they would benefit from it. I mean, it would also give the Western society the tremendous push, you know, if psychedelics were allowed and that could be research and that could be, you know, it would probably encourage like a cultural flowering. And right now we have kind of a decay of Western culture, like Western Western societies and crisis and we don't really know how to get out of it. And the current recipes given to us by the camps that are now also competing for the US presidency, they don't really solve the problem. I mean, we all feel like in the last couple of years more and more people feel that something is wrong and that something should change. I think somehow people are ready for a revolution, but no one knows exactly what kind of revolution it should be. So people who tap into that are quite successful, even though they might not even provide, you know, what is actually needed to have that change. But we do need a change on a national level in Germany, in America and other countries as well as on a global level. And I think opening up our societies to psychedelic research and psychedelics, I would be curious to see a society which treats itself with that, you know, liberty and relaxation and curiosity. Right now we're all tense and we're saying, no, this is the, you know, the chemical wall in our brain. I just don't think it works for for democratic Western free society to have a chemical wall in the brain. It's contradiction. It keeps us back from really developing a society that is much better than the current society because the current society is pretty shitty actually. And we really moved into it and we're trapped. We're trapped, but there is of course ways out. There can always be a so-called- We're talking about one right now. This is what's crazy. This isn't theoretical. And these are actually substances. Yeah, we're talking about it now in Kanye West on this show said he's the leader of the free world. Maybe we're maybe today we're now the leaders of the free world and we're going to start a psychedelic revolution from this podcast. It has to be done everywhere with everyone. They have to demand freedom. And if you have freedom, freedom over your own consciousness is what mechanic talked about often. Yes. That it means nothing if you don't have freedom over your own consciousness. Especially freedom over your own consciousness with substances that have been shown to have dramatic positive effects on people. Yeah. So there's a lot of drugs that are very good positive drugs that people use on a regular basis that if you take too much of them, you will die. So we know what the substances are. We understand what the correct dosages. We understand what the LD50 is. And we know how to prescribe them correctly. We should apply that same logic to psychedelics. I mean, but Hoffman was thinking about this in the 50s. This was another document I found in the archives. He set up a memo to store the CEO writing that sandals should now focus on these psychedelic substances. We should examine all the possibilities. We should create new compounds. We should, you know, we should become the psychedelic pharmaceutical powerhouse in the world. That idea is really a great idea. It is a great idea. Then Staudel just said no because he had been visited by Sydney Gottlieb who basically said, no, don't do it. Well, it's guys like that guy in the suit and tie with the salt and pepper hair. There's no nonsense Republican right wing controlling. I think it's also these guys are a little bit of the past. I mean, I'm quite surprised. For example, in America, I get approached by, you know, different camps about tripped in a very positive way because I think somehow that anti drug rhetoric is losing ground. It's the feeling I have. Well, it makes me a little bit optimistic. It's losing ground because the internet. So the narrative up until the internet came around was that these things destroy lives. And then all sudden people are saying, you know, actually not really. And then you have the positive effect that it has on people that are suffering from post traumatic stress disorder coming back from the war, which is really matches concentrating on it. Right. The mainstream media really is a problem in this regard because they're problem with everything. Well, they're there. They're essentially a propaganda network that is passing itself off as the news. It kind of comes from Randall Hearst in a way. I mean, certainly does. I mean, he's kind of set the tone. Absolutely. But I mean, I'm sure there were people doing that before. If you have control of the newspaper, and especially back then with hers publications, there's very few newspapers in the country. And especially that we're respected. If you have control over that narrative, you put something in the newspaper and people read it. They read that as that. Oh, my God, that is a fact. This is what's happening. People today are far more skeptical, particularly after the pandemic. I think the pandemic kind of shook things up to a point where it's much more difficult to pass off propaganda today than it was even just four years ago. I mean, that's why I was quite excited to come on this podcast on this experience because I think you have actually created a space where free thought is possible and free communication. It's like a stage that you've created. I think is actually quite an important artwork that you have established here. I mean, it's not so easy to create like your own media that has a global reach. So thank you. I don't know how it happened. It just happened. I think it made itself. Maybe. Yeah. I think so. Because the concept was right. Well, I think, look, I'm the one who's the host of it. So I'd be the best judge. I do not think I'm really responsible for this thing. I think this thing wanted to be made in the made itself. And it did it in a very sneaky way. It did in a very sneaky way. Originally, it was just me having fun with my friends just with a webcam, me and Brian, and then Eddie Bravo, and Tom Seger and all my friends. We just come over and just talk. Just have a good time. And then it started to be where it got enough downloads where I could contact someone like Graham Hancock and say, hey, tell me about ancient civilizations. Come on my podcast, Anthony Bourdain. Tell me about your travels. And then it became much, much bigger. And it sort of I genuinely believe it tricked me into making it when was the breaking point when it got big? It was very gradual. It was very gradual. I'll tell you when I realized it. I think it was like 2011 or 2012. I was on stage in the Chicago theater. And I was doing comedy and I asked the audience. I was going to tell story from the podcast. And I said, how many of you guys listened to the podcast? And it was just yeah, 3,700 people cheering. And I was like, whoa, I'll never forget that moment. Because I was like, oh, one of the things that I used to do, and I still do is I don't look at the numbers. I don't pay attention. I don't pay attention to how many downloads. I'm not like feverishly checking the what's good and what's bad. What I don't look at like what the retention is when people drop out, I don't, that's up to them. My job is to just have an interest in conversation with people that I'm actually excited about talking to. That's my only job. So the way I book it, I completely book it based on my interests. I don't I don't have a publicist that's like examining trends and this person's pop. I don't do any of that. I think it made itself. I think it made itself. I think it's a trick. I think it's like the muse. Like the muse sort of like brings these ideas into your head. I think the universe gave birth this thing. And I know it's a stupid, hippy thing to say, it sounds ridiculous. But if anybody should know, it's me. And if anybody should want to take responsibility and be proud of something, it would be me, right? But I'm not. I feel like it's not really me. I feel like this thing wanted to be made. And I think this is one of many of these things that want to be made all around the world. And that's why podcasts are developing. I think there's a hunger for honest discourse and real conversations with people that exists everywhere. And I think that's why podcasts are exploding. That's where you don't have a gatekeeper anymore to be able to go frustrated with mainstream media. Well, you shouldn't have gatekeepers. You shouldn't have someone who you're the narrative that you're pushing out to the world is heavily influenced by the people that are advertising on your channel. Yeah. Heavily influenced. So there's certain things you cannot criticize. There's certain things you will gaslight the media or the public into believing is a good thing when it's probably not really a good thing. You will say things in a very biased perspective. You will attack particular individuals. You're not just attacked political individuals. You'll attack them with a very specific narrative that gets repeated over and over and over again to the point where they make these compilations of these media pundits saying the exact same thing over and over and over again. This is not news. This is not real discourse. This is not real human beings discussing things and trying to figure out what's right and what's wrong. This is propaganda. And this is most of what people get. And inside that propaganda are some real news. There's actual specific information about the weather. There's actual real reports about conflicts breaking out overseas and all sorts of different things. But at the end of the day, it's not real conversation. So real conversation was able to flourish because people had this hunger for it. And they didn't even know they wanted it until they got it. And we just thought when we first started making podcasts that everyone was moving to a much shorter attention span. And that most of the things that were going to be popular in the future were like 10 minute things, like very quick things. Which is like a lot of the truth today with TikTok and Instagram reels and all these things that people like short attention span just captures you and gives you nothing. And you just keep scrolling and looking. And we thought that's what people are moving to. But then podcast came along and podcast came along with three hour conversations with scientists that get 50 million views. And then people are like, whoa, okay. So it's not that people aren't intellectually curious. It's not people aren't, they don't have this want to be engaged. They do. Everybody does. It just do that being fed correctly. I mean, it's also one of the beauties. I mean, I'm here as a writer of literature actually. I mean, if I decide to work on a book, I don't get influenced by anybody. And I have a very large space in which I can develop my thoughts and my narrative. That's why I'm actually active in this field. I think there might be similarity between a podcast and literature because they both go into the long form and into immersion into something. Absolutely. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, literature is the ultimate form of that, right? Because the amount of time that it takes for you to ponder the sentences and the paragraphs and putting them all together and the order and which you say things and the way you captivate and compel the reader. It's very similar. And it's all coming from your mind too, which is also very similar. When I hear you talk on a podcast, if I'm a listener, I'm listening. I hear one human being who's talking about your analysis of all the data and all the research that you've done to create this book, that's not really available in the most places anymore. But people want that because they want to know what, what did this guy find out? What does he know? And how does he know it? Let me listen to him. And along the way, especially where I'm in a three hour conversation along the way, let me hear some crackpot things. Let me hear if he says some things like, oh, that guy is a kind of a cook. Oh, that guy's not really thinking clearly. Oh, that guy's kind of full of shit. Oh, he's saying that, but there's no way he really believes that. Okay. Now I know now I'm suspicious. Now I can kind of like look at this through a filter of reality. So I think maybe we should talk a little bit about blitzed and notsies and trot. Sure. Yeah. Yeah. I thought that's why you had me here. I thought that would be like your subject of fascination with part of it for sure. I want to talk to you about everything. You know, I just was interested in talking to you soon. I mean, immediately when I saw the, what you were talking about when I saw in the Jesse Walter show. Okay. That was kind of of funny to me because that was really speaking to an audience. I usually don't speak to, but it was great. You know, yeah, well, he loved the book. They're willing to take much more chances on Fox News and they are on other networks. Well, I think they started with Tucker Carlson in a lot of ways, but the Jesse Waters thing was interesting because you got to scratch the surface a little bit. Yeah, it was seven minutes, not three hours. Yeah. So tell me about blitzed. What do you want to know? Well, first of all, what was, when was the first, what was the creation of Infantamines and when did it start getting utilized by military and by people at Hitler? Well, there's like a rumor going on that it started at the Olympic Games in Berlin, 1936 because an American Afro American athlete named Jesse Owens was running faster than the white, airy and German superheroes jumping further and winning, I think five gold medals. The rumor was he must be on something similar kind of to answering or like the jazz people that only so good because they're on something. Right. So there was like, was he on Ben Zadrine? Because Ben Zadrine was an American product that was already available and it's basically speed and there were no doping checks at this at these Olympics. I think there were the last Olympic Games without doping checks. Yeah. So you could basically take everything, but it's never no one knows. Jesse, oh, he was just good. You know, so, but there was a guy called Teodor Temla who was the head of the Temla factory and he said to his chemist, who's how should after the Olympic Games we have to create a better amphetamine, like a better than the American amphetamine. This can never happen again like an Afro American is faster than the white or white guys. And then how should was the chemist's name? He did research about amphetamines and he found that in Japan, a chemist called Nagai in 1970, 17 quite a while ago actually. This was in 1936. So already 19 years earlier, a Japanese chemist had made meth amphetamine and meth amphetamine is stronger than amphetamine. So how should thought I'm going to make a new meth amphetamine? So he found a new way of synthesizing meth. You know, you can, there's different ways you can make meth I guess and he found a specific way that this Temla company then patented the patent I was issued in Berlin in October 1937. And then they put it on the market in 1938. Meth amphetamine became available. No one said it was like a drug or anything. It was just a new medicine. You didn't even need a prescription. You could just like a child could go into a pharmacy and say I want 10 packages of methamphetamine and you know, it was cheap also and you got it. It was branded as pervoting. Pervoting, we say in German. There it is. There is Paveteen. And Paveteen, and Paveteen then became very fashionable. Look how innocuous that little container looks. Who would imagine that's how they sell meth? I think this could already be and I'm going to get to this in a second for the military. But first it was a drug that was just on the market in the civil society. There was no war yet in 1938. 1938 was actually kind of the height of the Hitler regime. Like people loved him. There was full employment. I mean there was a pressure against the Jews. But if you were like a national socialist, you thought that was good basically. So the problem was, or I mean there were many problems. But the reality was that it was like a steam engine. Like it was the society was really working. Everyone had a job. Everyone was taking part. That also created it was basically a modern capitalist society that also created a lot of stress. You always have to compete. Like you have to go from meeting to meeting. Like the German economy was booming. So people love meth. There was no coffee available because Germany didn't have like colonies like France where they couldn't bring in coffee. I don't even know if there was coffee. You know, probably you could get it maybe somewhere. But it was not a normal thing to like go into a cafe in the morning and have a coffee. So this methamphetamine became very popular like workers used it in the factories. They could increase their output. And party people used it because it was also, it boosted your ego. So it was, you know, it go into a meeting, an important meeting, you take a bit of meth before. So it wasn't stigmatized. It was just, it was, they called it performance enhancing performance enhancing substance. So it was, that's a neutral term. You know, they made studies at universities showing that there's actually good against anything. Also against depression and it would increase your sexual drive. And it was like people thought this is the greatest thing basically. There was no studies being done yet on addiction, which, which, obviously, is a problem of meth. But also we have to understand that this meth that Tamala produced is not the crystal meth that's being produced in a trailer somewhere, you know, in a southern state or so. I don't know. It's a different, you know, it was made by a pharmaceutical company. The way I found out about Pavettin was actually, it's actually a funny story because I didn't know anything about no one knew anything about Nazis and drugs, as I said before. Like in 2010, I'm asking a friend of mine who's a DJ in Berlin, Alex is his name. I said to him, what should I write about next? What should my next book be? Because I've written three novels and no one was about to write the fourth novel. And he said, right about Nazis and drugs. I said, well, but they didn't take any drugs, you know, because I, and he said they did. And I said, how do you know no one's ever talked about this before? He said, well, yesterday I received Pavettin, I said, what is Pavettin? He said, well, it's methamphetamine from the so-called, from the third Reich, the Reich being a propaganda turned by the Nazis. That's why I like to say the so-called third Reich. How did this happen? He had a friend who was an antique dealer. And in 2010, this antique dealer in East Berlin had purchased like in an apartment that where people died, like, you know, then the antique dealers come in and they take furniture, they pay maybe a little late, they like he bought a medicine chest. And he opened the medicine chest and there was Pavettin inside from the 1940s. And that antique dealer was a friend of Alex the DJ. He looked at it and he said on the package contains methamphetamine. He's like, what? So he took it with his partner. They were curious, you know, and I made a meta-sky and he said for one month we took this Pavettin and it was like so great. Like it was he said it was not too strong. It was it made us happy. We were very active. We worked a lot. We had great sex. It was like great. And then Alex the DJ being very interested in all kinds of drugs. He also took it and he told me this in my writing tower in Berlin. He said after the first Pavettin I could feel that something's coming on that there was no, it was like increased energy level. And then I took another one. And these are pills which were like 70 years old and they were still fun. They were still working. And then I took a third one. And my writing tower was right at the river in Berlin and there was like a big ship passing by. And he said and I felt like this ship when the big engines turned on and the the ship like the push of the of the engine like moving the whole big ship forward. That's how I felt after three tablets. So this is insane, you know. And I googled it and there was like just a little on the internet. There was one medicine historian who had like totally a non guy, but I mean a researcher who had written like a two-page thing that the German blitzkrieg which is the German word for speed war like the Nazis strategy, how to lead a war, was only possible because of methamphetamine because of this Pavettin. And I read this and I said this is crazy. Maybe I should write about this. And I contacted, so it's a very odd story how this came about, you know. And I contacted this academic. He was at the University of Ullmer traveled down there. I met him and he said, yeah, this, there's actually a lot more to find, but it just didn't have the time because he's investigating all kinds of things. You know, he was just this was just a side project of his. And he gave me the signatures in in archives. He got a signature. Every every document has a signature. And he gave me like the signatures where I can find like all the documents on the meth on meth during during Nazi times. This was in the military archive of Germany, which is housed in Freiburg in southern Germany. Germany is a decentralized country. So not all archives are in Berlin. For example, the military archive is in this small town called Freiburg. The military archives is almost bigger than the town, you know, because the the German military has done so much shit, you know, in the first really we lost two world wars. I mean, that's quite, that's that's world record for sure. So and everything that the German armies did is, you know, documented because the Germans loved document like everything is written down. So the military archive is huge. And because I had the signatures from this guy, basically did the legwork for me. I could look at all the files and then I realized that the German army was using methamphetamine. And it's, it's another interesting story how that came about because a professor called rank, he was the head of the Institute for Defense Physiology of the German army. And basically his job was to enhance the fighting capability of the soldier. So he was researching in 38. How can we combat fatigue? Because he said, not the Russians are biggest enemy, not the British, not even the French, you know, or biggest enemies fatigue, because you get tired in the evening, you fight the whole day and then you need to sleep. What a waste, you know, that's not good. We have, he was looking for a way to come to beat this enemy sleep. And then when Pavettin came onto the market, he started reading studies done by universities and they very clearly show that on meth. And I think this is an experience that people who have used meth probably would sign, you know, you don't sleep as much, you know, it keeps you awake because all your dopamine is released. So your brain is basically in a fight of flight mode, like your methamphetamine makes you extremely alert over a very long period of time. And then at one point, obviously you drop down and you get the urge to take it again. This is how the addiction works. But he was not, he was not, you know, looking at addiction problems. He was just looking at does it really work to keep a soldier awake maybe for two hours longer on the battlefield? Because there's this saying from Napoleonic times, the last 15 minutes in a battle that that's the decisive 15 minutes, like who's who wins in the end wins, you know. So if you have a if you have something that keeps your men awake for longer than the enemy has, then you have a decisive advantage. So he may test. I don't know. I have like this photos of it in my book Blitz, where you see like the young medical officers, like he was working in a in an institution that was breeding medical officers for the German army. So he gave these young guys placebo methamphetamine coffee, just to check check and like can they sustain longer on meth and they could they could actually they were more active like these tests started at 8 p.m. And went until 10 a.m. And the meth people like they were awake the whole night, you know, they were filling out, you know, they hear tests like you have to draw things or repeat orders or like solve mathematical questions. And the meth people were like going at it until 10 a.m. And then some said, and now we want to go out, like now then they wanted to party while the coffee in people. I don't know if we can see that image is kind of funny. Can you pull that up? Like the car. You know, your max on on Jimmy. That's not sure which one it is. I'm looking at it's just it's a lot of images in their own. Ah, gold. Yeah, this one. So these guys were all messed up. Well, you see like going up maybe you see like the S, you know, sleeping there. That's S means shine tub letter, which is placebo to the left of him as a perfect in guy. He's quite happy to the right of him as a bends drink guy. That's the B. And that's another stimulus. That's not that's the American stimulus, which is not as potent as methamphetamine. I mean, methamphetamine is more potent than amphetamine. It's like a difference between like a Mercedes and a bicycle or something. Okay. What is the C? C's coffee coffee. Yeah, there's a few more images where you like this is like a taken at 4 15 in the morning to stick in 5 15 in the morning. Yeah, go back maybe to the 4 15. Hmm. I guys had moved. Well, I mean, here we see photo. I mean, then he obviously like he obviously looked at the results of, you know, people feeling outness more pictures later in the day when the when the when the S person is like yawning. Well, you see in front of him, the pervoting person, he's not yawning. He's like, he's like ready. Yeah, he's ready for the next questionnaire. You know, he can't sleep for like another day. But the guy in the back though, that's a pee his head is down. I think he's solving. Yeah, he might be studying things. Well, in any case, maybe go one picture down. Yeah, that one. That's how that's how the test like he did. So he saw that with if you take two times, six milligrams of pave routine on the right there, that black bar, people, they don't show any fatigue at all. He basically came to the conclusion it does work. It does keep you awake. And he also found out something which is I think is kind of funny. They don't show any fatigue at all. He basically came to the conclusion it does work. It does keep you awake. And he also found out something which is, I think it's kind of funny. He found out that on meth, you are less capable of solving higher complex questions. So meth keeps you up, but it makes you a little bit dumber. Like things that are really that demand like abstract thinking or more complex things, you're not better on meth. Is it because meth sort of rushes you to come to the conclusion? Yeah. And you also, you feel too good about yourself and that self-criticism is lowered. And he concluded that this is perfect for the German soldier. It makes you awake longer and makes you a little bit more stupid. Because the soldier just needs to follow orders. He just needs to shoot for a long time. So he got all excited about it. This was in 38. His last test he did. There was in 39. And Germany was about to invade Poland September 1st 1939 beginning of World War II. And he said to his superior was in America. It's called the Surgeon General, the German. That's a different name. But the highest medical guy in the army who determines basically at the end of the day, what is given to the soldiers. So he wrote to his boss and this was kind of an old school guy, the boss. Like he was still from the first World War and he read the reports and he's like, well, we need to use a chemical drug to enhance the... Like he didn't get it basically. So he said we're not using this in the attack on Poland. And then the rancor, the professor really believed in meth. And I read his war diary. Like every officer was required to write it like a diary during the war. And in his war diary, you can clearly see that he himself became addicted to meth. Like he writes about it. It's so great. I don't even understand how I could even do a day at the office without meth. Why is not everyone taking it? But then like a few months later, it's like, I feel very depressed this morning. Even the paveteen I'm using does not help me anymore against my depression. Like he didn't understand that this was actually the problem. So he was becoming addicted to himself. He did hire and hire dosages. He did. And he became quite unhinged. But he was like the meth guy of the German army. But he was still doing it, you know, his job. And he asked the medical officers in the field in Poland. Poland was beaten by Germany within a few days. Actually, I think 17 days or something. It was a quick victory. Actually, quite surprising that it was so quick, but it happened so quick. And a lot of medical officers wrote back to him that paveteen was actually quite helpful. They said things like, and I studied all these reports for blitzed. And I quote, I'm quoting some of them in blitzed. Like it really helped all soldiers achieve their work. And I do their work load, which was basically killing or invading a foreign country. So again, again, was very excited. And he said to the search in general, because then after the successful campaign against Poland, it was now going against the West, France, the old enemy of Germany. Like we had had a war, 1865, Germany won, then in World War I, Germany lost. And now Hitler won it like the revenge. You know, no, we have the third one. We're going to win the third one. But his high command was saying, let's please not do it, because the French army, Lagrand Army, was supposed to be the best army in the world at the time, in the late 30s, early 40s. Like they were really proud of their army, the French. And it, I mean, it wasn't good, but everyone thought it's good. And they also had an ally, which was very powerful, great Britain. You know, the world's empire, you know, so these two powers to attack from Germany, these two powers was considered insane by the high command. Like they thought Hitler is just a lunatic. And Hitler wanted to attack the West already in November 1939. Like Poland was beaten. The German military actually needed a lot of repairs, because even in a successful campaign, you lose a lot of machinery, you lose a lot of people. You know, so everyone said, let's not do it. Let's just, you know, get back on track and develop a strategy, which we can win against the West, because they knew there is no strategy. Because that was exactly what happened in World War I. Germany attacked from the north of Belgium, and there was a stalemate, and then in the end, Germany lost. Because Germany is one country, and it cannot win against, you know, so many countries. So they said it's not going to work, you know, but Hitler was very stubborn. And he said it will work, but they blocked him. There was even a coup attempt in November 39 against him, which failed. And then he had a breakfast meeting February 17, 1940, three kind of revolutionary tank generals for Manche Dain, Gu diirian, and Rommel, Rommel later becoming very famous tank general, came to Hitler in Berlin in the rice translary and said, we have a plan. We know it's going to work. We can beat them, because we will not use the tanks. As everyone expects us to use the tanks, which is kind of more in the back, kind of backing up the infantry and, you know, being like the backup guys, like the heavy guys in the back. Like we will use the tanks in the front and make the tanks kind of overrun the enemy. And Hitler's like, wow, this is a crazy thought. He loved crazy thoughts. So he's like, this is a good thought. But where are we going to do it? And they said, we're going to do it in an area. And also I also said an image. I don't know if we need it, but it's interesting. They decided on an area which is the Aden mountains. And the Aden mountains is a mountain range in Belgium, which is exactly between the north of Belgium, where the western allies were massing their defense forces. And France, where the French also had heavy defense. But in this mountainous terrain, it wasn't heavily fortified. So they said we're going to go through the Aden mountains within three days and three nights. But we can't stop at night, because if we stop and kind of sleep at night, they will know that we're there and then they will come from the north and the south. And the pincer movement destroyed our advance. So we have to not stop. And within three days and three nights, we have to reach through Belgium, the mountains, sorry, the French border town of Sedol. We have to get there, because then we will be faster, because they will still be stuck in the north of Belgium. Like we will be faster than them and we'll race through all the way to the channel. And then we will be in the back of them and destroy them. So we will have kind of surrounded them. This is what Churchill later called the Sickle Cut. And this is the Sickle Cut. You see where they're going through and then kind of branch off to the north and to the south. And in circle, the allied forces there in the north and the French forces there in the south. Like being further within enemy territory than the defenders. It's a crazy plan. And the only problem is that that thing of not sleeping for three days and three nights. So they were not sure how to solve that problem actually. And Hitler said, this is not a problem. The German soldier is so convinced of the ideology of national socialism of fighting for me, the Führer. They will not sleep. I didn't sleep in the first world war. Hitler was a soldier in the first world war and he claimed that he was awake and didn't need sleep and stuff like that. So he kind of said that the ideology will make the normal German soldier into the super human soldier doesn't need to sleep, which is bullshit obviously. Everyone needs to sleep. You know, not because you're convinced of an idea. You don't need to sleep. And another fact is that actually soldiers were not convinced at all. You know, the German army was the German army. Of course there were many Nazis in the German army. But at the beginning of the war, they were also just, you know, young guys. And they were not like burning for Hitler. They were actually quite pissed there to go to war against the West. Like they were they were scared. Like I read reports on like mass depression before the attack started of people who just said, we're going to lose. You know, this is not possible because to launch a successful invasion into enemy territory, you need a three to one superiority in manpower and in weaponry. And the Germans were actually they had less people, less soldiers than the West. And their weapons were not as good. For example, that tanks were not as good as the British tanks. So it was basically there was a lot of a lot of doubt that this madman planned by these three young revolutionary generals and Hitler supporting this madman plan would actually work. But then a gunker thought, this is my calling now. This is my hour. And he presented his findings that actually you don't need to sleep for three days and three nights. On methods possible, if you give enough math to a person, you can stay awake for five days. So suddenly his findings became very interesting. He was invited to the high command. He was giving lectures. He wrote a so-called stimulant decree. I don't know if you want to see that. I found that also in the archive in Freiburg. It was the first official paper by an army where the soldiers were basically invited or ordered or it was suggested to them to take a powerful synthetic stimulant, which is this is the stimulant decree. It says for example, this was distributed to all the medical officers. So they knew you know how to use the meth. So for example, it says what you could give if someone took too much. Like then you give like a sleeping pill. It also says it's quite interesting. What are the side effects and the side effects are aggression. So that was like a desired side effect. So Rancosa live very popular. He was on top of the world. There's another paper I found which shows how many dosages then the German army ordered from the Tamla Company just before they attacked France. And this is 35 million dosages. So finding that document was also kind of found. Wow. Yeah. 35 million. Yeah. And so were they on a large dose of this when the soldiers? Well, it's interesting then to see how those 35 million dosages were being used because they were used asymmetrical. They were candid out, especially to the tank troops because the tanks were at the forefront and these tanks could not stop. So everyone in these tanks was basically on crystal meth, like all the way through the advance. And there's reports by the French army that they simply could not understand their opponent anymore. Like they didn't sleep. They just chased through. They behaved like madman basically. Romer was seen at one point, totally high on meth, like standing in the tank. Like the lid was open. He was standing there. And they were racing at night through a French village where the French army had camped because they needed to sleep because it's kind of, I guess, funny. I don't know if funny is the right word, but France also had sort of not a stimulant decree, but they had the rule that in a war situation and this had been beneficial in World War One. Each French soldier has the right to drink three quarters of a leader of red wine per day. So when France was attacked by Germany, I think it was 17,000 trucks with red wine, drove from the French wine regions to the front lines and distributed the red wine. So the French guys were like drinking red wine, which is a mood and a answer, but it does make you tired, especially three quarters of a leader. So the Germans were messed up and the French were like kind of drowsy. So that scene with Romer, I described, he's standing in the open lid of the of the tank going through this village at night and left and right. Kind of the French soldier's kind of sleeping basically and he just fires with the tank left and right and he runs over people and he's like a complete madman and then the French got scared. They got very scared and they base, that defense is collapsed. Germany beat France in a few days, you know, big neighbor that in First World War Germany had been fighting like that. They had been fighting four years like moving like a meter a day in the next day back and this time because of the methamphetamine charging through and you know Hitler was in Paris in June already. That's the story of Blitz in a nutshell or a part of Blitz. Isn't it incredible that that's on Todd and school? I do give talks now in school. Yeah, no, no, but no historians touched the subject. Right. I spoke to for this book, I collaborated, but I had advice from a leading German historian and elderly gentleman who passed away. Mom's in like the leading German historian, National Socialism, really cool guy. I met him, I showed him my findings from the archives and he's like, we overlooked this the whole time because we historians have no clue about drugs. Like we don't, it has to enter your mind in a way that this might have a relevance. Historians are very square people, at least used to be very square people. A National Socialism is such a serious topic that out of the box thinking is not really encouraged within the academia, at least, you know, but me being a non-historian, I could think out of the box. So he said this is the missing puzzle piece that we need to know to understand what actually went down in World War II. So he was very much behind it and wrote a preface to the German edition also. So it was interesting to communicate with him, obviously, about it because he helped me, you know, also put things into perspective because also what one thing he said was, don't argument in a monocosal way. It's kind of flippant to say the Blitzkrieg was only possible because of methamphetamine. It's methamphetamine played a huge role and I examined that huge role. I think it was probably one of the decisive factors, but you know, many factors come together. But if you can't stay awake for three days, none of it works. Yeah. You know, World War II would have been very, very different. You want to make some money after that water. And I mean, it's not a, if you look at it from a military standpoint, it actually makes, you know, a lot of sense that the problem in Germany, Nazi Germany, they then had was that the army was so crazy about meth and also the Air Force, they were using, giving it to pilots in the, we say, Luft in the air battle against Great Britain that was like a decisive air battle in the late late 1940 after France had been beaten by Germany conquered. Then it was Germany against Great Britain. There was a lot of fighting in the air between Royal Air Force and the German Luftwaffe and the German Luftwaffe was, you know, messed up to, but because they had less pilots. Kamikaze pilots, right? That's a big one. We talked about suicide flights. We've talked about that before. Japanese factory workers also use methamphetamine. Japan was an ally of Germany. They were part of the evil axis. So Japan had knowledge that methamphetamine was successfully used in the European theater of this war. So they used it also in the Kamikaze pilots against American, you know, ships and stuff. So where were we? We were the effect of meth on the soldiers and also the effectiveness of it during the blitz greek, but then also the Japanese pilots that the Japanese were using it, the Kamikaze were using it. I mean, the, oh yeah, no, I wanted to talk about something that became a problem then the German military because then suddenly there were guys in the, for example, the so-called health furah, which is like the minister for health in Germany. Nazi Germany would call the health furah. He was like an enemy of Pevitin because he said he like used the old argument. We are super heroes, anyhow, from our genes because we are a superior race, you know, we don't need a stimulant to perform these miraculous acts on the battlefield. So he wanted the army to stop the methamphetamine I studied all the letters going back and forth between like high command and the ministry of health and that the army basically said we're not stopping this. We're a modern army. We're using modern means to achieve our goals. So this actually shows that that Hitler is full of shit when he says you just need to install the right ideology in people and then they are, you know, mode, a motivated. It's actually Germany was Nazi Germany was a very, you know, modern system that was using this to their advantage and the army was a modern, you know, war machine and they used it very effectively. And that's why also other than armies who learned about this, it took them a while like the British needed quite a while to understand what was going on. But there was one point, a headline in America in a British newspaper, when does Churchill also use victory in form of a pill? Because in an Italian newspaper in the fall of 1940, there was an article on the German Luftwaffe using Pilla de Quiragio, like a courage pill, which was this methamphetamine. So then the British became like we have to examine this and they actually made tests in England comparing methamphetamine with amphetamine and decided that for the British guys, for the English guys, amphetamine is better because it's not so strong. Like the Nazis always take the strongest in the British. We're like a little bit more hesitant. And it is actually a smart choice because methamphetamine does burn you out, obviously. It's an addictive drug that's not healthy. And amphetamine is also not healthy, you know, but it's not as it does make you as edgy so you can you can take it over a long period of time, I guess. While methamphetamine really burns you out, I spoke in my research for blitzed with one medical officer that was still alive, that had served in World War II for the German army in Stalingrad actually. He was in Stalingrad and he said he still had purvetune and he gave it to like these guys that are like freezing to death being killed by the red army and he said it's not it didn't work anymore, but it you know it just gave us like another day of artificial energy. So methamphetamine is a very in a long war, it's very problematic. In a short war, it actually works. That's why after the October 7th attack of Hamas on Israel, I was interviewed by Haggatz, which is the leading Israeli newspaper because there was rumor that also these combatants or these terrorists or whatever you want to call them had used kapta goon, which is another form of meth that's a brand name that's very popular actually in the middle and I had found a paper from April last year, April 23 was a report. You can find it online by some newspaper that a large shipment of kapta goon was seized at the Gaza border actually by Hamas border forces who claimed that actually Israel was smuggling this into Gaza to kind of corrupt the Gaza youth. I don't know if that's true. It was just what Hamas said, but for sure there was kapta goon in the Gaza Strip and I'm totally convinced that people used it when they when they when they attacked Israel and that is not the only case when the terrorist attacks in Paris happened they found amphetamines. They've seized one billion dollars worth of kapta goon and it is rumored that the Assad regime in Syria is actually behind large-scale manufacturing of kapta goon at the moment. That's how they get their money because kapta goon is like the cocaine of the poor man, you know 13 tons. It's being by police and cover 13 tons of the drug known as kapta gone hidden indoors and wooden panels. Wow. So kapta goon is a is a wow and kapta gone has a similar effect to methamphetamine. It's it's very similar. It's a very similar molecule. Wow. I guess it's very strong. What makes sense that that would be very effective in times of war, especially for short campaigns. I had a reading in LA from bullets and afterwards a special a Navy SEAL approached me who had been in the audience and he was not on the team that killed Osama bin Laden but he was like on a parallel team. Like he knew a lot about it. Like he wasn't as he did stuff like that and he said before they go into an operation like that an operation that requires them to stay awake for let's say 50 hours and not only stay awake but to stay very alert for 50 hours. It's obvious that you're using amphetamine. It doesn't matter if you burn out later. You just take a week off, you know. So the Nazis invented methamphetamine for war the idea, you know, by ranchers to use it for war purposes. And it has been copied already in the Korean War. American pilots were on amphetamines. Like amphetamines are like a staple now of armies and of you know terrorist groups freedom fighters or whatever. You know because enough it it also lowers this was what Ranka also found out it lowers your fear level. So when you're on meth you're less afraid it lowers your level of in him. Like you're not as inhibited. Like you would rather kill someone in a brutal way than you would sober because it's very hard actually to kill another human being. It's just it's very stressful and we don't really want to do it. But studies found that on meth you're more likely it's easier for you to do it. So it's really the Nazis that are horrible you know they they pioneered in it. How similar is that to the effects of Adderall? Adderall's obviously I mean and there was I think somewhere in the neighborhood of 39 million prescriptions in a recent year. It's another one of these contradictions. Like we make like drugs are illegal but Adderall is legal which is basically it is amphetamine. So it's just like a certain type of amphetamine and I know quite a few people who are addicted to these types of pills and it's not a nice addiction I think. Because it's also you know it's legal like you. It's like a psychiatrist has take this so you function well so you kind of... You need to take it. What did you just say? You need to take it. You should take the medication. I'm very sorry I came on the show so Brad. I've been so amazing otherwise. No I mean I know many many people especially journalists. I know a lot of journalists and a lot of writers who use Adderall to be productive. Yeah and I would say why not. If you want to pay the price of using something that's maybe bad for your brain and maybe makes you addicted but maybe you think you write better on it. So that's like a chance that some writers take like who wrote do electric sheep? No do Android stream of electric sheep. Is that felt good? Yeah right. He was using a lot of amphetamines. I heard that Jack Kerouac wrote on the road like in two weeks on amphetamines. So I mean drugs are basically neutral. You know you don't become a Nazi soldier when you take amphetamines. It just it creates a certain state in your brain. You release all your dope when you're highly alert. You might be very creative but you also might write a lot of shit you know because your self criticism is lowered. So Kerouac being a very good writer he wrote the wave you know he was writing this on the road thing. I have friends that have tried amphetamines particularly Adderall and then don't stand up comedy and they say it's absolutely terrible. It's you lose that subtlety right? You lose the subtlety you lose a connection with the audience and you're not having fun anymore. It's like you're you're not being silly and your self criticism is not the window so you think everything you say is brilliant. Yeah I wouldn't recommend it. No maybe. I mean but some people find it very beneficial for productivity which is interesting because like they are probably depends what you need to do. It also depends on your self control right? Do you have the amount of self control and the amount of objective analysis about what you're doing with your life to recognize that what you're doing is detrimental. Can you manage that? Can you figure out how to back off? Can you figure out how to take time off? Can you figure out when to use it and just use it effectively and say to yourself in a very disciplined way? I'm going to take x amount of this Adderall stuff because I have a deadline. I'm going to get this done and I'm going to do my best and then afterwards I'm not going to fuck with it anymore. A lot of people can't do that but a lot of people can I guess and it's sort of like all other drugs. We should sort of figure out what's the dose, what's effective, what's not effective and then also strategies for helping people get off of it like I began. You know I think having any kind of legalization strategy so if they legalize drugs in this country I think it has to be done in conjunction with a treatment strategy I think that treatment strategy was designed again. Yeah absolutely. I mean the psychedelics do get you off other drugs. Yes it's a fact also DMT gets you off other drugs so they work against addiction so that old scare off you know some drugs are like you take one drug and then you take the next drug you know until at the end you land with heroin that's kind of stupid you know because if you take LSD you're not going to land with heroin you know if you take a guy again for sure also not. Well marijuana is the great one right the gateway drug people I think alcohol is a great gateway drug that's the real one because alcohol lowers your your inhibitions it lowers your judgment and then all of a sudden you're like I'll try that. Yeah right and then there's also people take cocaine when they drink too much alcohol to wake up. Yeah I spoke with actually with an ibogaine researcher Deborah Mash from University Miami and she found that alcohol and cocaine together create a new metabolite in the body and that is the one that many people go for. It's like it's like one plus one equals three basically so you won't get that high from alcohol alone and you won't also get won't get it from cocaine alone most people don't take cocaine alone they always drink when they take cocaine because they want that that particular form of metabolite of intoxication. Interesting it's obviously very unhealthy. So here it is how do you say that word? Yeah right. Yeah Kathleen is a byproduct of concurrent consumption of alcohol and cocaine as metabolized by the liver normally the metabolism cocaine produces two primary biologically inactive metabolites. Benzo lek how do you say that? Benzo lek go nene. Benzo lek nene and ekoneen ekko nene methylethter. Yeah it's this cool cool. Well that's a that's a big factor too right like how it's metabolized by the liver. That's a difference between eating cannabis and smoking it right so 11 hydroxy metabolite which is created by the liver which is five times more psychoactive than THC. All right yeah so there's a lot of factors and these the thing is like we don't know if it's kind of crazy that your book and your work is was really illuminating the effect that this had on one of the most historically significant events in human history which is World War II. Yeah I thought that was quite strange I mean I went onward with my research from I wanted to expand and I wanted to look at Hitler also because I was going to ask you this before you go to that. If methamphetamine was created after the 1936 games what was Hitler on during the 1936 games when you see him rocking back and forth and he's tripping was he doing cocaine was he what was he on? I mean I studied the notes of his doctor with his doctor's personal physician theodoma rail who was kind of a celebrity doctor in Berlin before he met Hitler like he was famous for treating diseases that don't exist so he gave mood enhancing shots injections and he was also a before he met Hitler, like he was famous for treating diseases that don't exist. So he gave mood enhancing shots injections and he was also a vitamin pioneer. Like he believed in vitamins and at the time vitamins were kind of unknown. So he was he thought if you inject someone with like such and such inject someone with like vitamin C, that would be that would be like a mood enhancing effect and actually that's true. So he cured Hitler's photographer who bet was Hoffman of a sexual transmitted disease in 36 and then Hoffman said I have to bring you to my to a special patient and then there was a spaghetti dinner with Morel and Hitler and Hitler was complaining of bloating problems. He always I was like he had digestion problems and Morel who was like an alternative doctor gave him like vitamins and the probiotic which was also new at the time and Hitler was cured and he appointed Morel as his personal physician and they became kind of best friends. They were like Hitler's been more time with Morel than with anyone else all the way up to the end. So Morel's notes are very interesting to study because he was like one of these German nerds that wrote everything down and I went to the another federal archive in Germany and I checked out all the papers of Morel and I could see that basically no one had looked at these papers like Hitler's the most examined person in the world. Like the most literature about one person is actually about Hitler but no one had I mean the last time someone checked out these notes I could see it in the record of the archive was like in 1986 and then someone in 1961 so I I was like the fourth person to look at this so it's it's kind of crazy because Morel describes like in detail like what he gives to Hitler and what that's why I'm a little bit surprised by this famous video of him like I think maybe it's a fake I don't know because in 36 up until from 36 when they met and Morel was with him at the Olympic Games until 41 basically Hitler only received vitamins vitamin C vitamin B1 and sometimes glucose like sugar was injected into maybe it was on a sugar rush you know because sugar is a strong drug because sugar immediately kicks you know in the brain so but there was no like heavy substances in 36 I not that you know I morel wrote everything down so I don't think he would you know and Morel's introduction Hitler was what year? 36 so it was at the same time yeah a little bit before so so the introduction was before the Olympics yeah is it possible that Hitler is taking something without the knowledge of Morel? No no because Morel was very protective of his patient he called him patient A and before that Hitler had like a new ray of like specialist Hitler didn't like specialist in general like he didn't like like there was called Brant he was like the highest S. doctor and he wanted to be like the personal physician of Hitler but Hitler didn't want like an S. guy to have so much knowledge about his body so he always kept Brant at bay and then Morel was like perfect for Hitler because Morel was like this kind of chubby good humor kind of house doctor with the crazy recipes and the crazy injections so Hitler thought this is this this is my guy basically and Morel became like Morel's wife was very much against that that his her husband became the personal physician of Hitler she said to him like whenever we won't spend that much time together from now on Morel like no I have to take this chance you know I can be the person he was like a celebrity doctor before us now he's the personal physician of the fear of the most powerful man of Europe so Morel very much controlled what Hitler took doesn't hit I didn't take anything that Morel didn't you know talk about Authorize and write down he was he was his doctor like he was always there you know so I see basically three phases and Hitler's drug taking from and from 36 to 41 it was mostly it was mostly these vitamins and Hitler was never ill during this time like he had a pretty good health in general except from the bloating because he ate wrong he was a vegetarian that basically ate like bread bread and sugar so that leads that's a very that's very unhealthy for your gut we know these days you know they didn't know that so he was always farting basically that was a problem for him and Morel kind of cured him with the probiotics and then the vitamins and you know Hitler kind of grooved along to this kind of treatment and he was you know very successful also in the beginning he was very healthy he won all the wars like he was on top of the world and then in 1941 Germany decided that he decided to attack the Soviet Union and also the Soviet Union camp that the campaign against Russia was very successful in the first three months a lot of methamphetamine was given to the soldiers just like any attack on France and they overran the red army like crazy like within three months they made huge territorial gains they were in October 1940 they were already standing in front of Moscow like they could see like one officer could like look with his binoculars and he could see the tram like the last tram station of Moscow he could like see that so they were right in front of Moscow and Thing was what happened was in the in August 41 like in the middle of the campaign the campaign started June 21st 1941 so August 41 they were already that huge you know made gained a lot of territory but Hitler for the first time became sick he had what they call the Russian flu like he was you know camping you know he thick the headquarters was moving with the troops so he was you know maybe drank bad water something and he had the Russian flu which made him stay in bed he had very high fever he was like diarrhea and vomiting so he was really not in a good shape so he said to morale and morale wrote all of this down like I was sitting in the in the National Archives in Germany and reading all this stuff and I've really felt like the fly on the wall that could look at things that no one had seen before like he describes that you know Hitler coming in sitting down the decisions that had to be made that they Hitler saying I need something stronger than vitamins I mean Hitler was lying in bed you know and and the generals were deciding on that important military briefing how to further advance and the the generals wanted to move towards Moscow and Hitler wanted to split the troops and go to Leningrad which is now St. Petersburg and to the south like he had a different strategy and so he wanted to be at that at that briefing and he said to morale I need something stronger than vitamins and morale gave him for the first time a very strong opioid which was called Dolan teen which was a German product and that that opioid you know there's different there's a different ball game than vitamins he got an injection of a very potent opioid and he gets up from the bed he goes to the military briefing he can call the shots you know troops will be separated like high command was like what the fuck you know but you know he's the leader so he decides and from that moment on we can see in the notes of morale that Hitler's drug consumption actually changes like he becomes more and more interested in potent substances and from 41 to 43 more well experiences a lot with also animal hormones like when Germany invades the Ukraine and has the whole territory of the Ukraine moorel gets the monopoly for all the organs of all the slaughtered animals in all of the slaughterhouses of Ukraine it's like like an order that I found like an artificial paper all the organs of all the slaughtered animals of all slaughterhouses occupied Ukraine will go to Hitler's personal the feurus personal physician huh was that for touring yeah I mean he experiment he had like its own pharmaceutical company by the time moorel in occupied Czechoslovakia where like his chemist was like getting awful and organs and thyroid glands and you know all kinds of very potent things and then making like concoctions with it like there was a famous liver concoction like from from pigs liver and moorels moorels problem was that at the time in 43 it was a war economy in Germany so it was very difficult to bring new medicines onto the market basically it was not possible like all the tests that usually are done in peace times on a new medicine so he said he said this to Hitler like I'm developing all these new medicines from all these organs and I kind of bring them on the market they cannot help the German people sustain in this war and then Hitler said this is bullshit I the fura will be your guinea pig and I will test all these dubious concoctions that you make and then went because when I take it every German you know can take it and we kind of bypass all the regulations and this is exactly what happens so Hitler actually became the guinea pig for like hormonal concoctions for moorels so this is it really it's really an insane story that is beautifully documented so you can like read like train wagons going from the Ukraine from the German army like very scarce it was to have a whole train wagon because they needed to ship you know wounded soldiers back or ammunition or and he just you know required like whole train wagons filled with his awful with his awful from the slaughterhouses and all the the livers of all the slaughter pigs in the Ukraine and then the army was like we can't do this we need these wagons for like war sensitive stuff you know and then moorels would run to Hitler and say the army is blocking me transporting these precious materials that I can turn into drugs for the common good of the German people and Hitler wrote an order and then the wagon was going through and then moorels was creating these concoctions and Hitler actually he took too many of these weird things you know his health started deteriorating in 43 like he was quite healthy until 41 41 to 43 when he took all these organ things and all these hormones and you know crazy stuff you know today you would send the doctor that prescribes you that stuff to prison you know but you know there was no checks and balances like Hitler just took because he liked moorels and he liked to experiment and they were always talking about new little enhancement of the body that was a a whole Nazi idea you know to become more powerful most strong you know so he was he was he was interested in in these things and and he actually his his health started to deteriorate and then if by 43 he had already become quite quite a different man he aged quite a lot I mean you can see it if you compare the young Hitler with like just five years later he looks like 20 years older and then in 43 because he's doing so poorly like his chi you would say today you know physical energy was like really down if you take like if you get like one pick liver extract injection a day you know you can imagine how you're gonna you know you're gonna feel like after like a year or so it's not very healthy so it it diminished what was the goal of the pick liver extract do they just want to hands energy like they then gave it to the German soldiers like they they they they drank this this stuff because it's like liver is always like filled with like nutrients I guess so that's why you know some people think and I would probably agree that's healthy to eat like liver like I think like an ounce of liver a day is probably the right amount but injecting pick liver so Hitler technically speaking wasn't a vegetarian at all because he was using all these animal you know supplements and it wasn't consumed with his mouth right right so what do you know the famous story about Hitler meeting Mussolini or Mussolini wanted to get out of the war yeah yeah I write about that in in in blitz because that is the first time like Hitler was quite depressed before the meeting because and felt betrayed because Mussolini wanted to leave the war effort this was in July 1943 like Mussolini said this is not working we we rather get out okay is that fine with you if we just leave they act they they access now and Hitler's like no it's not fine you know so he was very nervous before that meeting and wasn't a villa in northern Italy and he asked Morrell again for something stronger and then Morrell for the first time presented with then would become Hitler's favorite drug and this is it was a German drug called Oiko dal and it's quite interesting Oiko dal was made by the Merck Company which is still a pharmaceutical giant today and it's an opioid it's an opioid that makes you if you inject it intravenously quite euphoric but also quite calm you know you're not crazy if if you're on Oiko dal intravenously you're like you think you're like on top of the world it's like you feel so great and Hitler loved this drug like he he got it injected before the meeting with Mussolini on the way to the plane he asked for another injection he loved it so much and then like people who were at the meeting in this villa said that Hitler was just you know talking nonstop like I'm doing right now like talking no we're actually having a a conversation we're having a conversation Hitler and Mussolini did not have a conversation Hitler was talking like for three four hours without stopping and Mussolini became very sweaty and like eight came in and handed him papers that Rome was being bombed the very minute but he like he couldn't get out like Hitler was very dominant in the room very very dominant in the room and from that moment on Oiko dal became kind of his favorite drug and now comes the pun when Germany lost a lot of patents were also lost from Germany and became possession of America and the patent of Oiko dal also traveled to America and Oiko dal is oxycodone so what has created the American opioid crisis is the very same opioid that was Hitler's favorite opioid sold in America as pills you know crushed and sniffed whatever you know inject I don't know you know Hitler was it was injecting it from the start you know he didn't he didn't fuck around with pills you know because pills because he still had the stomach problems he didn't like a medicine to go orally like into the he didn't like they took too long you know you don't know he takes something now and it's acting like in 45 minutes and they're not good you know the injection is the immediate effect so that's what he wanted he would go to a military briefing when the war was in 44 you know the generals were just you know they knew it was lost you know they they came from the eastern front you know people were dying like every day like it was it was over but but they came to the meeting to tell Hitler basically or you know you want to save your men you know that's but Hitler on oxycodone on ochodata as it was called then had so much power in the room like so much charisma he was very charismatic early on but he had lost his charisma in the meantime but through ochodata he could reinstall his his charisma being good in the room and he would like and I read like a lot of witnesses reports like from generals a lot of them wrote books afterwards or made you know made notes what happened they said when they were with Hitler in this room they were convinced that Hitler knew something that they didn't know like he had a wonder weapon obviously like he knew that the war would turn around and we would win the Germans would win in the end because he was so convincing on this ochodata so Hitler was very clever actually in in using that drug to you know for his like horrific vision you know wow yeah and you can you can look at you can examine this like day day by day you know by studying the papers of mo'rel and then also studying like other you know accounts you know because always good to look at more not only have one source but there is there's quite a lot on it so it is quite surprising no one ever wrote about that before well it's fascinating because if you think about how much is written about Hitler and how much Hitler has been studied that they didn't study that it's totally crazy actually because it has such a profound effect on the way you think and behave it does I mean there was one we all know that on July 20th 1944 that was the most success I mean it wasn't successful but almost successful as the nation attempt by the bomb by Stauphenberg blew up in the headquarters in the East Operation Valkyrie it was called it was a code name and afterwards like mo'rel rushes in the doctor rushes in Hitler is quite injured actually which Nazi propaganda later said like the furah was not injured he was quite injured by that detonation I mean he was sitting there and the bomb was like on the other side of the table leg and the table leg was quite thick so and the table was thick so he was he was very lucky that he didn't die he had like hundreds of splinters and his body and his ear drums were blown and it was bleeding from his ears and he was like totally you know he was I mean he was he was injured you know and mo'rel immediately comes in and gives him oil code die because in the evening mo's so leni came for a meeting he was already already in the train so you can see like an hour later like Hitler like you know on top of this game again you know joking with mo's so leni and like the other like officers lose I've lost the leg that died like so and and and and then actually from that moment on Hitler that's like July 20th 1944 until the very end may may 8th 1945 and the war ends that is his heaviest drug consumption because then he's really like this is this is the most intense time one of the things for example that happens is that to treat his blown ear drums which you know were connected with heavy pain that he experienced the new doctor came in geezing was his name and he had cocaine he brought cocaine which was a legal product at the time also by Merck Germany was importing the coca leaves from Peru mostly and then Merck cocaine was supposed to be the best in the world like they were even like product foragers in China who like replicate the Merck label with the Merck cocaine Merck cocaine was you know was the best cocaine and this doctor came in and he wanted to give the cocaine because it was something to numb the pain basically it was an anesthetic and and Hitler was like I want more of this stuff and geezing writes this down I found these documents actually in Washington and the national archive he Hitler demands to use cocaine like he wants the doctor to to brush it into his no nostrils which is you know the most effective way to take cocaine I guess and then he's like finally I can think clear again and the doctor realized this is a dropped guy like he once he gets like onto a potent drug he like completely embraces it and wants it more so geezing became very you know like try to get the coca away from Hitler Hitler demanded more more of these coca cocaine treatments because I can feel finally I can I can breathe again and I don't feel like injured anymore and and actually on cocaine he developed the strategy of a second our den offensive we talked about the mountainous terrain of the Ardennes in Belgium in 1940 and Hitler wanted to do it again in late 1944 like a surprise attack and like his generals they couldn't believe it because it was ridiculous idea because nearly Americans were already on the on the continent like it was no chance it could have worked out it would just mean that a lot of people a lot of young German soldiers are gonna die you know that's what it meant his second Ardennes but he added on cocaine you can see very clear like morel when morel didn't like this you know he didn't like this other doctor coming in with the cocaine like the doctor started competing it's called the doctor's war because the one guy gives him cocaine and morel gives him oxycodone which is an opioid so Hitler was kind of speed bawling in August and September 1944 and made very crazy than decisions very bad very for the German for the Nazi war effort very bad decisions for the world you know it was good that he was so I actually spoke to British historian who told me that he had investigated Anthony Beaver is his name great colleague of mine he had investigated the British intelligence was planned to assassinate Hitler because obviously there were these plans you know and they had realized in 44 that is actually not good to assassinate Hitler because he was already so off the rails that he weakened you know the German war effort let's say Hitler was assassinated then let's say you know him love becomes the fool or something like this like him love he was also a total freak like he did two hours a yoga each morning because he thought the airy and you know airy and race is connected with ancient Vedic you know so he was he was into yoga but he was not into drugs but let's just say they would have had an efficient leader would have been more dangerous basically to the allies than keeping totally drug though to Hitler wow so they wanted him to stay fucked up because it was better yeah they actually did not bomb pharmaceutical companies until like in December 1944 Britain Britain bomber British bombers bombed the Merck company and then Eiko Dai could not be made anymore and actually Hitler then moves to the bunker and he doesn't have Eiko dial anymore which was you know his drug of choice he received it every other day in a very high dosage 20 milligrams intravenously of the most potent opioid so he became a junkie he became addicted to this so then when he moves to the bunker in the end phase of the war just before that the Merck production site had been bombed who were supplying it more it doesn't have it anymore and that creates quite a friction between patient A as more called Hitler and the doctor because the doctor basically made him hooked on a substance and suddenly it's like the more mistake of the dealer shouldn't make make your client hooked and then you don't you can't supply anymore and also no one else could supply you know he couldn't go somewhere else there's a report by movel driving on a motorcycle through bombed out Berlin like February March 45 like going from pharmacy to pharmacy trying asking do you still have like a supply of Eiko Dai you know so he the situation became you know Hitler lost world war II which was not good for him but he also was on withdrawal heavy withdrawal from opioids which made him feel like shit so that leads to the completely generation of the character wow so that that third Reich kind of crumbled in on it on itself fast and it probably would have lost anyway but still of course fastening that it all happened and it's kind of ironic that it happens while he's in full draw yeah I mean the only drug really that he had left in the end was Harmin which we spoke about Harmin like I studied like what Morel still had like in his bag basically like looked at the bottom of his bag he still had Harmin so he gave Harmin to Hitler so he'd like was it I don't know what Harmin does to you if you just take it single early but it's doesn't you know and sugar like Hitler more and more demanded cake because sugar does actually give you a little high yeah it does even if you're in the bunker losing World War II you still kind of craved at that sugar high but at the time they had already crumbled the cake for him because he like he was shaking so much from the withdrawal like he like he like took it in a spoon and kind of put it in his mouth wow yeah wow it's in blitz we find like a new biography in a way of Hitler a more accurate one actually is that is so fascinating wasn't there recorded instances of JFK didn't he have a doctor that were prescribed some sort of amphetamines to him as well JFK is a very interesting case he had chronic pain and there is reports that he used also methamphetamine also he had depression so he had a kind of a doctor feel good and one time I found a connection but I don't really I didn't really I couldn't research more about it that this this doctor feel good of JFK actually had studied what morale had given to Hitler but it's you know you probably don't even need to study more it kind of that's that's what's out there so JFK I think received quite a lot of medications that's why it's interesting what I what I what I wrote about in tripped is his possible LSD experience I don't know if you're familiar with that they talked about that would just water yeah I mean there's unfortunately there's only one source for it and we always have to be skeptical if there's only one source there's two sources it's always much better but one source and it's actually Timothy Leary's autobiography he describes and I don't think he made this up I have no reason to believe that he made this up he describes how a woman called Mary Pinsho visits him at Harvard telling him because he was known as the you know he was still employed by Harvard he was you know the LSD guy basically if you wanted to know about LSD he would ask Leary he had done the most research and also some of the research is very good very you know it's very interesting so she went to him she was like a socialite in Washington Mary Pinsho she had been married to a CIA guy but they had been divorced she was probably too quote-unquote left for him she was like a more like a peace person I guess and she was also a very good friend of JFK they were rumored to be lovers she was in the White House a lot he took her to functions like she was a part of his life and she visited Leary saying to Leary I have a very powerful friend this was in April 63 and I want to you know do the experience with him and Leary was all you know he kind of you know he's probably thinking he's a JFK you know but she didn't disclose it she didn't disclose who this powerful friend was and there's a day I'm gonna come with you we're gonna do it together and she said no no just give it to me I want the stuff the LSD and I want to kind of get some guidelines from you how do you do like LSD session like so they had this you know Leary told her a bit about what he thinks how it should be done set and setting you know JFK shouldn't do it while he's like doing a press conference you know he should do it when there's maybe he doesn't have to go on camera anymore that day you know maybe it's in the evening you know in the White House so she takes the LSD and then there's no record that they actually took it together because there's just no record there's one there's her diary but we'll come to our diary in a second what happened was a little bit later and you can pull that up on on YouTube you can see that it's quite interesting Kennedy gave his so-called peace speech at the American University which is I think in Washington or maybe not but is it Washington yeah and in this peace speech it's kind of funny actually to see him because we have to understand that JFK was quite a hawk like he was really a cold-war guy like he was he was a Democrat like the Democrats they're all for war you know they like you know they it's confrontation we know we have to be safe you know we have to protect the country you know we're serious you know arms race you know that was his thing he was not different than other presidents but in this peace speech that he gave a few weeks after Mary Pinshaw received the LSD from from Leary he has completely he has a completely different agenda and he sounds like he sounds like basically like a hippie he says like you're like very presidential you know giving speech one of all these you know students and next nice day in America and he gives presents coming give a speech and and he talks about you know we all live on this planet together even the Russians you know we all care for our children and we all they're you know we all in this together and he basically shifts course like he pe he he he says that this arms race is kind of ridiculous it just burns resources and we must come to a different understanding and then he gets killed like a few months later so that is that that is just those are the facts you know and I think I'll leave it at the fact so fact also is that Mary Pinshaw was shot in the head a few weeks a month I think I'll leave it at the fact. So fact also is that Mary Pinshaw was shot in the head a few weeks or months after the assassination of JFK. And that day of her death, she was jogging in Washington close to her apartment. There was a breaking into her apartment and her diary was taken. So maybe that's the source, actually, that links JFK to LSD. And maybe JFK was eventually killed because it took LSD and changed his mind. But maybe he just... There's a lot of factors when he was killed, right? It's obviously... I mean, it's kind of a mystery why he was killed. You know why does he need to be killed? But maybe that change of mind becoming like saying like arms race must stop, which pisses off a lot of people in the military industrial complex who are like base their whole thing on the arms race. You know, maybe that becomes a very big threat and it must be eliminated who knows. You know, but maybe he had a change of mind for sure. Maybe because of LSD, maybe because of the love making with Mary Pinshaw, or maybe they would just smoke in joints. They were seen, there are sources for that they had smoked joints in the White House before. But I don't know if cannabis would kind of bring about this change of mind, but LSD certainly could because the default mode network, which is cold, more arms race, something gets a little less energy. Other parts of the brain is like, maybe we should do it differently. And also the realization that if anybody can change things. Yeah, he literally has a responsibility to express himself in that way. Absolutely. If he really is a leader. Yeah. Norman, thank you very much. This is a fascinating conversation. That was just three hours. Metcrazing? It's a flu bye. Thank you very much for all your work. I mean, would you've done by just the Hitler stuff, just explaining all that is so illuminating. It's so interesting. And I really hope everybody goes out and buys your books. So tripped and blitzed is the other one. Yeah. And are they available? It's actually a present for you. Oh, thank you very much. And it can have the tripped also. Thank you. Are these available in audiobook as well? They are, but I do encourage everyone to read. But they are available. It is great to read, but sometimes people are still in traffic. Yeah, right. It's a great way to consume information on your books. Thank you very much. Really appreciate you. I hope we'll see each other again. Yeah, let's do it again. Well, when is this next book that you're working on going to be out? Stone sapiens would be out, I think, in the fall of 25. OK, in the fall of 25. Come on back. Let's do it. Thanks, Sarah. Appreciate you. All right. Bye, everybody.