Howdy, Sean. How you doing? Good. How are you? Oh, I'm great. Great. Thanks for coming all the way from San Francisco Yeah, right. Yeah, thank you for inviting me to come on your platform come on your show and Be able to you know tell my story and maybe provide some value to your listeners. Yeah I love stories like yours. What what is your shirt? No, where to go about but up can you explain that? Yeah, so this is the nonprofit that I started it's actually nowhere to go but up incorporated That's what it's the umbrella it's under and then nowhere to go But up project is the Basically what it's going to be and I'm building out the The board of directors right now for it, but it's gonna be a living facility for Male specifically 18 to 24 years old that are coming out of incarceration and re-entering into the community and so based It's like a one-stop shop It's like you're gonna be a year to a year and a half with programming and also like everything that you would need to integrate back into society from you know skills to you know counseling to job placement job assistance Resume building all the stuff that you would need to kind of like seamlessly get into society figure out how to become a man again and Get your dignity back and then be able to move on either You know the successful ones could either come back and be teachers and work for the nonprofit itself Or just move on and continue on with life What made you want to do all this? It feels like a lot of work Yeah, it is a lot of work, but My the podcast nowhere to go but up and also like my journey it all started with You know, I'm part of that population. You know, I did time in federal and state prison Not long periods of time, but you know enough to let me know that I don't want to go back there Right and so what I ended up doing was You know, well, let's go back to the beginning You know my story is not one of those prison stories where I'm gonna tell you about all the people that I saw stabbed or You know all the bad things that happened while I was there I mean to be honest with you I did 18 months in the state of Nevada and then I did 18 months in federal and so that's literally by the time you get there you get Comfortable it's time to go to the next spot So I didn't get a chance to do any of the programming and all the stuff that you should be able to do when you're there because you're there to be Rehabilitated so they say right none of that stuff happens There's no rehabilitation there there may be for some guys that are there doing 10 15 20 years, but a lot of that they do on their own. You know, they figure okay Well, I've got enough time here. I don't like the person that I was so let me figure it out But the guy that usually has about five years and under none of that stuff happens So the behaviors that actually get you into prison never get dealt with Yeah, I got I you know got my body nice and you know I was able to you know do a hundred burpees With no problem and you know all the other stuff But the toxic person that was inside there that got me to prison to begin with None of those behaviors ever were able to change and so when I got out It was just a continuation of what got me there to begin with. Yeah, I did a couple of You know stints of clean time and stuff like that, but let's go back a little bit further to what got me there and A lot of that was I grew up in an abusive household My parents divorced when I was about five and They used me as like a pawn in their and their game, right? You know they're to get back at each other So I was the the tug of war piece and so for me that That was kind of like the trauma that I suffered when I was a kid that made me angry and I couldn't control the situation. I couldn't control what was happening. You know I'd go to my dads every other weekend and when I was there My grandparents and him they would just talk horribly about my mom while I'm at the table And so when I go back to my mom's I think she's this horrible person and So I just take it out on her and she's the reason why I'm not able to see my dad as much as I want to and so that just led to me being a super angry kid You know, I couldn't control my situation. So later on in life. I became a control freak But I also gotten so much trouble up until literally Like I got kicked out of preschool Like daycare like what kind of kick it's kicked out of daycare, right? Why'd you get hit out of daycare? There were some kids walking behind the daycare there was that I go to the elementary school That's over probably about half a mile away And there's a big big field there were some kids walking by they were you know running their mouth and like I'm I'm in the third grade I pick up a dirt cloud and I you know, I thought it was a dirt cloud, but there was a rock in the middle of it and I throw it and It misses the person that I was trying to hit and hits a little girl right in her face Oh, fuck and she starts bleeding and you know nothing that I was trying to do But you know that's just kind of a lot of the things that happened to me I would do stupid stuff and getting trouble for it because the thing like something would happen that Wasn't planned on happening, but just out of circumstance. I ended up being the one that gets in trouble The first time I ever gotten trouble with the law same thing I was I say it was a freshman in high school and I had over that summer I had slept with this chick and She was dating some guy that I guess was a gang member. He calls up my house Leaves a message on the answering machine. You know the ones with the tape So I took the tape out went to school and I was a kind of kid that like I was a chameleon I can hang out with the drama nerds. I can hang out with the mods I can hang out with the stoners the gang bangers I can hang out with all of them and I would I would just bounce around when you were a freshman in high school Yeah, I know there's gang banging freshman. Wow. It's like how old do you have to be a freshman in high school? Like 15 years old. Yeah, like 15 14 15. That's young. Where were you? in Pinal California, which is near in between rich men and Rodeo and Hercules So it's not really the so all of the so they would bust kids in from from like the the poorer neighborhoods to that high school and So I you know they weren't like gang bangers in the way that you think of like say bloods and crisps and stuff like that But any kind of it's just a kids being a gang right and So what I did was is I had a couple of friends that were Involved in that and so at lunchtime or not lunchtime the first break. I went down I let them listen to the tape and they're like oh man Fuck that man. Let's we're gonna go get them right and so I was like okay cool. Let's go lunchtime came and Sure enough we got in the car went to the next the high school over and By the time we got there there's three car loads of guys and We get out we start walking down towards the convenient store. I see her and him walking this way. She bolts He keeps walking Everybody surrounds him he starts to put his hand in his pocket and somebody comes from behind me and hits him and then he just pinballs and Then makes his way to the convenience store two guys catch him at the store front Start hitting him they pick him up and they throw him under the counter and they drag him across and knocking all the cash register and everything else off He ends up getting the knife out of his pocket Which he was originally going for to begin with and slash is one of my friends across the face and it's all on camera and I never touched the dude and I ended up getting Charged with inciting a riot and so that was my first sort of like inkling of getting into trouble in high school Right my first trouble with a lot Not to mention if we go back to junior high I got expelled from my junior high for having a butterfly knife and playing with it and Missing the pocket when the teacher came in and hit the floor and clunking clunking and I ended up getting expelled from that school went to my dad's Flunked out of seventh grade had to go to summer school got kicked out of that school went to my uncles Got kicked out of that school went back to the school that kicked me out to begin with and was Ended up getting like suspended five times got sent to the office like 37 times within half of the school year Three weeks before my freshman year or the summer break they called me in and they said you know what mr. Clark just go home We're not suspending you. We're not doing anything. We're just just go. We don't want you here anymore We're socially promoting you to the ninth grade because you have straight-offs And basically it's like dude that's how what my life was right like I was constantly in trouble And then I was constantly doing things to reinforce me being a bad kid and It just it just went and went and went and The meth started when I was well, it wasn't called meth back then it was called a prank This is escalating quickly. Yeah It was called crank is a bird dirty biker dope It's really stinky nasty stuff, but how old are you now? 1516 okay, and so I start doing that Start getting in a lot of trouble running away not coming home. My mom ends up I think I go to juvenile hall once I did a 151 151 days at the boys ranch But my mom ended up giving me up as a ward of the court to the state Because she couldn't control me, you know, I'm running away all the time I'm not coming home not sleeping, you know being your mom has like custody of you Well, she has physical custody of me, but she gives Like control over me over to the state, okay? And so now where's your dad during all this you still seeing him or no? No, not really okay like once I started getting in trouble and after I left After I moved out from him, he just kind of like yeah, he's your problem now I don't want to deal with it and then we we were you know We talked every now and again, but you know, it just it wasn't What ended up happening there is I? taken the I Taken a bus up to Sacramento when he wasn't there. I didn't know he wasn't there I was going up there to see some chick and I go I go to his house. He's not there. I jump over the fence because I know how to get in because I was living there The neighbor sees me calls him up Unbeknownst to me my grandmother's in the hospital dying In the Bay area he has to drive all the way up come get me Because you know he doesn't for whatever reason he did on our way back down my grandmother dies and so That was a source bought a contention with him because he blamed me for him him not being there when his when his mother died Which was my grandmother? So You know, there's all these little things that like because of my decisions They weren't like directly things I was trying to do but things that indirectly happened because of what I was doing Does that make sense? Yeah, totally and so The meth starts or yeah, the the crank starts getting in a bunch of trouble Encouraging all that stuff did the 151 Ended up What's the 151 151 51 51 days of the boys ranch? Oh, okay, and so when I was there My mom had got me out on a on a temporary release thing to because it was like Thanksgiving and so to go hang out with my family and be with them on Thanksgiving I was allowed to leave When I was there I had gone on the phone and called a girl that I was dating before I went and I was like hey Do you want to hang out and let's meet up and we'll take I'll take the Barton on meet you and so basically I was gonna run and I did and hung out with her for four days ended up catching a Was in a escape charge so I added another year on to what I was facing and Ended up getting out of that I turned myself in ended up getting out of that and One more time I got in trouble because I think I got a dirty or I was doing something and I wasn't supposed to be doing Got in trouble. They gave me an option to go to nine months and Juvenile hall or six months in a rehab and so I mean obviously as I was six months and there's girls at the rehab, right? It's co-ed and so I chose that and little did I know that in a rehab Or a therapeutic community it doesn't go by by time it goes by progress so that six months turned into 16 months that I ended up there and so this whole time all the way up to here I Been learning how to manipulate really well and you know from getting the people to beat somebody up for me That was my first inkling of oh I have a little bit of power I know how to move pieces and manipulate people and get them to do the things that I need them to do Women same thing I was learning how to manipulate women from a really young age as well I mean I was raised by women, but you know Switching schools and going from you know being the new kid at school all the time I always got tons of attention from the females and so you know I would learn how to kind of use them to get what I needed out of them Why are you getting so much attention from the females? I guess I was a good-looking kid. Oh really? Yeah, I don't know that's just you know that's what I noticed when I was when I was younger okay and so It just continued when I felt like I had this this like I don't know if it was gift or or you know just this this thing about me and I was using it to my advantage and so you know that went on for a long time and including into let's see I would say I got out of that rehab after 16 months went to my brothers who Which I didn't really know was turning into my sister now, so he was trans. Oh, and wow Yeah, that was kind of strange. I went to move with him and his girlfriend He was dressing like a woman every day and he was saying it was for a part of a movie because he was an actor I guess I should be saying she now She's an actor right or an actress with a girlfriend So he's still like girls Yeah, it was it was a strange it was a strange situation all the way around Not people like that. Yeah It was different from me Because this was somebody that I looked up to I'd played ball with I'd go and you know We'd go out on trips and we'd do things and so it was It was just different right it was it was I just didn't know how to take it and so at one point We ended up getting in a fight and I told her I was gonna kill her and you know I got in some trouble previously to that Got in trouble as an adult now with the law. I had got a car my mom cosigned for it I was able to go hang out and do a bunch of stuff. I picked up some guys that I was hanging out with We stopped somewhere. I stay in the car. They go and beat somebody up with steel toe boots and kicking somebody We get pulled over as we're leaving I'm the adult because I'm 18 and they're 17 and I catch the charge So why were they beating people up? I don't know They were I have no idea This day I have no idea why they beat that person up I was just hanging out and you know I didn't have anybody to hang out with and I was in this place a newer place And you were smoking math every day? No, no So the math it was like 18 years of addiction but on and off So sometimes I would be doing math sometimes I wouldn't and this was a period where I'd gotten out of that rehab And so for about two and a half years. I'd stopped using everything And so when I'd gotten in trouble with the law when I was 18 I was Drinking so I'd started drinking and And so that kind of like was you know why I was not making good decisions. I guess you would say and So yeah, anyways ended up leaving there going back to my moms Then I went moved to Sacramento with my buddy and our neighbors downstairs Did crank So after two and a half years and not doing it bam here we go again What was it like the first time you tried math? What made you want to try it? All of my friends That I knew growing up they were all older than me and they were doing it and they wouldn't let me do it And so Every time we would go and hang out they would disappear into a room locked the door and they'd be either smoking it or doing lines And they would never let me in because I was youngest And so I don't know if they didn't want me to be responsible for letting me try it or whatever the reason was But from that point on it's like when somebody tells you can't have something now you want it, right? And so I knew that a lady down in the street for me The reason why I know that is because my dad ended up marrying her sister when she divorced my mom And I knew that she had She was like a stoner, right? So I knew that I might be able to find it there and she was about 15 years older than me So I'm 15 and she's got to be at least 30 33 And I go and I start hanging out down there and sure enough she lets me out she lets me try it For the first time Wow and what it was like was I it was like nothing that I'd ever done before right? It's just it What I didn't realize about it Is that and looking back on it after I got out of prison and all the other things that I did Is that I was undiagnosed ADHD? And so it really allowed me when I would get high it would allow me to super focus on things Projects, you know anything that I was trying to do it was almost like when Bradley Cooper in limit list would take that pill You remember that yeah, it was almost like that except without without all the All that but it just it really focused me and so but at 15 were you focusing on it 15? Just doing doing anything that I could to get out of doing what I was supposed to be doing like going to school Yeah doing other stuff I don't know it just Growing weed, you know just every little project that I had when I was a kid. It's just I was Super focused on yeah, and it just I mean it wasn't as is prevalent as when I got older Because the things that I got focused on you know started escalating. Okay, you know, so you know, let's just say uh I think I'm about 19 now and I'm on the run again Doing doing drugs. I meet up with somebody Stop I stopped doing the crank But then I start selling Coke because I meet this guy and you know We I meet him in a club and I got him out of some trouble because I had an entourage of people with me and We're hanging out and he got in some funk with somebody and I got my people to Kind of assist him and From that point on me and this dude. We came like best friends Like, you know, you ever ever have one I guess you would call like a bromance Like one of those guys that you just click with and like when you meet them You guys just are just inseparable. You're on the phone all the time. You're talking all the time. You're just hanging out just Yeah, sure So that was what it was like with this dude And he was a coke dealer. He sold GHB sold ecstasy, sold all that stuff So I mean that's what I started doing. Okay, so I started selling drugs for this dude and that's kind of where I got my start into You know selling more quantities and doing bigger things and Everything that I was selling at the time. I would be addicted to so Like I would hire on your own supply. Basically. I was a horrible drug dealer To be honest with you the only thing that that you make a lot of money at least No, I made enough money to to get by and to pay the bills and to party all the time Okay, and it was really just a facade, you know The only thing that kept me from getting beat up is that My biggest clientele was in the strip clubs And so I had a lot of a lot of strippers that were hanging out at the house. They would you know friends You know, I wasn't banging all of them. But where the strippers do and what kind of drugs are they like? They like coke. They like GHB and they like to ecstasy. Okay. Yeah, so And that's why I wouldn't get beat up because if I owe to drug dealer money or one of my friends money or him money He was like well All right, because they'd all all come out and hang out, you know because the girls would be around and they didn't want to blow that right Right, so I had a little bit of an edge there, but yeah, I wasn't a very good drug dealer. I was a good drug dealer Yeah So yeah, I mean I mean just The whole story just continues and continues and continues and continues You know if we want to fast forward a little bit to win I have my first daughter I get I get a stripper pregnant Which is my first daughter's mother and how old how old were you when that happened? I was probably about 22 okay, so I think it was about she was born in 2000. I'm 47 So yeah, I'm gonna say it's probably like mid 20s Okay, and so I getting some funk with somebody and It was gonna be one of these things where the next time we see each other it One of us wasn't gonna walk away and it probably was gonna be me Because up to this point like I'm a bigger dude, but nobody ever has really challenged me and So I usually get away with kind of you know flashing a little bit and people wouldn't mess with me this dude was completely different and It was like all right, well I know that if I don't leave town I'm probably gonna die You know just because of the this dude's really crazy and I It's crazy you have to murder you. Yeah Yeah So I didn't want to stick around did you know he'd murdered people before? Well, I knew that he was crazy enough and tried Okay, and I had like we had got into it and he'd came up to me Driving. Why'd you guys initially get into it? We were doing I was he was another another methodic right. Yeah, and we were working on a job together It was a really really weird story, but Um We got into it. We were working on a job together as painters, right? He I'd got him a job as a the painting company that was working and Well painters. Yeah, right? Yeah, they're always smoking crack Doing that they they're all about the uppers. Yeah, they're all about something Every one of them that I've ever met has either been on some sort of drug and alcoholic or something And so this dude was like really bought him with a barrel and he had Almost killed somebody before and we got into it on the job site and when he was driving away He'd said something to me and I hit him was he was going through the car as he was going Driving by and he didn't stop but I'd left and he came to my house maybe an hour and a half later Had a gun on him and was like trying to get into the house and I was like oh man So basically he like scared to shit out of me and I was like well look you're pregnant I don't have a job anymore Let's move to Vegas because there's tons of strip clubs and you can get a job anywhere which means I don't have to get a job anywhere I don't have to get a job you can and so we move there and Yeah, I mean just kind of like that was just my pattern like I would use people people weren't they were assets they were Things that I would see as What can I get out of you? Mm-hmm, you know what I mean and when I you know that was like a reaction that you just wanted to get out of where you were You didn't really did you have any kind of plan when you went got to Vegas? Did you know what you wanted to do? No I just wanted to get out of your high No, no, I wasn't really getting high when I when I left there So I mean there's period like I said there's periods of time when I would get high and then there's periods I would stop and so usually when Things got we're getting bad or or you know, I was doing stuff Like partying too much not coming home and doing all this stuff and and Kind of putting my own Situation in jeopardy like all right. Well my girlfriend might kick me out or if I keep doing this So I would tow the line just enough to get her to all right Well, I'll believe you now I see that you're trying and You know, I would then at some point I would fall back around and do the same thing over again Does that make sense yeah So just a long line of this and when I went to Vegas I was doing well. We had our daughter but I'd let my friend move up from Sacramento and Well, actually I found out that he was living there already and he was with another stipper that It's a whole another story, but ended up moving him into my house because he wanted to get away from her me and him start hanging out and Just didn't really work out there because my my girlfriend is like me and him reporting all the time and she's pregnant about to have the kid and I'm nowhere to be found most of the time off doing whatever I mean even to the point when I had my daughter Remember Johnny Depp in that in below and how he was in the delivery room, but he wasn't really there Well, I was like that on GHB when my daughter was born didn't he overdose on Coke when he was in there Well, I was on GHB when I was in there and so not now just Cibarily stand up Luckily the neighbor that was that took her to the hospital was there because he's ended up being the one that cut the umbilical cord No way yeah, because I couldn't do it So I mean, I'm surprised even let me in the room to be honest with you. That's wild. Yeah And so I mean just another example of you know all I care about is what I want and not really the things that matter in life just because I Look, I was a latchkey kid from the you know in the third grade So I mean I never really had any supervision never had consequences kind of you know lived my life the way that I wanted to all the way up to this point You know using people along the way Having you know Just craziness man. Yeah, so what happened after your daughter was born? What did you do? Do you think change and click? Not really I think We were I was starting to get more aggressive in the relationship like being more abusive verbally mentally emotionally and Like I was never really a physically abusive guy But I would do everything short of hitting you Because I knew I didn't want to go to jail But if I wanted you to you to bend to my will or bend you to the way that I need you to be Then I would start becoming more aggressive and you know until you submitted and I got more like that and she had had enough of it and was basically like all right well that's it we're done and The friend had already moved out and he got a two bedroom apartment because he knew that this was gonna happen at some point right He's like, I know you're gonna need a place to stay so I was gonna get a two bedroom apartment and so I did a moving there and wall Me and my ex were trying to or my first daughter's mom were trying to work things out Well, she was paying all the bills right because she was tripping. Mm-hmm. Okay. Yeah I was working on and off, but I mean I really my whole thing I always tried to do was get out of working Right and I think Bozyak said it the best Anything to get out of having a regular job, right? Didn't matter what we were doing, you know if I could if I could finagle away to not have to go to work and Get by and be able to do whatever I wanted that worked for me and so She had They were gonna go back to California For Christmas. She want she had a pathfinder and she asked me if I could take her to the and drop her off at the airport in it She didn't want to pay for parking when she probably should have after for Christmas. She had a pathfinder and she asked me if I could take her to the and drop her off at the airport in it. She didn't want to pay for parking, which she probably should have after what happened. But anyways, she uh, I drop her off. I end up going to the rum jungle on Christmas Eve by myself. The rum jungle. Yeah, I think it's a club. Okay. Maybe at the Luxor or one of the one of the other ones. I can't remember the names of those places. So I went there was doing some some more GHB. Uh, when I left, the last thing I remember is turning off flamingo going south towards Boulder highway. And the next thing that happened is I hit a light pole. So I basically I was driving blacked out and I hit this light pole. And any further to the left, I would have went straight into like if I went any further to the left or the I would have went straight into a liquor store. Wow. What is GHB like? I've never I've never tried it. Um, it's hard to explain. It's almost like it's almost like when you first do it, it's it's sort of like drinking like maybe you've drank two beers. You take one one capful. What I believe it was for to begin with was for guys that were taking steroids and bodybuilders. They would take that as a supplement as well because your body naturally produces it. And it burns fat while you're sleeping. Really? Yeah. So what could you compare it to? I couldn't compare it to anything. It's not like any other drug. No, it's an upper downer with I mean, what the how do you feel? So it starts out as a downer and like the more you do it. So I built up a tolerance to it because I would do it all the time all the day, all day long. Right. And so for me, it turned into an upper to a certain degree. So I would take a cap in the morning on an empty stomach and you know an hour and a half later, I'm like wired, you know, vacuuming the floors and you know, doing whatever. And so it gives you a little bit of energy. But then when you go past a certain point, it knocks you out. And so that's why it was one of the date rape drugs because when you would give it to somebody, if you give them more than let's say a cap, let's say you gave them two caps or you threw it in their drink or something, that would knock them out. Oh, god damn. Yeah. Did you ever do that? No. I had people that tried to do it that were around me to other people. I caught somebody doing it and ended up kicking around the house. But yeah, it was like those people gave it a bad name because I mean, it's not to me it wasn't that bad. You know, if you just use it in the right way, I never used anything in the right way. You know, I abused everything that I touched from people to drugs to anything that felt good. I over indulged in. So what ended up happening from there is, and this is just kind of how bad I was. And I did this more than once when I was in in California before I moved to Vegas. There was a point in time when I remember blacking out, driving and missed my exit woke up 10 exits down the road. Had no idea how I got there. So I mean, I'm having like risky behavior all the time. And what I came to find out later through just thinking about things and like, you're connecting dots and everything else like to my past and why am I doing the things that I'm doing? I really believe that I was trying to kill myself. You know, we had mentioned to you before. I'd had three overdoses up to this point. You know, so I ODed on on ecstasy and a bunch of other stuff once I overdosed on some some meth by taking too much of it. What happened when you overdosed on those drugs? So in this particular instance, which is the one that I can actually remember the most, we were all partying on like a on Halloween. I started out doing some coke and drinking. The night progressed, did some more coke, did some GHB. Then I did a hit at ecstasy. And then when we got to the after party, a bottle of tequila went around. I took a couple of slugs of that and then went to the bathroom and somebody gave me a like a jelph pill, right? It's like a like a pill with powdered ecstasy and something called black licorice. Anyways, a girl that I was hanging out with had said, well, you know what? You should do it as a suppository because it hits you harder. So if you stick it up your ass. Yeah, Jesus Christ. And that's the last thing I remember. Wow, about five minutes later, lights were out. And from what I heard from everybody that was left there when I woke up the next morning is that I was foaming at the mouth and probably should have been, you know, taken to the hospital at that point. But they just stuck me in a room and put me to sleep and like, you know, I'm lucky it didn't. I woke up. What was the drug again? It was called black licorice. Black licorice. And it was like some powder. It was powdered ecstasy. Okay. So MDMA was powdered and you would you would cap it up in in in gel caps. Brutal dude. Yeah. And immediately when I woke up, I should have been pissed, right? When they told me the story. Yeah. Instead, I'm like, all right, well, who's got a cap? Let's get me. Yeah, let's do some more. Let's keep going. So I mean, just craziness like that, man. And how old were you then? I was probably my mid twenties. You know, or early early to mid twenties. So the story when I wrecked that car, all right, your girlfriend or your baby mama's Pathfinder. Yep. So immediately nothing happens to me. I pop out of it. I don't know how. Um, there's a seven, 11 across the street. I get out of the car. I walk across the street to the seven, 11. I go by a Gatorade. The, the clerk, the clerk is looking at me like she's just seen it go. She's just like, well, I just, I just, I just, I just saw you wreck that car. Yeah. Like dude, you're walking like nothing happened. I get the Gatorade. I go back to the car. Guess what I do. Another cap. Black out again, when I wake up, I'm standing down the street in front of a, a menu for a drive through that's not open. Just nodding back and forth. Like this. I come to, I'm like, oh my god, where am I at? Where am I at? Get my bearings. Look around the corner. They're loading up the Pathfinder on a flatbed. I run over there really quick. I'm like, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, that's why it's my car. Go in, grab the GHB, take another cap, black out again. And the next time I wake up, I'm in the, in front of the porno rack at the liquor store I almost ran into. They've called the police by now because I'm standing there nodding back and forth. And they come in. I come to and they lead me, they lead me into an ambulance. It's waiting for me. And they think that what's happened is I'm having brain, like I have a brain trauma because of the accident. So this is just like the effects of being, yeah, you know, right. They can't smell anything because GHB is undetectable. And so they, and I just go along with them. Yeah, yeah, okay, whatever. Go in. They take me to the emergency room, check in and walk out. And I get a $90 ticket for the telephone pole or light pole. Wow. Wow. That's it. Oh, but, but where'd you, where'd you do with your GHB? Uh, it was in the, it was in the car. Yeah. They don't know anything about it. You want to take it with you? How am I going to take it with me? It blacked out. And it was already gone with the flatbed. Yeah, but you went back in there to get another cap where before they put it in the flatbed member. Yeah, but I took the cap. I think it's a good point. I don't know where it went. And what no, it must have went. It stayed in the car. Okay, so you slept it in the car. Yeah. Okay. I don't want to. Well, I don't want it. Yeah. Just they were going to take it. I don't know. That's a good question. You would think that you're like, Oh, wow, my car's going away. I'm going to want more GHB in a couple minutes. Maybe I should just take the whole bottle. Yeah. I don't know. I didn't. Um, so yeah, it, one ended up happening from there is she had my rights terminated. Um, for, for, you know, because I bit, it's cost for 18 grand. It wasn't paid for it. She's letting insurance lapse. Oh, wow. And so that was the end of that. So any kind of reconciliation or any sort of like, you know, we're working shit out. Mm hmm. Not no more. So she had my rights. Uh, she had me petitioned to the courts to take my rights as a parent away from my daughter. Okay. And it took about six months for that process to happen and for me to be served. And when I got served, I was in jail for a DUI. So I was hanging out at another strip club called Cheetah's Vegas. Been there. Like that, I like that. I love that strip club. Yeah. I was drinking a whole bunch and thought I was okay to drive. And when I left, blacked out again, um, from the police report that I read, they said that when they rolled up on the side of me that I was literally asleep with my head, and, and still driving. And so they hit the, they hit the sirens and they said, I looked over and waved at him and I pulled over because I mean, what are we going to do? There's no, I can't go anywhere. All right. Um, when they pulled me out, I could barely stand up. And so what happened next was I guess they said that I tried to headbutt the officer, but I couldn't stand up. So my head kept going back like this. And so they beat the shit out of me right on the side of the road there. And when I got, uh, they knocked me out. And when I came back to, I was in front of the, the booking, and they were getting ready to pull me out. What do you keep saying? Came back to does that mean like coming like I got knocked me out? They literally knocked me out. They beat, they beat me up so bad that I, okay, like I knocked out. Okay. Um, so came back to means I became conscious again. Yeah. Okay. All right. Yeah. Sorry. None of the words. And so, um, I was pissed. I knew something had happened, right? Like I felt like I was violated. I knew that I didn't wreck my vehicle because I saw it perfectly there. What I remember. And when they brought me into the booking, um, I was like, I rate, man, I was taking off my shoes, throwing it at the, the booking people. And I think I had my hand right here, uh, handcuffs. It's no, actually, they didn't even have me hand cut because I was pulling off my stuff. And I was throwing my stuff. An officer went by and I tried to hit him. And they like four of them jumped on me and we were in like a portable unit. So it wasn't like a concrete floor. It had some give to it. But they slammed me and I landed on my head. And the next time I woke up again, I was in the emergency room, making sure that they didn't, you know, do any serious damage to my, to my skull. Wow. Still talking shit. A lot of brain damage you had up to that point. Yeah. Well, that trauma. Yeah. That's what I didn't realize too after talking to a bunch of people about my story and some other people that had some TV eyes and traumatic brain injuries. And I had one when I was a kid, too. Oh, really? Yeah. So when I was a kid, I, I lived on a steep hill and I made a ramp, right, to jump. And I was, the bike that I was, I had was, uh, one of the ones that didn't have free wheel. So the pedals kept going no matter what. Yeah. And so I jumped this thing and the pedals keep going and boom, a fixed year. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And hit my head end up in the emergency room there. So that was the first one. How old were you? I was probably about seven or eight. So yeah, there's a lot of, a lot of brain trauma. I got knocked out a couple of times boxing as a kid had, you know, some Samoan friends and I don't know if you've ever met Samoan's, but I know if you have a huge. And so I was, you know, play boxing and got knocked out a couple of times. Isn't the rocks, Samoan? I think he is. Is he? Yeah. Pretty sure he is. Yeah. He's one of those. He's an islander of some sort. You know, we used to say in prison when we see him. From Hawaii. Yeah. All they got to do is stand next to the way pile and they grow. Yeah. They're just huge, man. Yeah. So where we at now? Uh, brain trauma, you uh, they smashed your head. Oh, yeah. That portable, uh, cop station. Yeah. And so when I wake up, um, talking shit still pissed, you know, that all this stuff is happening. I'm still kind of drunk. And the cop that's sitting there, which I don't blame him for what he did, because I was just being fine. I was just being a, uh, an asshole. Uh, he comes, he walks up to me. I'm just, you've mother, mother, mother, oh, this isn't that. It takes his, he takes his hand. So what? It hits me hell of a hard right in the throat, right in the throat as I'm talking and it's like, wow, wow, wow, fuck you. That's amazing. Yeah. That's fucked up. So yeah, I mean, that's, that's just kind of life, man. And that's what I was doing. And you know, this, I'm still not in prison yet. Still haven't been rated. Um, you know, I, I do a geographical and I moved down to Florida after I get out of jail for that, you know, go and do the DUI stuff that I need to do. Um, take a job. I got, I got served the papers, you know, to get my rights terminated and I kind of abandoned my daughter. I was like, she's better off without me. I'm going to get out of paying child support. So, you know, all right, later, see ya. Try to act like it didn't bother me. Uh, when I moved to Phoenix, uh, to take a job down there, I stayed drunk the whole time I was there, blew that opportunity off, came back to Vegas. New, I moved in with some friends, but they were getting ready to move back to California. So like, I knew that I didn't, I was running out of money, didn't have a job. Um, needed to make a move. And I was like, dude, what, what can I do? What can I do? What can I do to make money? What do I, work and I go. And I'm like strip clubs. I think it'll be about or just strip club. I used to do it before. So it's exactly what I did. I went hired as a strip club, got a girl to want to hang out and went and hung out with her one time. And when I showed up to her door, she opened it, she said to come in, I came in and she's smoking a bowl of meth. And I hadn't been doing it for about a year and a half to two years, right? I was, you know, I was drinking and doing all the other things, but I hadn't touched, you know, meth again. Went knew I shouldn't have like, it was crazy. You know, it was like really surreal because I knew that I saw her doing it. And then in my head, I'm thinking, walk away, walk away, don't, don't go, don't go, don't go. You know, it's going to happen. And as I'm saying that to myself, I'm walking right to her. I take it and I take a hit and that's it. Um, from that point on, I start really selling drugs. Um, I start, uh, getting guys that slammed up to like, steel shit for me. So basically, I'm getting them to, I'm moving a lot more drugs now. I'm hooked up with some person that's, uh, you know, um, giving me about an ounce to two at a time to get rid of ounce of what, uh, meth. Okay. Crystal. Okay. And so that's going on. Right. I'm doing it for about a year in that process. I'm figuring out how to do all kinds of stuff because I'm not sleeping very much. You know, maybe every, you know, staying awake for three days, um, figuring things out. Did you ever, you never cooked it, right? Okay. Now if I, if I would have known somebody that could teach me how I probably would have. Have you ever watched Breaking Bad? Mm hmm. I watched the whole series, well, at least the first six, six seasons, uh, on a, on a, on a four day weekend. Oh, really? Yeah. The whole thing. Were you on meth when you were watching it? No. Oh, okay. That would have been, I thought it would have been our fucking trip if you were. Yeah. I felt like it after I finished watching it because I'd literally had to stay up damn near 24 hours, 48 hours to, to watch all of them. Um, pretty accurate. Would you say, I would, would it be the lifestyle kind of, yeah, or the business part of it? Yeah. For, well, I can't tell you about the business part of it as being a successful drug dealer because I was never a successful drug dealer. Yeah. Not even when I was doing the stuff that I was doing, even as I had the enterprise, you know, I was, you would have been, uh, two of Jesse's to generate friends. Probably that was like where you were. Yeah. I would, I would have been Jesse. Oh, you would have been Jesse, but not cooking stuff, not doing any of the other things, right? So what I would, what I always referred to myself was the king of the dipshits because I was the one that always had, like I would hang out with the, the guys that were slamming dope because I'm not that bad. Right. As long as I'm not slamming dope, I'm better than you, even though I'm an addict too. Right. And slamming it is a main lining it. Yeah. Okay. And checking it. Um, and so that's what I would always think of, right? Like, well, I'm better than you because I'm not doing that. You're just smoking it. I'm just smoking it or I'm just doing a line or, you know, I'm not slamming. What's the best way to take math? Uh, to not take it? No, but if you are, I mean, if you're, it was the most effective way of like what's uh, the optimal. It's different. Um, I mean, there would be like the one time that I, I ODed, um, on it, it was probably the, it felt the best, but it probably was the closest that you can get to slamming it without slamming it. So what I would do is I would smoke it out of this thing. They called a quag, right? So it was like a bomb for, for math and it would run through the water. And I'd run ounces through there and, and you know, take it and dump the water out and put it in the freezer for maybe a rainy day or if I'd, you know, ran out or something. And so one day, I did math bomb water. Yeah. And so one day popsicles out of it. No. Oh, it was just in there. So I take it. I took a couple of scoops of, um, I slush whatever. It was like maybe about this much and I drank it. And it was way too much. Like a meth slurpee. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It was horrible. Wow. I mean, it felt really great until it didn't literally like my, my, uh, all my pores started coming out like started beating a sweat. Oh, and I'm just sitting there and all of a sudden, I'm just like shaking like this from the inside out. Whoa. And I literally felt like I was going to, I was going to die. And, uh, it lasted for about, I don't know, 30 minutes like that. And I couldn't move, um, just profusely sweating out. And you're afraid you're going to like die or have a heart attack. Yeah. It was afraid. Jesus Christ. And, but I was the only one there. So there was nobody, nobody there with me. And so I mean, it was, I just had to ride it out. And luckily I did. But yeah, that was, that was horrible. What was the guy doing in Breaking Bad? I think his name was Tucker. He was like out front in the front yard digging holes with the shovel the whole time. Remember, he lives like with his dad's house on Breaking Bad and one of the characters, one of Jesse's friends, he was always out out front digging holes with the shovel. Tucker. I don't remember that. I think I want to say that was Matthew, but they were, the dude was locked in there for like week till the time just in one room. Yeah, I remember Matt. Yeah, I remember that he had two of the, the two of his friends that, you know, always were trying to get him to do do bad shit or make dumb decisions. And, but I don't remember that part. But it doesn't surprise me. And that's, that was the thing. So, like, so if you wanted the best way besides mainlining it is to just straight up drink it, drink water from a bomb. I would say if you're going to do it, like it's, it's completely different. The best way, obviously, is mainlining it. Yeah. Um, you know, because that hits you straight up. And, you know, a lot of the, the guys that like I was selling to you that would do it, I mean, they would do it right in front of me. It was really hard to watch, especially when they're sitting there digging because they can't, they can't get a vein. Oh, my God. Yeah. It's pretty gross, man. And finally, they, they, they would hit it. And, you know, the look on their face once they did it was like, that looks like it feels really good. Geez. Except for that part, right? Yeah. That part, I could never do it. And that's probably why I never did slam dope is because I just couldn't get past the needle part. And I don't like the, yeah. I'm right there with you. I'm not fan of needles. Yeah. That's bad, bad stuff. I'd be down to try the slurpee though. I don't know. I think it'd be better off to, I'm down to try anything once. Yeah, that's not, that's not a good one to try. But, you know, teach their own. Yeah. So, I mean, where do we ended up living off? I forgot. Oh, yeah, you met the girl. You met the girl and then, uh, she, the stripper and she was smoking it and then he starts smoking it and then he started selling it by the ounce. And how I got her to let me move in is because we, I'd met her doing that, right? And we'd worked at the same club. Um, I went and moved to the shittiest roach infested flea bag weekly rental, right? And I invited her over because my goal was was to get her to see how bad I had it. That way she would say, hey, come, come move with me. That way I'm not manipulating you. You wanted to make her feel sorry for you? Yeah. So she would say, come live with me. And I wasn't, I wasn't, it wasn't my idea. It was your idea. So you can't say that I'm trying to use you. Right. Part of that manipulation. Yeah, for sure. And that's exactly what happened. She went over there. She saw the roaches running around and she's like, dude, you got to, you got to get out of here. Come move and live with me. And I'm like, oh, you sure? Are you sure? You want to do that? Knowing that that was exactly what the plan was to begin with. Wow. So I did a lot of that. So you're updating this check? I was with her for a long time. Probably I was with her until I until I went to prison. I wasn't telling you to tell I got to rest. How'd you end up going to prison? So like I said, I was doing all of this stuff, had these guys going, stealing these things for me, providing them with the truck and all of the money and all the, you know, the gas and everything to go to smashing grabs at businesses and also burglaries in homes. And they would come back. They would bring me everything. I'd fence it off and pay them in drugs. And this went on for a little while. The guy that I was dealing with that I didn't know at the time, he got busted and turned me, turned his confidential informant onto me. And I sold to that guy five times. And I was sold a meth. Yeah, sold him five ounces, five different times to an undercover cop that the guy that I was dealing with for a year put onto me. And so what ends up happening there is that I didn't realize that I was under surveillance for a while. They're watching me. They're, they're seeing me getting in and out of my cars. I'm, you know, going to make a run or doing whatever. I always carried a gun with me. So I would take it out of my back. I'd put it in my under the seat. Do the same thing when I get out. So they know that I'm armed. Right. When they were breaking into houses for me, they were pulling, you know, firearms and all kinds of stuff. I had about five or six of those and filed, you know, the serial numbers were gone off of them. And at one point, I just felt like like it was over, right? Like trouble was around the corner. Like my run was, was up. I just had this feeling that something wasn't right. I got rid of all the guns. Just I don't know why did that. But I just, I felt like I needed to. So I got rid of all of them except for one about a week later. It's about three o'clock in the morning. I have tons of electronic shit, right? Like all the stuff that they've stolen and I wasn't able to fence. Like I've got stacks of like, you know, decks and amps and all kinds of stuff. I have in the living room, there's a, I got like 36 fucking speakers hooked up in the surround sound, right? Bose system, all kinds of stuff. It's about three o'clock in the morning. This is all that stripper's house. Yeah. Okay. So it's like a townhouse. Okay. So one, two bedrooms, one of the bedrooms I have put a dead bolt on. It's a pretty nice house. Stripper's make pretty good money. Some of them do depends. Depends on how broken they are. Okay. Because the broken ones usually have drug problems. Not always, but good portion of them do. There are some that are. You know, you're making sure that they make $100,000 a year. Really? Once they put themselves through college, you know, they're the hustlers that, you know, my, I know that my daughter's mom at some point she was making a thousand a night. So really? Yeah. Do you still talk to her? No. Not at all. Not at all. So what we had? Electronic stacked out your living in radio shack and then a townhouse. That's a good way to put it, man. So yeah, there's all kinds of electronics and stuff in there. There's a huge loud stereo. It's three o'clock in the morning. It's on. It's pretty loud. My girlfriend and her roommate are asleep in the room. I'm in the next room working on $100 bill because I'm counterfeiting at this point. Washing $1 bills. So they basically taking $1 bills, stripping all the ink off of them and imprinting old 100, the old 100 on top of it. How do you do that? Very meticulously. Okay. So basically you would strip all of the ink off of the original dollar bill. How do you how do you strip the ink off a dollar bill? It was a certain degreaser that you used. I can't remember what the name of it is. I remember that that's what we were doing. A decir. So you get it. Okay. And then just just wash all the ink off of it, dry it flat right flat on a piece of. So basically I'd squeegee it to like a flat piece of glass, let it dry on there. So it's it's very flat. I tape it to a really piece of paper, run it through a printer and it would print the old 100 on it. And so the old 100 didn't have the barcode on it. Didn't have the stripe in there. The little strip that it has that people look at. Didn't have the hologram either. As before that. And so that's what I was doing. And they were passing. And you were just printing them out on a regular printer. It's a regular everyday printer. An ink printer. Right. Like an ink jet or something. Yeah. So it didn't have the ridges. It didn't have the ridges. Like you can scratch on them. Like in the lapel, you know what I'm talking about? Mm-hmm. How there's those ridges that you can fill. It didn't have that. But I mean, most people didn't know that. Because when they would go and they would they would market, it's 100. Right. What do these things look like after you stripped all the after you decreased all the ink off of them? They just look like blank white. They look like the blank sort of, you know, with the under. What wasn't green? It was just that and in all of the red and blue fibers. That's wild. Yeah. And how many of these things were how many of these one dollar bills were you turning into hundred dollar bills? I did probably I would say close about five or six thousand. Okay. I mean, because it was a particular process. I mean, it wasn't fast. It wasn't, and I would never be one of the ones who go and bust them. Right. I would have the guys who were working for me go and try and pass them. What? Okay. So the guys that you were that were working for you or they were they buying with the drugs. No, they would just go and buy like because you didn't want to you didn't want to do what to the drug dealers. No, why not? Well, they just fuck you up. Yeah, pretty much. Um, so what I would do is I'd send them out to like liquor stores or other places and they'd spend like maybe 40 bucks and get 60 back. Um, sometimes it works. Sometimes it didn't. Uh, you would look for places that had teenagers as cashiers because they're not going to know they're not going to pay attention. They're not going to care. Sometimes it didn't you would look for places that had teenagers as cashiers because they're not going to know they're not going to pay attention they're not going to care So I mean it was a meticulous process and I would do other stuff like All of the computer towers that were stolen I would swap those hard drives out and I would go and buy with cash at Walmart The C gate 80 gigs those were just started to come out. I'd buy those take those out Clean the the other hard drives strip the hard drive like basically wipe it and replace that used one in the new one Peel use a blow dryer to peel the the label off of it Re shrink wrap it and put the label back on Wow and then return it get our cash back So it's a lot of work a lot of fucking work for a little little return right but that's math like what else am I doing? I can't sleep Jesus Christ man, there's burning the candle at both ends. Yeah for sure So I mean that that's just the kind of stuff that that was going on at that point in time Like I said now we get to the point where This is what you got to rest it for eventually. Yeah, well, I got arrested for the the five-controlled buys That's what cost. Yeah, yeah, you either got flipped on you put a undercover dude. Yep, and so that's what caused them to do the initial raid and so on that raid that day that evening or that morning I hear a bunch of like boom boom boom and My doors shut. I got a friend over here. I'm working on a hundred dollar bill And I just like the the TV's on hell allowed so I'm not sure what it is I don't hear any like get on the ground or anything because they hear I think they Focused all of the the force into the living room because they heard they'd swear the thought it was right There was double paying glass windows to live next to up in Ellis Air Force Base I've tinted the inside of these windows So one of the flash bangs that they shot in made it through the first pain and in bounce back and blew up on them. Oh fuck Which then in turn caused the police dog that they had the drug sniffing dog to bite the officer because he got scared and just bit the office Oh shit, so they're pissed when they get into begin with right? They're like oh this guy if we're gonna fuck this dude up. I know that's what they're thinking I tell my friend to get out down the ground. I open the door and remember I told you The hallway at the end of it to the right The door is over that way and In the front of this door is a huge big screen projection TV Which is like the six feet tall ones at about three thousand pounds of real old ones Mm-hmm. The door doesn't open up all the way catches on like the edge of the The big screen. Okay. So literally they got their their SWAT shields up and when I come around the corner I have this little dairinger in my in my hand I look and I see that there's that's a SWAT team and I ditch the gun behind the the the TV And I dive on the ground put my hands behind my head If they would have seen me they would have killed me with that gun So and the reason why I didn't get caught with that gun is When I'm they hog tied me on the ground. They zip tied me a mouth and off to him and They picked me up and two of them and they ram my head into the TV And it pushes it up over the gun and so they miss it. Oh my god That would have been an extra five years Because it had a serial number five office They never found the drugs Um Because I kept everything in a TV TV VCR combo in the corner That was hanging off the ceiling And so in where the VCR slot was was loaded with cash and and and they never found any of that The drug-sinfin dog can't sniff it there. Oh shit. So you missed it. Oh smart. Yeah on purpose. Nope I wish I wish I was pre I did it on purpose, but no lucky break. Yeah. I was lucky Um, so I ended up going I took the fall for everybody I could prove that now this was planned I could prove that they didn't have anything to do with it because I kept Deadbolt on this door right here where I was doing all of my computer stuff and were like me 14 grams of methware that they found And then I had another back room that I had another computer in where I was washing all the bills And so I had all the counterfeit money in there Maybe you can explain this to me I had I bought a house a couple years ago and I renovated it and there was I know there was a bunch of Drug addicts living there because when I And this sink in the garage there was just a bunch of needles there's syringes there the syringes up in the attic We found and you know they were in some of the cabinets or everywhere and on one of the bedrooms There was dead bowls on the outside On the outside of the bedroom like they were locking somebody in the bedroom Well the reason why I did it was because I was the only one that had the keys So I knew that if I ever got raided that if I'm the only one that had keys in access to these rooms Everybody else could claim ignorance. I didn't know what he was doing. Okay You know, I didn't have it. I didn't have any access to that. I don't have keys to that Right, and they literally went and checked everybody's keys to make sure that nobody had Access to it. Okay, and then so I took the fall for everything. Okay, man. It was all my own mind anyways And what's my girlfriend gonna do right? Right, right, I'm gonna do what I want So I ended up going getting booked into to Cart County detention center and they released me three days later on my own recognicants So they went through all of that To just turn around and let me out three days later. Mm-hmm because I didn't have a criminal history At that point I was like, you know what fuck this catch me if you can I'm going on the run and I did And so left that spot had enough money and liquidated sold all the all the drugs that I needed to To get the money to move to a new spot reinforced that whole place with I put a one of those You know those front doors that are metal that you attach to you to in front of your front doors so you can open it up Yeah, so I put one of those at the entrance to the So it's kind of it's kind of weird how I did it, but it was just another layer that they'd have to get through before they get to the next door Before they can get to me don't send people put like burglar bars over their doors like actual bars name They can lock them. I use one of those. I just I just put that that Was the cheapest way and I could do it and put cameras up everywhere the place where I was living at I was on the top floor and I could see up this way and I can see down that way So anybody that was coming I could see him coming you can only get in two ways. Okay And so that way I would have time the next time that it was gonna happen To either get rid of the drugs or you know, maybe jump out of window or whatever it is That lasted for about I'd say three months. I was on the run In this process I was starting to figure out how to use credit card numbers and make IDs and checks and I was selling to this one girl who worked at a tour agency and was getting me stacks of information like papers That had customers information their name their address their credit card number their CCV their data birth And everything except for their social security number But that wasn't hard to find once I had all this other information You know, I can just do a background check on you and cross reference some things and you know, I was able to find their social security numbers I had so much information That I was trying to figure out how to do western union wire transfers for like it that you can do $999 at that point in time That was around to I would say 2003 Figured it out burned a bunch of information Decided to go on the road and I rented a car was able to do identity theft and get a person's I stole someone's identity got a credit card issued in my name or in their name to me Got around all of the different stuff that they ask you You know You know how they do when you apply sometimes you have to give them information they'll ask you questions about their family members or Or this or that which is all information that you can find in a background check Um, because that's what they use The credit card companies to find the questions to answer anyway to ask anyways so I was able to Get that I got a I rented a Durango I put the whole operation in the back of the Durango My girlfriend was driving at the time and I had six different cell phones and I was using and I was switching the The prefixes of the phone numbers to the prefixes of the people that I was using their credit card So What western union was doing is so when I would when I would online I would do all this and do all this stuff to do a wire transfer I give them that that Phone number so they could contact me and I would act as if it was like my work As we were on the road They would call to verify that I did this and my girlfriend would answer and say oh It's so-and-so business. How can I help you? And they say can I speak to you so-and-so? Yeah, hold on one second They'd give the phone to me or if it was a woman who I was using I would answer as the business and hand her the phone as she was driving and say yes, I I approved this And there's $999 waiting for me I would print out the ID that I needed For whoever it was that I was having the money sent to in the car and I did this all the way from I was it from Vegas to Amarillo, Texas And I planned out all the western union stops on the way Got to Amarillo ran out of math and couldn't find anymore And crashed for three days Even went to the strip clubs and with with my chick couldn't find anymore Wow And so we were both forced to have to like crash for three days Went back Did the same thing at different places on the way back And so by the time we got there's about 40 grand in cash we had Our roommate at the time which is the same girl that was with us When um we got raided and she was the one that was sleeping with my girlfriend in the bed Not sleeping with her, but you know they were doing that too, but um She kept calling and She says this chick never really cared about anything that we were doing right But all of a sudden she kept calling one and know when we were gonna be back And so I was like dude this is No, there's something wrong here Does she never does and I'm just gonna I'm gonna go and stash the money before we go back to the pad So I stash the cash went to the house We get there her friend Steve is there and this other dude And what ended up happening is his Steve was a hang around for the hell's angels and he's like one of these You know dudes. It's trying to you know It's a hang around. He's trying to get into the club right So he tells them that we're coming back with a bunch of drugs and all kinds of stuff trying to make his stripes with this dude We get there Don't think anything of it. We start getting high because I hadn't been hiding like three days now three four days Start getting high the dude pulls out a gun Put it on his lap and I'm like dude. What are you doing put that away? He's like, you know understand get on the ground You're being taxed And I'm like what all right. He separates me and my girlfriend our stories match And I'm thinking to myself. I'm like, dude I gotta get this dude out of this out of my house. How can I fucking get this guy to the house? And I'm like hey, you know what dude. You're kind of stupid for what you're doing I'm like if come over here come look at what I'm really doing And I started showing him some of the stuff that I was working on and I said if you really want to make some money You'll not do what you're doing right now and join me And we can partner up and I'll show you how to make some real money Anybody and so I sent him off with a cannon Dale fucking mountain bike and some fireworks I got in Where's that place called? New Mexico on the way back and Once I got rid of him The only thing that was on my mind is I was in a kill the studio and I went and bought a shotgun like two days later I worked I made the ID and everything else I needed to Bought the shotgun at a big five Waited the time where I screwed up was as I was cheating on my girlfriend this whole time There was this girl that I wanted to sleep with and we went and rented a hotel room And I think my my she knew what I was doing But since I was supplying all the drugs and I was You know, I mean the money and everything else. She was just kind of putting up with it Plus she was sleeping with my with the girl the roommate girl at the time too And uh really wasn't sweating it so She ends up she bought she pays for I give her the cash for the hotel room She put the hotel room in her name the girl that I'm trying to sleep with And that first night everything was good The next day I didn't get enough. I want more and I put it in My name well not my name but in the identity that I'm using in the credit card What I didn't realize is that when you rent when you try to rent a weekly They send your information to Metro to make sure you're not a Fugitive right Well the person's identity that I stole was a black dude So when it came when it went to them it was my picture But when it popped up was a black dude And so I go and pick up the shotgun And I get the room. They said it's not going to be ready for like three hours It didn't put two and two together to realize that well It's 11 o'clock 12 o'clock. Why isn't a room ready? They said come back in three hours So I go pick up the gun Have it in a car or in a Durango And when I get there they're waiting for me So divine intervention. I don't know you tell me That saved me from a murder And how long do you get sentenced to? I did they were trying to hem me up for Two to 15 years to begin with I caught the public defender working with the with the prosecutor Because I knew that from your public defender Working with the prosecutor. Yeah, so this is what I did I knew that there was a backlog for them to test the drugs And so in order for them to Convict you in a trial The drugs have to be tested the purity and all that other stuff I didn't wave my right to a speedy trial I said I said no I want to I want to have a trial within 60 days Because I was banking on the fact that I would beat the beat the time And right about a week before I was supposed to go to trial My my public defender goes oh well, you know, we're gonna have to push this off for two weeks I'm going on vacation and all this other stuff And I protested it in the middle of courtroom. I'm like, dude, I don't agree to this I said 60 days it's supposed to be 60 days And so right there it was kind of like hmm something seems off When he was supposed to be on vacation He called me from his office And I'm like, dude, I thought you're supposed to be on vacation Why did you push off my date? And he's like oh well, uh, and I'm like, dude, you guys are trying to fucking string me up And so that's at the point where I call my mom and I'm like, hey man, I'm gonna they're trying to give me I didn't mention the two years I said they're trying to give me 15 years And so I could get her to come down and get an attorney for me Right. And that's what happened She got an attorney for me she came down and I ended up getting 15 to 60 months in state prison But when I got busted how close were you with your mom up to this point? Not not really I mean it got to a point where she had actually sent the cops and reported me as a missing person Because I just dropped off the face of the earth. I didn't contact anybody I was just off in my my own world, right? And so when I would be using I would never like want to be around anybody that I knew Didn't want to be around family. You know my dad's really kind of out of the picture Um and my dad's a cop too So my whole dad's side of the family or law enforcement So I mean that didn't go really well Yeah, like during this whole time like throughout your 20s when you're running through Vegas And and doing all this stuff like what you call in your mom every month every week sometimes Yeah, we were talking. I mean she's we've always been close Okay, you know, but she's always been the person that's bailed me out Right like up to this point. I mean dude I've ran the truck through the house, you know her truck through the house in our you know like grew up in Cause a bunch of damage there sent me through an outward bound program that was like 15 grand The lawyer. I mean I've I've caused this woman probably in the upwards of about 50 to 60 grand So she came where was she living when she came down to uh Helps you out she was living in California. Okay. She came down there and she hired a lawyer for you. Yeah And so that they gave me 15 to 60 months And so I paroled out in 18 months But what happened and how I got the federal charges was that the guy that processed my place when I got raided showed up at the uh when I got arrested at the hotel room And so because it was a fraud and forgery right? And so he showed up and he is like, huh, I've been waiting for you to pop up He's like you went on the run and thought you're gonna be able to get away for this. Oh, you can try to you know Become somebody else or whatever it was. He's like, so I'm gonna tell you what I'll do I'll make a deal with you If you take me to your house because I remember processing your last place and you had a Shitload of stuff. I know you probably have that much or not even more At your new place or wherever it is that you're doing your business now. Yeah He's off you take me there and you give me everything. I won't charge you with any of this And I'm like, well that's a great deal Let's go right because all I want to do is go to sleep. I've been up for you know a couple days now and and like I was Falling asleep in the 120 degree back of the cop car. Right literally. I just went to sleep When he got there. I was like, yeah, that's a deal. Let's go man Let's just get this over with. I know I'm not gonna leave. I'm done. Right. Yep. And so I didn't realize he had a secret service guy doing a ride along with him in the secret service guy picked up the gun charges And there was a box in the back of that SUV that had 30 credit card numbers that you know so I got charged with False information for a firearm acquisition and in also 30 counts of access device fraud Which is having access to credit cards in our ears. Mm-hmm. So I ended up getting indicted for that It was a fighting my case there They released me back once I got indicted there Two charges 18 months running concurrent they released me back to the state custody went did my time in high desert and then moved to Indian Springs in Nevada Then I ended up going to Perrolling out to do my federal time in 2006. I got out and That was that was really different. How much time were you in total? About three years. Okay, and then but I mean if you want to count all the times like was it like low security medium security High-security is medium. Yeah, I've never been to I mean I started out in a high at high desert and the worst thing that I'd ever seen in Prison like I don't have any of those crazy stories where you hear people getting raped or stabbed or any of that stuff the worst thing I saw was a guy get Doused in the face with a hot pot full of baby oil You know all crosses face is bubbling up and all this but none of the other stuff. I was lucky I didn't have to go and do all that I didn't have any code defendants and any of my stuff. I mean it was all me You know they had me dead to rights. Anyways, right? So I get out in 2006 move back to my moms go to halfway house. I'm doing okay I Stay drunk probably for the first six months that I get out Just decompressing from being in I mean it's it's pretty traumatic when you get a prison man I've been jumped a couple of times. I was there You know got into it with with some Southiders and Ended up getting jumped there Was trying to was gonna run my whole bid by myself But then once that happened I realized that you can't really just there's no way that you can't click up with people Because you need protection, you know for whatever Maybe there is a way to do it. I didn't do it that way So yeah, I mean it just it was kind of It was it was sort of a shock when I got out Because the Everything segregated when you're in there. Yeah, I mean even when you're in a medium It's not as bad as the politics aren't as bad as when you're in a USB But it's still there like you can't eat after a black person. You can't eat after a different race You can't like grab somebody's like take a drink off of somebody's drink They don't really like you playing you know Games and stuff with them as well. They just they like you to be segregated and you start taking on They who do you talking about your car like I was running with the white so the whites weren't going to You know didn't want you doing all that stuff, right? And like I'm not that kind of person right I was a chameleon in high school. I like talking out with everybody But I had to start taking on that sort of mentality while it was there so You know not liking black people not liking Mexicans not liking anything that was other than white and I started falling into that And when I got out it was hard to decompress from that You know that kind of attitude and trying to change that mindset and so I struggled with it for a little while and I started doing okay I got into my union. I did some other jobs It was an apprentice in my union in 2008 hit and the financial crisis which you know everybody got laid off at work Especially if you're in construction had a lot of time on my hands and ended up I got married in the process in between this for all the wrong reasons Another stripper no, she was somebody that was in recovery and met her in a AA meeting. Okay, and so I went to AA because I was Doing you know drinking daily up to like a fifth of Alcohol a day and I had stopped one one day I was just like dude you got a quit and I just quit cold turkey went through the whole lock myself in my room Went through the DTs of shags the sweats all that stuff got it out of my system went to AA ended up Meeking her and thinking to myself well, dude I went I went to prison. I didn't have anybody because the chick that I Took the case for stole all my shit my trucks all my stuff Sold it all and I ain't get anything you know money on my books or nothing My mom even went to the door to try to to you know Get someone my shit back and was unsuccessful So the last thing I was gonna have do that if I ever went back to jail that I'm not gonna be stuck with nobody You know to write to me or coming at sucks when you're the one thing that guys like or count on is getting mail Right and I never got hardly any mail and so I remember that feeling you know sitting there waiting at You know I'm gonna get something and not and so I'm like Wolf I get married to somebody if I ever go away then I'll have somebody that can write to me Which is a stupid reason to get married right? Yeah, the attitude is usually the opposite from everyone else I've talked to They say when they go to prison the last thing you want to do is have to deal with Not being around your loved one or not being around your girlfriend or your spouse Whatever like being being separated from them is like the most difficult part because you go to the depression The jealousy like what are they doing out there? Are they getting with anybody else? Yeah? Well, I didn't experience it mine was the opposite right so the person who I thought was supposed to be there Wasn't and the thing that I didn't like to do is be on the phone So the phone they call it a stress box right because you're You're talking to people you're hearing what's going on they got people in the background Like I told my mom that's that's that's the person who Had my back always and I would tell her I'm like look I'll call you once a week But like don't bother coming to visit me Don't you know do any of that stuff because you're just gonna make it harder for me to be here. Yeah You know, and so that's kind of how I did mine maybe I thought about it in the wrong way I don't know But that's kind of what I tied it to you know getting married to this person for not the right reasons And so wait you said you were getting you got married to her So you would have someone to be able to connect to if you ever went back to prison But when you were in prison before that You didn't want to have any communication with your mom at all because you didn't want any communication with somebody outside of prison So you did you're basically saying you didn't want those letters. You didn't want those phone calls if I went back My mom wasn't gonna be the one that was gonna take care of me, right Because it's not gonna do it again You failed again. This is the last time I'm helping you Okay, so I'm securing Okay, you see what I'm saying? Yeah, not sure saying I'm securing somebody that could actually take care of you and Yeah, bail you out next time that you got that you got fucked up exactly. Okay, so like I said all the wrong reasons and more of that manipulation Right, so it wasn't it wasn't so much the emotional part of it. Okay, it was the financial You know making sure that I got money and all of the stuff and so When the financial crisis hit and I lost my job I had tons of time on my hand. She was working and I started making my way back to the people that I knew that were doing doing math and So started again A walled from my marriage because I knew so I knew that like I had a bunch of money. I was getting unemployment and I was going back to work periodically Because I'm in the union so they you know, they'll Get laid off your on a list if your name comes up and you take a job So there were some jobs that were going on, you know, every once in a while like you know One two week three week four week projects And so I was taking them, but I was also getting unemployment still. I didn't I was double dipping So I had a bunch of money What I did was I New that I want I wasn't done I want there were some stuff out there that I knew that I could do which was carding which was what bosey acted I knew that was possible and I wanted to do it But I knew how to do the credit card stuff. Not the card start with the the check fraud and so I started buying with the money that I was getting from unemployment I was buying printers. I was buying check stocks or the check stock paper that you used to write make checks I was doing all this stuff preparing and When I got everything I needed I a walled from my marriage and just disappeared Went to a place called Martinez. I was hanging out with a bunch of CD under-life people and was hanging paper Which is making checks on IDs and having them cash all of them Hooked up with my buddy That from Sacramento from before and I asked him and like hey man. This is kind of what I want to do. I know that you can Buy credit card information online. I don't know where you can get it at But I know it's possible. I know there's things out there that I want to do But I don't know how to do them. Do you know somebody that's doing it because you knew a lot of people are doing a lot of different things Found me somebody and this was the second dude that I clicked with like that Another bromance. So this dude taught me everything He taught me how to Get the cards from Russia Using the dark web Taught me how to Make your own So we started out with the blank the blank plastic right with the mag stripe And he had all these different Things that he had bought that you could print different like bank Bank logos and like just banks from anywhere you you want to like from I can't remember what they were Some of them I'm for like from Brazil like Bank of Brazil or all these different things. So you just put them on there What are you doing with them? Press and call You remember what they were? Some of them were like from Brazil, like Bank of Brazil, or all these different things. So you just put them on there. What were you doing with them? Pressing cards out. We sell them to somebody. What were you doing? We spent a money spending buying shit. Yeah, we were buying stuff. So around that time is when Best Buy started doing the purchase online and pick up in store. And so what we were doing is, and the only thing that they were requiring that you give them to prove you were was the last four digits of the credit card number. So basically, you just press out the card, not have any intract information on there and just show them the card and you walk away with items. So we were buying MacBook Pros. And so at that time, they were 22, 24 hundred bucks. And they never go on sale. And so when we would put them on Craigslist, we could sell them for about two grand. And they were going like this. And so we were making a bunch of money that way. We were getting some cards that had pin numbers on them to like bank accounts. So we would go and hit all like, hate street had about 25 different ATMs on that street alone. And so I just would literally go down from ATM to ATM until I ran that card out and then hit another card and just got a shitload of cash that way. Wow. And that's what we were doing for a while. We had two different offices. We had one office where we were getting all the information. And we had all of our stuff to get information and everything stored there. We had another location where we were pressing out everything. And so basically using the embosser, the timber and finishing it. And we did it that way just in case one place went down, we still had the other place. And so I mean, it was pretty organized. Most of it wasn't me. It was the guy that taught me how to do all of it. And we disbanded that probably after about three months. And I had gotten up to this point. I mean, I'm a federal supervisor. At least while I'm doing all this still towing the line there. I haven't had to do too many UAs yet. I ended up getting a dirty though. And I got sentenced to a dirty UA, like a piss dirty. Oh, okay. For my probation office. Oh, okay. I ended up getting a... Smoking meth. Yeah. I get a violation. They make me do a 90 day drug treatment center. My PO was a woman. And I went in there and started crying. And it was like, oh, I got a problem. I don't know what something to do. I need help. And so she's like, oh, well, we'll send you to a treatment center. I went to that treatment center. I was a 90 day men's treatment center. And probably within a month of being there, my buddy, I'd contact with him. And I said, hey, man, I need you to do me a favor. I'm going to say I'm going to come work for you. Right? Because he had a business front. And, you know, so I can get out of here every day. And they'll allow me to have my truck. So they bought it. And every day I was leaving and I was going to do doing fucking crime. And stay in high the whole time. I carried synthetic urine on me. In case I had to come back and they asked me to drop a U.A. I screwed up though. Nine days before I was supposed to graduate from this. So I almost did it. Right? Nine days before I was supposed to graduate from this thing. I ended up, did some GHB and nodded out. And blacked out again, driving. Didn't wreck anything. But just, I was supposed to be back at like six or seven. And it was like midnight. Had to call in and say, hey man, I made up some stupid ass story. And they tested me as soon as I got there. They knew I was dirty. But I used the synthetic urine and piss clean. The very next day, they kicked me out. My PO, I had to call her up. And I'm like, well dude, I didn't piss dirty. Like, they couldn't, they can't prove that. She's like dude, you didn't successfully complete it. So you're going to go back. I'm going to send you to another place. I'm going to violate you again. And you're going to, you're going to go to 90 days in a facility. Not like a contract facility for the feds. Okay. So basically like a county jail. And so when that was going to happen, it was like all these things, man. It just started came piling down on me. And my buddy took off. He went to go live with his girlfriend. I had to come running back to my wife. Like, oh, you know, I messed up again. You know, things are going to be different. I promise, you know, all this stuff. And, you know, I'm kind of being sort of, you know, physically, not physically, but mentally, emotionally and abusive and not relationship as well. She doesn't buy it. And the point when I decide where I'm going to change everything was on the side of a highway, I was on a high speed chase with her. We run into traffic. I'm chasing her down because she's not buying my bullshit. And I'm trying to convince her that, you know, or bend her to my will like I did everybody else. She's in her car and you're in another car. And I'm chasing her. Yeah, chasing her down. We hit traffic. She pulls over. I pull over. And I'm like trying to convince her on the side of the road. There's a bunch of cars going by all the sudden. Oh my God. It was a mess, man. Were you on meth? Well, yeah. Jesus Christ. So what ends up happening, man, is I fucking fall apart. I'm bawling all my knees, just fucking crying uncontrollably. And there's people honking, going by. And like the most surreal shit happened. I'm like, I feel like I'm floating above myself, looking at myself going to your just a pathetic fuck. You know, look at you. You're sitting here crying like a little bitch. Because your life is the way that it is. And what are you going to do? And from that point on, like I said, I knew I was going to a county jail that I'd never been to. I didn't want to be kicking drugs while I went there. And so I stopped doing it before I went in for about like about a month. Six weeks before. Stop doing the meth. Stop smoking cigarettes. Went there, got out after the 90 days. My ex wife now, well, I mean, she's still on wife then. But she takes me in, but she knows that she's one I'm not going to do with me. She just does it out of pity. But I don't go back to it. So I start going to AA. I start playing adult slow pitch softball. Get away from the group that I was hanging with, right? Managed to not fuck up my chance in the union. So I'm still have my apprenticeship that I can go back to. Start working. Not doing drugs, not doing any of that stuff. Playing softball was kind of a trip. I didn't like the league I was playing in. So I decided to start my own. And I did everything to start it. I did all the stuff, got the insurances, the teams, all the stuff that I did together. It took a lot of planning. It took a lot of thinking about how to execute it. I had a goal. And I achieved it. And what happened was I realized that that was the way that you're supposed to build self-esteem and confidence. It's by having a goal, achieving it, getting that good feeling from it, and then leveling up and going, well, if I can do that, then let me try this. And if I can do this, let me try that. And I just kept leveling up, leveling up, got into the rowing team on my union. Did that for like five years. Became a sergeant at arms for my union. So I really got involved in other things that kept me away from the people and the places and all the other shit. Became a trustee for my union for two years. Then I was on the executive board for two years. In 2019, I ran for a business agent position and lost. The thing that I didn't realize and that I do now, and this is really what I advocate for, is I'm still a toxic person. None of the things that I'd done and all of the, like, in-line things subconsciously that I learned and all the habits and the bad habits and the bad behaviors and everything that I'd learned up to this point, those were all still there. They ain't going anywhere. They're just, just because I'm not on the drugs, doesn't mean that those things went anywhere. Have you ever heard of the dry drunk? No, it's the dry drunk. So it's the guy that stops drinking, but still an asshole. Still an abusive person, still, you know, the same guy that has the problem, but it's just not using the substances to, you know, subdue it. Okay. And so I start, what I start doing then is, as one of them at work, I start listening to podcasts. And this is a part where I told you about why I started listening to Joe Rogan and I was listening to him for, like, 10 to 14 hours a day in my earbuds. And I'm following him. I'm following people like Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris, Lex Friedman, like all these people that have great ideas and, you know, their philosophies and their perspectives are like pretty spot on, man. And I'm like buying into it. And little did I know that my mindset started changing as I'm listening to this content all the time. I start taking on their ideas and their, you know, sort of philosophies and, you know, their thought processes. And I decide that I want to start a podcast. Because Joe Rogan's always going, hey, you start a podcast. Everybody that he talks to you on his podcast, right? Well, I really thought he was talking to me. Because I thought that we were friends, right? I mean, listening to this dude for so long that, like, oh, man, this is, you know, he's like my buddy. And so I'm like, yeah, I should start a podcast too. And so I did. And what happened after that was pretty amazing. As I'm, the podcast I started, I called it nowhere to go but up. And I wanted to tell stories of other people that were like me that had been through things like myself, bottoms and life struggles and kind of how they got through it, right? Yeah. And as I'm listening to their stories and I'm relating to where they're at and I'm talking about it, I'm healing at the same time. So it's sort of like therapeutic for me. And I'm using the podcast to leverage guests to help me go through some of the things that I'm struggling with, like from, you know, self sabotage to anger to, you know, all the things that are still kind of prevalent in my life. The one thing that I missed on this is that while I was playing softball, I end up in an open addiction. So I got hooked on painkillers for seven years. Jeez. But because I got an injury playing softball, right? Yeah. And so in my, and I told this story earlier today, but in my medical record, it says I'm an addict. And for them to get around giving me pain pills, they made me sign something that say that I won't come back and sue them for giving me these pills, right? So I take those and keep giving them to you. Yeah. And so I'm taking these, dude, and I'm like, I turned into a full of loan addict again. I'm buying $500 a month in extra pills. I'm like, you know, everything's revolving around these pills, but it's not to the point where it's affecting a whole lot in my life. I'm still able to level up and do the things that I'm doing. Versus meth that every time I tried to do it. So you're functioning, you're playing softball. You started a podcast and you're what kind of pills you're taking. Vicodin and when I finally ended it was percussets. And so I was doing like 120 a month. And then I buy another extra 100. So sometimes it was 200. It wasn't like full blown. Like some people I've talked to with have done like they were doing 20 or 30 pills a day. I was at about 10. And so, but I mean, it was just my whole, like everything revolved around these. You know, like even from the point where I would, you know, would sort of start running out, take too much, couldn't find any more and would start to withdraw. And you know, all of that stuff that goes along with it, you know, from trying to wean myself down. It was just a mess. And so, that's going on. I'm still doing that. The podcast. I wanted to start that. Oh yeah, I haven't started your podcast at this point. Well, I skipped a little bit forward. Okay. So before I started the podcast was I knew that if I was going to be, because you know, part of what I wanted to talk about, I wanted to be transparent about who I was and what I was struggling with. And I wanted to be as authentic as I could be. I couldn't do that if I was still taking pills, right? Right. And so I stopped. And how I stopped was is I weaned myself off. So I was taking 10 a day. I went to five a day to half of that to half of that. Yeah. And until I got to about quarter pill and then I started using edible marijuana to kind of lessen the effects of the withdrawal symptoms. Hmm. And so that worked. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I still do it today. I use it as a, I micro dose THC daily. Really. Micro dose THC. How much is a micro dose? Five milligrams. Okay. So I use it in the morning with my coffee. Jesus Christ. It's not enough to get you high, but it's enough to be. Five milligrams gets me highs. Fuck. No way. Oh yeah. Really? Yeah. My lightweight man. I built up a tolerance. So five milligrams doesn't do a whole lot for me. It 10 milligrams and I meet the devil. I see demons on on edibles. Yeah. Wow. Oh yeah. Yeah. Super lightweight. Well, then you know that that's no fun. No, it's not. So I mean, that's and that's what I had to learn too. Yeah. And like I would I make all my own edibles. And so I could there'd be sometimes when I would make chocolate and this piece had a little more than it should. And I'd get to that point where I felt like I was going to die. Mm hmm. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I'm dying. Right. That's not fun. It's the worst. But if you can get it to the point where you don't get to that, you're not high, but you're just before that. To me it it's almost like taking a like what people would take Zola for. Right. It helps me to focus a little bit because I am ADHD. And so it calms me down. It makes me focus a little bit. I still go off. You know, it's not a hundred percent. But it's a lot better than it was. Mm hmm. Or we yeah. We good? Yeah. Okay. So yeah. You know, what ended up happening and then I had a daughter to my daughter that I have now. Another daughter. Another daughter. Yeah. And she was she's almost four. That's where the change really happened from me wanting to become like stopping this abusive person. And it was all because of her. Okay. And my ex, me and her were super toxic together. And when it ended up happening to change that was we were I was in a rage. And we were fighting about something my daughter was behind me. I noticed her. I'm still yelling and she's gone. I stopped what I'm doing. It just like snaps me out of it. And I go and I look for and she's in the furthest part of the house curled up in a ball crying, shaking. Scared. And how old was she at the time? She's probably about two. And so the only thing that could go through my head at the time is like, I wonder if that was me. Like when my parents were fighting. And when I was going through that, I wonder if that was me doing the exact same thing. That was an eye opener. A lot because I didn't want her growing up thinking that this was normal. Right. That oh well, if she ever ends up in this situation 20 years down the road where she's got somebody who's being abusive to her. And she just goes, well, that's normal. My parents used to do that all the time. Because it's not normal. People shouldn't be treating other people that way. Especially somebody who you claim to love. And so it happened one more time. And we were already split up, but we were trying to take her to see Santa together to just kind of like some sort of normalcy. And we were going at it in the front. And she's in the back seat and out of nowhere. She just goes, stop. It's only two two two and a half years old man. And so that was kind of the straw that broke the camel's back for me. I started coming out in my podcast and talking about being an abusive person. Kind of like, I don't know. I wasn't hiding from it anymore. And what I noticed that was happening was, is the more that I talked about it, the less the power it had over me. And the more transparent I was being about it, the more people were reaching out to me, go and do. That's ideal with that too. And so I was reaching all kinds of different people, from women that were that was happening to them. And or had happened to them to dudes that were struggling with that themselves. And so at that point it was just like, well, this is going to be my mission now. Have you heard a soft white underbelly? I have. You watch his videos? I've watched a couple of them. Yeah, that guy is making some pretty amazing content. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah. All those people he interviews, the hookers, the pimps, the drug addicts, the homeless people. They're one common denominator with all those crazy fucked up people is fucked up parents. And really bad parenting. Well, I mean, the number one, the gateway drug is trauma. And not necessarily for everybody, but at least for my population of people that have been incarcerated and gone through something in their childhood, it's trauma. And the number one public safety issue should be untreated trauma. Because look at just look at the people that he deals with, right? That's untreated trauma. And it rears its head in all kinds of different ways from unwanted pregnancies to drug addiction, to domestic abuses, to all of these different things. If that got dealt with, what it should be dealt with is a mental health issue, which it is, we would have a whole lot better of a situation instead of using this punitive model. And I've heard you talking some of your shows about, you know, sort of, you know, how everything kind of is as far as society right now and how systemic stuff. And, you know, we actually shared a guest. Those on my show that's been on your show, Patrick Lavelle from the con. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, he's a great, great documentary. Yeah. Yeah. That dude's super smart. Yeah. That makes a lot of cool stuff. He sure does. I think he would be good to talk to Matt Cox. I think that would be a good introduction for them. Yeah, they're both definitely in the same world. They both, he, that guy's spent a lot of time studying that whole financial crisis and all the banks. What's that movie? What's that famous movie about the 2008 financial crisis? About the short, the big short. The big short. Yeah. That was a good fucking movie. That was a good movie. But the con covered everything that it left out. Yeah, but the con, I mean, it's a very, it's a, how long is that thing? How long is the con? It was like a three hour documentary. Yeah, six. It was sick. And it was multiple episodes, right? Five. Yeah. I watched all six, I, it was five episodes. I watched all five episodes back to back six hours worth. Because I think, it was either five or six, one or two. Because you lived through that time that you really relate to a lot of that stuff. Yeah. And then I watched it for a, I watched it two more times because with, you got to screen it, you got three viewings on it. And so I watched 18 hours of this. Goddamn. Well, because I was trying, because I was going to have them on the show, right? And that was the whole reason why they let me screen it so I could bring them on the show. And I was looking for inconsistencies. I was looking for something that I could like, you know, pick a part on. And I couldn't really. Yeah, I couldn't. There was nothing man. I mean, he put it in such layman terms to where like, you have no, you, you could be the dumbest person and still understand what was going on. Right. And it was, it was an amazing documentary to me. I started plugging that dude shit and all my, you know, just because I was like super stoked. And then I had his other producer on and then another one of their producers on the same time. So yeah, it was, it was pretty cool. That's awesome. And I've hooked him up with a Patrick with another woman that I had on my show who was a, so she got put in prison for three years and she's a, she has a PhD. She's a black woman. And she was calling out the corruptions in Baltimore, Maryland, where they were doing illegal foreclosures in 2009. And they were trying to get her to shut up. She was on the NAACP Baltimore chapter. I mean, this person was like a legit community member in the black community. Right. Somebody prominent in Maryland asked her to stop saying that there were illegal foreclosures and kind of like, hey, shut up, stop saying this prominent. Somebody prominent. Yeah. Like who? I don't know. Wow. It's in her book. Okay. She wanted, she didn't tell me because she wanted, didn't want to spoil spoiler. Yeah. So what ended up happening was is she got wrapped up in an indictment with some people that, she had done business with, but I mean, she was doing credit restoration. So somebody, you know what that is, right? No. Okay. So credit restoration, let's say you have, you need a 700 credit score. You've only got 600. Oh, yeah. So in order to get that loan, you need to satisfy some of these debts. And so she would just kind of figure all that stuff out and work it out for you to where you would ever do that. Um, shed her own business doing it. And so there were, I guess the feds found somebody that she was, had worked with where her name was in and they wrapped up in this indictment. And she ended up having to do three years in federal prison. So basically they shut her up. And she's been to the Supreme Court. She's going back again for the second time. She just started a nonprofit. I talked to her yesterday. She started a nonprofit and she's got Judge Joe Brown advocating for her nonprofit. So I mean, she's not some bullshit person, right? And so what happened to her was sort of the backside of what Patrick Lavelle was covering, right? So the big short tells you about the short. He covers, you know, the mechanisms by which they were using the appraisal companies and all these other different things that they own themselves. And how Wall Street was incentivizing by packaging up all these mortgage backsecurities, but they're bad securities, bad loans. And so that's what he was covering. And she was the fall guy that they were trying to blame the shit on. And so I hooked her up with him. And I think that because he's doing a sequel to his, to that. Okay. And so she's probably going to have a part in that. Oh, cool. Yeah. Did the con have a good response that have a positive response? Where did it release that? That was right in the middle of the pandemic. Yeah. It was right around. I think you had a mom in November. And I had a mom probably, I mean, did you get reached out to somebody? I don't remember so long ago. I do so many of these things. I barely remember. Yeah. I barely remember some of the guys. I know. Do you feel bad though when you when like somebody asked you about something and you're like, oh, fuck. Yeah. No, I just feel stupid. It's hard to retain all this stuff I talk about. Yeah. How many episodes do you have? On audio, there's probably 120. Okay. We're around the same. Okay. I just released one. Yeah. I just released 128. Wow. And I've got about 50 in the queue. It's a lot of work, huh? Is this all you do? Well, yeah, well, because I was on temporary disability because I had some repetitive motion stuff and I was able to get on right before the lockdown. Oh, cool. And so I've been on for a year. I got released back to work on the 29th, went jet skiing on my skis on the 19th, broke my fucking two toes. And I was supposed to go back to work on May 1st. And so that's going to get pushed back. But yeah, but the whole time I was doing that, I, you know, I was done a bunch of stuff with the podcast. I was trying to do everything I could to pivot out of it, you know, learned everything on my own and doing it for about two years can produce, can edit, can do all of the stuff. And so I've been trying to like move myself into that direction, right, to get out of doing construction because it's not really the one thing that I realized from the pandemic was I was willing to sacrifice the time with my kid to chase this career and being a business agent and all this other stuff, right? When the pandemic hit and I was able to co-parent with my daughter and have her more time, I realized that I need to be with her. If I'm going to raise her the right way, then I need to be around and not sacrifice that time. So now that put me in a different direction. It's like, right, well, now I don't, I'll do this over here if I have to, but I need to try desperately to get out of it and, you know, whether it's speaking, whether it's book, you know, all the different things that I'm trying to do. Like I'm just about ready to turn that corner. Like I could see it. Like I could, it's just right over there. Right. But it's just not there yet. Yeah, it's definitely a maturity thing. I'm the same way. If I'm not doing this, I'm with my son all the time. I'm not, I see that that or this. That's my life. My life changed so much as I had a kid. But um, I like it. Well, how would you sound the best too? Yeah. Those are, that's a good year. These ones right here. Yeah, it's fun. Yeah, it's definitely fun. You can definitely, you know, see how you mold them and shape their personalities and, you know, their values and all that stuff like right around this age, their minds just so fucking plast. So new and, you know, it's wild. Yeah. Well, what happened? So one thing that I forgot to mention, so remember the daughter that I gave up on? Yeah. So about two months ago, she reached out to me and wanted to start a relationship and started to get to know me again. Oh, that's cool. Yeah. And hold us, you know, she's 21. Okay. She lives in Vegas. Um, she was funny. So the story of not one is when she turned 18, my grandparents had died prior to that, after about 20 grand and she came up with her mom. She's my big one with it. No. Okay. Darn it. I hear you talking about big one on the time. But there's a different, I don't know, Mountain Hawk, I feel about crypto. Yeah. I don't know enough about it. And like when people try to talk to me about it, I'm just like, dude, I have no idea. Just stop. Because I don't want to, I don't want to know what I'm missing out on. So anyways, her mom, I guess, or her dad stole that or her stepdad stole that money from her. And so she called me up and was like, Hey, man, I don't talk to my mom anymore. And, you know, I need some help financially. And, you know, I was like, I don't know. It's just kind of weird, right? You know, because I'm always suspected of everything considering the life that I've been through. And her mom's pretty shady too. At least she was when I knew her. But yeah, she worked it out. You know, I've, I've loaned her some money and she's paid it back. So I mean, she's, we're stealing each other out. We haven't met each other yet. We're texting right now. We're not talking on the phone yet either. I'm just kind of letting her do her thing. Like when you're ready, I'm here. Don't, don't worry about it. So it's, it's kind of strange, but it's kind of. We're not talking on the phone yet either. I'm just kind of letting her do her thing like when you're ready I'm here don't don't worry about it. Hmm, so it's just it's kind of strange, but it's kind of cool at the same time But having my daughter really Showed me how important that relationship between father and daughter is By going through it with my own and in realizing what she must have missed By not having me around and so it's almost like I'm I'm trying to Poor kid like she's having to she's having to deal with me over compensating for the mistakes I made with this one trying not to make them with this one Right, right, you know, well they always say the daughters are the ones that grow up to take care of their dad's not the sons That's the least what I've heard But who knows yeah, I don't know well do thanks for coming down and doing this. I appreciate you being here man Yeah, it's a long way. I've you're had a fascinating fucking story. Well. Thank you for letting me tell it and you know It's a privilege and an honor to be on your show and Yeah, dude. I love watching it. I'm a fan also work it everyone find your podcast The best way to find it right now is I have a website in the works It's all getting taken care of but the best way to get a hold of my podcast and anything that I'm doing and to support the show Social media all that stuff is on my link tree Which is li nk TR dot e forward slash nowhere to go but up and Otherwise just go nowhere to go but a podcast or Sean Dustin on Google and I'm the first thing to pop up sweet man. Thanks bro. I appreciate it. Yeah. Thank you