The general gonna experience. What is your perspective on the Big Bang? There's a lot of people's views vary depending upon what the most recent theories are. But some people believe that the universe started with the Big Bang, and some people believe that it's always existed. And it's a continuing cycle of big bangs, endless expansion, and then ultimately contraction. And then it starts all over again. And that there's infinite numbers of big bangs that are occurring through multiverses, various universes all over the world, all over the cosmos. So I'm reading this book right now called the End of Everything by a friend of mine, Katie Mac wrote it. It's about the end of the universe. And it's really cool. It talks about exactly what you're saying. So there was a Big Bang. You can see it actually. And the cosmic background radiation, there's this microwave and isotropic. It's like everything's not uniform. And you can see that. Like two or three degrees Kelvin, it's really cold. So the question is, does it explode? And then does it strip the big crunch? You know, does it come back? And they think there's a stuff called dark energy. So does it continue expanding? And she calls it heat decay, or this other one's the big rip where it just keeps on expanding, accelerating, and even electrons can. Everything just disintegrates into nothing. And no one knows what's going to happen. But the really cool thing, I was just reading the chapter about. is it expands super fast. I forgot the name of it. Boltzmann's brain or something. There's some weird thing where, because a quantum physics, which is completely not understandable. If you say you understand quantum mechanics, you don't. Things can just randomly appear. So if the universe is going to be around for trillions of years, like in theory, at some point two trillion years from now, Joe Rogan could just suddenly create itself at a nothing in the universe. And you'd look around and go, wow, what's going on? And then you'd disappear instantly because of quantum mechanics. So it's a really what? Yeah. It's an annoying thing. So the theory is you could have an entire universe just because of quantum mechanics, which is the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. You can't know position and velocity. You can only know one or the other. And an extension of that again, man, I'm just a fighter pilot. I'm out of physicists. But you can. Things can just suddenly appear somewhere. And so given enough time, even though it's highly unlikely, this water bottle could create itself at a nothing just because of physics, the quantum mechanics. I remember my teacher at the Air Force Academy, used the example of all of the electrons and protons and stuff could suddenly move themselves and you could just fall through the floor. Now, the odds of that happening, it ain't going to happen in trillion years. But these weird things can happen. And so she uses this cheeky funny example of your brain could just suddenly create itself at a nothing and given enough time, the probability would be that. So some people say the whole universe is just this temporary thing that created itself. But I don't know. It's very disconcerting when you hear them talk about quantum mechanics. That is, you know what? I figured relatively out. Wait, you start going, wait, what exactly? Two things can exist simultaneously in different places. And one of them could be in motion. The other one could be still and they're the same thing. And they appear and disappear. And what? I mean, now there's quantum computers. Yeah, that's weird. Yeah. Do you understand that? No. So I don't think no. I spoke at a conference and I followed the quantum computing guy. So it's cool stuff. Right. You know, I've had guys like Sean Carroll try to explain it to me on the podcast. It just goes in one of my chimp ears and help the other. You and me both, man. Like I said, I love it. It's cool to learn about it. But it does make things seem a lot more mystical than just the standard sort of Newtonian physics perspective of life and gravity and matter and carbon based life forms. When you start getting into just listening to what they're talking about when they're talking about quantum weirdness and entanglements and things in superposition, you're like, what is the world made of? Right. Like, can you get down to the smallest possible measurement of life? The smallest things that you can measure, the world becomes magic on the smallest scale and also on the biggest scale. Right. Well, that's the weirdest part about the universe is that I'm inclined, especially as I get older and I think about things more, to think that everything is kind of fractal. And what the universe is probably is it's probably a part of some other organism, some immense organism that's in a universe that's impossible for us to comprehend the vastness of it. When, you know, there was a thing they just did recently where they mapped out the human, they were talking about human brain cells and the universe. And they were talking about the way the universe functions and the universe functions, the way it looks, like if you do a scan of the universe, like it looks far too similar to a human brain cell. This is a talk I want to do, Joe. So I saw these patterns from space. There's this one picture of a river in Indonesia I took. It looks like arteries, like all these blood vessels coming out. And I remember thinking, there's all these patterns that repeat, the seashells, there's these spiral elliptical seashells. And then there's hurricanes. And then there's galaxies. And these patterns repeat from the microscopic to the macroscopic. It's really cool. It's amazing. And I don't understand them all, but they, in images, they're really cool. Have you ever seen videos on fractals where they show you things like the Mandelbrot set and how the closer you get to these fractals, the same sort of pattern repeats itself over and over and over again? People, it is one thing to comprehend if someone's explaining it to you in the lecture. But it's another thing now with the advent of CGI technology, you can see these fractals be repeated over and over and over again. And the Mandelbrot set is a particularly interesting one because it's so beautiful and weird. And each part of that as they go deeper. See if you can find a video on it because it's pretty badass. Mandelbrot set fractal demonstration. I know it's on YouTube. But these patterns, if the universe really is a part of an atom that's in a being or a part of a cell that's in a being that exists in an, you know, the idea of infinity too, we think of the universe as being massive. It's 14 billion. Like that's not infinite. Right. It's not even close. 14 billion years is like nothing. It's not infinite at all. So this is the Mandelbrot set, right? So what these artists have done is as they zoom in, the Mandelbrot set repeats itself over and over and over again. And it just, it becomes the same exact thing at the lowest possible levels of comprehension or of illustration. They keep getting closer and closer to it. That's amazing. Yeah. Yeah. I needed that I was a math major in college and I learned about fractals, but they didn't have videos back that right. Well, this would blow your way, right? Because it shows it to you that in a way that appeals to the brain. Right. And it's so hard for us to comprehend or to try to illustrate it ourselves. This is the kind of shit that you see when you're on psychedelics. Well, it's too. This is another reason why it makes me weird in my room. Yeah. Like if you go on a super trip, like a real trip where you can't come back for four or five hours, this is the kind of shit that you'll see. it makes you wonder, like, are you looking at the very fabric of the cosmos itself? So I think there's a theory, string theory is kind of popular for small stuff at what electrons are made out of in the smallest subatomic level. And if I remember right, 10 to the minus 33rd meters, which is pretty small, but I think that's as small as you can get. Like there's a, there is a small as particle. You can't just keep on going infinitely smaller. It's like you can't go infinitely bigger because the universe is only so big. So it is bounded. That can't happen forever. Which is pretty well allegedly, but you know, right, but you know, 10 years from now, everything I mean, I think we know is going to be disproven. Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience on Spotify. You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data costs all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.