So you're running for governor of Iowa and we can get in the whole politics of that maybe later, but I'm interested in why? You know, I think I think the primary catalyst for me doing this Was I believe we are losing our culture and our heritage as a people. That's my honest belief And I believe it's not just in Iowa. It's across the country But when I look around and see people that were running for office it was all about policy It's all about here. This tax rate or you know this regulation needs to be changed And I thought no one is standing up to say we have to get the culture right first We have to step in and say what does it mean to be an American? What does it mean to be an Iowa and? Are the traditions and the heritage and the value of our ancestors important to us and? That's the in the deepest part of my heart What motivates me in something like this? I actually don't want to be a politician. I bet not had interest in it. You know, I spent a lot of my life in the private sector and building schools and I Have a I have a pretty good life. I have a great family and wife who loves me and supports me but you know in 1850 my family came over from Germany and Great-great-grandpa built our farmhouse And we had that same house on this piece of land in Iowa until 2005 In my great-grandmother passed away and I can still remember my grandma called me and she said Zach you wouldn't want anything to the sold farmhouse would you and I had you know graduate from high school in Iowa I was often college and I said no, I'm there's something better out here I'm I'm off to get something to find something better and then a number years later. I was driving by to see my other great-grandmother who lived to be 103 And I drove by the old farm and I just drove up. I said hey, can I take a look around and they said yeah I'm like great-great-grandpa built this he was a Third-class passenger on the SS while and coming from Hamburg Germany as a 14-year-old he was in this stowage Let's wait traveled over to America and He became a carpenter and then earned enough money to buy the farm and build it with his uncle and I said hey if you're everything about selling it, we please let me know and It I just didn't think anything coming to that time but a couple years later They called me and said hey, we're gonna sell this farm. What you want? I'm like yes I don't know how I'm gonna do it, but I end up scraping together enough money to Get an FHA loan a down payment and I bought the farm and then Since that time in 2014 I've been working to rebuild it and restore it and is the house still there house is still there You know when I bought it it was you know covered in vinyls it it had been completely changed on the outside Yeah, 150 years long time. Yeah, and and Being completely changed outside But I went to my my dad's cousin Peter and he just kind of had the repository of great-grandmas photos And so I got this palette of boxes of photos and I spent I'm not I'm not getting hundreds of hours going through photos And I was looking for every photo I could find this old farmhouse And I'll tell you to anybody who wants to be radicalized on What we've lost is a culture Spend that much time going through your great-grandmother's photos. Yeah, and you'll realize the community the traditions the pride I've done it a lot of it's gone It's unrecognizable unrecognizable and so I did that and I found every single picture I could find and I put the house back together Board by board counted every single piece of siding make sure it matched and now we live in the home that was built My great-great-grandfather And I tell you I didn't do that so I could run for governor. I mean that I started doing this over 10 years ago I did it because I wanted my children to understand their story and That their heritage in their culture what built them the man who built this house Who I bet hoped someday my kids would live in it. Yes But knew he would never meet them that That story matters deeply and so That's what really got me into this you know, I was not looking to run for for the seed and As I was talking my wife about this the current governor of Iowa who by the way is done a very good job I mean we're likely other than Florida Maybe the one of the most conservative states and she's done a great job at that in a nice person. Yeah You know when We were looking at this my wife said, you know the seed hasn't been opened in 20 years and There are issues in our state that are not dealing with taxes. They're not dealing with regulations that are systemic deep issues That are really causing our people to be hurt And I talk about them all the time and it's kind of from her this moment of hey You know put up or stop talking about it because this is an opportunity to go make real change It's not so I'm running So you said there are systemic issues that are not included in the normal palette of politician concerns Which be taxes and regulation how just in order of importance can you go through a few of them? Well, I think you know, I've spent life in large part as an entrepreneur and businesses organization have run or started I have key metrics that I'm tracking to know the health of my my companies or health of an organization You know, I think I think on that list for a state is the physical climate of it. That's no doubt That's part of it like can people afford to live here. Yes, that's a big part of course But the other there's other deeper issues that I think are more long-term and focus that we you know because of this like Constant news cycle of what's happening right now that we all have to respond to which thank God I'm not running for a federal office because it's like never ending and always changing but because of Because of that often we're distracted or our eyes are taking off the ball purposely from the big issues and a couple of of this I was number four in the nation for net out migration of our kids 25 to 29 Yeah, how can you build a state if you're people are leaving? important new people yeah Yes, we can talk about that Another one would be you know 25% of our farmlands now owned by out of state investors and funds that don't live in our state So our farmers who have had this ancestral connection to the land are now becoming ten Incidentally again something we left Germany large part four You know just take a side question for a second I remember when I was doing all that research in my family to understand a lot about the history and In what drove them to leave this homeland of theirs, you know because I always made up you know 35 40% German immigrants came over Very industrial people very family oriented people people that had pride in the work that they do Objectively some of the best people ever I would I would say that I'm not one of them But I just I just have noticed Oh, yeah big on tradition and and big on family and A lot of pride and where they came from So what would motivate people to leave and you know I think the common answer we always heard was well It's religious persecution So I started to get interested in this just understand more what were the real conditions and I actually found out that You know my family a lot of Germans came around 1850 Well in 1848 in Germany There's an attempted revolution across across Europe across Europe. Yes and It was called 48ers and what did they want? They well they wanted to be able to own the ground under their feet. They wanted free speech. They didn't like slavery They had a lot of these you know now what we call Western ideals. It was the end of feudalism. Yes, right and so What happened to them they were defeated? and so in Germany when there defeated minimum got exiled and Then many others just left. Well what state came online in 1846 was Iowa and it was also very agrarian Just like where they came from and so many people came over and I like to talk about this that you know One of the key points in Iowa's history that I'm most proud of is how I once responded during the Civil War so You know, we had them as very compromised with the Kansas Nebraska act And with that with that decision of you know, they sort of get to decide. Yeah, whether or not they're gonna be free slave there was a lot of Wealthy landoning elites that were rushing to the Midwest to try to lobby to create slave states of course and This Iowans patience on the prairie right and I was not a part of this you know but one of my favorite stories in 1861 the governor of Iowa is named governor Samuel Kirkwood He was on his plow in his field when a messenger from the Department of War brought him a message on horseback to him and then at the president said he needed to put together a company of 750 troops to be ready in two weeks and you mind you this is 15 years after I have a human state. We have our inner infancy and He said 750 troops in two weeks. How can that be done in two weeks later? 10,000 Iowans had signed up by the end of the Civil War more Iowans fought in the Civil War than any other state per capita Why was that I? Believe and there's some evidence of course. I've read deeply in this that they had just left a country that They saw oppression in and they fled that left everything and they were saying this isn't gonna happen here So I think when you talk about land and you talk about now 25% of our land is now owned by people that don't live in our state They're not contributing to our communities. They don't go to the football games. They're not shopping on Main Street It's a real generational issue and I go to these auctions. I've bit against many of these people land auctions. Oh, yeah and very often it's a farm management company To actual owner. We don't know who they are. We actually don't know who owns our land in Iowa There's not human level disclosure that's required so You can own land and LLC and that LLC could be wholly owned by a trust and All the state notices that the LLC owns the land That's it and so we've got in this place where Just common courtesy or your just common tradition of knowing who your neighbors are is not there anymore What's impossible in perfectly if you don't Can't find their names. It's kind of hard to have a community. It's buried America's ranchers helped build this country for over 250 years ranchers fed America through droughts wars pandemics every other kind of chaos Our friends in good ranchers built their company on that honorable legacy Good ranchers is a meat company. It's a hundred percent committed to America They raise every cut on local American soil the entire packaging and fulfillment process takes place in this country Same with customer support No dark basements in India you when you call you talk to real Americans and they donate a portion of their profit to veterans organizations We have good ranchers meet for dinner on our table. It is so good and it's easy to order It's a few simple clicks support a company that honors this nation's past present and our future Go to good ranchers dot com today and if you subscribe to any of their boxes of a hundred percent American meat You save up to 500 bucks a year and if you use the code Tucker you get an additional 25% rather 25 dollars off Maybe even better than 25% dollars off your first order That's code Tucker for next to 25 bucks off the order on top of $500 you'll save this year for subscribing Good ranchers calm American meat delivered and So one of the things that's governor that I want to do is require human level disclosure of land ownership Because I would bet that it's actually more than 25% of our lands So it is owned by people are sitting in another two other ones by the way if you don't You know have to bear the consequences of Your actions then you're much more likely to exploit and degrade the community that you're taking money from so like why wouldn't you I mean why do you care about Long-term best practices you don't you're just extracting wealth This is the spiritual part of this session. I believe you know I was my father was a 30 year conservationist in a pastor and I grew up like learning to love and appreciate the place. I tell I said this before but you know he legitimately made me believe that every sunset was made for me by God And we we driving and say look at what God made for you and I still think those things this day Of just like those little pieces that made me appreciate creation and one of my favorite clips from your show ever ever Is when you're on with Bobby Kennedy and he was having that discussion about how nature is how we connect deeply with God Yeah, it makes me emotional thinking about it. I couldn't agree more I said that to so many people and especially my father because it it's true and it's language. We don't use anymore It brings you to a higher place and it helps you understand like This is much deeper than just who owns a piece of land or what's happening It's actually like we are connected to God Through the land through his creation and it's on every page of the Bible from Genesis to Revelation There's a lot of nature What's what's the Garden of Eden filled with trees rivers? Animals right okay, and all the parables that happens to that verse so so that of course that's a systemic issue and let me say that that's been going on for a long time and Nobody's really talked about it. You go to a cafe every farmer's talking about these things about like oh You see that we had a piece of land in northwest Iowa Research ago for thirty two thousand dollars an acre not development Okay, I'm just I'm a land buyer. I'm interested in land. I'm interested in You know and all that how do you get to thirty two thousand dollars an acre? Even for you know famously productive farmland like what is that what's the potential return on that how did that happen? Well, let's just say commonly we'll go to twenty thousand dollars an acre That's fairly common north of the soil some it's some of the best land in the world. It is it is and so you know look Pete outside investors look at Iowa as a great investor because It's a solid asset. Yes, it heads against the dollar of hedges and you get a dividend like you ran out the land like oh and so one of the things I kind of complain or opine about a lot is that our land isn't an asset class it's actually Was meant as the inheritance for the sons and daughters of our state to build their lives the communities and their families and When they're tenants on that land and they're paying high dollar rent because the only way you can justify high high price like that is very high rent You're stripping away a lot of go back to say it's like kind of the spiritual aspect of this and that Land is best when it's owned and farmed by the same person It's we know this we know this from if you own rental properties where may be like There's a connection of stewardship that comes with that to know that I'm passing this piece of ground on to my grandkids and their kids and their kids And that's what it should be but that that is being actively taken away in our state It's a two other things that I think are big systemic issues that are on my scorecard as I'd say is one is Our farmers are actively being exploited by big ag companies when I was growing up born in Iowa We had over 300 seed and input companies, you know fertilizer and and agrochemical companies that were selling to our farmers Today that number three that control 85% of the market over 90% of seed technology is owned by two companies Munson to actually it's bare in court have a 90% of this have the Which owns Monsanto now yeah seed technology I of course But I forgot that Monsanto doesn't actually exist anymore. Does that I don't think so it changed the name Yeah, it was bought by bear in Germany. Yeah, they're they're sure mentioned a lot in court still But yeah, they're not they're not a company, but so if you look at the long-term trend That anytime there's a rise in commodity prices these input costs go up even though there's not a court direct correlating factor You know, there's a study out of the University of Illinois and this study compared the cost of farming in Brazil to the cost of farming in Illinois, Iowa basically and You have to understand that the three big companies in America that provide these inputs are also the same three big companies of Brazil bear quartet of ins and Genta that study Said that for growing corn using the same application rate that they're charging Brazilian farmers about a hundred and fifty dollars less Paraker than they are Iowa farmers. How? Well the real answer is because they're an uncheck monopoly and competition doesn't exist There's tacit collusion, but he here's how it actually works They they have what they call regional base pricing But what it really is is this when they look at They're pricing they base it on the yield that you're gonna create So let's say you have more productive land even though you're using the same amount of product. They're gonna take more You have less productive land even though you use the same amount of product. They're gonna take more It's it's wrong. You know and I will I'll give Credit to brokrellans and Donald Trump in the administration. They're talking about bringing anti-trust and Investing this with the Department of Justice and one of the things I've pledged to do at a violent governor of Iowa I'm gonna lead the charge to bring anti-trust suits against these companies that are exploiting our farmers because They're taking every dollar they possibly can and we're already on life support. I mean many many most farms are operating at a loss right now and When you talk to farmers about this You do not in like I can't emphasize it's enough. You do not hear them talk about tariffs They're not matter fact the price of soybeans this year with the tariffs was higher than it was last year before the tariffs The change came that the cost of growing went up in the cost of the input products that they're that they're using went up is I tell people all the time the tariffs are not the issue We have to get this unchecked monopoly in check and under control obviously inputs are essential to agriculture or to any any creating anything one of them is diesel fuel not a lot of movement there but then you have the products that you just mentioned seeds and fertilizer Taking out seeds let's just focus on fertilizer. What are the products like? Well, I mean it just depends on the most common product for fertilizers in hydrocemonia. It's used in the fall It's where a lot of a lot of nitrogen comes from but then you have other products that are you know or you know products from earth potassium pot ash those things But you look at the trend of the pricing in these you know, I think it was five years ago And the past five years nitrogen fertilizers went up 150% in the price of corn's down 2% So farmers are they're really being I would say extorted in this process You obviously want to sleep well and fashionably Brooklyn betting can help here TCN We take sleep time seriously try to get it ours and a lot of people here cannot help rave About their Brooklyn betting mattress the first thing you'll notice about your mattress is how stable they feel That's because they're built to last for decades not just years. It's American durability By the way, we When we bring it on new advertising, we have them send stuff to the whole staff and people test it and they love this Brooklyn Bedding's founder built the company here in the United States from the ground up Craftsmanship grit no college degree their factories in Arizona The prices are low despite the fact that American made high-end comfort with up the high-end price What makes these matches so great? Brooklyn betting uses copper infused foams and thermal regulation coated foams to help keep you cool and comfortable all night Plus they offer a hundred and twenty-night sleep trial That's plenty of time to make sure you love it and we're confident you will Brzeet visit Brooklyn betting.com used a promo code Tucker at checkout to get 30% off site wide It's not available anywhere else only in the show so take advantage while you can visit Brooklyn betting.com promo code Tucker tell you something I was really surprised by and I don't know much about it But I was hunting on a farm in November right before Thanksgiving a big big big working farm and I was with the ranch manager and I'm in a truck and he said this is a truck we used to spray roundup and I said people's using roundup I don't know you know, I'm not in the ag business. I thought roundup was bad Yeah, again, I'm very ignorant, but I Just thought I didn't realize if people were still spraying roundup He said oh everyone spray surrounded like everybody does and we kind of don't talk about it. I'm like I mean is that I'm not attacking roundup Specifically, but like are we sure that these chemicals are all safe? Well, you know will roundup is the most Hi, it's the most highly used herbicide in history of the country or this is the world So effective. I mean I've seen it's losing its effect on this greatly and now true. Oh, yeah, it has to be You'll have different mixtures now. Yes, that'll go in because they're we're getting roundup resistant life is eight resistant weeds And now they're the high percentage of weeds have glyphosate resistance. So you know You know I think in some ways the life cycle of roundup is is is kind of It's gonna be coming to an end on its own. It's limited by nature. It's loaded by nature and new products are coming out But I will tell you this when you talk about safety of products well, let me back up and just talk about The companies I mentioned the three big companies that are controlling the ag input market bear core heaven's and ginger. There's other ones but Bears a German company. Yes, court have a is an American company Top shareholders are blackrock van garden states treat of that company With cinjenta is a wholly owned state enterprise of the Chinese government actually hundred percent So about somewhere on the on the end of five million acres in our state Has chemicals and seed technology? From a company that's a wholly owned company of the state of China the country of China So I mentioned that to say this if you talk to farmers about Some of these products and you know Like life is a turn around up is you know very ubiquitous you use But if you talk to them about products even many of them will use anymore You'll get to products like paraquat Paraquat is actually it was really originally formulated by cinjenta this is what was used in Anti-drug spraying in Latin America was very controversial for that in it it'll burn down plants in a matter of hours but But if you're exposed to paraquat Your chance of Parkinson's doubles matter of fact Actually, oh yes Parkinson's there's people if you have something you don't want to get And if you go next and you type in and you just like look at paraquat You'll find stories of farmers who just will not use anymore though. They'll tell stories of You know spraying it and immediately getting like or that day getting like uncontrollable body noses It's it's a very very harsh product and it's still spring I think the estimate the best estimate is about 300,000 acres of of land in Iowa use this product this product is actually used in research settings in Myson rodents to induce Parkinson's Are you being serious? I'm a hundred percent serious in our EPA and this is where the big issue lies Our EPA still allows it so if we're talking about like are these are these products harmful like Well, we can get into that more, but yes Well, we know if it doubles your chance of Parkinson's You're gonna have to explain the upside To continue selling that product. I mean my instinct is like well, you'd ban that today. That's I think that's what what people Parkinson's are long now. That's true suffering Yeah, it's a sentence you don't want no, but when you You can research this your list of skin research is it is used to induce Parkinson's in research settings I mean so So when I talk about these products, you know, I think what farmers want is to Understand the truth to like know that their government is telling them the truth about these products. He was but As with many other things the corporate capture is so heavy and so when you talk about glyphosate or glyphosate based Serbicides round up is one of them. There's many glyphosate based herbicides The EPA study this for years Um, we know way more than we've ever known about this And we also know that there are significant risks associated with its use and so for example, one of the most uh Known cases is the case of the groundskeeper in California the first major lawsuit against Monsanto and this was a man who was his job was to work for the school districts in spray glyphosate and The hose broke on his honest Packardness in his little cart and it ended up showering him with this product In a matter of months. He had lesions alvers body and he sends emails Two Monsanto asking What should I do here? I mean, they're very like I need help like not. I'm trying to blame you. He's like what what do I do to solve this problem? Well, if you fast forward in that trial the When they were in the discovery process the judge agreed to make a large portion of discovery confidential Meaning that it wasn't you know wasn't to be released But the plaintiffs could uh challenge Something or request the disclosure of it and they could request a meat and confer to talk about him And they requested it at one point and the Monsanto Attorneys, I think literally said the words go away. We're not going to disclose anything else But then there's enough do I get to do that next time I get sued go away go away And so but there's a stipulation there that said if they didn't if Monsanto didn't Put in their another request continue the confidentiality within 30 days That the confidential is waived They forgot to respond And so now we have millions of pages of documents called the Monsanto papers millions And in those documents it is an absolute master class and corporate capture to the effect of You know That email that he sent to the company. They opened it. They read it. They forwarded around. What should we do here? And they just didn't respond to him a man who's like Hurting who's Oh the initial email and covered in lesions from your product. What should I do? What should I do? Yeah, basically was asking for help Read it for it around What do we do with this? Nobody responded to him And there's he sent to those emails. I believe it's two But in there's also things like There was a time in place where another governmental body was going to be doing a study on the safety of glyphosate or round-up on in this case and The EPA official that Monsanto was working with at the time Got wind of this and in the email with the with the Monsanto official He's recounting his conversation with this EPA official and in it he said This the official said to him on the phone. He quotes it in email If I can kill this I should get a medal And he did he prevented this other governmental body from doing their own independent research on the safety and effectiveness of If I can kill this, I should get a medal. And he did. He prevented this other governmental body from doing their own independent research on the safety and effectiveness of glyphosate. Of Roundup. Come on, now. This is real. This is out there. This is 2000. This is the regulator. This is the regulator. Yes. It's so. This is out there. And other egregious examples of, and I say this is say this very often I'm talking to farmers who I love, who are my friends and my neighbors and my family. And I am one of them who we actively farm our own land. I work with young farmers that, you know, to help them have an opportunity to be on land. We share crop. But I'm in there. I'm doing this. The most common common I get from people is if it wasn't safe, they wouldn't let me use it. And I'm just here to say that's a lie. Just like they were captured during COVID and the medical establishment captured agencies. Just like Bobby Kennedy is fighting right now and Donald Trump is fighting right now. These agencies have been captured for a long time and they've been lying to the consumers about the safety and efficacy of their products. And my whole goal here, I'm not here to sit and say we should ban X, Y, or Z. That's not what I'm talking about. I mean, I think there's certain things like paraquat probably should not be used. I mean, not probably. Double sugar abuse of Parkinson's like hard. No. Hard. No. It shouldn't be used. But what I want is good science. So farmers can say, do I want to use this product? And we can say, should this product be allowed? And also, if I'm going to use this product, this is how it should be used. And when you have commercials, we know how glyphosate enters the bloodstream. We know that if it's on your skin, about 30% enters your bloodstream, about 10% of that is through cardiac output, about 10% goes into your bone marrow. In bone marrow, glyphosate disrupts the replication of hematopoietic stem cells that are differentiating from red to white. It's genotoxic. There's 50 studies that show this. Like we know how it happens. And yet there's commercials showing people using this products in flip flops and shorts, just saying like, be cavalier about it. We have many products we use. You go into my shop at the farm. There's many products in the shelf that if they're used improperly are bad for your health. And they warn about that on the label. These do not, not in that same way. But in these papers, we're also examples like this. In 2000, there was a study called the William study. It's the most cited study on the safety of glyphosate, the most cited. 99.9% of all papers that cite the safety of glyphosate, cite this study. Last month, that study was retracted because it was found that Monsanto executives wrote it, wrote the study. But here's, here's maybe even the worst part. We found that out in 2017 and it was retracted in 2025. The Monsanto executive actually said when he's sending this back, he better not have any revisions. That's what he said. And so look, you know, I think oftentimes when you talk about the subject especially in my home state, there's this desire to paint you as some liberal, hippie that doesn't like farming. Like I'm the exact opposite of that. I can tell. I actually think that locism is a mental disorder that's trying to destroy our country. And then we have got to fight to protect our culture, our people, and our heritage. But I also believe that our government has been captured in large part. And this is one of the most egregious examples. It's really simple. Why do you love the country? One of the reasons you love it is because of its physical beauty, the landscape. I mean America is great because it's got great people and because it's inherently great. It's just beautiful. And anyone who's despoiling nature is an enemy of the country. Super simple. Anyone building ugly buildings, spraying poisonous chemicals. Those are our enemies. Those are not our friends. I don't think it's complicated at all. And that's not the liberal position. The liberals are the ones who are putting solar, bulldozing trees to build solar farms. Yeah. Let's just be clear about what this is. It's an aggressive coordinated effort to defile God's creation by people who hate God. Not hard. Abortion is directly related to building strip malls. Sorry. They're both destructions of beauty and of God's creation. That's what I think. And I'm not a liberal. Our new partner, Dose, is a way better option than big pharma. That's not damning with fake prints. Anything's a better option than big pharma. There's a much better option. Some things are just out of people's hands and cholesterol is often one of them. Everyone gets blamed for getting bad cholesterol because they eat crappy food. But the truth is a lot of it's just genetic. It runs in your family and there's not a lot you can do. So pharma decides the only option is take some pill and they can help. But a lot of them have unintended consequences to put it mildly. And if you don't quite trust that plan, no one can blame you for it. That's what you should think about Dose. Very different. Dose for cholesterol is a clinically backed cholesterol support supplement. Target for glycerides, HDL, LDL, total cholesterol. A lot of people use it and the results have been remarkable for them. And it's easy to take. It's a daily two-ounce shot that tastes like mango. So that means no pills, no powders, no injections. And it works. And it's filled with natural ingredients like turmeric, not a bunch of weird chemicals that you can't pronounce and may again have unintended consequences. Visit dosedaily.co slash tucker and use the code tucker for 35% off. If you want to try it, we recommend it. Dosedaily.co slash tucker, code tucker, 35% off. Exactly. And here's the thing. I think farmers agree with a lot of this. And of course, they do. They're looking to say, like, look, number one, many of these guys would like to try different things. But when you're operating a razor thin margins, the idea of trying a new method of farming is not that appealing because like, what if it doesn't work? And I actually can't, you know, keep the farm next year. And so these, these are our people that enjoy hunting, enjoy fishing, enjoy nature want to be outdoors. Like this is our culture. That's what we like. And you're right. Like, and we are the environmentalists. Like, obviously, you're the people that that want to keep that and keep God's creation. Bernie Sanders spends a lot of time outside. Do you think AOC can identify a tree species? I mean, these are people who are rejecting nature, rejecting beauty, rejecting anything that is natural and pure and trying to defile it. That's their program. Yeah. Well, and they, they've been completely captured by this, I like this religion of carbon, but it's, it's insane. And so carbon is not, I'm, by the way, emitting it right now. Carbon is not the problem. Carbon is the basis of life. Problem is man made poisons. So how's the health? Okay. So, um, I was still primarily in ag state, obviously. Yeah. We are, we are absolutely, we have Ag at all money on count. Yes. Right. Yes. Ag is, is the largest industry. And kind of come to the last point, if like that, that score kind of mentioned to you, it's like, we have the fastest rate of new cancer of anywhere in the history of human civilization. What? Yes. Can you repeat that? We have the fastest rate of new cancer of anywhere in the history of human civilization. Iowa, Iowa, Iowa. Matter of fact, if you live in one of the top counties for cancer in our state, they're all rural counties. Your lifetime chance of getting cancers one and two. And if you take Iowa as a whole and you compare it to say a state like Nevada, Nevada actually is fairly low cancer rates. And any given year, that is the highest smoking rate out of 50 states, but one of the lowest cancer rates, Iowa has very low smoking rates, very low smoking rates relative, certainly to Nevada and has a really high cancer rate. I'm just not a scientist. I'm just noticing I just I picked Nevada because I needed to pick a state that I was like, look, you've had as the highest smoking rate in America. Look it up. So if you choose to live in Nevada, over Iowa, and any given year, your chance of getting cancers 40% less. I've why have I never heard this 40% if you take the top county for cancer in our state and you compare it 70% less actually actually. And is the top county in Ed County? Oh yeah, absolutely. Yeah, it's not to mean no, no, no, no, actually there's lower rates of cancer. I mean per capita, of course, in those in those places for real in your population centers. They have a cancer. It's the top 10 counties are all rural counties. So you can say that people who are spending the day outside getting physical exercise 12 months a year, when those people have higher cancer rates than someone working in a cube and Des Moines, then you start to think, maybe there are external factors we should be looking at. You know, as I've brought this up, I find myself, this is so interesting. I find myself with a genuine care because like I said, I'm not trying to tell farmers how they have to farm. I'm not trying to tell for everybody they have to farm like me like we run under a general farm lots of it's organic. My goal is to help Iowans live longer healthier lives, help farmers make more money and help kids stay on farms for longer. That's like it's the farmer who are being abused here. They're the victims here 100% of the ones getting cancer. It's 100%. And that's that's you know, and I'll talk to farmers about this. I'll talk to people that who maybe are a big in the ag community and they hear these talking points. They'll say like applicators of these products have lower cancer rates. And they're not wrong. That's actually an accurate statement, meaning farmers in general as a whole can have lower cancer rates. But when you hone in specifically on non-Hodgins lymphoma leukemia, they have much higher cancer rates, the lifestyle of the job is going to give you more exercise. It's going to put you out. So there are these things at lower. But you hear these industry talking points about like actually there's lower lower in total. It's like yeah, but your chance of getting these specific cancers linked to these products is much higher. And so even with the rate of cancer in our state, you know, I'm in a governor's race right now. And even with rate of cancer in our state, there's not one person talking about these things that I'm talking about right now with the likely causes of the cancer in our state. We hear things like fear you'll be attacked as a liberal for bringing this up. I fear most that isn't a fear, but most I think that the ag associations, especially ones that are not member driven, you know, that are constituted by actual farmers that take large checks from the companies that I'm mentioning right now. I think the most likely scenario that everybody's warned me about is they're just going to come and try to destroy me. I'm literally here because I could get into tears thinking about the people that I know that have gotten cancer. My own father got it. He was a, he was a crop consultant. So his job was to go into fields, check for pests. We used to do this with him as a child. So I had a lot of fun doing it. He'd write a report and he'd bring it back to the farmers. And this is part of his job. He did it very well. And this is just the norm. It's what you did. And he'd recommend this is what you should apply. He did that for over two decades. And he was diagnosed with one of these exact types of cancer. And that's what really I think rolled was he? He was 60. Houch. We'll talk about this is maybe worry. Thank you. He's in remission now. Thank the Lord. But this is where I think this hits home spiritually too, is that I think Iowans in myself included. You know, about three and a three and a half months ago, I went back to my hometown that I grew up in in Iowa for the funeral of my best friend from high school for his father. He died of, died of cancer again in the 60s. And I just tell people like, I don't know how many more of these funerals of men and women in their 60s. I can go to when their parents lived to be 80. Like we're losing the wisdom of entire generation of people. And we life expectancy goes down. It's not progress. Oh, so I tell people, and this is the more the political way to say it. Look, we can have amazing, I haven't told people, I'm not running for office because of policy and money because of culture. And they say, what does that mean? And I'll say, look, ask every public and endearborn Michigan how much she cares about his tax rate or does he care that the Muslim called a prayers on the loudspeaker five times a day. And he doesn't remember nowhere. He's waking up anymore and his culture's gone. We have to protect our culture. Our founders intended that to be the case. We have a huge amount of talk about founders primarily when it comes to fiscal issues and things like this. We forget that I think I was John Adams who said something along lines of public view virtue is dependent on private virtue. And public virtue is the only foundation of a republic. So we hear these things and this is a bit of a bit of a tangent here, Tucker, but I've had to have a bit of a realization on this and to understand better what's going on because I grew up in an era where libertarian thinking was very pervasive. It was all the place I agreed with much of it. And there's still things I do agree. I was a fellow with the Cato Institute. So you don't need to apologize for my presence now. I know what you mean. Well, what's that long ago that many Americans thought they were inherently safe from the kinds of disasters you hear about all the time in third world countries, a total power loss, for example, or people freezing to death of their own homes. That could never happen here. Obviously it's America. People are recalculating unfortunately because they have no choice the last few years have taught us that. Or would the power grid in Texas failed in the dead of winter? It happened and it could happen again. So the government is not actually as reliable as you hope they would be. And the truth is the future is unforeseeable and things do seem to be getting a little squirrely. So if the grid does go down, you need power you can trust. Last country supplies newest product is designed for exactly that. The grid doctor is a 3,300 watt battery backup system that will power full-size appliances, medical devices, and tools with clean, reliable power. It's even EMP protected. That means it's shielded from lightning solar flares or an actual electromagnetic pulse event. There's no gasoline, no noise, no emissions. You just plug it in, charge it from the wall from your vehicle, or from the included 200 watt solar panel and keep going. Day after day taking care of yourself and the people you love is solely up to you. And the amazing thing is with these new batteries, we use one at home, by the way, is there super easy to use. There's no inverter you need to figure out on the front of it or anything like that. There's like three buttons. It's very easy and totally reliable, highly recommended. We literally use one, as I said. Visit lastcountrysupply.com to shop the grid doctor for power you can trust this winter. Lastcountrysupply.com. And I think what that amounted to is there's so many people have subscribed to what I call this religion of economic thinking. This idea of market fundamentalism that the market matters above all. And I say that that's not what our ancestors believe. It's not what our founders believe. It has their work. Exactly. I say about our ancestors, they didn't come here to become capitalists. They came here to own the ground under their feet, to build their churches and communities, and pass something onto the next generation of their children, of course. But they didn't come here to do it at the detriment of their neighbors. It actually came here to do it helping their neighbors. We obviously are a communist. I have to tell you the amount of arguments that I hear from this generation that has subscribed to this religion of economic thinking, which by the way, our founders did not support. They were in favor of tariffs. The states all had laws, primarily all of them had laws to protect moral virtue. Like this is a part of what they did. They knew it. And they knew because the state has a role in that. And we were, we are a Christian nation with a Christian form of government. Like our constitution could not have been created by any other religion. You're not endowed by a creator. You don't have any available rights. In Christianity you do. The divinity individual is real. We're made in the image of God. And so I have these arguments with people where I'm saying, look, 25% of Atlanta and myosene investors, I'd like to raise their property taxes. I'd like to disincentivize this thing that's been happening in our state and create a new category of tax for investment land for people who are coming in and prospecting. And I'm just this is socialism. This is communism. I'm just saying who says that? This is what gets me. It's self-defense is immoral now. It's basically what they're saying. You're not allowed to defend yourself. Yeah. I'm just saying, I love is not an economic zone for the world or for the country. It's not. You're upsetting me. Yes. Agree. And so when I say this, it's oftentimes people that were, you know, that were oftentimes as people that were really affected by the economic thinking that came out of the Chicago School of Economics. And I when I trace much of this back, I look at what happened in the 1980s. I think Ronald Reagan did a lot of great things. But there's also this market fundamentalism that really took over. And then you look at what's been the repercussions of that. This idea that unrestrained capitalism is what we worship. Or that it even is capitalism. That even is capitalism because oftentimes it's corporatism. Of course, just all garbage. Or that free trade is the ideal. It's like even the fathers of modern economics, Adam Smith, even David Ricardo, who is a person that basically developed the idea of comparative advantage. This is a big thing. Yes, free trade is good if you protect your national interest first. Like Francis, the micro, the Silicon Microchip was invented by a man from Iowa, Robert noise, who then tell. And then you look at what's happened now in our country from a product that was invented in our country. We produce 10% of them. And all basically all of the high tech versions of this, we can't produce. We don't have technologies to the ones that would be military application are coming from somewhere else. So there's this idea that that the market matters over all. I'm saying, no, that's not, we don't worship the market. Like the most egregious example of this, I think, is when you look at what happened through free trade in the Rust Belt and throughout the Midwest, where you had people that were told that their jobs are being shipped overseas, but they'd be replaced by high tech jobs that didn't they be trained by, which by the way is lie. It didn't happen. Matter of fact, the biggest benefits that came from that were for the leaders of large companies that chose to do what Adam Smith said not to do, which was free trade was about one country doing something really well. Another country doing something really well in the exchange. A comparative advantage in the market isn't exploitative labor conditions of a communist government. That's not included in the comparative advantage. Adam Smith didn't foresee that. No. And so when capital's mobile and you can move all of these factories to one place to get cheap labor, everything's going there. And then so who got rich off that? Well, large companies got rich. And then pharmaceutical companies got rich that prayed off purposeless white males who lost their work, of course, in large part of the colors and it creates still billionaires. Never went to jail. And like as I say this, I get like a good spouse because it's like, this is just wrong. Oh, yeah. I mean, the hundreds of thousands of deaths that have come from this when you take work and purpose away from people and you sell them a lie that then it's going to be replaced by these high tech jobs or high tech training for jobs. And it doesn't happen. And then you have these practices where people like, you know, like, here's a new customer. We can get them addicted. There's a stat I read. It's almost like it was on purpose. You know, in 2016, the World Economic Forum had that article that was published still online. I don't know why it's still online today. But I talked about this idea that in the future, you'll own nothing and you'll be happy. I tell people like that wasn't a joke. It wasn't a threat. It was a plan. Of course. And it's happening. Oh, I know. And so there, I think many people in our country just feels if there's this large plan or effort that's being executed that we're not privy to. No. But we have these cyops that happen that like that come up and we're fed them through news or something like that to get on board with it. I think what we just talked about is probably a large part of that. This idea that we're going to take away meaningful manual labor with your hands, which by the way, it's like maybe second to farming. That type of work is really gratifying because you're creating a product for a deal to my spare time. Like I can't wait to get off work and do it. Not because I'm great at it or something, but because it's so rewarding. It's so refreshing. It feeds something. It feeds a real hunger, I think, and all men. And so yes, no, it's like my primary form of relaxation. I just love it. And I think every man feels that way. I agree. Man, you look at some of these channels on social media that have taken off. It's so much of this. Because it's like, they're like addicting. It's like, I love watching. We've got even the bushcraft videos of people making these houses. How about Pakistani metalworking videos? You ever watch those? That's a whole genre. Those guys are amazing. I've never really liked Pakistan. I spent time in Pakistan. You watch those videos. You're like, I'm pretty pro Pakistan. Just the ingenuity, the craftsmanship, which is not high, by the way, but it's just like these are men making things out of raw materials and it's real to watch that. And they're proud of what they create. 100% and they ought to be. They should. And they have my respect. And me as well. And I would just say that I look at this from the standpoint of your own nothing. And I look at this large narrative that's happening in our country. I mean, you know this, but even in a black zone is buying single-family homes. There's another company in Council Bluffs that's doing as well, multi-billion dollar real investment trust. It's buying up single-family homes in Council Bluffs. Council Bluffs. That's a tough town. Yeah. And across the river from Omaha. Yeah. It wouldn't be your first choice. It's, I mean, that's how that's how ubiquitous this is. Right? It's like it's Council Bluffs. And then you look at our farmlands being bought by people that don't live here. And even when you get back into agriculture and you look at, you know, Iowa is a top pork producing state in the country. Yes. Well, most people don't know is, I think, somewhere above 75% of the pork that's raised in Iowa. The farmers don't own the pigs. Of course not. They're on contract from one of the big four agriculture conglomerates, Cargill, Tyson, JBS and national. So we're having this pride in our work as pride in our land. That's the health of our people. We're having these major issues come up. Well, so can I ask you to put, I mean, that does, so you own nothing and be happy. He's a very famous phrase. And thank you for reminding us that it was 10 years ago that it first emerged and that it was real. It was not a meme at that point. It was like a statement of intent. But I think that has obscured the even darker reality, which is not only you not own anything, you won't create anything. Yeah. I personally, just speaking for myself as a middle-aged man, I would rather at this stage create than own. I like both. But the joy, the thing that proves that you were made in God's image is your ability to create because God is the creator. Yeah. And when you create something, it's the whole purpose of being here, whether it's children or harmony or a pair of reading glasses, creation, making something out of nothing is the main joy and when you take that away, no wonder people are unfendable. Right. Well, also, I think maybe missing like the biggest one of those is speech. Well, exactly of this right here of what you're creating. I like to believe that's a form of creation. It is. That's it. It's like, this is from my life talking. Speech is that. And that is that created. This is where I believe that we get bogged down in the like the policy and the politics of this whole thing. And we forget about the grand or story. Yes. Of who we are as a people that were endowed by our creator that we're here for a big purpose. I spent a number of years building schools. And one of the things we'd say is that we believe every young person is a hero on their journey to find a calling and change the world. Like that was the inspirational line that we would say basically every day. Like that's who we are. That's why we're here. And a lot of this creation has been is being taken away as you mentioned. An AI is not the least of which. I told my kids all the time, look, use AI for research, never let it right for you. Writing is how you organize your thoughts. It's how you can think something through to separate the wheat from the chaff to understand how to think critically, to test your ideas and then get into bait and things like that. You can't have a machine do that. So it's a uniquely human thing is for us to come up with these ideas based on our unique life experience. It's like saying, eat a steak for me. Have sex for me. You know, wake up at dawn and watch the sunrise for me. No, I'll reserve those to myself because I'm sure the greatest bludgers in life and creating something is number one on that list of joy. So like why would you ever outsource that to a machine? I understand that. Do you see the commercial for the product that basically records like your grandmother? You'll record them when they're alive. And then after they pass away, it creates basically an avatar of them, but actually you can steal my memories. So then replace them with the creation of a machine. I don't think so. This is real though. Actually, this I say it's like for the longest time, we accepted technology and it looked farming is a big in this too. It's like, look, it reduced the burden of labor. And there's a certain point to that. That's probably good. Meaning like hand plowing a field is a really difficult task using a tractor. Okay, that's probably okay, right? It is okay. I have some joking, but but then when you start to see what it's being used for now to replace human beings, meaning you can continue to have conversations with this grandmother long after she's passed away and she'll give you her unique thoughts. Well, that's completely stripping away the divinity of humanity. This idea that we're creating God's image that we each have something unique to share. Humanity is something to be protected and is very special in the history of in the history of the universe. It's very special. And so like, let me just say this, a lot of my campaign comes down to this question. I was reading an essay by Wendell Berry. You know, it's funny, as you were talking, I was just thinking of Wendell Berry. And I was going to say at Propow of Nothing, I love Wendell Berry. I thought maybe he's never heard a Wendell Berry. Oh, I love that you read Wendell Berry. I love Wendell Berry. It's a matter of fact, his essay on 9-11 was so radical. I think it got taken off the internet, but it was like so good. You know, I, maybe shouldn't say this on here, but I drive a Tesla and it has an autopilot feature. And there's a period of time when I'd be driving with... You know, I, I, I maybe shouldn't say this on here, but I drive a Tesla and it has an auto pilot feature. And there's a period of time when I'd be driving with my kids and you know somewhere and I might like, you know, pull out the windowberry poem book and give them. So on the way to schools, they're talking to my sister-in-law yesterday about windowberry poems literally yesterday. There, I would actually have the kids take turns in the car reading a poem to be a kid. Wait a minute, because look, understanding these ideas, I don't know if there's other than faith in their tied in together, inextricably woven together the ideas that windowberry puts forward and the ideas of our faith. You can't separate them because it's about creation. Yes. It's about protecting that and understanding that we were told to tend the garden, we're told the subdued but not destroy us. And so I would have the kids read this because it's like, I want you guys to know like, if I'm gone tomorrow and you knew two things about me that I loved my savior and I loved the creation. Yes. I'd be very happy and I hope that, you know, if that's the only two things you remember about me and you just had to keep reflecting on those two things, great, you're making me emotional again. I'm sorry. But in this essay, I was actually in the Atlanta game. If you're listening to windowberry poems in the car with your kids, like I tell me where the fundraiser is because I'm going because I just we need more of this in America. So he had this poem, this essay wrote in the Atlantic, I think it was 1991 and somebody's some quote I read turned me on to that and I was like, I wonder what this is. So I went and read the whole thing. And he talked about this idea and I think this summarize is so much what I'm talking about. When I say, our farmlands being owned by people who live here are jobs or being shipped to other countries or factories being shipped to other countries, we've unchecked monopolies that are exploiting our farmers. We have highest cancer rate, but we're not talking about it. windowberry said that a foundational question that the Amish ask before they make any big decision is what will this change do to our community? Yes. And I think I don't know anyone who would deny that our politicians and our leaders have not been asking that question for a very long time. That is absolutely right. And that is absolutely right. And we don't ask ourselves enough. How will this change us and our relationships and our understanding of God in the world? And I think that of labor saving devices, I find myself I'm the product of America and at its peak and there's not enough labor actually. And I find myself trying to eliminate labor saving devices from my life merely so I will have the experience of labor. Yeah. And I think that the hand grinder coffee don't have to do that. Why do we do that? I always say to my but fuddled in grumpy children like because we're not depending on electricity for everything. You can grind your own coffee. It's okay. And I just feel like that and obviously I'm insane. So that informs a lot of my decisions is my lunacy. But it also speaks to like a need and all people to be involved in the production of something. Yeah. Right? Like door dash is I'm not against door dash but like not that I've used it. But like I don't know. You gain something but you also lose something. That's all I'm saying. Yeah. When you feel the feeling of accomplishment, it's a liberating feeling. Yes. It's a feeling that brings pride. And I would say this. It's a feeling that brings pride that also if you understand your own history of your family and your story, even connected to what's happened generation and generation and generation before. I think so much of where we've went wrong is that you know, I was at a, gosh, I was at a funeral for a woman that I loved dearly. Her name was Becky Elder and she was an agrarian from Kansas and you know, lived in Kansas for a while. She was somebody who started schools. She was an amazing woman. I mean, like this could give me emotional. But I was at a funeral about a week ago. She was a, I would call a daughter of the prairie, like loved creation, tended it, had their own farms, all these things. And her son was reading something about her and he said, one of the most common sins is forgetting. Forgetting where we come from, forgetting our heritage, forgetting that these places really matter. So like when I'm in my community and I'm seeing the people I'm surrounded with in large part, you know, it's like many of these places feel forgotten, especially by our politicians, who didn't ask these questions of what will these changes do to our community. I have a defensive mechanism that comes up in me to say like, I'm going to hear it. I'm going to fight for you. I'm going to do it. I don't know what that is. I don't know where that came from, but I would just say that God put something on me to say, look, maybe I win this governor's race, maybe I don't. My whole life is going to be focused on these issues because there are issues of caring for your neighbor. It's the one of the two commands I've been given by Jesus. And so that's why we work with, you know, we could do forming a different way and I could make more money on that. I have a family that I love that I want to work with specifically because it's additive to the whole equation. Yes. You know, in my great grandparents were living on the farm. I've found all these documents and I hear stories about them from the community. You know, it's so interesting. It's like we talk about we don't know who owns our land. You know, before when I was growing up and I talked about these pieces of land, we've bought some of these pieces because the people have passed on and oftentimes they'll want to sell to us because they know where my heart is and they don't want it to go into an auction and they don't want to go into somebody from out of the country. We don't know. We call the pieces of land by the last name of the people that live there forever. We're always, we do the same. That's what we do in exactly right. And it's honoring. I've told my wife, I plan to put up plaques or signs saying like, this is this farm. This is the history of this farm. It's exactly what we do. It's exactly right. And that's exactly the way to do it. And so what I was talking early on about this idea of something lost. I remember hearing some stories and one of the stories I really loved was that you might great-grandma in the right great grandpa. When they were on this farm, you know, these Iowa communities used to be dotted with these small farmsteads all over. Many of them have just been bulldozed and farmed over because you know, people are growing and growing and growing farm. Consolidations happening everywhere. And of course. And with the consolidation every time a farm is consolidated, I say to people, life goes out of our community. Like we have to get our young people back on these farms. One of my biggest, biggest efforts I'm going to be undertaking is to do that. They were so tight knit in these communities that people tell me, you know, we used to come over to your house, this house. Coffee was until 10 p.m. at night. And you're a great-grandma. You're a great-grandma. Actually, the counselors of our neighborhood. So they had these groups. And so if husband and wife were having an issue, they'd come over and they'd sit and talk this through. If they're having issues with kids, they'd sit and talk these things through. And they cared for each other and they're involved in each other's lives. And we're experiencing likely the exact opposite of that trend happening. And it's having a profound effect on our culture, where we become an insular and other ring. And just because you have a bumper sticker that somebody doesn't like that they're not to be talked to, just not at all. Like what defined us back then? No. Not at all. And we're not allowed to behave like that anyway. My dream for the state of Iowa is to see long-term rich agrarian society. Like a long-term rich agriculture heritage be restored. That's my dream. And that's what I'm fighting for. Boy, that's got to be one of the toughest battles you could fight. It's worth it. It's foundational not just to the state, but to us as a people. I think it's something in our soul that like working with our hands in the dirt with animals, with family, with multiple generations. There's a book by a guy named Alan Carlson, I think it was just called the natural family and where it belongs. And I had another basically radicalized moment for me was reading this and realizing this man said so many things that I didn't know how to say. Just that that set up of farmstead and neighboring farmstead that care for each other and that did a lot of life together was the most in tuned and connected. I think spiritually we could probably say we have been as a society or a community. And I would like to see that return. What I don't quite, we met at an event a couple of months ago, a very crowded event and had like a three minute, I had never heard of you. I had three minute conversation and I was like, whoa, I want to talk to that guy. So I should just confirm to anyone who's still watching this an hour in that you talk this way private too, which I love. But what if people in like a official organized Iowa politics think when you say stuff like this? You know, in longer form of discussions, I find that it's very, very good. But I think that politics has been so overtaken with this like bumper sticker ideology as it which is like, I think somebody wants to set a bumper sticker as substitute for thought or something like that. And so and also I just think I'm not the typical person that would run for office. I really think that's going to get mildly. I really like, I really worked hard to be on our farm to farm it to have my kids understand that, to work in education and these types of things. I really worked hard to do that. This was not something that I had just like saying, you know what, timings like I've been waiting for this forever or doing this. It was more that I thought, there's no term limits on the governor of Iowa. Longest serving governor in history of America is Iowa's former governor Terry Brentson. So in my head and in my heart as I talked my wife about this, like the next person who gets elected governor could be governor to die. Oh, yeah. We'll look at your senior senator emphasis on the senior. I like him. I'm not attacking him, but he served for a couple hundred years, I think. It's like that, a quote when Ronald Reagan said, I knew Abraham Lincoln and you're not Abraham. I love that, but it's, you know, so politics is not the place for long, form deep and spiritual discussion. And I wish it was. Yeah. Because I think if it was, you require people running for office to connect with you at a deeper level to actually understand what you're going through and to know that they care about those issues. You know, I don't care how low our taxes are. If our kids are leaving and our people are dying from cancer, we are not in what I'd call successful territories. Exactly right. And the beauty of economics is it's supposedly a species of science, which means it can be tested. So if you have an economic system in progress, longitudinal over a period of time, then you can assess with the highest degree of accuracy whether it worked or not. Right. Because you look at the outcomes. And by that measure, socialism, communism is like the worst possible failure or current system. He's not anything like that, but it's not a, it's not a win. It's a failure because look around. So like what we're doing isn't working. I don't care what they tell you at some think tank or what should happen. I've lived long enough to see what actually happened and no, yeah, doesn't work. Look at some of these new ideas that are coming out, which by the way, it's like the fact that these have to be stated is kind of crazy. And then the fact that we get pushback on it, like I'm somebody who firmly believes that the priorities of my government and my economy should be solely focused on making life better for the people that live in my state in my country. Like not racist, not not for big business, not for foreign countries. And I think so many people just thought that was the case. And then like meaning make people that are not really paying attention, but it's like the politicians are all telling me like we're going to work on this low tax. We're going to work on this thing. It's like, but hold on, what just a day ago, 81 Republicans voted to keep $315 million of spending for the national and down for democracy. What? Yeah, not on your side. Right. And it's like after everything that Elon Musk went through, after all of what these people did, all of what they took in the news, all of like the conflicts and relationships that are broke down to this, that one thing that we know is a front organization in large part is now getting hundreds of millions of dollars from our government and Republicans are voting yes on it, or they are. It's like we're not learning anything. It's like the idea how am I laughing? Because I don't know what else to do. How could you ever deny the existence of the uni party at this point? Oh, I know. Well, you have a very prominent Republican senator and presidential candidate working with the ADL to suppress the speech of Americans. So it's like, maybe the current system isn't what they do. And I, but people know that it's that it's fake. And I guess the good news is we still have enough elbow room and a freedom in the United States that reform is possible. If enough people are like, no, come on now, you have to serve our interests sort of or at least acknowledge them. Yeah, you, you would hope so. I think like this vote specifically is a quite the conundrum to that point, right? Like this all just happened. Well, I could name eight other things that happened in the last month and you're like, this is, this is so unbelievable. It's so outrageous that can continue the internal contradictions. If reach the point of breaking and like, oh, we're getting something new. And then it's just like, oh, onto the next year, it'll be gone in a week. It'll be like, in a week, it's gone now. Yeah, it's got you exactly it. But to that point, I think this is why this idea of running for governor is so appealing. It's like, maybe I'm wrong for saying this, but I've largely written off Washington, DC. I think that's fair. And it's like, if the people that we've put in power, no granted, I will say there's some huge, huge shining star to think what Robert F. Kennedy is doing, unbelievable. The repercussions of this for the positive health benefits of Americans will reverberate for for generations if it can stay in place because he's going to help an entire generation of people become far more healthy, the better lives meet their great grandkids potentially. That's amazing to have clearer heads and pure spirits. Like just start with like, just the government should not officially endorse eating a thousand pounds of sugar a year. Just that right there, flipping over the nutrition tables into something that more closely resembles reality. That's a huge step, reducing the VAX schedule from like, you know, a million vaccines for the newborn to a smaller number. You got to call that a win. And it's also something that I think we believe why are we even having to have this fight? Oh, like, but you know, like somebody asked me the other day, what do you think the most pressing issue facing America is? And like taking out the spiritual because spirituality is intertwined, but taking that out and said, I think it's that our government is run by unelected people and we don't know who they are. Yeah. And I was talking without our best interest at heart. And so this idea of America first of Iowa first, it's like, to many of us, this is just common sense. It's like, this is what the country was set up for. What's the other form of government that's legitimate? I can't think of one. If this is a democratic republic and government is acting in an interest, it's not our interest. How is that legitimate? How is that not grounds for, you know, anyway, right, there's no other legitimate form of government, but America first or Iowa first? Like there's that's the only option. And how we got away from that is unbelievable. And like, look, I was talking to my dad about some of these things the other day and some things you can think and know, but not exactly know how to describe or put into words. And I get that feeling when I think about the shift that our country clearly went through after this assassination of John F. Kennedy. Well, that's it right there. It seems as if something spiritual happened at that point within our country and it has to do with the complete disregard for truth, honesty, or like the American public deserving to know what's happening. And then, you know, I read a tweet one day, I don't know who said it, maybe his wrestle brand or somebody that said something along the lines of like the future success of our country and the Kennedys is like intertwined in some way. So it is true. I never used to believe that. And I would hear these baby boomers say that was the day everything changed. And they were silly. No, they were not serious people, but they could feel something that was true. And that was clearly true that a lot did change everything changed when he was assassinated in a way that I did not appreciate to tell it was much older. And they were right. They were right in saying that. And the fact that 63 years later, you know, CI still will not, this is a fact, will not divulge all the information that it has on his murder despite a bunch of laws from Congress despite a executive order from the president of the United States and a year ago, there's still hiding it. Clearly, there were, you know, probably a lot of people involved, probably a foreign country clearly involved, our own government clearly involved. So like, and they're still lying about it. But if the truth sets you free then lives and the lies and slave view, yeah, the adverse is true. So I think we are enslaved in some sense by these lies. You know, I think where I see this most is in the newest generation of people that are coming up, you know, coming of age, so to speak. And there's some very loud voices out there that they're all flocking to one in very, in particular that you've interviewed. And people asked me all the time, like, why do I think that is? And I just say, guys, look at the lies. Exactly. Look at what's happened. Look at the lack of justice, the lack of accountability. Like, we don't, where's Fauci? Like, what about the Hunter Biden laptop? One of these people are going to be arrested. I said, this is about Trump 10 years ago and I lived in Washington. I'm a product of Washington, obviously. And I wrote a piece, basically Trump is popular because you failed. And it's not what's in an endorsement of everything Trump said, though. I like Trump, but in voted for him. But it wasn't, it's not about Trump. Trump wouldn't have existed if the system was working. And the same is true of the person you're referring to, whose name shall not be named. But no, no, but true. It's like, we argue about, is he good or bad? Does he see, you know, whatever. But the argument's not really about him. It's with a system that allowed someone like that to become popular. It's like, why do you think people are watching that? Because you failed. You betrayed your own voters. Yes. Yes. That is right. Yes. And look, one of the biggest issues that's come up is about immigration. Yeah. It's all over. And I think for a long time, we have been criticized, ostracized for noticing what's happening and calling it out to say like, what's happening? And there's this idea of replacement migration, this replacement theory. And like I don't ever talk about this, but it's like, people talk about it and they're immediately just hammered down. Well, in 2000, the UN put out a document called replacement migration of course, 144 pages, multiple languages. But I read this and it's like, it's lining out exactly what's happening. And it's saying, look, European nations are going to be losing population. America's going to be losing population. What's the answer? Well, traditionally throughout history, the answer is to promote having more children. It's easier for people to have kids. Yes. They make life more affordable, bring home the money that's being spent overseas and use, I mean, imagine we just talked about a record of GANS in. Imagine when our country would be if we didn't spend $10 trillion on that. Yeah. Imagine what we could have done for our children and our communities. So when you look at this and you're in your, you're called this, I'm not called that because I don't ever talk about this, but people are called conspiracy theorists for bringing up this idea of replacement migration. They literally wrote a white paper on it. Of course. And they describe what it's going to do. And then you look at these people that are feeling like, yeah, especially young white males, like they're being taken out of society. They're being told they don't matter. Matter of fact, they have this original sin of being who they are. It's unbelievable. And then you, in the hands, I get dangerous conspiracy. Do you ever look at the census numbers? Oh, yeah. Right. So again, we can just bring science to bear on this is the native population being replaced. I don't know. Let's check the census answer. Yes. How about we do it by zip code? I'm 56. So what's, let's go back to 1970 census of 1970. Just spend an afternoon reading that. So anyone who tells you you're a bigot or you're engaging in conspiracy theorizing is is not is lying and probably lying in order to hurt you. Well, and Tucker, why? It's like, well, right. It's like, why are we not allowed to have an appreciate and love our culture? And why are we also allowed to let people in that want to be a part of that culture? That's the whole idea. People asked me how to pronounce my last name. And it's LAHN, but it's pronounced Lane. Well, why is that? Well, my great great grandpony came over. He wanted to keep the German spelling, but he wanted to be a pronounced American, and they took on the American customs and they became American. Yeah. That's what it was. And the idea that we're saying that this is how did, how did the family pronounce it in Germany? I was told his press learn like, yeah, it's right. And that's what I was told someday, as you could probably imagine, I'm going to go over there and dig as deep as I can and all this stuff. Because it's, you know, some people get the bug for learning this about their family. I am that human. I love this. Like I love learning about my history and heritage. And you know what, like 150 years in America is a thing to be very proud of. Yes, I agree. But also, they likely did not want to leave where they were at. They didn't want to go three weeks on a boat in the stoage from Northern Germany. Northern Germany on my mom's side, actually the family's been here since revolution. Actually, a great ancestor, direct great ancestor died in the revolution. And so these voices of people who understand the culture that our answers just created, and that's something to be so proud of. It's so inclusive that it reduces suffering. It is welcoming to people, but the idea that you can come in and try to put something else over top of that. And Charlie Kirk said this beautifully. He said something under butcher's words, and I'm sorry for that. I first met him in 2011. I think we're speaking the same event. I said something along the lines of the reason we're in a constitutional crisis is because we have a Christian form of government, but we have elected people that are not following that custom and religion, Christianity. And so you're going to have a constitutional crisis. You're going to have fraud all over the place. You're going to, like, your institutions will break down. because the system was a bespoke system that was created for the people who lived under it, and you've got different people, so you're going to get a different system. Yeah. It was created. Not a value judgment, it was just an observation. Yeah. It was created. Exactly. Amazing conversation. I'm intentionally not going to ask you about the politics of it. You're going to have plenty of time to talk about that. But I think this gives anyone who, again, watched this point is either, you know, like, oh my gosh, I'm saying this man money or stop him. But I am interested to, like, win really quick. Last question. What is the process from here on now? So our primary elections June 2nd, okay. And then if we win the primary, then the elections in November, many people in the primary. There's five people in the primary right now. And so I believe we have a really, really good shot at this. And I believe our message, the time for the message that we're saying is now. And that there's been a, I think there's been a void that's been there. And people are wanting politicians and people running for office because I'm never in for office. I'm not a politician. They're wanting people that will speak truth to them. And it will talk about the big issues, even if the donors in the special interests say, I've told them, I don't want your money. I'm not looking for your money. I'm actually, I'm actually here to stop a lot of the practices that you're putting in place. And so I've said, I'm my own biggest donor to this campaign. I will not be bought. It won't happen. Oh boy, they're going to try and stop you. It's not radicalism that scares them. It's quiet since your determination. I would say so. Godspeed. Thank you.