So you travel more than anybody I know you spend more days out of the country and have for more years than literally anyone I know. So answer this question. The countries that seem to be moving backward the most quickly, this is my perception, are the white Christian English-speaking countries New Zealand, Australia, Canada, UK, United States. Am I matching that? What is that? Well, I know. I don't, I can't really speak about the countries of what they used to call the old Commonwealth, the, you know, Australia, New Zealand. I've never, I've never been to those places. But I certainly think that England, the UK more generally, but England in particular, is really in a difficult position now. And I think that the diagnosis that English people generally are coming to is that they've had, they've had too much immigration. It seems like they've been overwhelmed by immigration, but you may have a better handle the numbers. How much immigration has the UK had? Yes. Well, I think that they're up around, you know, the country is the country, well, most recent, the countries had a lot of immigration since, you know, since the Second World War. It had some moments of acceleration. It, they had a huge wave of migrants from both the, the Caribbean and the Indian subcontinent in the years right after the war and by a huge wave, you know, one, you know, it's a, it's a couple hundred thousand. But more recently, we've had even larger numbers. And in fact, one of the, one of the things that made, has made Brexit so contentious in England is that the big promise of Brexit, the primary promise of Brexit was to limit immigration. That's what most English people thought it was for. Now, Brexit was delayed between the referendum and, and 2020. And when, when Britain finally got Brexit, it had COVID. And so it had a period of zero immigration for a while. But then something really interesting happened, which is the, the people who had managed to get Brexit. That is the, the government of, of Boris Johnson sort of looked at the numbers and they were very frightened that, that the economy was going to continue slow after, after COVID. And due to the way the British government scores economic predictions, immigration comes out as by definition a benefit to the economy. So they seriously, so they, like the California. Yes. So they decided, they decided to just loosen immigration for a little bit. And the result was really extraordinary. They got, I think 4.5 million immigrants between, not 2021 and 2024. 4.5 million? Yes. And so we're talking about, in, in three years, we're talking about an immigration that is 7% of the, of the country's population. And that immigration, because the European, because Britain had left the European Union, was not European immigration. It was 80% of it came from outside of Europe. So it was a profoundly foreign immigration. And the largest Britain had ever had. And it was brought about by the very people whose entire reason for being in government was to stop immigration. And it's had an extremely destabilizing effect on the, on the politics of the country. So they, according to the way British economists score the economy, more people almost always from poor countries make you richer or something. Yes. I mean, it, it's sort of like it adds, it adds a certain amount of units of labor in the country is that many units of labor richer. And there's not really a sufficient, without going into the economic details, there's not sufficient reckoning done of the fact that these people will age, they'll form families, they will collect the generous and perhaps overly generous state benefits that they've been brought into, to help defray. Yeah. I mean, is there in the history of the world a country that's had like that level of immigration from poor countries that got richer because of it? The United States. But it's a very special case because we were, we were, we had laid claim to a, you know, a continent wide land mass, although we didn't always do that explicitly. And we had only a very few millions of people with which to claim it. And so we really needed people and they generally came from societies that were, or let's say they came from, they might have come from societies that were richer than ours, but they came from the less parts of those societies. So I think it did enhance the United States while we had, you know, a more or less virgin territory. I understand that the Indians were there, but a lot of the territory was virgin and ripe for, for development. As long as we were in that position, it was a benefit to us. The mistake that other countries in the world have made, and Europe more than anyone has been to assume that if they get mass immigration, it's going to work the way it did under the very special circumstances of 19th century North America. But instead what's happening is it's, it's working more like the circumstances of 17th century North America. That is the, the people who are arriving from abroad are becoming the, the core group in their replacing the indigenous population. That seems to be what's happening. And what not everywhere, but in a lot of places, but in greater London, if you go to London, it's, it's in contestable. Well, it's overwhelmingly, it's like 70% non-British, right? That's right. That's right. So what it, I mean, can that be changed, fixed, reversed? That's what the discussion in England is about now. And that's why the politics on the English right is so, you know, it's so fractured. It's fractured, but it's actually very interesting. A lot of, you know, there's a lot of, sort of like new ideas sort of popping up out of desperation. You know what? They're mostly of, they're mostly ones that you would recognize from, you know, the Trump campaign. They have a lot of them have to do with deportation, you know. There are, there's a lot of discussion of withdrawing from the European Convention on Human Rights and from the UN, you know, refugee treaty from the 1950s. The UN has a refugee convention from the 1950s that governs a lot of rights of asylum. And the Tony Blair government in the late 90s and the early part of this century passed something called the Human Rights Act, which made, which made European human rights law and the authority of the European Convention of Human Rights binding on the UK. So there's talk about, about exiting those agreements. And, and to not just talk, I mean, this is the sort of thing that, that, that whenever it's brought up in a Western country, it's described as extreme right wing and fascist and, and that kind of thing. It's not just being talked about in England. It's being talked about by, I would say the three main forces on the English right, which are Nigel Faraj, who's in the Reform Party, Kimi Badanok, who is the leader of the conservative party and Robert Jenrick, who's the main sort of like radical. Let's just say the conservative alternative within the conservative party. All of them are talking about getting Britain out of the European Convention of Human Rights to the extent where you think if there is ever a conservative government, again, it will happen. I mean, it's no, it's no less believable than Brexit was before Brexit happened. You've probably heard about eighth sleep. Lots of people are talking about it. It is a company with one mission, improving your sleep. And it's changing the way people do that, the way they get a good night's rest. We just got word that their team is launching a new product. It's called the pod five. It's an original and innovative mattress cover plus a blanket that uses precision temperature control to regulate your body's sleep cycles and give you the perfect sleep, which really, really matters. It can range all the way from 55 degrees to 110 degrees, meaning that you're covered no matter what. It's like electric blanket to the next level, but also a cooling blanket. So it makes you sleep better. Temperature is a massive effect on the way you sleep. By the way, it also detects snoring. And then an adjust your bed position to reduce or completely stop it. So there are a lot of ladies in America. We're going to be grateful for this product. Everybody who works here will tell you because they all use it that there's no better way to be alert, productive and happy than by sleeping well and eighth sleep really does help. Visit eight sleep dot com slash Tucker use the code Tucker to get 350 bucks off your pod five ultra. If you don't like it, you return it within a month. That won't happen. We think you'll love it. But you can if you want eight sleep dot com slash Tucker. But that's still, I mean, that's pretty tepid really like pulling. I mean, the country's been pretty much the same for a thousand years. I mean, you can go to Stonehenge pull up bone fragments and trace the DNA to people living in Britain. So I mean, for all history that we know of, it's been pretty much the same people with something the French came a thousand years ago or whatever, but it's been some changes. But in general, they're the indigenous population. And now in 80 years, they've been overthrown replaced. It's extraordinary. This is an extraordinary anthropological moment. It's like, I would never heard of anything like that happening. Well, there were these, there were have been a couple of examples of, you know, what the German paleo historians call, you know, a filter of on the wrong, you know, movements of people's, you know, people move off the steps in Asia and into Western Europe and then they, you know, that's how we got our independent, sorry, our Indo European languages. And you know, there's movements down through Greece and on to, you know, the menowing area, I don't know exactly was about a thousand, a thousand, a thousand, a thousand, Russia. And the Finns have kind of Asiatic eyes, you know, I don't, you know, I don't know what happened when, but occasionally there are these huge movements of population. This one's a little bit different because it's enabled by technology. So it's not contiguous people's sort of like pushing against one another. I mean, it's sort of people who are brought by boat and by, and by airplane. But in terms of its, its importance, yeah, it's a major, I guess what I'm saying is the reason it's unprecedented. I mean, Genghis Khan, you know, rolled over and impregnated thousands of people. But I don't think those people's leaders asked him to come and impregnate their wives. This is like the only invasion I've ever seen that was been bitten by the leaders of the countries that have been invaded like coming in Vedas. It's not like they were begging for it, but they, they, they, they sort of created a climate of permissiveness, you know, that, which people took advantage of. And, and it's the, I think what you're getting at is what was the psychological state of Europeans between 1945 when they started doing this. And today that made this, facily the question. And I don't understand it. And it's a funny thing because you and I have lived through the deepest part of that transformation. And it's still kind of a mystery to us. So if anyone's watching this 100 years from now, that, you know, they, you know, I hope they, they can see how confused we in fact were. But I mean, I think that in the wake of World War II, something happened in the middle of the 20th century. And it's really tough to say what it was. It might be a coming to, you know, to consciousness of, you know, after the horrors of the two world wars. It's like, you don't want to, you know, this is maybe too moralistic, explanation. But, you know, people began to understand that there were bad things could happen if you were too judgmental about other peoples or, or, or, or inimical. But there are other factors, such as just the technological factors, the, the sort of the visibility of alternative places to live through television. And that I think is, I think it's, I think the technological are, is, you know, and, oh, and the fact of the fact of, of easy travel through airplanes. And the fact that you, that the telephone, the television and finally the internet, enable you to go someplace without being cut off from your ancestral homeland. So it makes the decision to travel abroad much lower stakes, you know, I mean, the people who came to the United States in the 19th century from Sicily, they were gone. They got out, you know, for the most. Never saw their people again. Yeah. Well, you know, in fact, in the Italian migration, a lot of them did go back. But it was a, in general, it was a big decision. And in, in, in the case of the Irish, I think they were usually here for, for good. Anyhow, I think it's a combination of, you know, at the statesman, at the level of statesman, I think it's a discomfort with any kind of expression of hostility or lack of hospitality towards other peoples. But at the, just the operational level of the individual migrants, I think technology technology had a lot of it had a lot to do with it. It's impossible. But I mean, yeah, technology for sure. But you know, in Victorian England had you know, the ability to move people around the world to control, you know, the world's biggest Navy and all that. And it would have been unimaginable. They didn't want millions of non-English living in England because they were proud of England. And they thought it was distinctly English. And they thought, I guess I'm getting at is, it's so strange to me that the self-confidence of Western Europe collapsed after winning the war. I think that's so weird. Germany's a different case. But I mean, Britain, France, Spain, Portugal, I mean, these were all countries that like had nothing to be ashamed of from my perspective. Certainly England and France, why did they lose confidence in themselves after winning? That's a, that's a sort of complex question. I'm not sure I agree that these countries had, I mean, they were all in very different positions. I mean, Germany, Austria, and Italy were the defeated powers and the malefactors in the war. France had collaborated. Part of France had collaborated. And there was a tremendous amount of soul searching. And there was a tremendous amount of guilt. Spain and Portugal had kind of resolved their own civil war in the 1930s. And they were kind of out of the picture. It would seem that Britain had a record that it could really be proud of. But it was dismantling an empire. And so the two main victorious non, the, you know, the main victorious powers were the United States, Britain and Russia. Russia was communist and had its own project to prop again dies. But the United States and Britain, they also had reasons for self examination. There was, you know, I think there was plenty of triumphalism after the second world war. It's very, it's very tough thing to read. I think that the America I grew up in was really quite proud of its its role in the second world war. I remember even as it was reexamining its own history, you know, of racism, slavery and even the settlement and the wipe out of the Indians, you know. So it was a mix of impulses. So I'm not sure that they were, I'm not sure these countries were as self doubting as we think. Well, the effect was to just collapse, especially in the case of the UK. So is there any getting back to what it was even 35 or 40 years ago? You know, it's funny. I heard a member of the reform party saying that what people, what people really long for in England is a return to the status quo anti-Tony Blair. That is, you know, Britain had a lot of migration. There was one wave in the 40s and 50s. There is another one that kind of coincided with our beginnings of our latest wave, which has never, which has gone on unabated, but they had a wave in the 70s and 80s that British did. But the biggest one was just was intentionally started by Tony Blair. And the, so the reform, this one member of the Fort Reform party says, if we could just go back to the status quo anti-player, that would be fine. That was only 30 years ago. But in fact, the amount of change has been so tremendous. And it's not just the, that the numerator of, of migration is changed. It's also that the denominator of the, of the total population of Britain has changed. That is, Britain is a very, very slow growing demographic. So they're not really producing a lot of new children. And so the, a disproportionately large amount of the, of the British people and years to come are going to be the product of, of immigration. So no, I don't see any, any, in general, there's no way sort of like cataclysmic developments to, to, to reverse any of that. We're sorry to say it, but this is not a very safe country. Walk through Oakland or Philadelphia. Yeah, good luck. So most people, they think about this want to carry a firearm and a lot of us do. The problem is there can be massive consequences for that. Ask Kyle Rittenhouse. Kyle Rittenhouse got off in the end, but he was innocent from the first moment. It was obvious on, on video, and he was facing life in prison anyway. That's what the anti gun movement will do. They'll throw you in prison for defending yourself for the firearm. And that's why a lot of Americans are turning to burn up. It's a proudly American company burner. It makes self defense launchers that hundreds of law enforcement departments trust. They've sold over 600,000 pistols, mostly to private citizens who refuse to be empty handed. These pistols and I have one fire rock hard kinetic rounds or tear gas rounds and pepper projectiles and they stop a threat from up to 60 feet away. They're no background checks or no waiting periods. Burner can ship it directly to your door. You can't be arrested for defending yourself with a burn up pistol. Visit burnupbyrna.com or your local sportsman's warehouse to get your stay. Burner.com. So it just kind of goes extinct. I mean, because there's no way that those two cultures can live and share power. I mean, that doesn't, that's never happened in history. It's called one culture dominates in the end. You have a culture. It depends on how separate they remain. I mean, let's look at the, at the, at the history of the settlement of North America. I mean, the British, particularly if you talk to Spanish historians and Spanish observers of this, were notoriously insistent on remaining separate in the, in the lands they, they conquered and, and they did, and they did dominate. And some, in some places they were able to settle these, these areas in other places like India. They were sent home, you know, after a long period of exploiting the place. But there were other, there were other nationalities that tended to colonize by mixing more. And so there is a sort of a, a mix of cultures becomes possible. The cultures that mixed into what we now think of as, you know, different Latin American cultures were earlier on quite separate. There still is a degree of separation in South America between these different strains of like the European culture and the, the native culture of, but I mean, in, in, in most of Latin America, you can say that there's such a thing as Brazilian culture, there's such a thing as Mexican culture. And there will be, you know, I trust such a thing as English culture in, you know, in 50 or 100 years. But it will be a very different thing than the English culture that we recognized over the last 500 years. It would, so it is a rupture, you're right. What happens to the pot? I mean, at some point, do the politics get radical? Well, that I think is, it makes me feel radical hearing addresses. Well, that I think is what's happening in England now. And it's one of the reasons I went to England. And it's why I, I think it's really, it bears watching in, in the next few years. They had a, they had a huge, they had a lot of riots last summer. I mean, there was an episode in which, you know, the, the British born child of Rwandan immigrants who sounds like he was kind of a crazy man, went to a, to a Taylor Swift dance party that was being held for a bunch of, you know, little girls. And he stabbed a dozen of them and, and killed three of them. And the, and the town in which he did it just blew up. And the, and, and, and the protests spread across the country. And you had like a wave of really quite spontaneous public uprising. And that was last, that was, but just about a year ago in August. The government, which had just entered office, the, the starmer, the government of Kirz-Starmer, the labor government chose not to view it as a spontaneous uprising. They described it as the, you know, a reaction to misinformation and that sort of thing. That did not convince the, the public very much though. And I think it contributed to the, in general, low popularity, the government has enjoyed since then. It's a strange, just as an aside. It's a very strange situation in Britain where they, they have a land, this, this labor government has a landslide majority, although they've won only a third of the votes. So that in itself is very stabilizing. But I think the events that we've just been, let's see, the developments we've just been discussing have made, have contributed to make, to make Britain susceptible to radicalization. What about Germany? I mean, Germany has also been completely transformed by immigration, but that's a society with less free, even than Britain and people can't even say it out loud. They've been taught to hate themselves and to keep that stuff inside. But you wonder at some point, did Germans say, you know, just had enough? And well, you know, I think it's worth, it's worth remembering that, you know, that we had a lot to do with that, you know, German culture of, of denotcification and, and sort of let's say, German, the, the critical German approach that, that they take to their past. And, and so Germany was not, Germany has never been a real free speech society. It's not a, it's not a, a value that is held to quite the high degree that we hold it in our first amendment. Yeah. Very, in fact, no other culture on earth really has that absolutist idea of free speech that we treasure, I think rightly. But so working with that German culture, which is not a pure free speech culture, I think that we reasoned, you know, the United States, partly because of the circumstances of the Cold War, wanted to reintroduce Germany into the family of citizen of civilized nations very fast. I mean, we were talking about rearming them in the 1950s, you know, we were talking about creating building a European army around Germany in, in like 1955. It was as an alternative to that, that the European Union was created because that prospect really freaked the French out. Okay. But at any rate, the United States really wanted Germany to be re in, in, in, introduced to the West and, and to do that, a certain number of ground rules had to be laid down. You know what I mean? Like you couldn't buy a, um, you couldn't buy a copy of mine, Kampf. You couldn't, um, you, eventually you, you couldn't join a communist party. You know what I mean? There's, um, um, so yeah, Germany had Germany's free speech was, was a little constrained, you know. It might have been that constrained anyway. But it also had this highly critical idea of, of, of, of German history. And again, it's understandable, but there's a lot of great stuff in German history too. I mean, the reformation comes out of Germany. Germany was the most cultured country in the world with the, you know, with the arguable exception of, of Britain at the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th centrainates. It's, I mean, I don't have to go through the, through the list. It was only a matter of time before German said, well, like can't we talk about the good things in our, in our culture too? I thought that that moment actually was coming around the time of the Iraq war. And I think that that was a, to a, to a, you know, Gerhard Schurder. I mean, at the time it was fashionable to blame France for the European opposition of, to the American adventure in Iraq in which, in which, you know, Europe has been spectacularly vindicated, I think. But in fact, I think it was Germany as much as France that was, that was driving that, you know. Europe has been spectacularly vindicated, I think. But in fact, I think it was Germany as much as France that was driving that rebellion. And it was Gerhard Schroeder who said, who is then the Chancellor of Germany, he said the foreign policy of Germany is going to be made in Berlin and only in Berlin. I thought that that was happening then. At any rate, for a long time, people really lacked the institutions through which to express that German... You know, I wouldn't even call it pride. It's the desire that... It's partly pride. But it's just the desire that Germany be treated like a normal country again. And I think now 80 years after the war, that 80 years after the war and confronted by certain problems that actually require a certain amount of national pride to address. I mean, the Germans are beginning to talk that way again. They're beginning to say, you know, we need to be Germans again. So the people trying to wreck our civilization want you to be passive. They want you weak so they can control you. Weakness is their goal. No thanks. Our friends at Beam, a proud American company, understand that our country can only be great if its people are strong. That's why they've created a new creatine product to help listeners like you stay mentally sharp and physically fit. People like to mock creatine. See, then, it's not like creatine at all. The people buy it because it works. This creatine can help you improve your strength, your brain, health, your longevity. It's completely free of sugar and synthetic garbage that's in almost everything else that you eat. Of course, you don't hear about it too much because again, a population that is strong, clear-minded and physically capable is a threat to tyrants. That's why they want you to play in video games. To celebrate American strength, actual American strength, Beam is offering up to 30% off their best-selling creatine for the next 48 hours. Go to shopbeam.com slash Tucker. Use the code Tucker at checkout. That's shopbeam.com slash Tucker. Use the code Tucker for up to 30% off. It's built on core values. Integrity results no BS beam. We strongly recommend it. It's interesting that AFD, the alternative for Germany, is treated like an outlaw party by the courts in Germany. Yet it's growing in popularity. It's just reading in the largest German state members of the party were banned from owning guns because they're vulnerable. North Rhine, West failure. Can that continue? Well, this is a big drama. It can continue. It's an interesting situation. The German, I'm not sure where in the Gründe-Güzhette city is in the basic German basic law. The German constitution permits something called the office for the protection of the constitution to monitor parties to make sure that they're not dangerous right wing extremist parties. The goal of having that in the constitution was to prevent any recruescence of Nazism. There are parties all across Europe that had certain antecedents, whether in the institution itself or in just personnel the way for example, Mussolini's fascist party was ended at the end of World War II. But a lot of its members went and they joined the MSI, the Italian social movement. That continued after the Second World War. When there were offshoots of it, many of the people in it became left wing. Georgia Maloney started a new party, but it had some people who were in the MSI. So if you want to trace a genealogy from mid 20th century fascism to certain European leaders, you can. And people do that as a way of gaining talking points against Maloney. They're doing it. However, the interesting thing about the AFD though is that the AFD is not one of those parties. The AFD was founded in 2013 by a bunch of academic macroeconomists who were worried that the European Union by guaranteeing the debts of Greece and other failing countries was in an invisible way taxing Germany. So it was built around a very wrecking diet complaint. And not a hate field complaint. And I remember interviewing the head of the party at the time who was an economist named Barenth Luca. And he was just a very nerdy guy. He's left, I think he's left the party since. But the party underwent two transformations. The first came in 2015 when Angela Merkel invited immigrants from fleeing the Syrian civil war to come to Germany and it began streaming over land into Europe. And we're then joined opportunistically, as you may remember by a lot of Pakistanis and Iraqis and Iranians and Afghans and just a whole huge human wave. And a woman in the party, a very charismatic sort of like mother of many children named Frauke Petri said, you know what? We are the alternative for Germany. No party is arguing for an alternative immigration policy. That has to be us. And so it became the anti-immigration party. But at the same time, it had for similar but less noticeable reasons. It had attracted people who wanted a change in Germany for all sorts of things, including what we would call culture warriors, people who wanted to change the school curriculum to so that it denigrated Germany less. And then it became a whole big grab bag of parties, of tendencies, which it is today, although they are a much more united party than I think a lot of people think. And they're now, you know, they're, they get 20% in the last election and between elections, they tend to pull much higher. So they're a serious party. They have at times in the last few months since the elections in January, I believe, they have been the largest party in Germany in terms of opinion polling. So if you have a country that calls itself, advertises itself a democracy, a country run by the people who live there. And over time, the establishment excludes parties that represent the majority. The people then don't you get a revolution at a certain point? Maybe I, you know, I think I get a little off track. There's one piece I forgot to explain. So, so there is the, there exists in the German constitution this idea of banning parties. Yes. And it's, I think that then when people understood it, it was something that was supposed to be done in like 1948, whenever like a gang of people, you know, got together in one city. And that's why like there have been parties banned since the Second World War, not in a very long time. And they tend to be, tended to be, you know, tiny little groups of what we would call Jack booted thugs. The idea that, that this mechanism could be used to ban the largest party in the country. And furthermore, one that was founded, one that was founded two generations after the Second World War in 2013 is not what the constitution and the division. Nonetheless, you can see the appeal of it for two formerly big national parties that are now shriveling up and want to get those votes back or want to keep from being swept away. You know, of course I can. It's just such a violation of the core principle of a democracy that I just don't think, you know, I do have to change the name of the system. It's just, you know, it's an autocracy run by people with power and everyone else shuts up or you have to stop doing that. Yeah. Yeah. You have, you know, you have, you've interviewed, um, uh, Callan, George Esco on this, um, on this show. If you look at what happened in, in Romania and the elections last, you know, last November where he was simply disqualified because someone in the government asserted without presenting proof that, that there had been a Russian campaign to, to elect him. And, and, and managed to head off the next, you know, his replacement, um, in the second round of that election, which was delayed for many months and got a number of establishment into, into the Romanian government. It didn't really work like, like a democracy. And yet when it happened, people said, well, we've defended democracy. We've defended democracy against the voters. So it's the sort of kind of, it's the kind of thing that, that Bertolt Brecht would, would make a joke about. Right. Um, and, and yes, it's not small, the democratic, but people have chosen to call this, this form of government, which is, I, you might call it like state of emergency liberalism, which is basically the, I think the most accurate description of what it is for, uh, the, the, the, they claim, they claim the term democracy, but I don't think they're doing so very successfully. And the, the parties that, that, that, that, that, that represent this state of emergency liberalism do not do terribly well. It just seems like the spread between what people want and what they're getting grows wider every year. People seem to hate mass migration everywhere in the world. I don't think there's a single person who likes mass migration really. And you can tell by their behavior, certainly true in this country. I think people have an expectation of sovereignty, which almost no country has, like a country gets to make its own decisions, but that's not in practice happening anywhere, with only, again, a few exceptions. And so there's so much frustration about that that I just, I'm wondering what's the point where it bubbles up into something unmanageable? Well, a couple of things. I don't, I'm not sure that the, I think that the gap between what people want and what they're getting is, is wide is wide, but I'm not sure that it's widening. I mean, the, the election of Trump was certainly a, yes, was certainly a call for more action against mass migration. Yes. And since he's been elected, the border has been pretty much closed. There have been deportations. There have been, you know, certainly the rhetorical stance of the, of the administration is against migration. I mean, Trump may disappoint his voters on other things. But on that one thing, which I think we agree is like a really central issue, actually the will of the, the, the people and the actions of the government have kind of converged. I agree with that. The, if there were to be, as I've just described, a conservative government in England and the, added a bullish to the, the human rights act, which would allow Britain to act in a fully sovereign way, then the way would be wide open to deporting people who did not have the right to be there. And certainly to stopping the ongoing traffic of, of small, small boat migration in England. So I think that that's, I think it is, I think it's possible things are getting better from a Democratic point of view. You out also said, okay, so at what point does this explode? I'm not sure it does because one of the things that makes things explode is the, is the, is discontent in, in numerous and dynamic classes. And that's why, you know, the, the Arab world was so unruly throughout the, the 1980s and the 1990s because you had, this was a, a part of the world in which people were having like six or eight or 10 kids and there was no place to put these young men. There was a lot of, there was a lot of martial dynamism in the, in these societies. And when fact wherever you have a lot of young people, if you look at the United States in the, in the 60s and 70s, you have a lot of disorder and rebellion. But we're not societies like that anymore. We are top heavy societies full of old wobbly people. And not, these are not the kind of societies that, that say, don't and I've had enough. These are people who need, I mean, the, the, the, the, the demographic heart of, of our societies is in the, in people who are of an age where they need care, not where they're going to run out into the street shaking their fists. So most of what the big health company Sal is loaded with sugar and filler since synthetic junk. Not too good for you. And that's why we're interested in a company called Peak. It's a modern wellness brand that is actually healthy. It's got clean science back methods, all kinds of blends, trusted by doctors, loved by experts. It supports gut health, glowing skin, steady energy, not peaks and valleys and it makes it really easy for you to feel good all day long at your best. One of our favorites is RE Fountain. It's a calming electrolyte designed to help your body recharge and recover overnight. It's got magnesium, no sugar at all, no artificial sweeteners, no fake flavors and it gives your body what you need to hydrate and restore overnight, which is good. Everyone here has felt the difference better sleep or energy smoother mornings. It has helped a lot of people here and it can help you too. You get 20% off for life for life. When you start your first month, go to peaklife.com slash Tucker peak, p i q u e life.com slash Tucker highly recommended when the children of the latest wave of migrants to the United States are 18. So that'll be in 15 years. Then you're going to have a really dynamic society. You're going to have a lot of people born in this country to immigrant parents who feel like they want a piece of it and you're going to have massive change. You think absolutely. That's why I've tended to look at this, what's happening now with arguments over the border and with Trump as part of a process that will come to resemble about a century later, the process that led to the new deal. Because I think the new deal was the consolidation of a new governing system in a way that took account of the waves of migration that had changed the country between 1880 and 1920. We look at our present demographic change and we say, oh my goodness, things are really, what country has ever faced anything like this? And it's really, there really is a lot of points of contact between what has happened with us and what happened to the country between 1880 and 1920. People from the initial argument is look, it's all well and good to receive people, but this country is about a certain set of values. It's about historically determined. These people who are coming know nothing of our country. How are they going to ever assimilate into it? It's exactly the same arguments that you got in the 1880s, 1890s. Then you get demands for like closing the border and it just doesn't happen and doesn't happen, until 1924 when it suddenly happens. And then suddenly the only people who can come here are the people who are already here. I mean, I'd like to see the only Americans with the ones who've already arrived, those are the only and that's why, if you look at it, it's why there are so many Italians in Argentina. They came after 1924 when the Italians could no longer go to New York. And so from there, these people had no choice but to mix together into a new kind of American. And the people who said these people will never be able to adapt to the old American ways. They were wrong, but they weren't totally wrong. I mean, they sort of like the country did change to reflect the identity of the new immigrants. And then in 1932, when Roosevelt came to power on the heels of an event that discredited the old elites, which is the crash, then he claimed the authority to basically reorganize the country and the name of this new mix of the, you know, of the settled Americans, the new immigrant Americans. And it, it nicked the country into one people so effectively that by the 1950s and the 1950s young Americans were sort of like complaining about how boring and homogenized the United States was. You know what I mean? Yes. So it can be done. Will there, after Trump leaves in three years, will there be like a series of Trump's or will the party revert to what it was? Oh, you've will be the Republican party revert to what it was before Trump. Oh, first of all, I think Trump is such a an unusual person that I don't think he can really be replicated even if no matter how hard anyone tries. He was a, he was a, I mean, he came to prominence because he had an incredible amount of, you know, what used to be called brass at a time when brass was, was what, what was required. There are other people who have sort of, sort of, who seem to have more of the, you know, more of the qualifications that that a politician would require. That is like patience and, and like an understanding of policy and things like that. You had people like Ron DeSantis seem to be offering that to the Republican party for a while, but it's not what the country felt it needed. The country felt it needed brass, the country felt it needed someone to come in and insult, topple and then break the old establishment. Was that establishment broken like after Trump? Well, it's still in progress. I mean, it's, I mean, I think, I mean, this is something you know a lot more about than I do, but I mean, if I look at Trump one, I would say that it was an almost other failure on Trump's own terms. That is, I mean, he used that list that Leonard Leo and and others had given him to, to, to, to fortify the Supreme Court as a, you know, a more or less conservative force and, and he nominated a lot of judges. See, but I don't think that he ever understood the where the actual levers of power in the government were. And so the, the same deep state that he had complained about went on was as strong in the day he left office as it was on the day that he arrived. And so one had the impression that he'd learned absolutely nothing. And so what has happened in under Trump too is one of the most astonishing surprises in the history of American politics. Now in Brexit, you had a guy who was kind of a genius in the workings of British government named Dominic Cummings, who was be able to say, was able to say, well, no, you don't need to win a majority in parliament on this one. You just need to control the, the cabinet office, etcetera. Trump never had such a person. But apparently, and the details are still not clear how apparently he acquired one or several in the course of, in the course of his four years out of power. I think Steve Bannon is correct to say that the two or four years out of power were in, in Trumpian terms were a great blessing for him. So there's someone, I mean, maybe Steve Miller is, is a candidate for this who has the most tremendous Machiavellian understanding of what can be done inside government. I mean, the speed with which, you know, USAID was dismantled, which in what seems to me, it was not really a cost saving operation. It was like a purge of a certain tendency in, in government was really, you know, whatever you think of it as an ideological operation. It was a tremendously expert operation in terms of, you know, government rejiggering. The executive orders that he has, you know, canceled and the new ones that he has passed in order to give a new reading to affirmative action. And I would say that the, that affirmative action was in many ways the key institution of American government of the last half century to render it in operative, even if he hasn't fully killed it, is a, is a constitutional revolution. So yeah, this is, I mean, things are still in progress. It's, it's very difficult to see whether for whether an operation like say deportations, whether that is going to accelerate or whether Trump is really running out of gas and, and, and, and, and this is going to, but it's hard to see how it will proceed from here, but it's been a huge change. He's turned out to be a very significant president. Can you go back a second? How was affirmative action the key institution in American government? Well, I, you know, I've always thought, and we've, we've talked about this, that, that the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was the, you know, it created a new constitution that was, was really at odds, a de facto new constitution that was at odds with what we thought of as our real constitution. And as, you know, you know, what it basically tried to do was sort of like create a more, you know, create a society in the South where, you know, blacks could live as equal citizens to, to whites. You know, in, in public and in large companies and, and, and, and that sort of thing. But it wound up to be a wound up being an incredibly versatile tool. You could use it for anything. Once you had declared a sort of national emergency. So like getting women onto, you know, like corporate boards or getting, you know, bilingual education into schools, getting, you know, protecting, you know, transgender story hour. I mean, it just, it just ramified into every corner of American life. And anybody could be made, any, anybody was under suspicion. And, you know, let's, let's just say incorporation. It worked publicly and privately in corporations. Anyone who ran a company that was, you know, larger than a few dozen people was understood to be under, you know, the government's watchful eye. You could, you could avoid being sued really only by establishing a, in affirmative action program. And so it became, it became the, the means through which the government could approach any institution, public or private and saying, you know, we'd like to have a look at your hiring practices. We'd like to have a look at like how you, you know, how you've been behaving for the last, you know, for the last year and your board meetings. We'd like to know if there's anyone, you're hiring who has kind of an, an animus against black people or women or gays or, or immigrants. And so it had a very chilling effect at every level of government and at every level of, of society. Is that over? It is for now, except we now have a culture in which for 50 years people, even in the most private, you know, conversations sort of have been trained to ask themselves, you know, can I say this or, or is this okay or, or, you know, like, you know, I'm not homophobic, but, you know, and so you have a, you have a society that has really been trained to be scared. So a lot of this, you know, yes, I think so. So I think that institutionally it's over, but, but culturally, we are really not a, a people that has sort of like learned to use freedom and that will take a long time, it'll take a long time to get an easy freedom of conversation back about about things obvious things that you notice differences between people and differences being groups about anything about anything almost anything. Yeah. Do you see that changing? I see it changing. Do you see it? I do. That's interesting. Yeah. Um, it feels like the term racist has lost its sting like almost completely. Um, yeah, I, well, I would expect that to happen. I, I don't, I haven't really gathered any evidence about it. You know, I mean, for one thing, it's harder to, you know, sue a person when you're, you know, the government has announced that it's not enforcing affirmative action, that kind of thing. So I mean, if you can, it used to be that if someone could just, if you could just successfully attach the word racist to a person, um, you know, whether through a lawsuit or, or, or, or, or a public relations campaign, no one could hire him. Do you know what I mean? whether through a lawsuit or a public relations campaign, no one could hire him. Do you know what I mean? It was a real... Oh, I do know what you mean. Yeah, yeah. And it was sort of like it was not as different from the Chinese social credit system which we liked to deplore as we liked to think. And that is no longer true. Yes, I think that is no longer true. I think it's no longer true that institutionally you can destroy a person with that kind of imputation. However, it may become true again depending on what happens in the next election. So people are wary. And I also think that people were not the sort of people that is comfortable going out on a limb anymore. We've become a very conversationally cautious people or at least anyone who's like lived the last several decades in this country. You acquire habits. I mean, I think that you can't expect a person who's had these very self-protective habits beaten into him over decades to give them up in the same way that people who lived through the depression maintain their habits of frugality for 60 years after that. Yeah. I remember when banks introduced ATM cards, they couldn't get people who grew up during their depression to use them. Well, that's a very good analogy because it was just too spooky. Do you remember a country where people spoke freely in conversations? Do you have memories of that? I remember one where people spoke more freely. I remember and in fact, I went to college in the 1980s. I think it was pretty free. And actually when people described the first really mentioned in the wider public of so-called political correctness was I think in the winter of 1990 to 1991. Yes. And shortly thereafter, you had the Clarence Thomas hearings for the Supreme Court which introduced the idea of sexual harassment. And I got the feeling that things were changing very quickly right then. There were a couple of incidents then. And one that I remember very clearly was there was a dodger's, an executive for the Los Angeles Dodgers named Al Campanis who got invited on Ted Cople's show Nightline to talk about Jackie Robinson 40 years after. He'd entered the big leagues. And Al Campanis had been, he was not only was he not a racist. He had been Jackie Robinson's roommate and he was one of his defenders. He was great. But he said a few things kind of the wrong way. Like he gave a wrong answer to the question of why aren't more blacks managers. And he was ruined. He was ruined. This is a guy who had like fought to bring Jackie Robinson into the major leagues. But I mean, you know, he lost his job. And I remember Maxine Waters who was already, and I don't think she was yet in Congress actually, but she was very active in California politics already. So she wanted to be sure that he wasn't secretly being given any benefits by the Dodgers of any kind. And I mean, he was just like, he was just destroyed. This kindly old man who had been a friend of Jackie Robinson. And it was clearly something was happening there. And I think that what was happening is that these enforcement possibilities, which are in the Civil Rights Act, that lawyers were getting more adept at using them. for a growing number of things like saying, well, of course, you have freedom of speech. But if you say that in the company you own, you will create a hostile environment for your employees. And therefore they'll be able to sue you for this much money. So basically without banning speech, you were able to make speech very uncomfortable for people. So that just play out was, I mean, is it just impossible for people to live this way forever and people just decide? Well, it didn't play out. It had to be rebelled against. And the removal, the lifting of the executive orders that order affirmative action by Trump was an absolutely necessary step. The decision not to enforce affirmative action was a necessary step. By the way, it was preceded by a Supreme Court case that appeared in its millimouth way to say negative things about affirmative action programs in universities. But it's clear that universities were proceeding as best they could to maintain it. So, no, it does not play out. It's this affirmative action, political correctness woke this whole constellation of authoritarian and even totalitarian seeming rules. They are rules. They are not part of the culture. They are not the result of a lot of people deciding we really ought to be nicer to trans people. They are enforced by the fact that if you follow the follow of these, you know, of civil rights laws, it can cost you your business, your reputation and everything else. What's the real purpose of them? I sense that social justice is not actually the goal. No, I should add that this is just a, well, let's deal with this. I think that solving the age-old race problem in the United States was the original goal of civil rights. The tools that were given to solve that problem included ways to overturn democratic democratically made decisions in the South. That tool, that ability to circumvent a democratic mandate from the American people, from any people, is such a valuable thing for politicians to have. So they started using it for everything. As I say, under representation of immigrants, under representation of Hispanics, all these things become crises. Social justice actually was the name that was given to this. It was always, and you can call it anything you want, but it always was a way of using the government to sort of order society. The danger of it was that you could do that at a really, really micro level. I mean, you can do it at the level of what signs people hang in the doors of their shops. It became kind of like the world that Vazlav Havel describes in his, and that's why everyone started reading Vazlav Havel and Alexander Solzhenitsyn again, because our society felt like those Eastern European societies at the time of... No, it was Soviet. It was totalitarian. I mean, in the strict sense, it was total control over people's lives. I like to draw the distinction that Hannah Arendt does at one point. A lot of people use totalitarianism to mean like a really... I mean, a mostly, originally used it to mean like the state can be all competent. And a lot of people in our time use it to mean like a really, really, really bad dictatorship. But the way Hannah Arendt uses it means like the state gets into the totality of your life. There's no nook of your life that the state does not belong. The state wants to be at your dinner table. And listening in on you. The state wants to be on your route to work and make sure... The state wants to be everywhere with you in everything you do. Can we go back to that? So you said that this was not organic. The population never cried out for total control of its personal conversations or anything else. It was imposed on the population by the state. Now it's been rolled back by the state. Right. Run by Donald Trump. But can it be reimposed? Could President Alexandra Kazu-Cortez be like, my goal as President is going to be to eliminate racism? When people is laugh at her? Yes. But there might be a confrontation. I mean, as long as Trump hasn't removed these laws from the books, which he hasn't, he's merely sort of like suspended the enforcement of them. And he's unwritten some executive orders, which can be reissued. I mean, it's a reprieve. So the interesting thing would be what would happen if... How would the public respond with four years of living more freely if those freedoms were suddenly withdrawn? And this includes... You mentioned young people. This includes people who've never had any experience of having political, politically correct censorship at work or that sort of thing. And I don't know. You were saying less than it did or that people often say the Democratic Party when it takes power again, as it will at some point, will be a lot more radical. But you were saying, maybe that's not correct. I don't know what they will have the capacity to do. I don't... You say, well, how will people respond if President O'Kazzio Cortez says, we're going to have a fern of action and drag queen story hour again? I just don't know. But I do think the Democratic Party is probably going to find something to some way to radicalize. At what point do economic debates like reemerge? Notice we've... As we've been talking about drag queen story hour and race and sexuality and all this stuff, there's been in a way that would have been weird 40 years ago, but almost no conversation of like macroeconomics in public, like all the oxygens taken up by that, this... The political... Yes, there's stuff. I think it's a very welcome thing that economics is coming back. You hear a bit of it when we talk about the tariffs. But Trump has really confounded a lot of the categories. I think that everyone has the habit of saying, talking about tax cuts for the rich and and all that kind of thing to tie this to what we've been saying with immigration. Immigration is a very important part of this economic question. An interesting thing about Trump's first term is that as best we can measure it, it was a highly egalitarian period. We really only have accurate, undistorted numbers for the first three years of it because the final year of it was COVID. But it really appeared that the bottom quintile of earners advanced against other quintiles for the first time since the 20th century. And I... Really? Yes. This is in the feds numbers that came out towards the end of the Trump administration. If you look at total economic performance like the way we tend to measure it, okay, we tend to measure it by the mean. That is the GDP per capita. Economic performance was much better or it was better under the Obama administration than it was under Trump. The economy grew more. However, if you look at the distribution of it, it would be better. It was... There were far lower gains for the very rich under Trump. But there were relative gains for the... There were absolute gains, let us say, for the people in the lower quintiles. I think the four bottom quintiles did quite well under Trump. And that... Well, his voters benefited. That's what you're saying. Exactly. Okay. So, I mean, it's hard to say why that happened. I think immigration did go down. But mostly immigration was talked down, okay? When you have high immigration, high immigration is like a direct transfer payment from those who compete with immigrants to those who use immigrants, you know. But... I hate that. That's interesting. Yeah. So, immigration really is a transfer of wealth to the rich. Yeah. So, when we talk about Trump and immigration, that's... I think an important thing to keep in mind. And that is why a lot of people were really surprised by the shift in votes among... Particularly among black and Hispanic males to Trump in 2024. And people have sought to explain it through these cultural, you know, factors that we've been discussing earlier. Today, oh, it was a Trump's endorsement by this hip-hop star or whatever. But I think it might just be that people... You know, people at that part of the economy, you know, tend to be, you know, that benefited from Trump won, tend to be disproportionately black and Hispanic. And it might just be a direct case of people just devoting their direct economic interests. It's a little weird if you go through the congressional black caucus, certainly among the people whose names you've heard, like the famous black political leaders in this country, they're all for open borders. Huh. Well, I think that that is largely intersectionality. And, you know, people talk about people in universities talk about intersectionality, like it's a theory about, you know, the how, you know, different types of lack of privilege intersect, like, you know, am I more discriminated against because I'm a black woman or because I'm a lesbian and that kind of thing, or because I'm foreign or whatever. But actually what intersectionality is, you've used the term on your show. But what I think it really is is just coalition building. The civil rights regime created a system in which you, you could do almost anything you wanted, a minority could do almost anything you wanted with government. You could do almost anything you wanted with government in the name of minorities. But minorities remained minorities. You couldn't get the, the majority to do that. So what happens is minorities wind up make the beneficiaries of minority government wind up making an alliance, you know, you can't vote against immigration because you're a woman. And, you know, women's rights or immigrant rights and immigrant rights or human rights and human rights or gay rights and they're all wrapped up together. So and that's where the, you know, like the, the much mocked non sequiters of intersectionality come from like, like gays for Gaza and that kind of things. My favorite. Yeah. But really you're just describing the democratic party. That, that is just like theoretical overlaid, justify, retroactively, a coalition. The democratic party is the party of the beneficiary beneficiaries of the civil rights rights act of 1964. Oh, democratic party is the party of beneficiaries of the civil rights act of 1964. And the republican party is the party of the victims of the civil rights act of 1964. Or those who have objections to it on, you know, I mean, if you count among the victims, those who feel their liberties constrained by it. Yeah. I would say curtailing someone's liberty is starting somebody. Yeah. Interesting. Does that change? Well, as I say, I think it's, it's in a balance now. But, but you know, to, if, if I could say another thing about, about immigration and the economy, there is a kind of a longer term, there's a kind of a longer term process sort of working itself out as we create this, as we create through border enforcement, a tightening of the labor market on the bottom of the income distribution. It should do some very good things for the, for the country. If you believe, as I think you probably should believe that, that inequality is one of the biggest problems confronting the country, it's going to alleviate that somewhat. But it's going to do it in a kind of a, it's going to do it in a way that is going to hurt in places. I think people are right. I mean, I think those economists who say that, that, that immigration, that curtailing immigration is inflationary are right. And it's inflationary in a lot of ways that affect the, not just the upper middle class, but also the middle class lifestyle, like the great proliferation of, of really nice restaurants. The idea that, you know, when this experiment in mass immigration in, in a nearly open border, you know, with Mexico began in, in the 1970s, there weren't a dozen sushi restaurants in Pittsburgh, you know, I mean, people didn't. There were no sushi pits. Yeah. restaurants in Pittsburgh. Oh, this stuff we tend to think that, that this is, that these amenities have developed because of our, you know, improving taste that we're just so much more discerning than our parents were. But the difference I think is this source of, of, of just plentiful, bountiful, really cheap labor for people who can, can, you know, work in back kitchens and things like that. So, there's no one. I worked in a restaurant as a dishwasher 40 years ago this summer. It was a diner in New England. Everyone was white in the kitchen. Everybody, everyone in the criminal record, everyone was white. That's, that's interesting. But so when you, when you, when you tighten up that labor market and suddenly you have to pay your dishwasher $1 more, $2 more, $3 more, the, the, the, the meals in your restaurant are going to get more expensive. So there aren't going to be, you know, like San which is Gourmet sandwiches for $11.99 anymore. They're going to be like $28.99, you know. And people are going to say, I'm going to bring my sandwich to, to work, you know, I'm going to, and, and then the restaurant is going to close. And the country is going to become much more like it was like what you saw the tail end of in your diner in New England. It's going to have crummy or food. It's going to have, you know, things are going to, there's going to be a lot more sameness. That's the, that's what the world of a, of a, of a low immigration less free market. Let's, where there's less of a free market in labor. That's what a society like that looks like. The, the working class gets richer. They, they move towards the middle, everyone gravitates towards the middle class, right. And institutions, economic institutions begin to serve the middle class. That is, you have a, a, a, a, a, a shrinking of, of Gourmet restaurants and, and a, and a concentration of restaurants in the middle of, you know, the middle of the road category. So the middle class was the dominant, um, you know, was the dominant portion of the country. was the majority middle class country up until I think 2015. And did that change? And then the middle class is no longer the majority. Is, is that because of immigration? Has a lot to do with immigration. Yes. Globalization and immigration. And, um, I mean, I think people, people tend not to mention, um, immigration. I mean, people sense say it's a mix of globalization that is free trade and technology, you know, but I think that the most important part of globalization is immigration. Why is it the most important? I mean, it has, it's just those changes. George Borhas, the Harvard economist has said that, you know, immigration, people always talk about, you know, is immigration good for the economy or bad for the economy. And basically whenever you measure it, it's tough to get an effect on the economy that's more than like 1%. It's so trivial. I mean, but what the huge effect is, which is like dozens of times larger than the effect on the economy as a whole, is the transfer effect. The sort of loss of jobs by people who need $15 an hour to wash dishes to those who will do it for $8 an hour. Okay. And the benefit to people who used to be paying their gardener, you know, $30 an hour, now find it can be done for $6 an hour. Or more likely they pay a guy who's got a team on his truck and they pay him, you know, $30 an hour and let him sort out how this is done and he does it much quicker and they save money. You see what I mean? I do. So it becomes a transfer from the, from the working. So it doesn't necessarily expect, I think what you're saying is it doesn't necessarily expand your economy, but it just makes the rich richer. I think so. So that would explain why rich people in these are broad strokes, but in general, hate any conversation about immigration immediately go to motive your racist and just aren't at all interested in talking about it at all and why working class people really resent it. There may be other reasons too, but that seems like a big reason. Yes, those are broad strokes, but I think they're roughly accurate. There's a, you know, I, I, there's a French sociologist named Christoph Gilwee who's written books about how this has worked in France and his thinking has really clarified mine on this. But you know, you basically in France, you have 20 cities that are like nodes of the global economy. And today like, you know, like in, in Toulouse, you have Airbus and where they're, you know, where there are engineers and executives at Airbus, they have, you know, you know, African gardeners and, and, and there are nannies and there are all sorts of people there. It's a global economy niche. When you get out into the countryside, none of that stuff touches anything. It's basically people, the economy consists of like returning, you know, cans to the, you know, to the grocery store. This explains why, you know, if you live in a place like Washington, DC or, or Berkeley, California and, and, or Boston, people are like sincerely puzzled. They say like, how did Trump win? I don't know anyone who voted for him, you know, and they say, they'll say something like, no, really, I've talked to people of all classes. I didn't vote for him, you know, my mother didn't vote for him. My nanny, you know, you know, and, you know, from Jamaica didn't, you know, who's not naturalized and you know, she didn't vote for him. And the answer is the, the dividing line is, is not between rich and poor. It's between the beneficiaries of, and the excluded from the global economy, right? That's the dividing line in the politics. So when you give up open borders, you're really giving up like a whole way of life. You give up the solidarity between classes in your country. Oh, what does that mean? I don't know. I'm, as soon as I said it, I realized that what you could look at it in a, in a separate, in a different way. I mean, you, you give up a dynamic that brings the classes close together, you know, which is that the, the ability of, of working class people to withhold their labor for more money, right? You know what I mean? You undercut that. They become, it's why trade unions, when they were actual industrial unions and not arms of the Democratic Party, you know, were, you know, they, they equated immigrant labor with scab labor that was what they were behind the immigration restrictions. Yes. So nice. So you give up that dynamic, you know, it's, but it's very tempting, you know, it's, there, there are other ways to look at it. But yeah, I think that's basically, that's basically the best way to look at it. Well, China ever decided, as it, as it's, you know, economy matures and it, and cools inevitably, that it needs mass immigration to China. Um, you know, I don't know much about China. I know, I know a little more about, about Japanese, you know, China, China has had a, a tremendous amount of, of internal labor migration. Yes. Which is just, which is just about to come to the end of. Um, and, and so it's labor costs are going to rise. Um, I don't know how it's going to react. It's very interesting that Japan has chosen, um, you know, a tightening economy over a a diversifying society. That is, they've, they've kept out immigrant labor for the most part and where they've admitted it, they've tended to do it on a temporary basis. You know, you get a few Filipino nannies and you, they send them home at the end of their, of their, of their term. The only mass migration they've had in the last 100 years has been from Korea. Um, which they controlled until 1945 and then the Koreans who stayed kind of pretend their Japanese. Yes. So, you know, I think that, you know, and how does that trade work for them? I think it's worked well for them. I mean, I think it's worked for them. I mean, the United States is constantly that the United States has brought tremendous pressure on Japan to, to admit immigrants. And this is one of the things that I find exactly this one of the things I find quite mysterious. But if you look at the, and this pressure on Japan to to admit immigrants. And this is one of the things that I find exactly this one of the things I find quite mysterious. But if you look at the pressure that the United States, this is one of the things that I think that USAID did. It's I mean, it's sort of an ideological arm of the country. But if you look at not just programs, but but people in the United States diplomatic or in the State Department were always sort of like brow beating Victor Orban in Europe, for instance, for not for not being more welcoming of immigrants. But I so I think we're at the point now where we're in a moment of of transition. But I you know, Japan is is deeply in debt that I believe they have the largest per capita debt in the world. Although it is all to themselves, you know, so it's the it's debt to that. So it should be it should be workable. But there's still a Japan. And you know, as we've discussed, Japan decided that it valued its cultural continuity more than European countries did. And so Japan, if you go there, you discover it's still I think the Japan that people who went there 20 or 30 years ago remember it has. So that I mean, they seem like the only smart country like in the world because that does seem no one's starving in Japan actually Japan is infinitely nicer than New York, for example, sorry. Etochio is and even though it's bigger and more crowded. Yeah. And I just wonder like is that like that just that just seems like the greatest win to me. I well, I well they they think so because they continue to they continue to keep this policy and and there's not a lot of there's not a lot of agitation for for changing it, you know, but I don't I don't know. It's been a few years since I've been there. Last questioner, you hopeful about the United States. Yeah, you know, but I I'm not sure that's saying much. I tend to to want to be hopeful and and the United States has some tremendous strengths, you know, it's got the United States is something has happened since the I'm using Europe, which I think is the best, you know, frame of comparison here, you know, you know, the United States has got a lot richer than Europe in the last 15 years. I don't know why that's happened. The two societies seem to be converging up until, you know, roughly the time of the, the, you know, the the the financial crisis of 2008 and then the Euro crisis that followed it and since then the United States has peeled away by like, I don't know, 20, 20 or 25% from from European standards of living. So it's it's richer. It seems to have a it seems to be in a period of democratic abolition. I mean, that is the the the the the populace is engaged. This doesn't mean that, you know, they've made a right choice with Donald Trump or that he's always going to do the right thing, but but the the the the public is kind of vigilant and and it's it is reforming the country. And we've reformed before. So I'm I'm relatively, I'm relatively optimistic. I am too. And you make me feel optimistic. Oh, Christopher Caldwell, thank you very much. Thank you, Tucker. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level. That's not surprising. That's what they do, but on another level it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's a more what can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it a way that you could actually get information that is true not intentionally deceptive. But we did do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.