I was rollerblading at Seminole High School. He craved a chip out of his suit so he comes home with it so my parents like emergency comes home with the tooth. No, no, I had it. They went and had a emergency like the guy came in on a Saturday to glue his tooth back on the Super Bowl Sunday. So that later that day we were wrestling or something. It fell back in my elbow, hit his tooth and it totally broke again. Oh my goodness the doctor said fuck it. We're gonna give you the whitest tooth that we have. We're not gonna that tooth. We're gonna make sure it does not work in math. We're gonna hope you catch up. Every day. Hopefully brush the rest of them. I'm just trying to like stain it. These are just stained one and the white are all the rest of them. Instead of like doing a whitening strip I'll just do like... What's out a new port owner? Or are I like put that tooth in a cake up with a little bit of water so it's just like a cold coffee water and just like tries to stain it. I'm just gonna keep on there. I can't hear you. I can't hear you. That was a good thing. Dude, I smoke mode out. Yeah? I still got it. We should drink a cup. We should drink a cup. Alright, let's get this fucker roll and... Are we wrong? Do we need headphones? If you want them. You don't need them. You don't need them. You don't need them. You're gonna mess up his hair. Yeah. You don't want to mess up your hair. You're not gonna be able to grease his hair. No, yeah. I just like him because I can grease it. I know it was a joke. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. So this podcast is a very rare podcast. Extremely fucking rare. Today's special guest is Jake James Legend, Pinellas County and his brother Luke James. Not so much election. Also, maybe you'll let it go. Also, it is own right. Also, a legend. Yeah. Our mom had two boys that were all over TV. Yeah. We're already stars. I was on TV. I was on TV for three days about you. It was just like a solid day on Bany's 9's. Oh. So it was a classic though. Jake, for everybody out there who's not from this area who may not know who you are, give us like just introduce yourself. Oh, this isn't local? No, it's not. Yeah, it's local too. It's also not. It's a local channel a little bit about myself. Yeah. You know, he gave me the elevator pitch. Who Jake James was? Oh, well. It's a complicated and long story. He's never been an elevator. So he's going to have a hard time. Yeah. I mean, I've been on escalator. But one of those fast walking things in the airport, which call those. That's a fast walking sidewalk. Oh, nice. Oh, it's like a flat escalator. I like it. Yeah. Called a moving road that you can walk on. All right. Well, I don't fucking know, dude. You don't know who you are. Does anybody know not really the floor of man? I'm still kind of trying to figure it out. Yeah. I've just done a lot of dumb shit. When you're a little kid where you touch a stove, you know, a taut, I pretty much do that with every aspect of my life. Just touch it. Yeah. I forget about it and do it the same thing that I say. But he doesn't touch it. He just like puts his face on it. Yeah. Right. It's to the extreme. Yeah. It's not just the touch. It's not just like a, it's pretty much. It's like, oh, I kind of like that. Well, me summed up real quick is, I'm either not doing it or I'm all the way fucking in. Kind of deal. All in or all out. Yeah. There's no, you would look at the same in that aspect. Yeah, for sure. Is that like an up, is that like something that was hardwired into you guys as young kids? I think we get it from our mom. Totally. But that too. Yeah. But they, they're extreme. Well, they could handle it better than, well, I could. Because like you look right now how Luke looked like eight years ago. I know. Yeah. We just, we just switched kind of. Oh, jig never looked like this. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Can you ever look this good? Yeah. I was, I would think I was ever that skinny. Yeah. No, you are. You are. You are. You're so ripped. Yeah. I cut up. You're a cake man. I saw the HGH. Yeah. It's doing good. The protein. I think you're, I think you're taking like the racing horse steroids. Um, straight in the ass. What's the shirt? What's the shirt? Oh, sworn to fun load a nine. What's that? It's a motto from one of my good buddies dads. I just passed away. Oh, okay. Yeah. Is this gnarly biker dude? Dang, it's a fuck. No, no, no. Pretty much like fuck everybody. You know what I mean? I like that dude. Yeah. If it ain't fun. Fuck. Fuckin' go home. You made it right. Yeah. You made the shirt? Yeah. I just been making shitty shirts with the final iron on letters. Okay. I was, uh, thought I was going to start empire just like every little thing I do. It doesn't happen. Just like the mountain do thing. Yeah. I thought they were going to kick Dale Jr. off and put me on mountain do. But you mean what mountain do thing? Oh, when we shot down the line. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'll make sure. So I know you have a mountain do tattoo. You can't just say it. Like everybody knows. Yeah. Give us a introduce those two. I'll have the story of the mountain do. Okay. So the mountain do things started. I don't even know how that started. Was that your idea or my idea? Probably someone's idea. I'm like, well, no, you want to meet a, you want to meet a do a suicide. Like, you know, a new kid yet you hit the fountain. You get all the sodas. A little bit of soda. You want me to do like a 12 pack of every different soda. Okay. Like how fast I could do it. Yeah. But then I started reading about all those people dying from like chugging water. So I'm like, look, I might die, dude. So he was like, all right, let's just do six tall boys a mountain do. Which was almost a gallon. I really didn't do the math, but it sounded better than 12. Yeah. I don't have time for math, but I'm going to do it. Six tall boys, 12, 12 dudes. That was better. But they don't have a converge like how many tall boys are in a gallon. Yeah. There's no one. What's in a tall boy? Well, 128 ounces in a gallon. 16.9. 16 times. 16.9. Oh, were you referencing the cans of liquid death? Yeah. I was looking at the liquid death. That was like 96 ounces of mountain do 128 ounces as a gallon. And you chugged the whole thing? It's on ask how I know that, though. Yeah. It's on the frick YouTube channel. Yeah. It's about to blow up. Yeah. It's been on there for like five years. I think I got like 150 views. I thought I was going to get out and be a superstar. But we literally timed it. And it was how long? I think a minute and three seconds. A minute and three seconds. Or six tall boy dudes. Shotgun, six tall boy mountains. So bad. Okay. So I was, were they code red or regular dude? They were regular dudes. Yeah. We don't fuck with that code red. Okay. Okay. See, they're real do blah blah. Or get the fuck out. Yeah. Don't hit me with that diet. Yeah. Oh, that was funny too. Cause I was clicking at this shitty restaurant on the beach. It was like dollar taco day. So I'm just like jamming tacos while I'm cooking all day. So we in a, we shot gun to all six of the dudes. And I was like, I just started puking. Right. So I'm throwing up Mount do, throwing up Mount do. And then I hit the tacos and I was like, all right, I'm good. Oh, so we got a little bit from the dudes. No, I pretty much got them all out. Really. Yeah, but I didn't drink a mountain dude for like probably like a year. Yeah. You should show us the mountain do tattoo. Oh, the whole closer. The whole can. Put up to the mic. Yeah. Yeah. Can I get somewhere mountain do that in the night? I got that right there because I always see guys getting tattoos of like guns in their waistband. That's so funny. We were just talking about that. I know it's like dude who put these floors and had that. I know. It's pretty stupid. It's still makes no sense. Lame his tattoo. So I'm like, I want to get a fucking can of Mount do in my waistband. Yeah, you get it. Just pretty much like a fuck you. Oh my gosh. I was going to ask you. I was just going to ask a prison question, but then I realized we didn't even like introduce that whole story yet. Yeah, that's what I yeah. Go ahead. You've been to prison. How long were you in prison for? I did total of six years. I got a seven year since Florida. You have to do 85% of your time. So I ended up doing like give or take couple days, six years. Holy shit. Yeah. And what did you go in for? Arm burglary, arm robbery, possession of cocaine, possession of oxycodone. Wow. That's a that's a tongue twister. I think that was it. Yeah. That's a lot. It sounds a lot worse than it is. Yeah. Do you want to get some backstory to the lead up? Yeah. Later it. Oh. Yeah. So how do you get arrested for? Well, I mean, before you get arrested, you got to understand like the backstory of the whole story. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I tried Coke for the first time at 16, but I didn't try. That's not late. I didn't do it like a year or two after that. I didn't touch it. Okay. But, but I should have known that first time when I did it, I shouldn't have done it anymore. Right. Cause it's like, that's all you want kind of deal. Yeah. Yeah. I just got a super addictive personality kind of deal. Mm hmm. Just kind of take off with it. So you're 18, 16 to 18 years old when you get arrested? Yeah, but the people that people I ran with was kind of, they were way earlier than me. Yeah. And I would always say no and then just kind of started doing it. You know, everybody says like, oh, I'm selling drugs, but it's really like you're doing them and kind of get them half price because you're selling. Had old in a little. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I always had insight. Yeah. Wow. How do you know so much about this? Yeah. Well, we're no saints here. Yeah. Yeah. So when I was, I don't even know if I can hold that was, that's kind of a blur back then. But I got to hook up with a bunch of people that had a bunch of fucking like, like it in and shit like that. Yeah. And I was selling those and then I started like, you were selling bike events? Yeah. So I didn't, I was actually selling them then. Wasn't really doing them and didn't smoke. We didn't really like going out to bars drinking. Yeah. And then I started trying the pills and it was like, oh, it feels, it feels fucking great. Yeah. So you popping every day and then I didn't have them one day and I was talking to somebody and they're like, oh, you're dope sick. I'm like, what? Like a junkie, like doing heroin or something? Random dude, did you see it? And I was probably, oh, no, the guy I knew. Okay. That would, that does them too. And then I don't even know how old I was then. I was probably, I was probably like 18 somewhere in there. Yeah. So then it just kind of spiraled from there just started doing heart like just hired those ones and with all the pill mills, shits around here too. Oh, my God. So it was so easy, man. Like totally out of control. Right. That was an epidemic time in Florida first. Yeah. No, it was fucking good. It was like, he goes to the grips of pills. You go to these doctors, man. And there's, there's fucking 100 people outside waiting. Right. And there's people inside, they can't fit no more people in there and it's all cash. And you know what I mean? Dude, it's still like that though. I mean, my wife had to just go to the doctor and they were like trying to give prescribed her a bike. And it's just like, no, I really don't want it. I don't need it. You're like, no, no, no, you need it. You need it ended up like forcing and giving the forcing her a bottle of like an end. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like I got to tell them if something, I'm like, don't give me to me. I can't do it. Yeah. You know what I mean? Because I don't even, I don't even really want to do it. So how easy was it to get it? Like what is like some crazy people? Well, I had, when I was 15, I had screws in my hips, hip's are all fucked up. So I had x-rays and I would just pretty much take them in there. And if I didn't have the x-rays, I knew what to tell them. So they kind of know you're not a cop or something like that, I guess. Yeah. So we would hit like probably like five or six of different ones a month. And I mean, in your getting shit, the where fuck would put down a fucking elephant, dude. Yeah. And then like fucking up. But like, oh, I got a call too. Let me get some of that. Promethez. Talk to my ex-job. Oh, anything you wanted, you just tell him to like, oh, I can't concentrate or at what age? I got this. I think that was, I was, I was in school, 2005. So cheese, I was like early 20s. Okay. Probably like that. Yeah. But yeah, that was totally out of control. So pretty much if you just like had an excuse and some cash and you knew what to say, you could get whatever you wanted. Yeah. That's, I mean, that's all it is. It was more so the cash. Were you drinking and eating these pills? No, no, no. I was never a big drinker. I mean, I believe it or not, he never drank back. I never drank. I always like, people are not people like have some drinks. No, people have some drinks. Like people have some drinks and they're like, oh, I want to go get some Coke. Yeah. I'm like, I just want some Coke. Yeah. Fuck the drinks. Oh, I don't want a drink. Holy shit. That's how I was. So I was totally out of my fucking mind. Oh, yeah. So, I mean, like seeing people not like, okay, I get why you drinking then do it. But I was just full blown. Okay. Doing Coke and and then it got to the point to where I was dropping something off for somebody and they were shooting up shooting up Coke, shooting up Coke. Yeah. So they said, do you want to try? I go, no. And then like a couple more times I go over there like different times than one day. I was like, yeah, fuck it, whatever. So tried that. I hated shooting up pills. I love shooting up Coke. Why? I'm more pills and shoot Coke. I don't know. Cause I'm a, I have no idea. I just remember you can't remember like what like a reason for it. No, I just felt like, I felt like when you shot up pills, it was, it, you just went through too many. And then I'm like, I don't want to be dope sick. Right. So I don't want to go through all my pills that quick. Okay. With the Coke, I mean, if you snore, whatever you do with it, you're going to want it. Yeah, you're going for the raw. It's no matter what you're going. Yeah, but like that was like that chasing that night deal. Yeah. Yeah. So where I was just, I was just banging Coke, snore and pills kind of all day. I mean, if I had it, yeah. And then you're just, if that's just your whole life, kind of just revolves around. What, what are you going to do next to get money? Who are you going to scam? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What are you going to do kind of around? Did you have like a job, feel like a job or anything at anything like at the time that was like holding you down like any kind of stuff in the end of your life or? No, I mean, if there was, I, I never had like a serious job. So I never really took anything serious back then. If I didn't like it, I just be going to be like fuck you and leave. Yeah. Yeah. Because yeah, which is kind of like, I work at the same job kind of jobs now. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You stick with it because we have to. It's just a pay now. Yeah. Yeah. Walk me through the timeline, how that part of your life led up to the part where you got a rest trouble. Yeah. When you're, when you're hitting at that hard for so long, it's a matter of time. Cause you're, you're either riding around all day with shit. You're, you're, you're, you're always doing something shady, illegal kind of deal like that. Um, the people you hang out with, you're fucking hanging out with total fucking scumbags that do not give a fuck about you. Yeah. They just, they're hanging out because you might be able to get something vice versa. You know, I mean, I would hang out with people I would never fucking hang out with. Right. So it's just kind of like that. And then you just get in this wrong crowd and then just just shit, you know, I mean, just it builds up and everybody keeps going the next level to where it's just like something fucking bad is going to fucking happen. Yeah. So then, um, I guess, I guess basically the first time I really got in trouble. Luke, were you, were you talking to them at all? And that's what you remember this, do you remember this time? Yeah. Uh, we didn't really ever have a great relationship, I think, between the ages of from whenever I can remember up until I was a, he goes on a prison. I mean, we, we really connected in prison. Yeah. Like through heavy metal and just kind of, it took me like three years for being sober in prison to kind of, if I would have gotten out before the three, like three years, I would have gotten out done the same thing. You think. But oh, I know. Because I would, some days have been like, oh man, this is so stupid. And then it's like, oh, I kind of just, if I got out right now, just get out. I mean, like, fuck this shit. Yeah. You skipped the whole part about how like you got arrested. You went to county for about eight months. Oh, yeah. Yeah. No, that's what, I mean, I was getting to all that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, basically, basically, I, I, we, I was with this dude, uh, this, like, yeah. I just seemed like at this point, you're just like in a tornado of just like, yeah. I mean, you're just kind of, you're in that, you're in it. You're just on autopilot. Yeah. Just trying to get drugs like not really, you don't care about nobody, but yourself, kind of, you're just trying to get high. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's it. Right. And for my perspective too, it's like, you know, it's like you show up to all these, like family functions. You know, if you do show up at all, like you show up and then you're like, not an out and like you're dope sick or like you don't want to be there and like you start fighting with everybody. And then it just like everybody just like wants you to be well, but like you're so caught up in your addiction that you don't recognize the help that's around you. And like all the love that's surrounding you because you're just looking for that next fix. Well, that too, but then it's like, you know, you're fucked up. You're not trying to hear a fucking shit about it. Yeah. Like you know, you're fucked up. Do you really know? Like how much do you know? I know. Okay. No, it's really fucked up because like my booking photo was like, it was fucking horrible. Yeah. But you don't think you looked that bad. Okay. Until you still picture. Do you see the pictures or like like now down the road, I'll look back on a lot of pictures and shit. I'm like, what the fuck was I even thinking? Like you're not thinking. Like all with eyeballs. You do not know. No, you do not like, I was 190 pounds when I got arrested and I look, I look fucking ridiculous like under 200 pounds. Really? Yeah. Yeah. So you don't, you think you look, you think you look normal like like you're not on drugs. You think you look fucking normal. Right. You always think you're getting away within people don't know. Yeah. Like now I'm like, God up. Like just how much shit I did like seeing people like, I mean, that's why I like a lot of times I would just be like in my, in my place. Like by myself. Yeah. Like I don't have to see nobody. I'm to talk to anybody. Yeah. Because like you can't talk to anybody. Are you so fucking coke down your mind that you can't even look anybody in the eye. You're fucking looking on the ground. Yeah. My great. You're like going to the store to get cigarettes and you're just like, fuck, nobody's in line and then you're just like, if somebody's in line you're just like, kind of like dancing around just looking at the floor. Yeah. You don't want to stay in still. Yeah. Man. Just so nobody like books you in the face. Because it's like, people know. Yeah. People know. But I honestly did not think I looked as bad as I did or you don't. Yeah. It's really weird how that, how that kind of happens. So were there any actual family functions like this were like in this. I would always, I would never go. You would never go. Oh, never go. Oh, Luke says there were. There's a couple. Well, probably a couple, but for the most part, I would always not go. Yeah. You know, like family vacations, my mom would be like, yeah, yeah. Oh, I'm going to, we're going to Mexico. Yeah. Are you going to go? Yeah, I'll go. Jake, are you really going to go? Yeah, I'll go. Oh, by the ticket, we're like in high school. Yeah. So then the day would come like five in the morning, they're banging on my door. I'm like, fuck you. I'm not coming out. Pretty much that one time. Yeah. And there was like, and then I had to leave. I think I didn't, I didn't have no place to stay for like a week. So I was pretty much just like trying to scrunch up enough money to get a shitty hotel room. But there was a couple of days where I would just be walking around all night and then like sleeping on side of somebody's house I knew, but I wouldn't tell them kind of I was there like that. Yeah. During the day, I would do it. Yeah, I was fucked. There was one like Easter trip to I remember where like we all went to Kogo Beach. Like you, you two like ended up at like the double tree north of the Air Force base. My mom would always think. And it was like me and Greg like a holiday and Jake was supposed to come and you know, we came late. You guys came for like one night. You showed up at like 3 a.m. And then you left it like seven. No. It was like tearing ass across Florida that old old mobile that you had just probably fucking getting booted the whole way. Oh, okay. That was so fucked because like that was probably like I had been new to do him below then. And I was so fucking geeked out that we decided we ended up leaving like I think we left at like 10 o'clock at night. Who's we mean a couple of my buddies. Yeah. That I think I think they all they're in prison right now. Shut up to the home. Yeah. One of them we borrowed the tricycle for that Jimmy Hart commercial where he was dressed up like Jake saw. Really. Yeah. Wow. And he tried to pawn my phone. Give him a ride. Hello. Is that the greaseness? Yeah. Yeah. Okay. But, but yeah, I remember because we left it 10 and don't take that long to get over there. But I was so I like I would not fucking see I was like I was driving. That's a good two and a half to hours. Yeah. It was like 10 o'clock at night, but then we got there at three. where driving the whole time I kept fucking missing the same exit on the highway. And I had to keep going. I remember just doing like we probably did like three or four loops like super long loops on the highway. No idea where I'm going like super blurry vision to where like you try to look at your phone. You're like, okay, I'll look at that tomorrow. You're about to roll up your moral of brick phone. Try to play sneeze. She's a high school. I think something's out of focus. Oh, it's a fucking Nokia. Why are they making these phones on a focus like this? How about we play in snake while I was driving? Yeah. That's bad. I mean, yeah, I fucking totally forgot about that. Yeah. Somebody had a waterfall of vodka and then mom woke up in the morning. God, we were so nice. We were right. I was like 17. We weren't in high school in the same time. Where are we? No. No, I graduated. We went there. Yeah. We're probably like eighth grade. Yeah. Yeah. So then I remember mom gets up in the morning and happens to grab this water bottle full of vodka and she, I don't know how people do this. So I mean, she chugs it and then like after three gulps realizes it's vodka. I'm like, well, she finishes it. That's why I'm called bullshit. I'm like, she was pissed. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you know that when you open the fucking water bottle. Yeah. Especially Luke has a nose just like my mom's. Yeah. Yeah. You know she smells that. I just melt through the plastic. Oh, this. And then if you're grabbing like a random water bottle that isn't yours, you're totally at fault for anything that's in it if you just go for it. Oh, yeah. Every time I open a water bottle and I don't hear that click, I'm like, no, that's in there. Yeah. Yeah, for sure. So she drinks the whole thing. I'm actually kind of blaming the whole story about that, about on my mom. Thanks, Mom. Love you. Holy fuck. Yeah, there's been there's a lot of there's a lot of crazy stories like I'm sure I don't even remember. Your parents were fucking super cool back then though. Yeah, they always let us tell her super way back. Do you still have the cigarette scar? Yeah, I still got a cigarette scar. Mine shows up. You know, it is, but yeah, it's right. The little circle right there. Can you really see it? Yeah, right there. How do you guys feel about when you see a can of Milwaukee's best? I have a drink once it's probably to be honest with you. They don't have the gold tops anymore. So I don't get the flashbacks that you still know. Yeah, I mean, I was just trying to help you guys out. Yeah, you really did help us out. I was going down the wrong path. How did that shit go? How did that work? Okay, so I mean, I was fucked up back then too. Yeah, so I was feeling money from his younger brother who was trying to score some beer. No, I did not steal it from you. Yeah, we will. They want it. They want it. They want it here. That's capitalism. Yeah, we're like 16, 17. I just started an economics class in high school. Yeah. Yeah, so we asked you for beer and I don't know. You were somebody else. We're like, go ask Jake for if he can buy some beer. We got like $20, $30 or whatever. Yeah, you come back and he's like, yeah, he'll buy it for us. But he wants to put a cigarette out on our arm. And that's the only way he'll do it. And we're like, fuck no. And he's like, well, then he's not buying the beer. We're like, all right, well, fucking just do it. Like how back could have you put a cigarette out on your arm? But I remember he comes over and he puts the cigarette out of my arm. And then it like it boils up and then surprise, then he takes this dumb and he just riffs the skin off. So it wasn't like you just put it out. That's something you just like, and then a cool working severe, but he sinches it and it takes this thumbnail and scrapes the fucking skin off. It was like four of us. And then he made eye contact with me as he was doing eyes like, I owe you. But the fucked up, it really fucked up part about it was I was supposed to get you guys a case of Milwaukee's best for 30 bucks. Yeah, I show up. Probably that's 12. Yeah. And it was nice. Yeah. And that walk he's the highest. We still got a fucked up on that though for sure. And my parents found the cans in the yard like 10 years later. I do have two graduations. If our parents ever ripped up that front yard with all those Paul metal plants, what would they find? Oh, man. Like I would even know like weird shit. I forgot that you left there probably Luke's tooth cell there somewhere. I wish they were. I wish they were. I'm trying to look like an idiot. Oh, he's a character. Yeah, that's right. Jesus Christ. It's like the McDonald's golden arches. I just tell people it's like I couldn't afford a gold tooth. So it's like give me the way to 20. You got it. Oh, but actually be sick. Oh, yeah, you said I got gold. You could always switch it up in the future. Yeah, you can do it. You're doing it. You're doing it. I'm doing it. You've earned it. It's like a phone plan. You got it. We got it. We got it. We got it. We got it. We got it. Oh, man. All right, yeah, that's were amazing. I think I was podcast was just going about Luke's teeth in the day. It circles back to the teeth somehow. Every conversation. It's just nice to be included in the counter. I don't care what it is. Honestly, it's just really great to be here. And it just grown up with me. You got some pretty thick skin. Yeah, definitely. No, I ain't gonna hurt me. So walk us through the walk us up to the actual rest. How did that how did that what led up to that? Okay, so I got a rest the first day. I know I got I got a yeah, I got arrested in 2007 I was I was driving somebody around We picked up this crackhead and St. Pete that owed him money and told us to drive to Seminole That's where the money was that he had at his house. Yeah, so he does go to this house in Seminole Pull up. He's like oh, it's a house right there So we're in the car. We're not even really paying attention to him. Yeah, he gets out and just fucking books it But we don't know that so they do it on with just fucking He's like where's my fucking money? I was like, dude. He left it's not even his house The dude fucking is so mad. We're all fucked up to so fucking He gets out yelling where's my money and now we're in fucking Seminole. There's fucking kids. I remember kids playing So parents are fucking watching. Yeah, watchin. This is like broad daylight. This is broad fucking daylight middle afternoon Wow, there's dumb motherfucker kicks this fucking door in Okay, nobody was fucking home. Thank God because like it probably would have been like a life sentence kind of deal So he gets in and then he fucking grabs like a few shotguns out of this house. Yeah So random house a random house that he that the dude told him that he lived at but he didn't fucking live there All right, kind of deal. So he's just wanted to ride or something No, okay, so we picked him up because he owed that dude money. Yeah, and he's like oh, you got driving to Saint Seminole to this house so I can get my money or whatever What you never trusted crackhead because a crackhead never leaves money anywhere That's all less than the last day on life advice. Yeah, so they end up he ends up turning like okay kicking in the door Nobody's home cool 30 degree 30 degree felony like lowest felony You grab guns you arm yourself It's arm burglary which is like a first first degree felony Kind of deal right he brought the guns or guns. Oh, he stole now the house So so when and Florida if you Okay, so say you're like going in somebody's house to go like burglar. Yeah, at home. Yeah, it's mean it's serious But it's not that fucking serious. Yeah, you you steal a gun from their house You are on yourself. So you're that's our burger. So it's actually in there with the gun I'd mean it's serious, but it's not that fucking serious. Yeah. You you steal a gun from their house. You are on yourself. So you're at our burger. So it's actually that's going in there with the gun. Um, no, I mean, that's actually a little bit worse. Like home invasion. Yeah. But it's, I mean, it's up there though too. So, so whenever we get, we get popped for that. Oh, no. Okay. So we get away, uh, they get my license plate. We focus the neighbors or yeah, the neighbors get the license plate. Cop's going to my house. They talked to me. What happened? They tell me to come in and make a statement on the state. I go, okay, I never fucking go. Never do a statement. It's like three months goes by. Nothing. I'm like, cool. You're good. I got away. Yeah. Right? No, no, no. I'm fucking cutting trees. I'm, uh, I'm, I'm, I got on with some dude. I don't even know how I got the job, but it was like a tree service. Yeah. So I'm just like grounds to you. Whatever. I'm fucked up, whatever. Yeah. So I see they, these like three cars like pull, like pulling off any in Rox Road at this house. It was like, damn, let's kind of like cops. So then they, they pull in around the neighborhood real quick, they turn around, they jump out. And I start running. Oh, fucking, and I got pills on me and I'm fucking eating them. And then, so they got their guns drawn on me. No. So I get arrested that day. That was, that was February 25, 2007. So I had to sit in the county for eight months. I ended up, that was like, that was my first, like, getting in trouble kind of deal. So what are they charged you with? Um, the home, they got Charlie, arm burglary. Yeah. You went in the house too. I didn't go in the house. I was in the car. I mean, that's how it goes. Okay. So if I'm like, I'm like, hey, Danny, drive me a store real quick. Yeah. You're right. I'm right. You're Robin. You're Robin. I put you on even. No. And I get back in the car. Yeah. You're fucking, you're getting charged with arm robbery. Right. Okay. It's your fucking car. You know what I mean? Yeah. It makes sense. Yeah. So, oh, no, no, no. So my parents bail me out a week later. Right. They bail me out a week later. You had eight months? No, no, no. I didn't do eight months on the time. Okay. Okay. Okay. I got, I got to mix up. Okay. This is a lot of, this is a lot of shit show coming up here. Okay. So I get arrested for that a week later. I fucking finally convinced my parents like, you got to let me out. I'm so fucking like, dope sick, like, I'm hurting so bad. So everything fucking sucks. And then, um, so I get out fucking right back on it. Let's go hit the doctor. Let's go do this and that. So I'm running around this fucking other motherfucker. We got a shit ton of pills, Coke. And we have a ton of money on us. And I got, I'm driving this cattle, a Cadillac. I know we have to get gas. Yeah. I keep fucking forgetting to get gas. Fucking run out of gas at Park and Park Boulevard and some of the Boulevard. Yeah. Okay. That mobile is. Yep. So this fucking scrawny coaked out motherfucker can't push a Cadillac. Right. Okay. So I have to get out and push it. He's got a suspended license. So there's a, but there's a cop in the mobile parking lot. He goes, you boys need some help. No, I got it. So we push the car in. And, um, he's like, Oh, because we look, we look fucked. We look at our fucking minds. He's like, he's the, you know, something's going on. So he's like, oh, I'll catch your ideas. I'm like, cool. Yeah. Here. And then, uh, the dude gives him his and he runs the guy. Okay. So the car's not actually running, but he's driving the car. And he goes back to the state of Florida versus Fred Flintstone law. Okay. So, but I mean, okay, early in the day, we, we bought like these huge box of fucking needles and we're just shooting up all day and throwing the ones behind us. Okay. And the back seat of the car. So there's probably like 15 fucking needles laying in the back of the car on the floor. So, and there's he, he threw Coke under my seat. I had pills on me. And so I ended up getting arrested that day. So why? Because he runs dudes. Well, he runs all the time. He runs the guys ID and since it's suspended, yeah, he's got probable causes to search my car. Right. And he's, he's driving. Yeah. Like no questions about it. Yeah. Yeah. So, uh, and the motherfucker threw the Coke under my seat too. So I got, I got out all the charges that day. That was another guy. He got arrested like 20 times never, never did more than a couple days in jail. So that's a little fishy. Yeah. No, I know. So, uh, that happens. So that's a week later. So now I'm back in ain't nobody fucking bailing me out now. So I had to ride it out for like eight months. I was charged with a position of Coke possession of ox code on that one. So then, and that was one of the first times I went and saw him, uh, was through the, uh, the video screen video chat. Yeah. At the jail on 49th, it was like one of the, the first steps towards our relationship, actually being something was like me and my mom rolling up there and like talking to him on that. So pretty cute. Thank you. I know this boy's taking you back to those times and you could take that back to the cell with you and tell your boys about it. Sure is. So I saw it. Yeah. No, it was cool. I mean, I appreciate all that shit. Yeah. Yeah. So I fucking ride it out for eight months. Oh, no, no, no. Okay. So it goes real fucked up. So you get a rain, you get a rain like day or two layers, then I want to get arrested and then your first court date, like something like mine's probably, I'm probably in there for like two months before I get on the actual court date, right? Stay in front of a judge. Um, I'll talk to my parents. I'm like, they're like, do you want to get a lawyer? I go, uh, no, back up. That was the next time I got there. Okay. So we're good. So I ended up going eight months. Um, they ended up giving me probation. I forgot how many, how long it was. Yeah. Uh, so I get, I get out on probation. And the day we got out, my mom took him straight to like outback steakhouse for like fucking like surfing turf and blooming on. Yeah. And he's still just like fucking strung out in there. It is like, I fucking hate everybody. This fucking sucks. And then I remember that. No, no, there's a lot of stuff. Like I don't remember. Uh-huh. And I remember very vividly taking you to checkers to on a, the one by goose is that's closed down now around here. And like we're just like in line ordering spicy chickens and you're still just like wanting to get fucked up and you're just like this fucking sucks. You know, there wasn't even my fault. It was fucking bullshit. And you're just like, you keep like repeating that same story about like how it was your fault and how like you didn't deserve to be in there for that long and how fucked up it was. Well, yeah. Yeah. You, you go through that layout because I'm fucked up, but I didn't fucking do that shit. Right. Right. And that next shit. I mean, that was, that was because of that. I mean, that's just kind of how you think. You know anything? But all the fucking like a chain react. But all the bad shit you've done. I mean, that leads you to that point. Right. I mean, you fucking, when she like that happens, you totally deserve it because you're hanging out with those people. Right. If you're not, you know what I'm talking about. Right. These are fucking scumbags. These aren't like dudes that got their shit together. Yeah. These are like total fucking pieces of shit. Yeah. I mean, that's what I was at that time. Yeah. Like I didn't get a fuck about nobody. So yeah, a lot of that shit. I don't remember because I was so fucking high. Like, yeah. Just kind of shit like that. And then so we keep going like fast forward kind of just just keep doing the same shit. Get some. Oh, no. I think I tried to, I tried to, I went to the doctor and I tried to just sell them because I just had this thing about fucking working. I do not like working. Yeah. Or like being told what to do kind of deal, which was, which has been pretty pretty rough for all the shit I fucking done. So um, yeah, just just fast forward just kind of just kind of fell right back to like I never went to jail. Like nothing ever happened. I'm still getting fucked up just the same as I was. Same vicious cycle. Try to smoke and crack. I shot up crack a lot more than I was that like. Uh, I don't know. I just shot. I smoked it like once or twice. Okay. I didn't really like smoking it because I was like, well, I'm not a crack yet. I'm just going to shoot crack. I just kind of shoot it up. Well, I'm not smoking it. What is funny? You're just saying it like when you're that fucked up, you just try to be like, well, it's hard because like a lot of people like normal people like, well, at least I'm not, at least I'm not as bad as they are. But like when you're fucking doing everything, it's like you just got to your grasp and onto like you're like hanging off a cliff hanging on to like a piece of grass. At least it's not math. Oh, and that is like probably the only that is the only drug I've never done like knowingly like never bought math. Never bought math. I might have done it next to senior. I never have never known me. I did not inhale. I did. I shoved it up my ass. Oh, boy, I'm a prison pocket. We're getting there. Wow. What the fuck with the armpit is that Oh, you're fresh. It's got to sniff. What's it smell like, Luke? My hoppers. Slim gyms. And if you've ever been to my hoppers, you know what that smells like. It's like slim gyms and stray cats. Had a little bit of bush light. Oh, no. Phone with me with the pineapple. Oh, yeah. It's going to be the Maha for clone. It was going to smell like cat piss mar bros and bush. Oh, man. I wear it. Yeah. So where we going? Yeah. So it just the eight months I was out after after I got out on probation was just same shit. Yeah. So on I got arrested that first time on February 25th, 2017 on February 25th, 2018. I had no idea it was one year to the date. I had coke, but I didn't do it that night for some reason, which was I never went to bed with drugs ever. You always finished. I always finished it. I could not keep it. Okay. I had to go till it was gone. So, but it was weird that morning. I woke up super early and I'm like, oh, cool. I'm going to shoot up, go gain all day today. So, but I thought you had. Yeah. Well, so wake up with the bag. You're like, yeah, but it's like, I didn't even have a regular like because when you shoot drugs, you use like an insulin needle. Okay. It's really small. Okay. Okay. I'll only thing I had was like what you shoot steroids with. Like a big fucking what's the difference needle? It's your time needle that you know, okay. So whenever the docile like an insulin needle when you're shooting up regular drugs, I mean, it's like that long. And it's it's it's like smaller than a fucking showing needle. Yeah. Okay. A steroid needle is like that fucking long. And it's fucking it's pretty girthy. It's a pretty much really big one of those McDonald's draw is long and girthy. That wide. I don't have a lot of experience with that. Do you uh, take it from your luke or take it after mom or dad? Where are you talking about girth? I thought they called you the tuna can. Yeah. So um, yeah. So I mean, that's fucked. It's just like your arms are fucked. I was wearing like long sleeves. I never I never got like track marks, but yeah, I would just stick them wherever. But like you're just kind of just like got pokey dots kind of all over. It was pretty obvious. You could see it pretty well. Yeah. So I would wear like long sleeves and then um, he was always wearing sweaters. Yeah. And I fuck I never wear sweaters. Right. And Florida. Yeah. So um, I fucking forgot where we're going with this. Uh, you were leading up to the second arrest. Yeah. You woke up with a wake up and show it up when I woke up. Yeah. I mean, that's let's years and years of drug abuse right there. Thanks. But uh, that's what he's here for. Yeah. So So that day, I mean, I was hanging out with this chick just like total Pinellas Park, like homecoming queen and uh, we're riding around just kind of shooting up drugs. And I remember in the seminal mall fucking bathroom. And she's like, you got to be more. I was like, no, I'm just going to go to the bathroom and like shoot up in the bathroom. And then uh, something happened. I dropped her off at somebody's house. Uh, and then I just kind of hit me all at once kind of like, what are you doing? What are you doing with your life? Like this isn't you because like people like, no, I mean, no, I'm not, I mean, I'm fucking crazy, but I'm not like that fucking insane. Like with the drugs and all that mon um, well, they knew I was fucked up with the drugs, but they didn't think I would really do anything too crazy. So I just kind of, I don't know even to what made me think about it. I was just like, I want to go, I want to kill myself. But I'm going to do it by running in a pharmacy and OD on the pills kind of deal. Just kind of OD in the pharmacy. You just have the idea at seminal mall that you wanted to this one. I've tried to drop the girl off. I was driving around. I was out of drugs too, which is all your out. So you're on like the phone. I was out of Coke. So like when you're coming down off, I mean, it's, it's a shitty feeling in the, it just, it just sucks. So I'm like, oh, I'm going to rob running this pharmacy that I used to go to all the time. Just uh, just the same shit. Like, you could be like, hey, could you just front me like 10 of them until I get my script on in a couple days and then kind of they would do it kind of like, they're, I mean, they were all pieces of shit too. So yeah, I didn't really felt bad about it. But um, I had, but I was shooting up. We didn't have any water bottles in the car and you shoot, you need like water and stuff to shoot up. So I had a old thing of fruit punch in my car. Why did you water? When you, when you mix it to shoot up drugs. So you mix the cocaine with water. Yeah, and you put it in the needle. That's a, yeah, you draw it out. That's what makes it day. Yeah. Okay. That's how you can shoot it. So, um, I had, I had a fruit punch rolling around the car. I filled the needle up with fruit punch and I bring in the pharmacy. What the fuck? So they, yeah, it was fuck dude. But so wait, okay, you filled up with fruit punch. Why? To make it all you had. Okay. You thought it was blood. No, no, no, to make it look like, like, it's all the stuff that was, it's a lot of blood. Yeah. Yeah. So it was like his weapon going in there with it. Okay. But like how fucked it, but I got my name tattoo tomorrow was my first tattoo when I was 16. I remember that I ripped my fucking, I think I ripped a sleeve. This whole fucked up was makes no fucking sense. I like ripped one of my sleeves off and put it over my jig tattoo. They won't know who I am. But I was in it. I remember just standing in the pharmacy and I couldn't pull the trigger. I couldn't do it. And then I was about to walk out. I was about to turn around and just leave. And then I'd some just like totally fucking came over me. He was like, no motherfucker, we're doing this. And I was, it was kind of a blur from then. I remember these two chicks in there. They were freaked out. Like the guy that owned it. They're like, it's in the back. It's in the back. So wait, wait, wait, you're standing in the pharmacy. Like where are you like? Oh, like in the, it's a small shit hole. I mean, it's just kind of like, okay, that's probably the only thing they ever filled prescription wise was like opiates and shit. Like, you know what I mean? Kind of deal like that was back. It was back in the day when they were pumping them all out. So I was just standing there just kind of like, because they would have like band-aids and like kind of weird shit like that. It was kind of like the top shelf, the food mart right by our house. Nothing in it. Just kind of like, they got some Ben gay in there. Yeah. It's like a real pharmacy. Yeah. So I was kind of like walking around waiting for people to and then that's that's when that happened to where I was almost like walking out and then I just remember turning to like where was this needle the whole time? I probably had it. I'm not sure 100 percent. I probably had I probably had like, um, in my pocket or something like that. Okay. Okay. So then I did, I pulled it out. I said where they at and they're like, they're in the back, they're all in the back. And I remember going back in the pharmacy in the, the little room where they keep all like the, the drugs kind of locked up. Yeah. So I didn't know where the fuck they were at. And it's just like, you're just like that shit going on to the same time. Yeah. Thanks. But it was just like shitty little fucking home depot drawers that were like lock drawers. Yeah. So I'm just ripping the fronts of the drawers off with like with my hands. Kind of. And then I finally, I'm like, looking for the pills. Like the holy fucking rail. Like I found the whole thing there. The fountain of youth. Yeah. So then they have one of these big, big huge like mortar mortar and pistols, kind of how they compound the drugs. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So like that. So I remember taking like three, three bottles of the rocksies, which is like a hundred in each bottle and just dumping them all into this fucking big thing and fucking just mash it up. Like it's a water. Oh, yeah. That's what, dude. Let's like, I kind of wish there was a video of it because it was so fucking ridiculous. What I did, you were so is the video. Oh, I kind of, I just feel like kind of see it. What did you plan with the needle? You're telling us, you're robbing them or you're killing. They know, they know the deal. I just told them, where's it at? Where's it at? Right. And instantly, because that's all they fucking have to ask for. That's all they pump out of there. Where is it? That's all they pump out of there. And they know that. So they're like, it's in the back. Right. So it's a plan to rob them and get out of there. Well, if I plan was to go in and kill myself, to be kind of. So I get back there and I'm crushing all these fucking pills up. I dump water in there. I'm trying to fucking low as needle trying to like, it's like, is there still cool aid in the needle? No, I push that down. Okay. That's why I could drink that first. That's why I had the one needle. And if it was blood, it would have toy clogged up. Yeah. Kind of deal. Yeah. Yeah. Because that's another problem when you're a fucking junkie. You guys want to know about that? What? Just your needles clogging. If there's blood or something in there. Oh, really? Yeah. So, um, so I'm back there and I'm trying to draw this. Just fucking whatever the fuck I just made at end of the needles. Like, soup. But you I couldn't get it. I couldn't get it. Oh, it's too thick. It's um, okay. So when you when you're shooting up shit, you you put it in whatever, like a spoon or a cap or whatever, but take your cigarette filter. You pull it out. Right. Right. Right. Right. To filter it. Ball it up. Yeah. And then that's how you filters it to keep all the keep all the good shit in there. You know what I mean? Okay. So, uh, so you're going no filter. You're just, I'm just, I'm just trying to, and I'm getting mad. I'm getting mad at first because I'm like, why isn't this fucking I just want to just end this right now? But then I don't know if something came over. I'm like, I kind of snapped out of it to where I'm like, what the fuck are you doing? And I was like, oh, then it's just kind of you come to and you're like, fuck, man, I fucked up really fucking bad. And um, so I didn't know this at the time, but there was a, I think there was a 38 gun, a handgun in the back, in the back rumor I was at, I was locked in. They locked you in there. They were trying to call me, tell me to like, the, I think the people that do the own the pharmacy, he was like, Jake, he knew me. Oh, really mean. So he's like, tell me to come out. I'm just like, I don't even know why the fuck I was answering the phone. It was kind of weird. I never even thought about that. Yeah, like that. Like, the label. They called, like, I remember answering the phone. No, it was in the, it was in the in this bag. I was in this bag. When they kept all their like, there was a phone back there and they kept ringing. I was, I don't know why I answered it. I kept answering it though. So I'm like, he's telling me to come out and then, um, so there was a handgun in the back. Yeah. So he's going to call the cops. They told him there's a handgun in the back. But I know about it. So SWAT team came and, um, it wasn't, it didn't take that long from the side. At this point, you had given up on, on trying to kill yourself. Yeah. I kind of snapped out of it, just kind of, like, oh, man, what the fuck are you doing? Yeah. Yeah. You don't eat none of them or anything. You're just, no, you're just waiting for the cops to come. No. So, well, they come and they're, the SWAT team comes and it's banging on the door. Like, come out. I'm telling them, fuck you, I'm not coming out. Cause I'm now, I'm just like, oh, man, what the fuck am I going to do? And then I'm like, well, I'm going to be dope sick as fuck. So I hit pills to where I could bring him in. Yeah. Don't really want to talk about how I brought him in. Just so, I don't want to, I don't want to fuck up anybody else's chance to bring shit into jail. Jail sucks. Yeah. In drugs, make you feel a little better. But anyways, um, you found a way to snuck sneak him in. I snuck him in. How many of them? Uh, I probably had like, there had been like 20 of them. Okay. So that probably lasted me like two days. So this is before they broke down the door or whatever. No, they didn't actually break down the door. Okay. I know we're jumping ahead a little bit. But yeah, yeah. So they're banging on the door, telling me to come out. I'm telling them not coming out. And then after I figure out how to bring him in and I didn't bring him in my fucking safety deposit box. Yeah. In the jail purse. Yeah. In the prison pocket. Didn't do that. That's what everybody's probably thinking. For sure. People don't would have had to. Yeah. Yeah. Got a lot of space up there. Yeah. So finally, after I get situated, I want to do it. Um, I got what I need. I'm like, fuck it. I'm like, I'm coming out. So I tell I, I bang on the door back and I'm like, I'm coming out because I'm like, I'm probably going to get fucking shot. So I remember opening this, this back door and it's right by the back exit door to like the shop. And there's, there's got to be like 10 or 15 red dots on this fucking back door. So when I open the door, it swings this way. And the exit door is here. So I just see all these fucking red dots on this back. As it goes. Oh my god. Yeah. So I'm like, so I just out of the doorway, I just got to stick my hands out after you sell the red dots. I go, I go like this. I'm like, I'm coming out. And then, um, so I just try to go like, I'm like, all right, let me see what I'm doing the movies or something. Yeah. So I just kind of like, I'm coming out because you don't know what the fucking dude. There's just so much going on. It's like, kind of don't want to get shot. I mean, I tried to kill myself, but I didn't want to do it. So definitely don't want to like, yeah, right here. So I finally get out. And I had sweat pants on too. So I fucking turn out, I turned around with my hands on my head. And then, um, they fucking bum rushed me. I mean, my fucking pants are around my fucking knees. My little coked dicks flop it around fucking everywhere I look for. What is this like? What is it? Coked egg? It's like a you ever seen one of those old school door stoppers? Yeah. Yeah. For the fuck. Yeah. Okay. It's like that, but smaller. So, uh, yeah. So then I'm sitting in the back of the cop car, like, in front of this fucking pharmacy, uh, I remember Bay News nine coming there. And you're just sitting there in the fucking back of a cop car, no tent. Just like fishbowl. And then all your thing, I'm like, all I'm thinking about is like, God damn, I'm like, am I getting like ever get out again? And because I was 24 when that happened. That was 18. Yeah. 19. 19. 20. That was 20. That was 20. That was 20. That was 20. Um, so, do you send him back of this cop car in front of the fucking pharmacy, people all around news there and you're like, cool. Like, feel like just a total piece of shit because I wanted to keep you in the car. I was probably out front of the pharmacy for like two or three hours because I got to do like all this shit. And then they fucking probably take you. But I'm sitting in the car kind of like away from everybody. But like everybody's walking by you looking in and yeah, it's just kind of like fucking you motherfucker. And it comes up and it comes up. Like, how do you feel about what just happened? How do you feel like your performance in there? Like, just leave me alone or try to kill myself. So I'll, we're going, we're going to jail and then like, that's all that's kind of running through my mind is like, how long I'm going to be gone for kind of deal. And then, and then I was like, oh, did you know what's so fucked too? So we get in the book. I get booked. Well, we go man and you get like strip search kind of depend, depends on what cavity search. Uh, no, they don't never, they don't cavity search you. Okay. Um, if they feel like you stuck something in something, they'll put you in a room to where there's like no running water. So till you like shit or something like that. So they know, yeah, they'll put you in confinement like by yourself. So something. Yeah. So like that, like that. But I mean, you get butt ass naked. You didn't request the cavity search. Uh, I did. They told me to fuck off. Here's a blow and he sandwiches and I'll put you inside. Yeah, but it's, I mean, it's, I mean, but now like it's, it's kind of like I've been, I've been strip search so much. Like I don't really don't give a fuck. I would kind of actually battle. Well, we'll get to that later too. I would battle. If you were the guard and I was me, we would both try to make each other more uncomfortable as possible. So like what would you do? Uh, well, here, let me, let me, let me, let me give a little bit of of a story. So I, so I could get book. I guess strip search, um, you get your clothes back. And then, um, you're in booking, your central booking where they do your fingerprints and your photos. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, Pinellas County jail is so fucked. Fuck you. You fucking cock suckers. Thank you. And then, um, so you're probably, I was probably down there for like 20 hours and you're in this room, the concrete room, no windows and just for, for less than like, it's like you do not know what fucking time it is, but just on the clock on the wall. Right. But if it says eight, you're like, I wonder if that's eight in the morning, right at night. You're right. So there's a, there's a one bathroom. And then there's a guard stand right outside of it that you can go use, but it's like there's no stalls, no nothing. And then I was like, well, I'm kind of getting dope sick. So I was like, I wonder if I can, I fucking crocheted up a fucking roxy in this bathroom. And thank God nobody walked in when I was doing it and fucking started it while I was in booking's bathroom. I just did, I didn't give a fuck. Do you like right? And they got the door with the little window. They just see what you're like. What do you get to add five more years onto my sentence? Yeah, run it, run it together. I mean, it's the same shape. Whatever. Yeah. So, um, yeah, then you finally go to jail. I fucking, I knew a bunch of people I went in the cell with because I fucking just left there fucking four months, four months ago. You know what I mean? So, uh, so then you got to deal with that. It's like, it's like a fucking walk of shame, dude. I was high for two days feeling good because you had that stash that you brought you in. I didn't even call anybody until I ran out of girls because I mean, it was super embarrassing for me to like after everything kind of wore off with the drugs. And then I knew that you knew that it was probably all over the news too, right? Oh, yeah. So it would come on. I was in the pot. They got TVs in these bots. I was only news for like three fucking days, man. It was a, it was a slow news week in Seminole. Yeah. You heard about it too. Yeah. I was working construction. I was like riding in a van to Sarasota in the back of a van with a bunch of other Mexican dudes. And it was like six in the morning and it was on Bubba the Love sponge and they said, Jake James, I'm like, no fucking way. I know. I text Luke. And he's like, yep, yep. That's so. Well, no, no, no, because Bubba would do that a lot about the news and I listened to Bubba since I loved it. Like, fucking like religiously. Yeah. And then I don't know how to Ned. Yeah. Only that is real. Yeah. So that is like, oh, Bubba was talking to you. Well, fuck you, you fat piece of shit. Yeah. Look at you now, Bubba. I'm on the radio and you ain't fuck. Wow. You'll double fist of blue jam in the back side of McGillicuddy. Yeah. So, um, yeah, just dealing with that being dope sick. Like, yeah, I would trade my whole fucking trays for like juice. Go on. What? My whole like you get fed like three times a day. Oh, okay. Shitty fucking meals. Yeah. I could not eat anything. I would for like a week. I would just trade. I would just drink juice. I would just trade my trays for like people's juice. Do you probably even have an appetite, huh? No, you're like, you're just like, just shitting your brains out. Not hungry. Diree. Yeah. Hold hot. Just. It's fucked. Dude, it's just like you're a little, it's like you're a little fucking baby. Yeah. Just curled up in a corner. How long did that last pour? Uh, it took like, it took like a month. And I did that twice. And like, that's how fucked up it was like the first time it went like went through that and then to get out and like do the same shit. It's like that just shows you like, I'm either really fucked up or that shit's really fucked up. So the only time I went through like a true detox was like when you're in prison. Cause I remember mom and dad put you through some like uh, like medically induced. Yeah, I don't know what the fuck I don't know. That was either the thing that was you gonna come up for a couple of days and then you detox and you wake up. Yeah, it was weird, but you know, that suffering. But wow, you have to feel that suffering, dude. Oh, yeah. Because like, oh, that's when I tried that's when I was selling them for yeah, like a two months and then I started doing them again. And I think that's really not about that. That's a really important thing I think to hit on is like, if you don't feel that suffering like when you're trapped in that, that darkness that you've created around yourself then you don't really know the pain that you have to go through to feel it. So you go through it. Like they just sleepwalking pretty much. And then you have no reason not to do it again because they go, well, whatever. I can just like numb myself to numbing myself. And it's just like this continuation of blocking out things that you have to go through to progress as a person. Yeah, no, you need pain to grow. I mean, if you don't feel pain, you gotta suffer the consequences. You gotta super don't learn like it's just like the whole fucking touching of stuff you gotta feel pain to to grow and get past shit. But this how fucked up this place was like before we went, you have like your meeting with these people. It's just all a fucking scam. So they're like, they're like, oh, do you need pill like they gave me a shit ton of fucking like oxycod nades before because I was like, oh, I'm sick. They're like, oh, we're rich in a script. And then like in jail. I'm pretty sure this was like at this detox. This was I don't forgot even when that was prescribed you adder all to. I was like, oh, I'm sick. And they're like, oh, we're rich in a script. And then like, in jail. And Pray. I don't know. This was like at this detox. Oh, this was, this was, I didn't forgot even when that was. They prescribed you at her all too. Well, yeah. So you go through this detox thing. So it's like, it's like a day or whatever. So you wake up and you're not, you're not dope sick. I don't even know what the fuck it is. They give it like you some opiate blockers or whatever. That's, and they like claim it like, if you take opiates again, you'll die. Oh, no, that's when Suboxone started coming. Yeah, because they keep putting out Suboxone books. What's that? It's an opiate blocker, but people take them. You still get a dial on them. Yeah. It's supposed to be to help you get off. But if you take up opiate pills, they don't work. Yeah. So like you're taking Suboxone. If you take like, if you do heroin or fucking oxies, you're not going to get high from it. Okay. Kind of deal. So it kind of, but it makes you from not being dope sick too. Kind of. You're still fucking not feeling good. Yeah. It's a weird thing. Yeah. So through this detox and when I get out, they prescribe me, he prescribed me an overall value. He's what I'm going to do. I can't do. No, no, no, he didn't give me an opiate. It was like four or five different other pills. But with me, I'm like, I fucking love pills. Right. Oh, this is amazing. Yeah. So then I mean, but it didn't know where I think that lasted like a couple weeks or something like that. And that was pretty much, oh no. Because they told me, they told me, don't do coke because you'll probably die. I think I did coke like four days after that and a lot of fucking coke. I was up in the fucking mut room like a bunch of coke. I remember one time mom went on like the family computer and like the latest Google search was symptoms of coke overdose. She told you that. Yeah. She showed me the needle that she had found. And it was like, do you think Jake's doing drugs again? Like, what? It's a line. Um, can I phone a friend? Maybe. Well, Jake might have diabetes. What's his blood sugar? Like, that was fucked, man. I mean, that's like what I'm saying. There's so many fucking things that's happened that I probably I don't remember. I just know it would need a little kickstart. Yeah. They make it very easy to be an addict in the state of Florida. They do. And you know, like, when you love somebody, you'll do anything you can to. Yeah. They make me not feel trained. Yeah. Everybody just like, and you know, it's like, it gets to the point where it's like, you're enabling this person, but you don't realize it because like, you don't know what this person wants. And anything that respond to positively, they'll give to them because they're actually interacting with you in a way that isn't just like, fuck you. Can I get money? Fuck you. I don't need you in my life. I hate you. Everything I'm doing is because of you. And, you know, it pains you to see somebody suffering like that. And you never truly understand the darkness that they feel. And you just want them to do well. And the best thing that you can do is just let them go through it and just be there when they need you. Yeah. Yeah. I always think when I think about how suffering makes people better is like, they say that the native Indians would take their newborn babies and they would dunk them in the ice cold river when they're like, literally like, once old to build up their immune system. Speaking of good immune systems, I probably have not been sick in five years. I think I think everybody should go to prison for at least six years. Is that true? I have, I do not get sick. Like if I catch a cold, I'll feel it for like two hours and I'll get tired. And I'm like, well, I'll cough up some green. I'm good to go. That's it. It's called single cough. So probably I could probably, if you took my blood right now, it's probably the cure for AIDS. And why you just because you built that, just being so fucking dirty, they're fucking shit holes, dude. Like, yeah. Wow. Yeah. I do not get sick. Jails and public transportation are the best way to build your immune system. Yeah. No self-respecting mosquito would fucking bite you. Not at all. So then, so you go to county jail for that for that charge. Oh, yeah, for that charge. So on the big charge. So I'm in county. They actually, can I take a piss real quick? Well, these like, uh, like keyboard warriors, these like, these like 40 year old do metal. They're fucking moms basement. Was that given her hard time? Cause she put out like neon. You know, like, Celtic frost put out the neon, like the cold lake. And are we recording? Yeah. I'd like to go on the record and say if you're involved with metal sucks at all in any way, shape or form, you can fuck off and die because you're not doing anything to progress. Heavy metal. Why? Why is that? Because they shit on anybody who's trying to do anything like original, unique and fun, like Anna who's making all these badass t-shirts who's going out of her way to keep these leg a sees alive. And just because these big bands aren't profiting directly off of them, then that means nobody can. Yeah. What's that out? What's that out to forever street metal bitch? Forever street is that our Instagram tag? Uh, yeah, it's her Instagram. She, she puts out shit a few times a year. Just follow her. She has rad shit. Different. What was the website? That you said, she said that. That's right. The Instagram tag. I said, fuck metal sucks. Metal sucks.com. Dotnet. They came in at part. They were the first ones to post the candle. Fuckless video we did. Oh, yeah. I remember that. Yeah, they were there. Yeah, yeah. They were standing in front of Janice Landing and then we filmed them. Yeah, they could have been there. Yeah, they could have been there. Oh, where was I? Prison problem. Fuck in jail. That was a lot. No, I'm not surprised. I don't remember. I was either really fucked up or prison. I really only remember the last five years of my life. Oh, the way I like to think about it is I spent my first 24 years on retirement on actually 30. And then so I got pretty much work till I die now. Yeah. Fuck. But so yeah, now you're in fucking prison. And you I mean, so how, when did you find out how long you're going to stay here and you're in county? Oh, no, you're in county. Now, so I get a rain. This was what I was talking about earlier. Get a rain. I think I get a quart date in like two months. You have a lawyer? No, okay. This is the part I was telling about. So my, my mom was like, do you want a lawyer? Okay. And I was like, no, they got me like dead to right. Oh, I mean, there's no. There's no way. There's no fight in it. That's probably the fucking. No, I was like, I'll just stick with the public defender. Like don't waste the money because it's a, it's like a, like the higher your felony is like pretty much that's how much the lawyer's going to charge you that much more. Right. It's kind of deal. So I go to court the first day and usually like, it's, it's usually nothing. It's usually a waste of. It just set you another day. It's, yeah, pretty much. So you usually do that for like a few times before they come at you with an offer. Like where the state will come with you. Like, please guilty today and get this many years or do whatever prevention and all that shit. So the first day I walk in a court, I even told my parents, I was like, I haven't told everybody don't come because it's, it's going to be a waste of time. So I go in there and they're like, all right, Jake, Jake, state of Florida, verse Jake, James, that list all my charges. The state sits there and I mean, yeah, it looks super bad on fucking paper, but they're like, they're going back to when I'm 16 for smoking up tobacco citation. And like they're just, they're just trying to make me look like I fucking kill babies. Right. They're fucking, yeah. Yeah. So, so judges like, all right, state, what do you want to do? Let's set this for trial next month on blah, blah, blah, date. Judge goes, we already have a trial set for the afternoon. State goes, oh, that's fine. For the afternoon of that day. For the day that they scheduled the, it's like a pre trial. This was like, okay, so they scheduled the trial for, they told me to take 15 years today. Or if I don't, they're scheduling trial for next month on this date. So that date that Judge says we already have a trial set in the afternoon. State goes, oh, don't worry. This will take like a half an hour. And when he loses, we're giving him 35 years. So I'm like, oh, okay, oh, this suck. Well, I guess we're sending it for trial. So I went back, I went back to the pod. So I could use the phone and I called my mom. I was like, we had to get a lawyer. I'm going to be gone forever. You know what I mean? Because I'm 24 years old. I think 30 years old is a senior citizen. Right. Yeah, when you're 24 years old. Yeah. Yeah. So I was like, Jesus fucking Christ, dude. So we get the lawyer and it was 60 a ton of get out of here. Yeah. So it was like, it was a good lawyer. So we kept pushing it back. They kept wanting me to take 15 years like every month, kind of when I went to court. And I mean, just just hearing the 15 years for so long. Yeah. But there was a lot of shit that happened in between. I just, I've tried probably. Okay. So the max part of the jail and Pinellas is so like overcrowded that you sleep on these boats, like new guys that would come in you sleep on these boats. And they don't fucking take your beds. Oh, you fucking tough guys out there like that. You just fucking do whatever. So I'm out in this day room. So it's like, it's all cells. Yeah. So it's supposed to be everybody's in their cell at night from I think like from 11 to 5 or something like that at night. But I'm in the day room. There's no room for anybody. There's people out in the day room. And I'm walking around. Like it's probably like one, two in the morning. I'm kind of walking around. I'm kind of pissed. The guards tell me to lay down. I keep telling them fuck you. I was like, come in here and make me fucking lay down pretty much. So they fucking take me out of that cell and they put me in a bigger one. And I do the same thing. I'm like, well, I'm not fucking going in a cell fuck you. I'm like, come in here and make me fucking go in the cell. Yeah. So, but then I remember one of my buddies I grew up with over in Largo. He goes, Jake, get your dumb ass in this fucking cell. I grew up with him like in middle school and she'll like that. So I'm like, all right, cool. So another time, because they just fuck with you, man. Like their pieces are shit. They're, you know what I mean? They just, they live. Some of them lived a fuck with you. Yeah. You know what I mean? So, so like it's just like you kind of just have enough to you. And it's like you're so stressed out. Like I'm going to get, am I going to get like, I'm not, it's like it's hard. It's hard to be like, okay, yeah. I'm going to hear, I'm going to do 15 years. Yeah, let me try this fucking piece of paper. Yeah, I mean, it's fucking, it's hard. It's hard. It's like, it's really fun, especially when you're younger. You know what I mean? So this one time I tried to fight a cop. He was, he was acting like he wanted a fight. And then I tried and then he's kind of backed off hit the panic button. Yeah. They, they a lot. Yeah, weapons, don't they? No, they only have mace. They have mace and taser guns. So we, we'd act really fucking tough until they pull the tasers out when they throw the ones that fucking shoot you with the prongs. You're like, okay, where do you want me lay down? Yeah. You know what I mean? You got to show like that. And then just feel like that. Go to confinement, get out. And then this one time there were, because you have locked down at shift change. So like in max, there was, there was two shifts. It was 12 hour shifts. So before it shifts. What do you mean? What do you, okay. So when you say mad guard, what does that mean? Uh, the, the maximum security part of the jail, okay, kind of deal. So you weren't like in a prison. No, this was, this was still County jail. Okay, guys, so you're, you're in County jail until you get sentenced, kind of deal. So you're, you're super fucking guilty until you're proven guilty. Exactly. Yeah, you know what I mean? Like they take everything away. Like innocent, so proven guilty is fucking bullshit. Oh, for sure. They take, they strip everything fucking away from you. Mm hmm. And then so I just, that's a really true innocence. And they true, they treat you like fucking animals. So that's how fucking motherfuckers act in there. Right. Like fucking just, like just stripped down like fucking caveman. So, uh, shift change happens. They're supposed to count. They count. Make sure everybody's still there that's supposed to be there. And then they leave, but they close the cells and then that shut all the TVs, everything off. So you can't be shit. And it's usually like 30, 40 minutes somewhere in there in the, in the county. But these, these cock suckers kept it in there for like two hours. So I fucking get everybody fucking riled up. We're fucking, we're throwing like, because it's all trying to explain how these fucking, they're, they're small fucking rooms like a day room. And then you got the cells on the back. So, and it's all like plexiglass windows so they can see you. So we start hanging sheets like over the bars. So where they can't see us and we're throwing, we're just throwing like wet paper, uh, toilet paper fucking wads at the windows. We're just like chunking shit. And they get me and like two other dudes for like inciting a riot. So they put me on this shit called at, at, it's administrative segregation to where they could put you in confinement for however long they want with no, because usually if you get in trouble, you get it, it's like a fucking principal referral. Yeah. And then you go to, you go to the principal and they tell you, okay, well, whatever you do, you get 30 days down and down and fucking confinement. Right. But with this shit, it's however long they fucking want to keep you down there. Wow. So I was like a solitary. Yeah. Fire yourself. Well, the way the county jail was, it was, it's like another big pod, but you're like, you're in a cell by yourself. Right. So it's just like you and a bunch of other fucking pieces of shit, just like you fucking try to fucking pass the time and it's like so they had, they brought me down and these motherfuckers hated me. They, they handcuffed me. They put, they put all your shit in a trash bag like all your fucking commissary, where the fuck you have. These got, they, they squirted like all my shampoo all over all my shit in the bag, just kind of like shook it up. They, they, they will guy walks me down in the cells open and there's fucking shit all over this fucking cell. And I go, you're not fucking put me in there and he goes, oh, we'll send somebody down here to clean it up. It's like, I know that's a fucking lie. You're not going to fucking trick me. I'm not going to that cell. So I got my feet like against the fucking doorway of the cell. Yeah. Pushing back at him. I'm not going fucking in here, dude. Like I'm ready to fucking right. I'm not going in this for myself. You're gonna fight. And he's, he's trying to, he's trying to like get me to come in there. Just so he's throwing me in a fucking cell full of shit. Right. Literally shit. Little like there's shit all over the walls, all over everything that because there's a lot of crazy motherfuckers. Yeah. Right. Right. And that's a whole another fucking story. That's so fucking gross. Yeah. So, um, so he finally gives in and puts me in a normal cell. So I mean, as you're just like, Jonah in this fucking confinement, you're like, okay, this is cool. You're pretty much just like jerking off and doing push ups. That's it. That's it. And do some lunges for how long? Yeah, how long do they give you? I was, I was in there. Well, that was like towards the end right before I got sent. So I think I did little over a month in there. Okay. And then, um, but that, I mean, that shit's gross. So like they fucking whip up shit with piss in a cup. And like if you're fucking the dude, like next to you, doesn't, you get's mad at you for some fucking reason. Cause I remember one day he was, I saw something doing that. And then I saw him seeing him throw this cup and this guy has cell, like, because you can kind of, because it's kind of like an L kind of deal. So like this guy in this cell got mad at this guy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. See him throws like that. And I was like, that's weird. Why would you throw coffee in his cell? Like then all of a sudden you like fucking smell it. It hits you. Oh, yeah. And then they send these motherfuckers over like bot buckets like other inmates are called trustees. Yeah. Like the fucking good dudes. Yeah. Whatever. So, um, and then they just dump like hot, soapy water. So the fucking shitty soap water just runs into everybody's cell. So you're just like, like, I'm like, oh, my God. You're just like on top of your bunk. Just like, man, I should have made way better life choices. And like that was probably the first time in my life where I was like, you know what? Now I know exactly what my parents were talking about. That moment all sunk in. So, um, so my last point river of shitty soap. So I like talked to my lawyer. I was supposed to go get sense this day. So when you have a court date, they, they get you up at like three in the morning. This is big fucking ordeal because the jail, you like go underground and then you go into the courthouse kind of deal. Yeah. So I'm like, ready to go, ready to get sentenced and then like nothing. I'm like, God, I'm like, this is fucking weird. I haven't woke up fucking like three o'clock in the right. Yeah, cause I was kind of excited to get the fuck out of County jail. Cause that's all you're hearing, County jail. Prison is way fucking better. Oh, right. It totally is. Yeah. I mean, if I had to do the two, I would do prison. Yeah. I've had a pig. I've had if I had to do one of the other. I would definitely do prison. But, but yeah, so I'm sitting there and it's like 11 o'clock. I'm like, what the fuck? And you're in confinement. So you can't call anybody. You can't, you don't, can't talk to anybody. And finally they come and, uh, they put me in a room with my lawyer. And he's like, what the fuck did you do? I go, what? I didn't do nothing. I just been fucking sitting down and confinement like rotten away. Yeah. So, uh, he's like, yeah, but some guard, like, I guess they must have put me on some, like weird, like, like they have me like kind of red flag to where I'm a threat to where they had to like bring me out by myself kind of like, not like Hannibal Lecter, like not like that, but like I had to be moved by myself. Yeah. No, I know. It's like, yeah, but I look at that. I look, I look fucking insane when I got fucking sentenced on that. I know I did. I was just like, I haven't shaved like hairs, fucking all crazy. And then, um, my lawyer's like, well, this is the best we can do. Read, uh, they went down to seven years. And I was like, let's fucking do it. Cause like you just, you've heard 35 years, then 15 years for so long. Right. Yeah. You're like, that's a whole fucking game. They call it the boot, like everybody all the inmates, they call it the boo game. Cause that's what they 35 years, 15 years, 15 years. And then we're in there for months, like a most whole year of hearing, you're getting 15 years. And then they finally like seven years. Damn, that sounds fucking awesome. Yeah. And that's what they do. It's like a fucking gift wrap. Cause it's like a president on Christmas morning. Yeah. And it's, I mean, it's, it's fucked. I mean, that's, it's all a game. And this shit's all a joke. Yeah. It's just a system. They beat you down psychologically and they hit those numbers. That's what it is. And then it's like, you know, 35, 35, 35, 15, 15, 15, 15, 15. And then they hit you with that, which is still way too high. And they shouldn't even give you that in the first place. And they should actually address the problems that got you in there in the first place. Yeah. The people rubbing shit on the walls in there. They don't need to be in a prison with all these people who are in there for like drug abuse. Those people need attention. They need help to understand why they're doing that. Oh, yeah. But they, they gel, they gel like people like that. Like that don't need to be fucking jailed. But a lot of people, I don't know. It's fuck. You should just kill child molesters and let everything else is fun. Legalize everything else. Yeah. That's fine. So I mean, so after you got the seven years, what happened next? Um, so you wait. So I had to go back to the confinement. And then I'm just, I'm, I'm actually really fucking excited now. It sucks. I got 17 years. Go to the side. I can go. I can go. New chapter. What's a new chapter? I can get, I, I finally know what I got to do. I can fucking, I can walk around outside. I can fucking smoke cigarette. I mean, that's all I'm worried about. I'm like, I can fucking smoke cigarettes and walk around outside. You're here. Sign me up. Yeah. Yeah. Let's go. Because you're fucking, you're inside. out of the time. There's no windows are outside time and counting. I mean, there's windows like this big, but it, it, I didn't like looking outside because it was so close to home that it kind of, it like hurt looking outside. Yeah. You know what I mean? You know what that 49 street. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So that mean that kind of socks and then you can't, you get a little more freedom being up the road like that than being in the county jail. So I remember, so you go to these. uh, so they usually takes a few like a three, four days, because they do a couple of runs a week to go to prison. Yeah. Yeah. I went to Orlando and if you have like any self conscious, anything about you, that shit is gone dude. It's drip. So you fucking, you're in the, you're in the van. You go to Orlando. You're there just pretty much beating you down, cheating you like a piece of shit, taking away everything you are. Yeah. You fucking, you're outside with a chain link fence in a horseshoe. And there's probably like, I don't know, I'd say 30 to 40 dudes standing there, but I asked naked. Just like, it's okay. You know what I mean? Really? And like everybody's kind of been up all night because you know the nights they do prison runs. Yeah. And you're kind of like, I hope this is it or I don't, right. This isn't a fucking sock. Because I had no idea. I mean, you fucking watch TV shows and shit like that. You don't know what to expect. Right. Kind of deal. And I didn't really know anybody. My uncle was only one I went to prison with, but I didn't really fucking talk to him about it. Um, because he found God and all that good shit. Right. So I think you know about prison is don't drop the soap, but beyond that. Yeah. So you, you get in this thing and they, they just, they just call you all kinds of names. Should you like piece of shit. You can't do nothing. Not really. I mean, you can't, you could, but it's fucking pointless to you because they'll beat the fuck out of you. You know what I mean? Yeah. Like they'll handcuff you and just beat the fuck out of you. So you do that. You get naked. You get strip search. And you guys, you just wait and you with your property, uh, you got to get your fucking everybody gets their fucking head and face shaves with like the same fucking nasty fucking holes. Uh, you get your ID. Just fucking everybody's calling you an idiot, go through medical, do all this fucking shit. And then I remember finally get to go to my fucking dorm. And I was just like, I remember laying on my bunk on the top bunk and just looking at the fucking ceiling and be like, Oh, all right. There we go. Yeah. Here's the start. Yeah. So it's like seven, eight months in. So I figured with the game time I kind of, I was betting on my game time. I never went by the whole thing. Yeah. I was like, we got lower five years to go. Like, okay. So they call, I remember I just made it in time for like for chow. And I'm like, I don't want to go. I'm like, I was just kind of like just laid down and like this dude, this dude, I ended up running into it a couple camps. I was at, uh, he's like, come on motherfucker. They got yard bird tonight. I'm like, fuck, sorry. Yard bird. Yard bird. It's, uh, they had chicken like a couple times. Yeah. So my, oh, wait, what? Chicken. So when I first went in, they had, they had actually like, they had real food. Like, because you go from county county is just like, it's like alpo, man. It's so bad. Food and dog food. Okay. It's so fucking bad. So by the time I get in, it was like six months of like real food. Like food was actually, it was decent. You know what I mean? Yeah. Um, and then like every time a fucking new governor comes in, I, uh, fuck those boys. It's not a fucking country club. So we got all soy products. All real soy products. Everything was fucking soy. Well, yeah, because it was cheaper. But dudes aren't supposed to eat soy because it's a fucking, it's a estrogen. Right. Right. Right. Gives you like tits. Well, yeah. Yeah. I mean, I got two of those things. Thanks for the DOC. They took one out. They told me they are nice. So they told me to go fuck myself on the second one. But yeah. Wow. Yeah. So, uh, yeah. I mean, it's just, it just miserable. They just make it miserable. Kind of just bullshit. I mean, that's why I don't know. We would just do like the dumbest shit. I mean, I just kind of would act like I am now. But did you get all your tattoos when you're in there? Not all of them. Okay. I probably have like, because you're like, you're completely covered. I probably had like seven or eight. Yeah. When I went in. But there's not a lot of do. I played, I played poker all the time. I read. I worked out and I got tattoos. Okay. Just kind of kept myself. At what point did you start like getting close to Luke? Um, it was a couple years in probably, right? It was a couple years in. I what made you? So we are talking to him. What made you want to? Yeah. I'm fucking Jesus Christ. Now that he's gone, I miss him. You want what you can't have? Is that what it was? Yeah. Right. Well, man, it's your brother. I need to prepare for this. You guys want to shotgun a beer or shotgun? Is it that time? Yeah. So it's a good segue. And then we'll have this, we'll have to touch on the shotgun legend that you are as well. I heard that I heard that you don't even spill a drop. Oh, fuck. I just cracked it. You fucking dumb ass. You better choke that one in the shotgun. Oh, dead head. What a shotgun one, Katie. What is it? You're breaking the third wall. Is that what that is? Katie's like, this is like a fucking opera. He's like, get me the fuck out. Totally regret coming tonight. Jake is the shotgun master. Oh Jesus. Oh, fuck. Oh, it's your first time boys. Mother. Hey, poke mine. Just poke it for me. Yeah, take this one. All right fair enough. Just poke it You got a bud because you got the nice triangle you got it all I know what I'm doing. That is much is you got the angle. Daddy's got his upside down Have guns gone Great videos where they they you're like so Say me and Shane are doing or we're doing it and then blow it Yeah Instead of like you pop it and you say aim it at you and blow the whole beer in your face That's you know you want to do it Kind of what's yours boys cheers cheers Well, you don't have the macho in for this Oh, yeah Macho Man nasty savage Force is gonna be pissed He gets mad at me. He's like I don't even smoke secrets in here. He's the guy that owns the building the rest of the building And I know I need some fucking weirdo named forces Jewish with sideburns No, black hair Definitely not All right now I need a real big beer Need a casual one from time Now I need something to just We've read it about wow A bubblic and we use that you ain't doing shit no Bellow please don't copyright strike me Oh, yeah, where did we leave about to talk about how me and you started talking well, yeah, how'd you guys? Well, he would come up he would come up to see me, but I don't know them even before that How long does it go by until you're to your first visit? Why wouldn't some and county and then we try to hang out like in between and You know like you can't you can't be around people that are like wrapped up and stuff like that and you know Yeah, you try to spend holidays together He comes up he's fucked up. He doesn't know what he's doing and it's like, you know You just have to understand that and give him a space and then I remember exactly where I was when my mom called me just like when you see a train coming down the tracks You don't go stand in front of me. Yeah Stop what you're doing. Just wait you mess it goes by Running into the middle of traffic and trying to stop every car that's going by you. It's useless You're just gonna destroy yourself So you just got to accept the things that are gonna go past you and it's like hopefully we'll meet up again one day and You know time goes by and I I'm living my life and I remember when my mom called me and There was a time in my life where every time my mom called me I expected her to tell me that your brother's dead. Yeah, and it was like a solid like four years anytime I'd get a call from her whether it was good or bad I always expected the first words out of her mouth to be like Jake's dead Yeah, but I can't die so you can't He's a fucking cockroach No, I should have been dead like a million times and I had accepted that it's like I just accepted the fact like I had I had a brother growing up, but I never had a brother growing up and it was just somebody that Was sharing this experience of me living in the same space coming from the same space, but we never really like had a connection because we were always just so different and When he went to I was gonna make a jailer prison person when you go away and like Where you were at for a couple years It's prison. Yeah, so when you went to prison like some time it passed and I think I just like asked for Your address or whatever and I just like started writing you letters. Yeah. No, it was awesome because uh Because it's like even fucked up, but like people you say Like asked for your address or whatever. And I just like started writing e-letters. Yeah. No, it was awesome because, because it's like, even fucked up, but like people you used to hang out with, like you didn't do nothing wrong to them. But they see how fucked up you are. So everybody starts backing away. They cut you off. Yeah. Well, that everybody just starts backing away. And then that's when you start like falling back toward all these other most like you're doing the same shit. Like it's like the fucking junkie scene or something. You know what I mean? Just kind of you fall back into that crowd because nobody gives a fuck what you do. Then it'll carry if you're dead or alive. Right. You know what I mean? So. And all that shit falls away. And like, and I kind of saw the opportunity to have the brother that I always wanted. And I remember very vividly. I got this Simpsons Anatomy book that teaches you how to draw every character from the Simpsons. And I remember drawing this picture of Homer and then just like writing the note in it about like, hey, remember? Like, you still like watch the Simpsons and like each hacker is in like hang out and like all the shit. I really miss you. I would make him actually eat checker pieces. Not actually. Yeah. I didn't eat a checker. Yeah. Well, I didn't eat a he like shoved him up my ass and would like laugh about it. Yeah. And throwing off the roof into the pool. But I never you're a bunch of checkers. I love what a big view for it's just riding. The big view for it. And they down like that little rug. The checkers routing the fucking pieces. Like that. Yeah. The cracker barrel checkers. The cracker barrel. The golf team. We just. We just chill over his heartfelt. Oh, my man. We shouldn't shock. I'll be doing it. Hey, yeah. This is the problem with our relationship. Like you're drawing Homer Simpson. You're drawing Homer Simpson. No, it's like anytime I like try to like talk. He just is an idiot. And then we're both idiots at heart. So it just like spirals. And we're just like two turns in a toilet share. This experience getting flushed down the drain. It's a dream called life. It's a dream called life. The same fate waits us all. But you know, I'm glad to be sharing the same toilet with everybody sitting in this table and the person working the camera who didn't want to shotgun a beer and not the call anybody out. But it's awesome because that's what I was saying. Like you kind of lose touch with people you hung out with and like real friends. They back off. And it's not because they don't like you. It's just because you're fucking out of control. And like me, I'm like, I'm mad. Like why is everybody back at off? And then all I'm like, well, I'm just going to go fucking harder. Fuck these motherfucker. Yeah. You know what I mean? Fuck these nerds. Right. Fuck it. Nerds. So I mean, that's just basically how it was. So I mean, like you're sitting in there. And like you don't hear from nobody. And then you're like, you're sober too. And you're like, but you don't. You don't like really get it. You know what I mean? Yeah. Like what was that? What was that? Explain what it was like after it had been excellent at times when you got arrested. It's been all the time in county. Then you finally got transferred to prison. Yeah. At that point, what was your, like what were you thinking about like the drug addiction and the pills? Like was that how far behind you was that at that moment? Oh, it wasn't that far behind me. Like I was still like, you just kind of blame everything else. But like the what really happened. You know what I mean? You're just grasping on the shit to blame it on. Okay. And that's that's kind of what I was talking about. Like after like three years, like I remember talking to my mom and she was like, she came to visit me and she's like, you're totally different. Like she could tell after a couple years after like three years. Yeah. Yeah. Because it's kind of cliche to say, but like a fog lifted off my off my brain to where I thought like, I'm like, oh, okay. Because it's like, I'm not I'm not stupid. I just did a lot of stupid shit. Yeah. Yeah. So right. But I mean, that was cool here and her say that. And just kind of reconnected with my brother. You know what I mean? Because I was a huge fucking dick. Yeah. Massive. Yeah. So I mean, and then it's like you feel bad. You feel bad like shit you've done to people that care about you. Yeah. And that you'd always push away. And then you know what I mean? Just just kind of shit like that. So you deal with a lot. It was harder mentally than anything. Like physically, nobody fucked with me. I got one fight one fight one fight. When I, okay. So when you're when you're doing the whole DOC tour of Florida, you people transfer all the time. So anywhere you go, like if you do something really fucked up at some camp, there's always going to be somebody at your next camp that knows what you did. Yeah. So I was playing poker. And it's like you shouldn't really be gambling while you're locked up if you're trying to stay out of trouble and show like that. Because it was pretty much, it was pretty much me and like a bunch of black dudes fucking gambling all the time. And like they call me the great white hope. Like what? They call me the great white hope because like I'm not fucking a lot of white dudes that go into prison are fucking lame and green as fuck. Like our fucking big time fucking pussies. And like I wasn't and I fucking knew how to gamble and I'm not fucking stupid. So I remember once I was a gamble, it's just with this, this big ass fucking, this big has dude from Tampa. He calls me a bitch one day at the poker table. And he said, go get some more money broke bitch and I told him, don't you fuck, don't call me a fucking bitch. And he goes, all right, bitch. I go, I took all the chips I had and I threw it in his face. And you tell him get there. And that's like a part of the pod to where they can't see you fight where the guard station can't really see you. So I'm like, all right, well, I thought I was going to get the shit be that to me. So I was like, I was doing that big. Oh, yeah, it was bigger than me. But he's a big fucking goofball anyway. But we ended up being friends like after him being at different camps and all that. So we were fighting, we were lined up and he like, you fight like down this wall. So he like kind of kept running from me like backing up. And it's like, I just want to fight just get this fucking shit over with. So I ended up like hitting a one good time. And he was like, oh, I'm done. I don't go. All right. So that's how I am like fighting with me is when are lose? I'm cool after man. Like I got it off my chest. Like I don't, I don't get a fuck if I get beat up. Cause if you have not get beat up in your life, you have not fought anybody worth fighting. You know what I mean? So a lot. But after that, I had to stay up for three. I was like, that was a good cloak. That was a good cloak. That was a good cloak. That was a good cloak. That was a good cloak. Burn that aside of me. If you have never gotten beat up in your life, that's an epic cloak. You have never fought anybody worth fighting because you're picking and choosing weak people to fight. And then that's, that's a whole prison thing is that people pray on the week. Yeah. It's basically what I'm getting into. So, but after that, I mean, it's just, he was from the guy I fought was from Tampa. And there happened to be like like four other dudes from his neighborhood in there. And for him to stop against a white boy, it was, that was a big whole fucking thing. So I had to stay up for three days straight. So I did not get my fucking head bashed in with a lock. Just to watch your back. And so. Well, no, because a lot of times, because people, it's, it's people are fucking, are, people are scared. They act tough, but they're fucking scared. Yeah. So I've, I've waken up, I've waken up with the middle of the night when I, when I was in there. And people will take your, their belt and put out, because we have like the school master locks to put on our, yeah, yeah, yeah. Our doors for like our commissary and all that. So, but like I've waken up, I waken up at three in the morning to like, I do next me as getting his fucking head bashed in with the fucking lock. Yeah. So, but it's like all I'm hearing for like, like it's all lights out. It's probably like midnight now. And then I'm just like, oh, you let that cracker get over on you. You put that cracker get over on you. And I'm like, okay, cool. Well, I'm going to be up for three fucking days. So I'm like trying to read books. And I'm just like, I'm pretty much just like eating instant coffee, trying to like stay awake. It's just like. Oh, God. It's like the worst feeling because you're just waiting for. Well, no, just like a retaliation because right. You're what you're just waiting. Because a lot of people, I would say a fucking 90% of people in prison are fucking pussies. Yeah. That they would wait and sneak up on you or wait to your sleep. And when you say this guy below, you got his head bashed in like, yeah, did he survive? Oh, yeah, he survived. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They're killed like, um, I never saw anybody get killed. Yeah. I've seen, okay. So like, shit, you see in the movies and then shows it happens. It doesn't happen every fucking day. All right. Like I've been, I've been 20 feet away from like, these guys, they were chasing this guy around and when he swung, I was like, wow, he fucking hits like a bitch. You're right. Yeah. But I'm like, why the fuck's he punching him like that? And I go, oh my God, he's stabbing him. So these two guys, these two, these two guys are stabbing the fuck out of this dude. But I'm like, those guys hit like fucking pussy. Right. But I'm like, oh shit, they're fucking stabbing him. But I'm like 20 feet away. But it's like, you're fucking heart's racing dude because you're like, holy fuck man. And like, we wear light blue, like canvas uniforms kind of deal. And it's just like, there's no blue left. It's all red. It's all red. Yeah. So like, I've seen that happen. Um, yeah, it's just like, I've seen all everything like you would see in the show or a movie. But it doesn't happen all the time. Okay. Yeah. Cause most people are just trying to chill. I mean, like you got a little bit of freedom. Yeah. You're not really trying to fuck that up and go to confinement to where, because you are always fucking hungry in there and like being able to hit that commissary window is like, is everything. They're like everything. Yeah. If they ever took commissary out of prison, I would have, I would have killed, I would have killed everybody and killed myself. I love it. Yeah. No, it's like, you take my honey balls. I mean, stay coffee. Do that. I mean, that's all you got. Yeah. I mean, you got to think about it. Like, like people were getting fights over a fucking raiming noodles. Oh, yeah. And it doesn't matter. It's the like, that's the whole thing. It's the fucking principle. But it's like, it's hard to get down to that. Yeah. It's like, God damn suit man. It's like, do you really want to fucking die over a fucking raiming noodles? I know. I know. I know. It's like, it's like, I try to explain it. People are like, what's it like? I'm like, it's really gay and just like a whole other like subculture of a subculture. Really gay. Really gay. Yeah. Yeah. They do that. A lot of people think that if you're, if you're gay for this day, it's okay because you're not on the street. Like I've heard conversations like that. And it's just, yeah. Oh, the self dropping a for the stay. Gay for the stay. Yeah. Some people are, they're okay with being gay in prison. Well, I've, no, I've also, I've also say leave it. I've also heard, okay. This is a funny one. This is a real funny one. So I'm laying, I was at Polk and I had like, I probably had like two years left and you know, like sometimes you're just, you're just fucking over everybody. You can never get away from anybody. Yeah. I'm in a two man cell. I'm laying on my bunk in the next cell next to me. Jesus is like, there's these three guys talking there. He's like, how am I gay motherfucker? He was sucking my dick. He's a fucking cock sucker. And then, and then like the same conversation. It's like, no man, he's gay. He's like, he's gay. He's like, gay on the street. Gay. Like that's like kind of the mentality. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know problem. I mean, that just sounds kind of fucked even say, but it's just like, this shit, people like, it's the things that you tell yourself to get through what you need to get through because it's like, don't experience it. The reasoning people have for doing shit in there is insane. It doesn't make sense to, it doesn't make sense to people like that are outside. Well, even for me, it didn't really make sense because I was like, just logical, just like logically thinking about stuff was just like, yeah. Right. You got your dick stuck by a dude, but you're not even talking. Like, yeah, but that aside, just like the way, I mean, but a lot of people just, I mean, that's just like a mental thing. Like you're, you are traumatized, but nobody would admit that in there. Yeah. About about that, but people, you know, your mind, your mind makes helps you get through it. And so people just do weird fucking shit while they're in there. Yeah. You know what I mean? You come up with the stories that you need to tell yourself to justify it. Your actions and then you're coping at, right? You have nothing else to do in there. And I think there's no human affection other than the people that are around you. And if that's what you need to do to get by, then that's what you need to do to get by. Yeah. So that, but yeah, that's, that's all good. But it was like people were just, just like the, the reasonings like I would hear people a reason about just every little aspect of the whole right. They're coming up with a reason for everything for everything is there one thing that happened in the entire, like one part of the entire experience that sticks out to is like, yeah, I like fucked up thing. I was like really fucking bothered me was, um, okay, when I first went in and like child molesters and shit, Florida is so fucked. I would fuck with these dudes so bad. People would, I remember getting on top of this one dude, he was in his bed. Like I would call mom and ask because people like always a job, he's a Joe mo or whatever. So, but I would. Yeah. So I wouldn't know that for sure. I would call my mom. I would call my mom a lot of times, even if I was hanging out with somebody, I call my mom tell me to look them up. Okay. Like, so I know what they're in there for. Okay. So cause it's like, I don't know what to be fucking hanging out with the child molest or somebody like did some really fucked up. We all did fucked up shit, but for you to like do that to a kid. Was it, was it easy to kind of figure out who did one? I mean, some people were. Some people were. And then I remember this one dude, I got on, I got on, he was, he was taking a nap. I just went on top of him, put my elbow in his throat. He woke up and then I felt it had a bill mouthful of skull and I fucking spit it all in his face. And then I slapped him. I got up. He just looked at me. It was just like, well, this fucking sucks. He didn't even fucking say nothing. You know what I mean? Because it's like, half those motherfuckers know, man. It's fucked in like people a couple of times where I would do it. People would like try to fight me. But it's not like they would just talk shit. It's not actually trying to fight me. Kind of deal like that. But just for you to stick up for somebody like that. I don't know. I didn't know he was a chum. Oh, they all knew. They did. Everybody else. Somebody is. But a lot of people will cut some people will stick up for those guys because if they they buy him like commiser and show. Yeah. But you're kind of like selling your soda to the devil. So it's like fuck. I don't know. I just don't get it. You could. I don't know. So you would call your. Well, I would say for like look him. You were like this guy up. Look up who's in jail. And she would have what he's in. She would look him up. Oh, no. Yeah. She could go on my call. Yeah. She would do that for you though. Yeah. Because there was a few people I got like hung out with. You know what I mean? I was fucking freshery. Shout out to mom for a fucking look at it up. Well, you kind of like happened to me. And I don't. Right. But Florida is fucked. You like in every aspect of Florida, not in not the prison, but Florida is a hell hole. But for every aspect of Florida, it is it's fucked. Nobody gives a fuck about anything. Nobody nobody's like no more. There's few people who are true to what they do. Yeah. Who really give a fuck. And I think it's just from everybody moving here. There's no back. There's no back crowd. Yeah. You know what I mean? Like you go to New York or you go to Pennsylvania. There's generations and generations. Yeah, right. Exactly. Yeah. No one's from here. It's just a mixed breed of everybody. And I don't know. There's just a bunch of fucked up Florida idiots. It's a bunch of rich fucking white people fucking up this whole fucking state. A bunch of rich white people and a bunch of fucking addicts. Making all the laws. Yeah. You've been always fucked with me the most about how you explained your experience with us. It's a little detail. And when you talk about it, it doesn't really seem like a big deal. But the fact that there's no air conditioning in any of the prisons is so fucked up. Oh, no. Summertime dude, there is no sleep in life. That's oppressive. Like you take, you take, like you go to sleep at night. You're probably waking up five, six times just tarantined. What? It's about like that's how fucking wet it is. Wow. Because you're sleeping on plastic fucking mats. It's, they have windows, but it's, it's that big, but they put a piece of metal over it. And there's probably like 10 or 15 drill holes. Little holes. Little drill holes. Like, if you're barely getting any air. Well, we would, we would throw up in the window. We call the AC. You take a couple of forks in the trash bag. And I don't know how the fucking this works. But you would rig it out to where it would catch wind and blow it to your bones. To your butt. Right. That's some genius shit that happened to their story. There was real life fucking MacGyver. Like fucking, yeah, genius shit. Yeah. It's, it's amazing. Like, but I mean, that's the whole thing. It's, I remember my dad coming to see me and he's like, how do you do this? And I was like, you're there going to do it. Are you going to lay down? And you know what I mean? Like, no. If you get thrown into something, you're going to do it. And you're going to figure out how to make it the easiest way possible. So it was just, yeah, that's crazy. There's a lot of you have a choice. Yeah, you know, yeah, no choice. Do it. I'm sure. I'll just hear for the ride in the honey buns. But any buns, baby. I see frost frosted honey buns are just playing. Frosted all day. Come on. That was like, when I got out, I was in like the shape of my life. And I was all, dude, I probably ate five ramen noodle soups a day. When you got out or whatever, you know, when I was in the whole time, like, I probably, five ramen noodle soups a day, like at least two honey buns. Just eating totals. Right. And you were still in the best shape. Yeah, it's, it's fucking nuts, man. I remember when he got out on work release and like we were trying to work out together and he's like smoking cigarettes, drinking instant coffee and like eating like, oh, yeah, man, man, man, man, man. You were like doing push-ups with my mom on his back. Good. Motherfucker, keep up. You guys were trying to work out together when you got out. No, we were working out together. How did that go? Hey, man, you want to work out? Where were you? Where were you working out at? Oh, his, uh, that place fusion, he was loving it and seeing Pete. Oh, before that was it. Yeah. At the house. Oh, yeah. My mom and dad's house. Okay. So you guys were working out like in the driveway or something? It was like working out the driveway. Like he was showing me like what they used to do, like, to pass the time and work out. It was just like all squats push-ups and just like lifting random shit. Like all the different kinds of push-ups. I always thought were like really interesting because you know, you got your basic ones. Yeah. And you got the ones like where you crawl. And it's like, okay, we're going to crawl all the way down the driveway and then do push-ups. And then you just like kind of doing this army crawl. You're push-uping too. And the whole time you're smoking dipping and drinking instant coffee. Oh, yeah. Dude, well, I would be on the record on the pull-up bar with a mouthful skull and like a top roll-up cigarette smoking it. Doing pull-ups. I mean, that's how you had ad resistance. Yeah. Yeah. Didn't you say at one point? So they banned cigarettes. Yeah. They, they, they took the cigarettes out. I forgot what year that was, but they gave us a year notice. And so we're like, oh, it's a year. But then that shit went by so fast. Right. Like nothing. So it was like October one year. And then we saw like flyers everywhere. It was like, wait, what? It's like, that's pretty much all you have. And you know what I mean? Right. It's like a little bit of freedom. Yeah. Yeah. So they were going to ban it the next October that year. But they were going to stop some of the September before. So like the whole year goes by. And then at the end, everybody's fucking scrambling. Everyone's right. Right. Like, I can bury him on the fucking yard. So they stopped selling them. And then I mean, the price of a $5 pack of top went up to like 200. It would just kept double. And like it went to 10 and 20 and 40. And then it got all the way up to like 250 bucks. I heard some of the reception centers. Like people first come in. Yeah. They were going for like $500, $600 for one fucking like small ass pack of top. Wow. So that was that made it easy to quiz, Mohan. Yeah. I like to eat. I like to eat commas. It's nice. I don't like smoking fucking $40 like pin. Yeah. Points of the back. There's. Yeah. It really means so. Now what about what about when you finally got out? Like what was it like? Like you know, you know, you're at least like leading up to your lease. Like leading up. I was at, I was at work release. Oh, okay. This is another one. Oh, yeah. So I went to a camp after that. Or I went to work release at the Largo Goodwill. It was right across street from Diamond Dolls on 19. Yeah. Oh, yeah. So fuck. But before I got there, is that my celebration station? It is at right there. Yeah. It's close to there. It's close. Not that close up. Not close enough. So I go to this. I go to the Goodwill. It's shut down now. But I went there. But before I got there, there was a motherfucker that raped some chick at fucking Diamond Dolls that was out there. And then another guy killed. It was at least one or two people and then set the house on fire. Damn. That was at work release. I mean, worker leases. You have less than a fucking year left. Right. You know what I mean? Right. And what do they make you do for work? Oh, you'll get a regular job. You just go. You can go out. And you're living in like a halfway house or? No, I mean, it's or they just take you out of it. It's pretty much like a halfway house, but it's still DOC. It's not like it's not like an actual prison. Okay. It's like super low custody. No, but you don't have that much fucking time left. And these fucking stupid cock suckers did like the dumbest shit. And I don't know. They it was that whole thing and like doing that much time. Like that was the first time like me really doing time. So being that gone that long, I'm like, I can definitely wait. Now I'm good to go do like all this dumb shit. You know what? Yeah. So when you you rode your bike, like how far to go. I worked. I worked two jobs. So I would leave the center at like five in the morning and ride my bike from there to to any rock speech. Every day. So I was doing like I was doing like 22 miles a day, but I would leave the center. I look five. Where was the center? The center was right across you from Diamond Dolls on. Okay. Okay. That's far as fuck. So I've got a far asked bike. I've worked dry. I've worked in that's a far not as a far. I don't even drive that far. Honestly, like that's far. I would get back by like midnight, 11 o'clock or midnight. And I think it was 11 I had to get back because that was like our curfew. So I mean, then I would get like two hours of sleep and I would just keep doing it. But I was so fucking pumped just to be able to just write your feeling a little bit of freedom and shit, right? Just riding my bike, working and just kind of feeling normal. You know what I mean? Yeah. Just kind of being like a normal person in the world. I guess. Well, not really normal, but right. Yeah. You know what I mean? But you're not in prison anymore. But I mean, I'm right in the bike. Right. Then there's something wrong with you. Oh, that's like the people on the bus and take a bus in Florida. You're like, God, he's a fucking drug. Yeah. He's no license. I mean, that's fucking normal. But down here, you just you look down at everybody that's fucking riding a car. Yeah. You see somebody walking on the side like DUI definitely. Yeah. No. So I mean, I love that. But so, but that shit came to they after those guys did that shit. I remember one morning woke up at like three of them morning and all the like, it was like the, it was like the riot squad. I forgot the fuck their name was in there for prison. They all came in all of our doors said, all right, motherfuckers, packers, shit. You're going back to prison. I was like, no, God. So I had to go back to one of that reception camp. I first went to what you that whole fucking shit. Back in Polk. No, that was Orlando. I was in Orlando. Yeah. So I had to go through like that whole shit when I first went back to prison. And then so it was like, was that like two or three months? Yeah. Then you went to Polk. Yeah. Then then we went to. No, that was after. Oh, yeah. I went back in it. What are you ever in Coleman? No, okay. Coleman. That's a federal. That's a federal. That's a federal. Yeah. Oh, okay. Yeah. Coleman's federal camp. That's a, yeah. You got to do like a lot real big shit to do that. Yeah. You do. Yeah. It's like, that's like the Harvard for criminals. Yeah. Remember, uh, that's where Matt Cox was, right? Yeah. But you remember, uh, we got Mike Oxbig was either just. Yeah. He was definitely there. That's a change. I heard that. No, but Dave Clark, you're a rim. Yeah. Remember Dave Clark, he's a man right now. Still? Yeah. Yeah. Was that one of your buddies? He's get out to the, he's get out as 2037. 2037. He's done. But he loves God. Yeah. He's super religious. That is, that is really all that matters. Yeah. Especially in Florida. Yeah. So you didn't find Jesus. Jesus actually actually, actually, we don't get along our logo. You were Jesus. Well, yeah. I mean, we really, we really don't get along because all these Christians out here, it's, oh, they're always talking about forgiveness. Yeah. But since I've been out of prison, it's every time I try to go do something like gross, you're a felon. You can go fuck off. You check that box. You know what I mean? Yeah. But that's like all of our, all of our laws, whether you like it or not, are based on Christian values. Yeah. But everything is based on Christian values, which they say church and state is separate is bullshit. Yeah. Because it's that whole fucking forgiveness thing, you fucking cock suckers that I'd never get forgiven. Even when I was a simpensivania, when we got the, the house to rent, yeah, there was a few places that would not even talk to me because of my background. Yeah. And it, and it sucks because I don't know, just not even talking to somebody before and just kind of judging them on that. Like that. Yeah. Yeah. Cause they don't know you. Yeah. And you have made like, uh, I feel like I've got a full fucking three. Oh, yeah. Well, because I just, I've learned that there's more. Jesus Christ. There's more. It's a bet on the air. You can answer it. Yeah. Yeah. Answer it. Answer it. Oh, hey, what's up, babe? Oh, you know, it's fucking sucks. These guys fucking don't know what they're doing. You're live, you're live on the air. You're not live. You still like, you're. You still like, you're. You just fucking stoked. You get your room cleaned up or what? All right. Go to bed. I'll be home later. Love you. Um, we're, um, we're still in prison. We're, we're still in prison. We're still in prison. We haven't even made it to MDF yet. Yeah. Do you want to, do you want to tell the story about how we met? Yeah. That'd be sick. Yeah. What? That's an easy one. No. No, no, no. If you're asleep, you go to bed. Okay. Well, I'll see you in a little bit. Or a few hours. We'll see what comes first. You're just, you're just prolonging it. Being on the phone right now. You're just prolonging it being on the phone. Love you, love you, baby. Bye. So that's your shot out, shot out to your wife. Yeah, shot out. It's all right. How long after you got out? Did you meet your wife? God, I got out in February. I met her in May. It was like love at first sight. You know what I mean? I guess. Where you might later? Look, you were there, right? Where did you meet? I orchestrated the whole trip. Did you really? It wasn't. Give us the story. So like another thing that helped me and Jake. And our relationship was a heavy metal. And you got him into it, right? Yeah. I helped guide him towards the healing powers and righteousness of heavy metal. It is way better than Jesus. I highly recommend heavy metal over Jesus. The Jake that I remember. 100. Is like is completely different for the whole story. Although I will say Jake did have like the traphouse Gucci man CD when it first came out. 100% like that. They really? I remember my mom like picking it up and like look at this girl cooking at the stove naked. When I remember Jake, she's got a little food. I'm like, yeah, he's all black. Don't pay me. Thank you. Thanks. Thank you. And that looks amazing. Please let me know. I went through. I went through a lot of big trends. Kind of trying to like find yourself. Yeah. Well, you found yourself. Yeah. Well, I mean, that's kind of the problem with down here because that's like goes back to the whole thing about nobody's really into anything down here. Yeah. Because you got all these old fucks and all you do, all they do is drink. There's just like there's really nothing going on around here. If you think about it for for young people, I used to skateboard all the time. Yeah. I had my hip surgery. I couldn't do that anymore. Say nothing. So I had nothing. I had nothing. If you think about it for, for young people, I used to skateboard all the time. Yeah. I had my hip surgery. I couldn't do that anymore. Did nothing. So I had nothing. I had nothing, but drugs and, and rap. Yeah. Cause when I remember Jake, it was like when we were young, it was like the hot boys, like big timers, Jake early cash money. And respect your money for the next. And then there was like always the parties at your house. Jake always had the baddest bitches all around. And for sure, like I remember like the scene like titties for maybe the first time. And definitely like with Jake. Were they mine? No, they don't. They weren't. It was like the first time I seen a real pair like women's titties is definitely probably a party at your house. I always saw a girl screaming from like. Yeah. I remember Luke tell me a story one time. He was like, he's like, I walked into my room. And there was just this girl and Jake was like, yeah, go in there and check it out. And she was just spread even on your bed. I forgot. I saw it. He's like, that was the first time I seen a pussy. You got girl. No, she was like, she was like, Luke's size. You know what I mean? She was like, no, it was like, they kind of look like the same. It's fourth grade. And we were in like middle school. Like, you're like, the coolest back then to me for sure. I'm like, go to like the Redington Pier and smoking black in my olds with you. And I was in six. Yeah. This is living. Yeah. We would party at the house and we would go like ride our bicycles to Luke's house. And you would already be there and all your friends and fucking mad girls and then we are in the in the in room. And with the four more to score board on the wall. I'm glad you guys like carry that tradition. Oh, yeah. Oh, we did. We did. Or stacked. Oh, yeah. Yeah, they're definitely weighted. That's kind of how like our scores were. There was only like two of us that actually scored on the score. But that was so sick back then. Oh, yeah. Yeah, you got to find. I mean, I just kind of I just kind of floated through life my whole life. Yeah. And not knowing it wasn't a bat. I mean, it was not a bad thing, but it's like I kind of went through life, not knowing how to do anything, but fucking party. Yeah. You know what I mean? So, but so I kind of I guess prison probably was the best thing that's ever happened to me honestly. Honestly. Yeah. If I had to do it again the same way I would really. Yeah. Could he be dead if it was well, I can't die, but my life's a lot better. Yeah, you can't die. You're immortal. I guess that's right, dad. Fuck off till the end of the month. So yeah, man, it's just it's just weird how everything kind of just kind of keeps working out and yeah, learning shit. I mean, I learned more from prison than I have from anybody in my whole life. A lot of people that I've talked to that have been in prison for a long time, say they've met a lot of their best friends in prisons. Oh, well, I met a couple of buddies. I mean, I'm saying they're my best friends. I saw I still keep a touch with two of them. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Shout out to Chunk and John. Yeah. What up, Doug? Hey, John, kid, that truffle shuffle, bitch. He's wider than he is tall. Yeah, he's my buddies. He's five foot tall and five foot wide. Wow. Yeah. He's kind of like that girl on Willie Wonka, the blue one. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Oh, hell yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, hell yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, fuck. So, thank you. Have you met all? Yeah. Where were we? Heavy metal. Heavy metal. Yeah. It's the law. God damn better believe it. Heavy metal is the fucking law. And if you don't agree with that, then you just need to tune out right now because we don't have time for you. Let's take a five second break. So these nerds can fucking tune off. Oh, a moment of silence for the end. I'm a moment of silence for the fucking nerds that think Metallica started at the black album. Fuck you. Fuck load. Fuck reload and fuck anything after that. I just found out that load is the album cover is actually blood and semen. I always thought that the album cover was Guy Fieri's forearms. It's real blood and semen. I remember. Oh, I just felt that out. Who's blood and who's semen? I have. God damn it. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Where is it? Where is it? Somebody called Billy May's Scriss. Back to the heavy metal. So while Jake was partying and doing all this things and doing all that shit, I discovered heavy metal, listening to Metallica Slayer and all the things that you find out early on and your journey through non-commercial music. Me and Shane went to a couple of casual TV shows. Yeah. I was one of the first shows I went to. First, right now. Who almost got beat up by the lead singer? Was that Alex? I think it was Alex. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think he like a guy who are here almost who we will whoop to. Yeah. Who's not the lead singer anymore actually, but yeah, I remember them. I don't know what we were crazy back then. We were just like, we were just while out of their shows and throw beers on stage and fucking we were like 16 17 drinking beers out there. Yep. I get fucked up, but that was a good time. Yeah, that was fun. So you know, that whole thing progresses and you just dive down the bottomless pit that is like the legacy of heavy metal and it's just something that always stuck with me. And I feel like once I discovered that I had my thing and the thing that like I could really own. And as Jake was going through his thing, like I had my thing and you know, as he was suffering through whatever he was suffering through and going through whatever he was going through with my parents, like I just had like my slayer and metallic albums. And it's very typical, but sometimes typical and cliche is what you need to get through the really hard times. And I always wanted him there and always wish that like he could understand why this music was good and like why there was something there for you. There's something there for everybody. Like no matter what emotion you're feeling, no matter what you're going through, you can throw on any one of those classic albums and work through it. And it just stuck with me and so you passed it to him. Yeah, for some reason like when we started writing and corresponding with each other while it was in jail prison prison prison. He was thanks for keeping bringing to that up like that. Not the feds. Not the feds though. I'm a bottom of the barrel of fucking criminal. He got a cockroach criminal. He got a music player and he was able to buy like single MP3s. Oh yeah. And I was writing him out with like Tom to download shit. So they're like download like some Nile download some. Now here's some slayer. Here's like some suicide silence. Here's some. Yeah. Whatever. Slayer, everybody should listen to a slayer die by the sword. And I don't give a fuck like who's out there if you got like some shit to talk about it. The first suicide silence album is fucking amazing. I don't care how true you think you are the shit fucking rips. But anyway, Jake had that on his iPod or his prison pod at one point. So if any guy not my prison pocket. He's prison. But it was. And the prison. The prison pod was in the prison. I want to point. It was in somebody's prison pocket. Yeah. I just kept sending him stuff to listen to. And you know, I was going through my journey through heavy metal playing shows doing my thing. And he was still just like locked up doing his thing. And we're close to him. And you Photoshop some sweet pictures. Like yeah, we get off a house. Yeah, me. Jake and Obama visited a waffle house at one point. Those. Well, they got okay. So money about that was my dad's side of the family did not know it was in prison probably for four years. I don't think we ever told Grammy. Well, no, she knew. Oh, yes, you slipped up and told one of our cousins. So anyway, I was just old. That me. Luke. That's funky over here. I'm so the lotta list Luke. That's what I'm saying. My dad's side of the family thought I was a hotel manager in Tallahassee. I've been cutting trees. I was cutting trees in Fort Walton Beach for a while. I was doing a small shit all over. I guess they were embarrassed to tell them that was in prison or something. But they're out of this. Yeah, they're like, they're super fucking right wing fucking Christian prophecy fucking weirdos. Yeah. And I guess that doesn't go with that relations. Yeah, but nobody nobody gives a fuck about our little family on my dad's side. So it's why we're here who gives a fuck. Sorry. Sorry. So we started making plans for this thing called MDF. That was when we were still working together. Yep. It was getting close to like a year, a him being out. You got to buy tickets for it like probably like six, eight months out. So I was like, fuck it. I'm going like full fucking MVP package spent like all the money, getting all the wrist bands, doing all the shit, getting everything lined up. And he's like, hey, we're doing this because the one thing that you need to get over, like something that's bothering you is like, you need to go to work towards. And I thought this was like a really great thing for him to look forward to and also a really great thing for me to look forward to because I saw him getting out as like the start of our actual relationship as brothers. And I was just really grateful for that like fourth chance that I got to like be there and like hang out and like be cool and be human together. And I was so pumped. I told him and I got him through it and like we were talking about it. Yeah. I went up to it like through your work release and everything. And I'd bring him donuts while he was on work release and like we'd drink out, drink coffee before you'd have to go to work. And like I'd come up to like clear water, like jacked up off of like fucking for Apple fritters and like quadriple lattees from lighthouse donuts shout out to lighthouse donuts donuts. No, we actually. Where was the, where was the work release? Well, we never got quads. We ordered quads one day lattees and the guy goes, we don't do that. He was just totally out of line that we were quadruple latte. Yeah. Yeah. And we got through it and we made it to the trip. Yeah. Oh, that was amazing. Just just kind of opening my eyes to that there's more to life than Pinellas County. Yeah. Yeah. Although like Pinellas County is a great place. The best part of Florida is really great. It's really great if you're like 60 incoming down to. And you're not an ex con fucking scumbag piece of shit. Or if you're washed up WWE wrestling is totally. Yeah. Or a, or burned out fucking BTLs to, to Strockey. Oh man. So what's the next on the, on the journey of Jake? On the journey. What's, what's, what's, so what's, what are you looking forward to? Like what's, right now me and my wife Ryan Ryan James shot up. Bow out. Bow out. We're moving to Philly on the 11th, moving up to Philly. She's from there. And just more work opportunity for a piece of shit like me. Yeah. Oh no, she got a badass job up there. So like any, any city we go to, we know somebody we can stay with. Mm hmm. Ride the couch and yeah, shit like that. And it's, it's been awesome. I meant like, I've met a lot of fucking cool people just all over. And it just makes you want to like there's, there's more to life than just right here. Yeah. Right now where I'm living at, yeah, I've lived that my whole life because I mean, the house I'm living in right now is across the street from the house being Luke grew up in. What would you say to the, what would you say to the 2007 Jake James who you're sitting right here? Oh shit. Thank you. It's been a while. Right. Oh yeah. No, it's been nuts man. But I mean, it's just who knows? I kind of believe in all that like, don't change like I wouldn't change nothing. Just if that's how it worked out, you know what I mean? Yeah. So everything's been forged and steel and so good. Yeah. I would go through all that again to be where I'm at right now. Basically. Yeah. It's been an epic journey. Yeah. It really has been for the whole, I mean, the whole thing. It's like, maybe someday I will do something with myself. But you know what I mean? But I mean, I'm doing, I'm doing the best I can for what it is. And I mean, I love it. I love my life right now more than anything. That's all it is changing. Anything. Hell yeah dude. That was fucking legendary dude. Yeah. Thanks for coming out man. Thanks for sharing dude. I know a lot of people have been able to take this and learn from it. And sure as a lot of people would relate to your story as well. Yeah. I doubt it. I hope not. Hope not. Yeah. But I can say one thing. I hope I know, you know, he's leaving and he's moving on to the next chapter of his life. Yep. So I hope you find what you're looking for. What's the voice? Woo! Whether you think you can or you can't, you're right. Never forget that. God damn right. Would you just say?