Go, Roman, find him. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe, Rogan, podcast, by night. All day. Bradley Cooper, what's happening, baby? You know what it's like when like a twilight zone episode or something? We're like, you're watching the two. This is an episode where I'm watching the TV. And then also on your Instagram show. And you're looking at me. And I got the, yeah, I'm also inside the show. It's crazy. It's weird for me, too. It's weird for me that it gets weird for other people, too. Like when I see people being weird about it, it's okay. I feel comfortable just saying that. Oh, good. You look comfortable. No, no, no. It's excitement. It's weird for me. I was trying to explain this to someone. They'll like, do people have a hard time being comfortable on the show. I go, I kind of do, too. It's fucking weird. Yeah. It's weird that that many people are watching. Yes. And then you start thinking like, oh, don't fuck it up. Don't say that. Right. But if you think about it, the fact that you did this long form set up and that we live in a culture where people totally say that it's all about short term, it goes against it. The people are interested. Yeah. Well, the short term stuff does work. Short attention span stuff is very popular even with me. But I have been resisting it more and more lately. I'm like, fucking heroin addict, slowly weaning myself off the drug. And the more I wean myself, the better I feel. Like, physically better. My brain works better. I feel more relaxed. I don't feel like this kind of like Sugar Shauna Malley, the USC fighter, he said, even when I'm just scrolling, even if it's not anything about me, he goes, there's just like a low level anxiety that I get. I'm like, yeah. Yeah. Because like, you know, you're wasting your time chasing a fix that you're never going to get. And you're just like getting these short drips of like, oh, look at that. Oh, look at that. Oh, scroll, scroll, scroll, scroll. But that's not what people really want. But people really want is something engaging, something that's like a great documentary, like which are still super popular, like a great documentary. They're still, you know, a huge on Netflix and huge on YouTube. So this is an open-himer was like three hours long. Right. Exactly a billion dollars. Exactly. So people went. Humans didn't change. It's just you can hijack the reward system by giving them some short attention span nonsense. And it just like tricks their slow drip dopamine into like continuing to watch a stupid shit. But that's not what they want. No. You know, someone I want. You know, it's a difference between like, yeah, just a little drip of something that has the illusion that I'm getting what I want as opposed to what I actually need, which is sort of a reminder that I exist. Yes. Yes. And that I'm communicating with somebody and I can relate to it. Yes. Which is a different thing. And I only know this because I've never been on social media. But sometimes there was one time I got on, somehow got on TikTok and it was all police footage. You know, like, and I was just, I remember laying on my couch 40 minutes when by and I was just doing this. And it was like the first part of the video. And then what happened? And then like the second part part two. And that was the only time I experienced I thought I got to stay away from this because I won't leave the house. It's bad. It's bad for you too, because it programs you to think that that is going on everywhere in the world. Like if you have eight billion people that are interacting with people all over the world and you only take the worst examples of that and broadcast it. And then it becomes viral and millions of millions of people that it rewires your way you think about human beings. But the, and the other thing is about memory. Someone was talking about Niagara Falls the other day. And I thought I've been there, right? And I'm like, have I been there? Or did I see a video? Or was that one of the things when I put the Oculus on? Right, right. I can't remember. But I know what it feels like to be looking at it. Oh yeah. So it's changing the way memory works. 100%. I've had a wall in my memory, like a tangible wall. Because and I think it's connected to like Dunbar's number. Like Dunbar's number is the amount of people that you can keep in your head. Like because we evolved in these tribal scenarios. We evolved with like 150 people. And so the way Dunbar calculated it, there's like very close intimate, close circle people, which is a small amount. And then immediately after that, there's a slightly larger amount. And then it gets up to, what was it like, it gets up to like 1,000 people? 1,500 people? That's the most amount of people you can keep in your head. So it's like five people that like, you're tightest of tight. And then 15 are like slightly outside of that. And it gets all the way up to about 1500 people, recognizable people. But I would think I'd be able to, that you could keep in your head. Yeah. But I'm way past 1500 people. So I'm fucked. Like I am like, there's people that I know really well. And then I see them and I'm like, I don't remember his name. 1500 sounds. And it seems bad. Like I'm like, why can't remember his fucking name? Like the number is horrible. Horrible with names. But it's just because my hard drive sucks. It's like, I don't have enough room. Right. It's like, you know, when you, the old iPhones, that it's like, you've run out of, you know, Magspace, like, oh, Chase, I gotta start deleting photos and videos. And then you get anxiety with that or do you sort of breathe through and say, well, this is the way it is. I kind of just deal with it. Yeah. It makes me do. But my memory itself is like very good and also very bad at the same time. Yeah, me too. I have a serious problem remembering people's names. Well, you think about how many people you're saying it. I was like, and I watched it so so many times. I was like, Jamie, right, that's Jamie. Like as you were saying, like, remember any of the guys I just met, can't tell you what I just met them, shook their hand, looked them in there. They say their names and it just goes in and out. And some people get upset. What's my name? I don't fucking know. Oh, you don't remember me? Yeah, I'm like, you don't remember? What's my name? You're like, well, that's why in Hollywood people love to say, good to see you. Instead of nice to meet you, like that you met me two years ago. Like I don't remember. Yeah, Leonard Bernstein had a great thing that he would always be about. I loved you and the last thing you did. Ah, that's funny. That's funny. Speaking of which, I watched a movie. Is this thing on? And it's good. It's really good, man. It's one of the best representations of someone attempting to do you stand up. And it's a really good film. And, you know, but it's not really just about stand up. It's about these people with this. It's about, they're actual human beings. Like these are complicated, real, like not car, caricature-ish, not cartoonish people. Like I get that these are real people. Right, good. Complicated real people that are trying to figure out their relationships in the context of this one guy will earn that is tempting to do stand up. Right. So it was great. I'm glad you say that. So you, because you know, I moved to New York in 97. And then that was my introduction to any comedy world. Other than with my dad, I used to watch Rony Dangerfield, you know, New Year's Eve special. We used to watch it every year. You know, and it was Elaine Boozler and Sam Kennison and Dyson. You know, Elaine Boozler, for that one. I'm pretty sure she was on there. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And I was obsessed with Dyson when I was like an eighth grade. I memorized one of his records, and I would do it in the train stage with all of my friends. Because back then, that's all you did, right? You would memorize stuff. Oh, yeah. There was no video to look at. You know, you wouldn't all sit around. You would just memorize and then, you know, regale your friends with your impersonation of them. And then, and Richard Pryor was my hero, hero growing up. That was my idol. So I had this thing with Stan of Comedy. Then I moved to New York and I'm all of a sudden immersed with these clubs and upright systems were gated just starred. I did this movie, What How to American Summer. And there was all these people. I didn't even know about the state from that show on MTV. There was a song. Yeah, all this. And so I just, you know, little by little, immersed myself into that world. And I just became fascinated with the culture. And then Zach Alifanakis, who I met like in 2001, way before hangover, I used to go and watch him do stuff. And I just love the culture. And when Will was telling me about this, I was like, oh, let's set it in New York and the seller. Because I just love the geography of the seller, too, that you go in the olive tree and you walk down in this place. This is whole other world. And it just felt like, yeah, I really went like, can I, can we pull this off where it's authentic? Where you were watching it at home and you get a sense of the fact that you're saying that you feel like it got it within the striking distance makes me really happy. Yeah, it's striking distance. It's like one of the only films, or like punchline was an interesting film, the Tom Hanks, Sally Fields. Yeah, of course. But it was bullshit. Like you watch it like, well, they have lockers. Look at the fuck is this? Like, and also the comedy wasn't good. It wasn't real comedy. It was like it felt flat and fake and people were laughing at nothing. The will stuff felt real. Yeah. It felt real. The clubs felt with a guy trying to work out what it's like to be on stage and open mic. And then the fact you got Jordan Jensen in who I love, she was fucking correct. I texted her afterwards, like, she killed the movie. She's great. Yeah, she's so bad. She started shooting her and I was like, oh, wait a second. Yeah. It was like, and the first thing I had shot where there was one of her sets, and I was just up there with the camera and I came around and her profile. And actually, I felt like I was in the stars more. And she looked a lot like Gaga and Ali, like singing shallow. Oh, wow. I liked this weird moment. I was like, whoa. And then she was just incredible. And then as it went on, she had a larger part of the movie. And then that whole thing when they're talking about the small penis. And we go up to her and just her writing that down. And she was just so fluid. And I was like, oh, yeah, she's got it, man. She's got it. She's great. She's really great. She's a really unique person. Like a very unusual person. Like even just talking to her. Oh, yeah. We're going to farm with two moms. And yeah, amazing. Yeah. She could do anything. I know. And she's so fun. She's fun on stage, too. Like she's great. Like very smart. Very smart. Very smart. But like her character, like the way she interact, I'm like, well, that's so realistic. Like we should fuck. Like exactly. Yeah. Exactly. And then you go back to the like East Village and Chinatown apartment. You know, they live in a one room. Yeah. I believe it. Yeah. It was great. It's like, you know, you're never going to really capture stand up in a movie because it's like to capture what it is, you would need like years. And also you would need a movie dedicated to it. Exactly. The movie's not dedicated to it. Exactly. I mean, it was just about can I can I make you feel like you're there what that you're with him on stage? Yes. That was that could be like, you know, the silence and then the camera's boom. There's nowhere to go. How did you work out the stand up scenes? Did you have real audiences? And then they just real audiences because you have to hit the quota of extras with SAG and all that. But we we try to do it as authentic as possible, which was everybody that works at the seller. They're there in the movie. Everybody who agreed to do it. So all the waiters and everything, the staff, that's all people that work there. Liz, who's the manager who plays the manager, she's the manager of the seller. So all those people are real. But then the patrons we, I can't remember what the email was or what the the the the ask was, but like people who like to go to stand up comedy, who go who go regularly. And then once they were there, I never told them what was going to happen. I never directed them once. It was like whatever the they're laughing at, that's it. And I don't do many takes. So you're getting an authentic reaction. Now it's hyped up because there's cameras there and it's a movie, but they're not told what to do. It feels like that. And so and even in the mix, like we never added anything. There was no added laugh, nothing. Oh, that's great. Yeah, yeah. It's all because I was like, it's got to be real because I want to will to just you know, I just don't want to act. Right. And that's why you know, you Shane Gillis was kind of the first time he was here at the mothership, Shane gave him four minutes of a set and he and I and Will and I flew to Austin and we're sitting in the green room and Shane was like an hour and a half late and Tony was there and that he was so nice. I never met Tony before. And that's where I smelled the thing. You know, I did this. Oh, it's really awesome. It was fun. It's just no joke. Yeah. And and that was the first time we'll ever went up and we were just trying some of them, material and went up as Alex Novak, because I was like, when do you have an opportunity as an actor to actually do the thing you're preparing to do? Like you right and like think about how much that would cost. Like you can go into a room with those real people. Right. It's all and then every step that you're taking your in a club. So he did that. And then when we back went back to New York, he did like three times a week, four or five times a night for like six weeks. Just so he could understand what it's like. And some people didn't know who he was. You know, you get a lot of tourists come into New York City. And there were nights where you knew that he when he said Alex Novak, they're like, cool. Right. Not like you're not Alex Novak. Right. You know, okay. Let's see what you got. And so that was really that was really great. How did you who wrote this film? He wrote it with this guy, Mark Chappell. It was it was a movie that was more about his based on this guy, John Bishop, who's a real comedian. It was a very successful comedian in the UK. And he will met that guy on a barge somewhere. And he was at how talking about his story. And he was like, yeah, I was doing something else. My wife and I were breaking up and I walked into a bar a pub one night. I didn't want to pay the cover. That really happened to this guy. So he put his name down and they called him. And then he was like, yeah, I'm getting a divorce and got a couple chuckles. But he just loved it. Never done comedy. Nothing before that. And he kept going back. And he like was obsessed by it. And then like weeks later, his wife, strange wife walked into a place he was doing an open mic at with her girlfriends. And he was doing a set about their relationship. So that actually happened. I know. And then they got back together and they're still together. And then now he like he tours around the world. Like he makes a living as a comedian. That's incredible. Yeah. So when he was telling me that I was doing another movie. And I remember I was like, what are you working on? Because we've been friends for like 25 years. And he was telling me that. And I was like, I just imagine Will because I know him so well. And he's so charismatic and funny and just has this presence that that is kind of lacking. I don't feel like there's like a male archetype now that fits him. He's like, he's like Robert Mitchum. He reminds me like a young Robert Mitchum will earn that. And he's telling me that I'm like his voice and like that face stand up. And I was like, I just couldn't get out of my head Joe. And I was like, hey, man, can I read it? Like how far along are you guys? And I read it. And I was like, I didn't quite because of like you, I'd never seen a movie that I thought nailed it. And I love stand up comedy so much. I was like, and I have no desire to try to redo it. And also comedy is so massive right now. And the specials are so great and cinematic right now that there's no reason to try to make a fictional movie about something that we can watch as a documentary or a docuseries or a show that is authentic. I was like, so, but I still would really love to capture it cinematically. So what if it's a foil and the movies about the two of them? That's interesting. Yes. And you suck. That was a great scene to a Jordan was like, yeah, you're bad. You're really bad. And it's much more about just what what stand up comedy would anything. And you talk about this on your show doing anything that puts you out of your comfort zone. Yeah. Anything that pushes you, you're gonna you're gonna improve as a human being. That was really what that that whole thing is about. And I just love the culture and the world. And I thought there's so much tangible stuff there for me to get excited about cinematically and story wise. But really it's like it could have been anything. Yeah. Just something that he'd never done that had he put some self out there and that in doing it and doing it, he just sort of gets more comfortable. And then the mic comes off the stand and then he's leaning against the wall. And by the end of it. And then the way it was structured, it allows him to do that vampire set at the end of the movie where all he's doing is exercising what he's feeling emotionally because he's comfortable in this setting. Yeah. Because the old him when he has that fight with her in the attic, he just would have kept that all inside. And he would have been kind of tonic at his kids assembly where we meet him in the beginning of the movie because you just don't know what to do with all that. But if you have an outlet, something expressive. Yeah. You can you can exercise it in a healthy way. Yeah. So that that's that's that really was the point of that whole part of it being stand up comedy and open mic. What you really nailed is someone trying it for the first time. You guys really nailed that. You really nailed a beginner in comedy. Like it seemed completely realistic. Great. Great. Yeah. And like I think that's one of the reasons why kill Tony is so popular. Yes. You know, because you get to see, you can't that that raw reality of someone who has never done stand up before, like there was people that went up at Madison Square Garden in front of 16,000 people that had never done stand up before. You can do it. No, no, that's don't do that. Yeah. You should be in a fucking smoking room. Well, that's real, Katie Moore, but a tiny fucking room where this interested people where everyone's bombing and you bomb to it, it's not that big a deal. Because you might have some potential. But if you fucking bomb in front of 16,000 people, the pain of that, you may never recover. Also, just think about the odd, like, because you're going to hear your voice through the, you know, echoing. Right. It's can't be just in it. Like, so there, I imagine there's an echo. So you're not only bombing, but you're hearing it reverberate. You don't really feel that. Oh, you don't hear the echo because you have monitors on stage. So it's pretty, pretty flat. Okay. But that noise of your voice where you've never heard your voice in a microphone before, right? And now you're in front of 16,000 people doing it. And then Tony's sitting there looking at you with chains there and I'm there. It's like a nightmare. It's like you're, you're walking into a nightmare. Well, what just doing stand up in front of like a guy like Shane Gillis is crazy. Crazy sitting right next to you. You've never done stand up. You're going to do stand up right next to a guy who's selling out arenas. Like that's nuts. Yeah. That feeling is nuts. But it's wonderful to watch is you're watching authentic reactions happening in real time. Yes. Okay. If your New Year's resolution was change everything and be a new person. Good luck. So instead of pretending you're going to meal prep, kale forever or do morning cold plunges. Here's one actually realistic thing, AG one. AG one is a daily health drink that supports your energy, gut health, immune health and helps fill common nutrient gaps, just one scoop and cold water each morning and you're off. It's got over 75 vitamins, minerals, probiotics and whole food ingredients in there. So instead of guessing whether you need a probiotic or a prebiotic or sorting through 10 different bottles of pills and powders, you can just do one scoop and get on with your day. It's great because it feels like the grown up move, but for once it's actually really easy. It takes like 30 seconds and you'll notice the steadiness that sets you up for the day, not wired, not crashing, just functional human being energy. I partnered with AG one for years. And if you want to give it a try head to drink AG one dot com slash Joe Rogan. And for a limited time, you'll get a free AG one duffel bag and free AG one. Welcome kit with your first AG one subscription order. Only while supplies last that's drink AG one dot com slash Joe Rogan or visit the link in the description to get started. It's not processed. It's as clean a mental food as you're going to get. Yeah, it's true. Yeah. It's just that we I think human beings really love seeing what it's like when someone starts out doing something because a lot of people have these ideas like, maybe I could try that or maybe I could learn how to play guitar. Maybe I could do that. But it's just the getting going and sucking at something in the beginning. It's terrifying for people. So when they see someone just try it, I think they're like, look at him. Go, look at him. Go out there doing it. He's on the bike. He's moving. You know, it's like you see actual people that are trying to do something that they've never done before. And it's exciting. And also the one thing I wanted to touch on is the craft of it all, you know, that it's that it takes a lot of work. I know that it's not, you know, just, you know, the writing, you know, when she says that one point, she's like, you got to write, you know, keep going up. And I think most people, at least I didn't know before I started going that people go up three or four times a night. Like I didn't understand. And so that was something I thought it was important to convey. Just the work ethic that's needed. Well, New York is really great for that. And it's always had a culture of that. It's had a culture of guys hopping from club to club and doing set to because there's so many clubs in Manhattan. So guys were just, you know, I think the most guy I ever heard one guy did eight, eight or nine sets a night. Like they're just like, that's how many clubs there are. So you just hop all over the place. You start your night at like 8 p.m. Yeah, down the way. You're down downtown that you're on. Yeah. You go all over the place. It's, um, we've got a lot of that here now. There's just so many clubs in Austin now. I mean, we went there. What you built is incredible. Thank you. This culture is something. You know, I showed the movie to stand up who hadn't done stand up in like 15 years. And he said, the only thing that for sure you got wrong is the culture. I was like, what do you mean? He's like, no, people aren't that nice. And I was like, actually, I think you're wrong. I was like, it's changed. I was like, people are supportive now. It's in where you go. There's places where it's not very supportive. Really. But at least like I used to go to the seller like in early 2000s, didn't feel like it does now. Right. Well, I think Ari Schafir changed that a lot. He brought like the culture of LA to New York. Where you like more supportive of each other. It was always like dog against dog because really what the way it all started out was in the 1990s, it was all about everyone was auditioning for a sitcom. And if you and I were, if I showed up to audition for a sitcom, like, I'll fuck Bradley's here, he's going for the same part. Fuck that guy. You know, it was just it was like, that could change your life. If you got that sitcom, now all of a sudden, you're fucking huge. And I'm still like struggling to pay my rent, eating ramen. And it could have been me. Right. And so there's this like serious resentment that happens in the 1990s because everybody like the golden carrot at the end of the stick was the tonight show or, you know, hosting a late, if you could get your own late night show, oh my God, he made it. He's a host of the tonight show. That was like the thing that only one person could get. And then there was like the sitcom, like if it really worked out, they'd make a sitcom around you to get a development deal. So there was people with psychologically backstab people, people would talk shit people before they went on stage. They would try to hijack their fucking mind. Right. So like really it was dark. Crazy. And then the internet came around. And then the internet, instead of people being your competitors, they became not just your friends and not just your colleagues, but also an asset. Because if you're doing a podcast and you've got your funny friends on, then your podcast is better. Right. And then if you tell people about their podcast and their podcast is better, and then you go on their podcast and that's better. And everybody benefits from everybody else doing well. So it'd be completely reversed the system. And then it became much more about being supportive of each other. And then everybody kind of realized like, hey, it's way more fun when we're all having fun. You know? And since the television thing kind of died off, the sitcom thing kind of died off with reality shows. And then it was really just more about getting clips up on the internet and about getting and then there was Netflix special. So it wasn't just everybody trying to get an HBO special. There was way more specials. And then you could just upload specials to YouTube and became this way more collaborative, supportive environment. And then Ari Schafir took that that we had kind of like established in LA and brought that to New York and a lot of those guys ran with it. Yeah. I mean, that's the way to go. People always say, you know, there's a lot of room at the top. Yeah. There's a lot. There's a lot of room and stand up for sure. You know, and it's like, and everybody has their own lane, even within this big highway. And everybody wants to be with other people who wants to be a lone wolf really for a long period. Yeah. If you have there, they're all a psychologically destroyed. They're just a mess. Yeah. Who doesn't want to have friends? It's crazy. Yeah. I don't get it. But, you know, it's that aspect of the culture I felt like in the movie, you guys nailed, which is a realistic aspect, a realistic portrayal of what it's like, where a bunch of people just they were all busting each other's balls. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You could be supportive and still honest. Yeah. That was the thing. Yeah. There's no lack of honesty or criticism. It's just, it's not done with the hope that you're, for your demise. Yes. That's the difference. Yeah. I think the 90s like poisoned a lot of comedians, it poisoned them because it gave you this idea that the whole thing was about a means to an end. And that end was a sitcom. And everybody thought you just had to get a sitcom, kind of get a sitcom. And that was what everybody was working towards. There's people that were developing their entire act based around a, around a persona that they could sell to the networks. Were you doing stand up before your sitcom? Yes. I see. Okay. So is that how that happened? Did someone see you and then they were like, oh, you got it. You got to try this show? Yeah. I got ridiculously lucky. Like, you know, a lot of people say, oh, I work really hard to get on a sitcom. Nope. No, I got lucky. I did the MTV. I never had any aspirations to act at all. I did MTV half hour comedy hour. I got a development deal and all of a sudden I'm in living in LA and I'm on a sitcom and it happened in a company. Great sitcom. I was on a bad one first. I was on a bad one called hardball. I was a sitcom on Fox where I played a baseball player. That show got canceled. And unfortunately, I thought it was going to go because I was retarded. Those, you know, 25 years old, 26 years old. And I was like, oh, this is going to take off. I should get an apartment. So I had a lease on an apartment and I wanted to be everybody. I'm sure people were telling you that it was going to take off too. Oh, yeah. Of course. Everybody believed it. You're going to win an Emmy. Well, the guys who made it, uh, Jeff Martin and Kevin Curran, they worked on the Simpsons. They worked on married with children. They were really good. Oh, wow. But then the Fox people came in and just ruined it. Like the executives came in and they brought in a bunch of hacks and just ruined the show. Did you have fun doing it? Oh, yeah. I had a kind of good time. But also missed comedy. I missed New York people and I wanted to get out of there. I was like, I got to get back to New York. Fuck this place. As soon as it was over, but there's like, fuck, I got this lease. So I had a lease for a year. And then I got a deal. How long were you in LA at that time? Oh, I was only in LA for a few months. Wow. Yeah. So I moved out there to do the show. Right. I got a lease like almost immediately. And then I was out there for a few months, showed a canceled. And then I got a development deal to do something for NBC. And they were going to do a, my own sitcom. And but as we were developing it, they said, Hey, there's a show that we're doing. It's called news radio. It's already been picked up. We already did the pilot. But we fired one one person from the pilot. And we want you to read for this. And that's how I got on news. Right. That's how it happened. Like that was the only second show I ever audition for ever. Wow. So I had one show that is one on the air and you can't. You had a very unique track. Dumlock. That's nuts. Stumbled into it. 100% I can't take any credit for it. Dumlock. He's amazing. His my ability to keep it together in auditions. Yeah. Not crack with no acting experience at all. But it was just not, it wasn't something that I aspire to. So it didn't have the kind of pressure that it probably had for a lot of people. And I didn't have the same kind of relation too. Right. Like you put, I assume if it was not something you really wanted. It was like it was fun, but you weren't like this is, this is like this feels right. No. What it felt like is, oh, I'm going to get money. Yeah. It's a money. Yeah. Then something's wrong. It's wrong. Like yeah. It's like it's wrong. I was like, this is good. I'm going to get money and I have to worry about money. That's how I thought about it. And then when I was doing it and I was like, wow, I'm so lucky. Like how do I stumble on here with Phil Hart. Man, this is crazy. Dave Foley and Steven Roode raised here and you're like, this is nuts. It was a crazy cause. No, it was Paul Sims. Paul Sims, right. Yeah. Who would just left Larry Sanders show. Right. So he left. Oh, my gosh. Yeah. It was crazy luck. Just stupid dumb luck. That's right. So working to that other show with Jeff Daniels. Yeah. It was, it was a lot of fun. So, but back in those days, like everybody was working towards that. And fortunately, I already had that. So my thing was just like, continue to work on stand up and just work on my stand up. And if this all goes away, I'll just go back to being a comic and doing stand up in LA. Yes. Right. So yeah. And so that was new. That's right. Yeah. And that's why I encountered like the worst backstabbing I've ever seen in my life. So you're coming from New York where you didn't feel that you didn't feel it. It's much. Right. You know, you felt like a lot of shit talking, but that was fun. You know, guys would make fun if you bombed. Right. They were doing it to your face. Yeah. They were doing it to your face. And it was the more like, it was just a more ball busting like silly environment in New York. It wasn't it. No one thought they were going to get famous in New York. You know, they were all just right. Yeah. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But in LA, everybody had this idea to get a sitcom. And then in the 1990s, they started giving out development deals. That was the big thing. You get like a $200,000, $5 million. Everybody had this idea to get a sitcom. And then in the 1990s, they started giving out development deals. That was the big thing. You get like a $200,000, half a million dollar development deal. And then all of a sudden, you have all this money and you're living it. And so everybody was working towards that. So it became, instead of like people working towards just being a stand up, it became stand up was a means to an end. And then all these other people, they were in your way to get that goal. Jesus. And then your agent was telling you that's what you had to do. Right. Because they wanted that money too. Right. So it's all like programming people to go after the system. So completely different culture and the stand up community there. Exactly. But then that all went away. It all went away. Like the idea of working towards a sitcom is not, it's like working towards a career in ham radio. Right. Like, this is fucking blown away. Well, you said it already changed it. How did he do it? Because he brought the LA culture to New York. The LA party moved from LA back to New York. And he, I mean, everybody that I talked to in New York is always like, you guys are doing it wrong. Like, people listen to it. Yeah. Well, because he was established and he was a really good comic. And they were like, okay, he's right. And then we'd come to LA, like a lot of guys like Andrew Schultz and a lot of his other guys, they would come to LA and they were probably everybody's so fucking nice here. And they're all just having a great time. Like why aren't we doing that? Why aren't we just having a great time? And so it shifted. Hmm. It's just, it was the culture of the internet. The internet changed everything because there was no longer this one thing that a hundred guys were trying to audition for. Now it was anybody could just put up something online. And then all your friends became assets. They all became like valuable to you instead of competitors. That's cool. Yeah. Do you go up in these cities ever now? I do. If I'm in LA, I also do sets in LA. I haven't been in a while. Most of the time I'm at my own club. Right. It makes it wait. Also I have teenage kids and there I want to be home. Did you do the seller? Yeah, I did the seller back in the day. But more I did. I did the stand. I did catch when it was there. Right. I did. I always did Danger Fields. Danger Fields was great because it was like hole in the wall. There was hardly anybody there. Is that where he shot his special? Yes. Yeah. It was big in the 80s and then something happened. And by the time I got there in the 90s, it was like fucking dead. One time I went there and I had a spot at like 8 30. And I don't remember what time the show started. But there was a few people on before me. And I got there and the people that were on before me were sitting at the bar. I go, what's going on? There's no crowd. There's no crowd. There's nobody. And so then this couple walked up and they bought tickets for the comedy show. And this guy Bobby, who was the dorm man, like step right up, it was a Scottish guy. I'm owning a half of you. He did. He seats them down. There's no one there. Just them. They sit down. Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to Danger Fields, your first act. And we all did stand up for two fucking people. Yeah. The whole night was two people. And they had a great time. I'm sure. But it was weird. It's like when you're doing stand up for just two people. You're only looking at two people. You also realize how much of your act is bullshit. How much of your act is fucking dance moves. It's just nonsense, like English on the cue ball. It's like you're doing a lot of silly things that like don't even, and you're not connecting with real humans. Right. And when there's two people there, it like cuts the fat out of the hole of your shit. And you recognize where the flaws and you're writing are and the flaws and you're delivery. But Danger Fields was, it was a wild little place. It was like a classic comedy club that didn't have any, no industry went there, no agents, no managers went there. Oh, it was just like a bunch of weird degenerates. And it was fun. Wow. That was fun place. So I did that club a lot. But a lot of, I did the road a lot. Yeah. Because that was how I could make money. And I could headline, like I do a hour. Because if you're in the city, you're doing 15 minutes sets or 10 minutes sets. That's great. But it's hard to piece together an hour at a 10 minute set. Because you kind of want to let the material breathe and put it all together. Of course. And to one big thing. And you really can work on that a lot more if you're actually headlining. Do you watch a lot of specials, comedy specials nowadays? I don't. I watch a lot of comics, like when I see the club. Right. But not like, no, I probably should. I probably should watch more of them. But really comedy is, it's like an artistic form of hypnosis. And the real way to see comedy is to be their life. Right. Because you're like, and you know when the person's locked in and you know when they're not, you feel it. They got you like they're thinking for you. Yeah. Like if I'm watching a tell and he's at like the mothership and he's killing. Like we're all like this. We're like locked into his brain and we're letting him like take us on a ride. Yeah, of course. Like a kind of a form of hypnosis. Yes. And I really think that a stand up special as good as they are. You're maybe getting 60 to 70% of the experience of actually being there. That's why I enjoy watching you to see how different people make them. Because there's all different types. Yeah. You know, some are heavily edited which always brings me out if there's a way to keep it so you feel like you're in the room. Right. You know, I remember it was Mr. Tamperine Manor, the Chris Rock special where when he changed the tone of it and he started talking about the Jurgenoff to porn and how he became a dick's to porn. And it was that great filmmaker who who's a comedian who does music. He did that thing during COVID when he was in his house. Well, I think he directed it. Oh, and the camera just keeps going on keeps going on by the time you don't even realize it because you're hypnotized. You're right here on Chris Rock. And I think probably subconsciously just thinking about it now. That's probably one of the things because that's kind of the frame I use the whole time on Alex. Yeah. But I remember watching that going like, when the fuck did this become a close up? You know, but that's what that's what it was happening. So there was a synergy between the camera and what he was doing in the place. But this made me feel like cinematically I was there and this is what he was doing hypnotizing me. Right. And then the opposite of that was the special that Chris Rock did where he changed clothes. Mm. So he was doing a special where he filmed part of it in one place and another part of it in another place and he spliced the two of them together with different outfits. So you would have him begin a bit with one outfit on and then end the bit with a different outfit. And you're like, what are you? Who's idea was this? Yeah. Because the minute you cut and edit in any way, you know, even podcast audio wise, that's the thing I've learned. You know, some people, you know, they edit the audio of a podcast and you're like, that's not someone didn't take a breath before they answered. Oh, like cutting out. Yeah. Yeah. It's a whole other rhythm. It's the YouTube thing, right? The YouTube for a long time was doing this things where they would cut out all the pauses in between people talking things and it became like a style of editing. Right. Or it's like shocking. But the idea is like it's impossible for me to get in. Right. It's just impossible. But it's the short attention span concept. Right. You're just saying people are so fucking stupid, you can't give many breaks. You can't give many breaths, you got to keep talking, keep talking, keep talking, keep talking. And then did you do the little little little little. Yeah. It's like, it's like, it's like this wash and yeah. Yeah. Just trying to keep you engaged as much as possible by editing instead of by having actually interesting content. Compelling content. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But it's an interesting exercise. Yeah. It's, it's, it's, I enjoy watch. Like I think Josh Safti did Sandler's one and he, and he did all this backstage and he walked up and then he was in many locations, but he was playing music a lot. Yeah. I just like watching everybody's different, you know, sort of exploration of different stand up shows because it's such a huge viable market. So people, you know, it's fun to watch how they do it. I think that's probably why because I watched so many of them. I wanted to do it in a way in a movie. Have you done Sandler, but oh never never never. No. Have you thought about it? No. When you were doing the film, did you think about it? No. No. No. And I don't know why Joe. Yeah. It's not like one of those things that I feel compelled to do, but would it be fun? Would I be scared all those things? Will I try and open Mike one night? Yeah, I probably should, but it's not, I didn't feel compelled to do it. No. The problem would be if you did it and it went okay, but you're like, I think I could do better and then, and then you're gone. You know me? I know everybody. It's kind of the same thing with all of us. Of course, dude, there's always a party. Yeah, I think you do better. Yeah. Then next thing you know, like I got to leave, I got to go do a set. Right. What the fuck are you going like? Is that I have any dinner? No. It's like all artistic pursuits, they can become an obsession and they become an addiction and they become a part of you. And then it's like your brain naturally goes towards that pathway of thinking about that thing all day. Yeah. Which I love. Oh, it's great if it's a fun thing. I remember being 11 and watching the elephant man and knowing at that moment. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's kind of like this knowing at that moment that like, oh, this is what I want to do for the rest of my life. When you saw the elephant man? Yeah. Really? Yeah, I remember. I mean, I don't know. I mean, I thought about it a lot, obviously. David Lynch directed it. I remember the scene Anthony Hoping. I would love to film. So I always love film. My dad loved film. But it wasn't like a conscious thing where I was like, this is it. And I remember, you know, in my living room, it's on the TV. I saw all the movies on the TV, you know, I never saw Apocalypse Now in a movie theater, Godfather or anything loneliness, the longest it's runner. You know, none of it was all on the television. And but I was watching the elephant man. It was on HBO. It came through Philadelphia where I lived Comcast and they would show like it all the time. And it was Anthony Hoping's coming in and he's seeing Joseph Merrick. The elephant man for the first time and the way David Lynch shot it, you only see his shadow. And then Hoping starts crying. And I don't know. I was just like, I was there in that cellar with him. And I was like, I forgot I was in the living room. And then the whole movie was like that. And it came out. I was like, I just want I want that. So was that like the first C that was planted? Yeah, that was it. It was the first and only it was I was 11. It was like, it was like, bam. It was like a shot. Yeah, it's right. It's right at this. This is it. I look how young Anthony Hoping looks. Yeah, he was a pro. Stand up. Stand up. Turn around. Wow. Wow. That was it. Was like watching that now, like thinking that that I wanted to see changed your whole life. I'm like, well, first I thought wasn't in a shadow, but that was before. And then I'm like, oh yeah. And then yeah, then I was just in it. Then all of a sudden I was there. Then I was like, is Joe in it? Does he know what I'm talking about? And then I was, and then as my brain started going, the movie kept bringing me in it. And then by the end, by that push, and I was like, I'm just watching this guy look at this thing for the first time. And then fuck, look at this beast Anthony Hopens. I wonder what he was looking at when he was crying. I know. Yeah, because you feel pulled out out of your eyeballs. And I wrote, so I went to grad school, moved to New York, wrote him a letter because our dean said somehow he knew him or he had, the school I went to then I only got into because they let anybody in. They did that show inside the actor studio. Do you remember that on TV? Yeah, I remember that show. So Arthesis was the show. There was like our, there was a class, but it was a class like technically a class. And so all these incredible people would come on and Anthony Hopens was there. And I was there for that. And then I wrote him a letter just telling him and I asked James Lipton, that was his name, the dean. Yeah. And then never, I never heard from ever. And then, you know, and now I know him, dude. You know how weird. It's crazy. So weird, right? I never get over that. Me neither. Me neither. Me neither. Ever. And there's some guys, I don't know if you feel this way too, but like there's some guys, like then they become your friends, but still I still feel a little bit of like extra energy when I'm around them. Like it'll never go away. Right. And it's crazy. For me, one of the big ones was Tarantino. Like, oh, hang out with Tarantino. No, it's so odd. Going to dinner with him. Yeah, it's crazy. hanging out with him here, him coming to the club, he come hang out in the green room. It's nuts. It's just weird. It's like that's Quentin Tarantino. Yeah. That's great. Yeah. And it never goes away as close as you get and even when your brain's off. Right. Because that's always the lipiness is my brain off when I'm with the person. Right. That's like when like, okay. Right. And even like Clint Eastwood who I did American sniper with. I mean, it was always Clint Eastwood. And I got to point where my brain was off, you know, but still I'm just like, what? If my dad was alive, if my dad was fine, he would flip the fuck out. What was like doing that scene with the fake baby? Oh, is that right? So funny. I was just talking about that two days ago, dude. And you know, I've come full circle. Yeah. I actually think it's dope. Really? I mean, it's fucking dope. Why? I just like, wow, look at these people fully invested. And it's a doll. And it's like a scene where you like kind of like move it down. Yeah. I could tell you the whole thing, dude. So we had three sets of twins. And Clint likes to shoot fast, which I loved and love. And they were crying and they weren't ready. And he was like, you know what, let's just, let's put the doll in. And I was like, okay. And I was like, all right. And I had the doll. And I remember it. And I made a joke on set. And I was like, I was like, I'll just save your 35 grand. Because I moved his, his, his hand with my thumb. Yeah. You know, like I say visual effects like 50 grand. Like made a joke about it. And then we got to post and we were in Vancouver at the, doing the meeting. But you know, everybody defers to the boss. I still remember being in a room. And I'm like a theater. We're watching. And they're like, okay, Clint, so we did this. And you know, the tank has dirt on it. And you know, whatever visual effects they had done. We get to the baby. And I go, okay, Clint, this is the scene. And it ends. And I'm literally behind Clint. I just see the back of his head and I'm waiting for everybody to raise their hand. Like we got to spend more money as an amazing big big big real. And I think they kind of like two fingers too. Like they weren't even, it was like an A.A. Yeah, that's it. Yeah, that's me. I'm doing that. That's it. But dude, it's kind of dope. I love it now. I'm a couple of circles. So, so I raised my hand. And I was like, Clint, I just think that it's clear, you know, that that's not a baby. And what would do we, can we at least just find out what the cost would be? And no one said anything. And then I remember he was like, I think we move on. Wow. And that was it, dude. And I was like, okay, okay. And I remember talking to the other producer. I was like, this is going to come back. I was like, bro, this is going to come back to haunt us. And I remember you said, no, Brad, you're too close to the movie. I was like, I don't think so, dude. No, everybody's like, it's moving his thumb. This is crazy. That's a rubber baby. It's crazy, dude. There's another one too. And like, yeah, yeah, yeah, it's crazy. What is it like doing a film like that where you're playing an actual human being? Is that, is that different than like a written character that has no physical body that you can kind of become who you think the words represent? Yeah. But when you're playing a guy like Chris Kyle, you're playing a human and you're trying to figure out a way to make it as realistic as possible, but you're acting like, what is that like? I mean, the thing that just popped my head is the pressure is, it's like night and day because there are people that you have to serve. Now especially with Chris Kyle, we started making that movie. He was alive. He got killed while he was still negotiating with Warner Bros. I think we just closed his deal and then he was murdered on February 2nd, I believe. And it was just like, and then, but in fact, we were like, now we really got to make this movie. And then Clinton, I flew to middle of the Texas and met with his family and his widow and his parents and then the kids. I played, I did the alpha man. I did as a play in my thesis in grad school and then I did it in Williamstown and I actually did it in New York and London. So, and that, and even though it's a long time ago, that was the first time I felt that responsibility because I actually love that guy, Joseph Merrick. And I did, and I felt that responsibility to him. So I had done something like that before. But this was the first, this was the next time. It was massive Joe. But I think that that, it's like you're always looking for what's the fuel that's going to allow me to work as hard as I can. And the fuel when you're playing a real person is like, there's like four extra canisters or like, that's a firepower for you to work hard. Because you're just, you know, you're looking across the eyes of somebody saying, I'm going to serve your son or your husband or your father. It's a major response. Not even more major because he's now he's deceased. Yeah. It was mind blowing. But it terrified me. And also like, I'm 185 pounds at that point from Northeast Philadelphia. This guy's from mid-lothian, Texas, SEAL team three. You know, it's like how, and the way Clint works, the way we did work, you know, Kevin Lace, who was a SEAL team three with Chris was in the movie, played Dauber, Jacob Shikka was one tribe, which is what I'm wearing. He was a Marine that did you ever see American sniper? Yes. There's that scene where he goes to the hospital and there's all the guys that have been wounded, Jacob Shikka is one of them. You know, this is real guys. It's all real. So I step in, you know, I've got to, I'm going to die unless I believe I'm Chris. Right. Like, so I have to do whatever I can so that I believe I'm Chris. If I believe I'm Chris, then I have a shot at everybody else potentially going along with this illusion. I just have to, I have to be absolutely fearless when I walked on set. So I just, it just made me work so hard that I had never worked hard that if it's a created character, you know, it's different. But it comes with a different set of challenges, you know, it depends, it just depends on what it is. But I do know and then with Leonard Bernstein, I do the same thing, huge responsibility, like massive that I felt to his kids, to people that loved him. But mainly it's kids. All three of his fun has passed away since it, but his three kids are like, okay, you know, they're like handing you, you know, it's like if someone went to your daughter in 12 years and said, here's this movie about your father, do you know what I mean? Yeah. You know, and this guy's sitting across and be like, okay, I'm going to play your father. That's just a whole other thing because the truth is like if it's good, it's going to last a long time. And it's going to be a thing that marks their journey. So I'm a part of whatever little part of Chris's journey. So you give somebody the faith that whoever has the power to give to that artist is just, you know, so it just made me work, you know, like you just, you just don't stop working to get to the point where you believe you're him or you believe that he's a part of you, something's working. Did you meet Chris Kyle? Never. Just talked about the phone once. Wow. Yeah. So what did you, like what did you train? Oh, yeah. What did you do to try to like? Yeah. Well, here's interesting. Well, I couldn't do anything that would ever achieve what he achieved. But it's like, what can I do to look like a master? Right. So there's three weapons, three, three, three, the pool, the 50 Cal, the rifle. It's like, what can I do? How much time do I have? I think I'd like six months. Also luckily we're the same shoes size, same age. He is a whole new year I do. He find things that like, you know, same height. I was like, oh, this is great. And then I just like, but he's 200, 38 pounds. So the first thing was 6,000 calories a day, found a trainer and 6,000? Yes, 6,000 calories. How did you force? First I did it with real food. And that was a big mistake. Because I couldn't get up. I remember the first week I did it had an incredible chef. And then I couldn't get up. Like I couldn't move my stomach. But then we, I think we split like half of it into protein shakes. But it was still 6,000 calories. When you say you couldn't get up like what you mean? You might, wasn't able to process that much food. Yeah, whatever, whatever happened. Because it's getting blocked, getting blocked. Like major pain. Like I was giving birth or something, what I would imagine. So then we change it and it would be like huge meal shake, huge meal shake. Worked out twice a day, fight at three rest days, no cardio. It goes all about strength training. And it was all focused around deadlifting. Okay. And it was guy Jason Walsh who I worked with. And I did that yet. So it would be like Monday, Monday, 5.30 am. And then a 4.30 pm or like 3.30, Monday, Tuesday, rest Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, rest Saturday, Sunday. And did that. And I got up to 238 pounds. And a lot of it was like, because I was thinking about him, his neck. So I came like, I would do all these, all the next stuff. And it was his shoulders. We wanted to see you could shoot over and it's like, you know, which we did all the time in the movie where the guys just, you know, Chris. Yeah. And if I'll play offs, let's go. Draft King Sportsbook and official sports betting partner of the NFL makes every moment feel bigger, a running back cuts through the line, a strip sack flips the field, a tight end hauls in the kind of touchdown grab you'll talk about for years. Post season games shift fast and with Draft King's live betting options, you can stay right in the moment. Fast Draft Kings has your back with early exit protection. If the player in your eligible NFL prop bet goes down at any point in the first half, you still get paid in cash. New customers bet just five dollars. And if the bet wins, you get 300 in bonus bets instantly. Draft King Sportsbook every drive, every play, every moment, download the Draft King Sportsbook app now and use the code, Rogan. It's code Rogan to turn five bucks into 300 in bonus bets if your bet wins in partnership with Draft Kings. The crown is yours gambling problem called one 800 gambler in New York called 877 8 Open wire text. Hope in Y 4 6 7 3 6 9 in Connecticut called 8 8 8 7 8 9 7 7 7 or visit ccpg.org on behalf of Budhill Casino when resorting Kansas passed through a per-way dirt tax may apply in Illinois 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction void in Ontario restrictions apply. That must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven days. Cinnamon odds required for additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio limited time offer. How much weight did you gain? I went from 185 to 238 and all naturally because I can'ters in my family. I've had skin cancer and like I'm terrified of anything. So I was like not going to do that. So you know, did create a teenager thing? To create a teen. Yeah, which by the way, I just started again like three months ago. Oh, it's amazing. Dude, I'm on this push up thread with a bunch of dads at my school and we do 100 pushups a day. And if we don't, you have to pay $10 into a pool and then when we get to 800, we go to Chinatown and I'll have a meal with the money. And then I started taking create team like two and a half months ago. And we just up to the 150. I was like, this is because I could only do and we like YouTube the perfect pushup, which I didn't know, which is like a whole other world. And then now it's, I mean, creating is incredible. It's incredible for your brain. I know. I've heard you say that. Like I can't tell that because I also take zins all the time. So it's like, I don't know what's doing it. Yeah, me too. But, but yeah, where was it on the crisp thing? You're talking about gaining weight. Oh, yeah. So then it works with 38. And I worked with the guy who, so I was doing that in conjunction with learning about sniping and working with Kevin Laces guide Dawber. We go up to the Disney ranch and work with like 600 yard head targets prone that I would just do all the time. And then once we cast the rest of the team, we did all this stuff. But really Kevin Laces guide Dawber was the guy because he was there. And he was there through the whole shooting. Just so everything would be real. And we just drilled it. We became a group. Like, you know, we did the work. But it wasn't so much about like, I was like, I have this amount of time doing like seal boot camp will do nothing for me. Like that, that'll just give me the brain like how hard this is and will I be broken? I've done us not that I couldn't have not maybe I would have been broken. But I felt like I do understand that. Like I've been through certain things where like I understand what it's like to push myself to be on my breaking point. And what that looks like and feels like what I don't know is when I'm looking at a target. And I have to factor in the, you know, the curve of the earth. You know, like that's the stuff I want to learn. Yeah. So that's where I focus was those three weapons, you know, live rounds gaining the weight. I felt like I was with you. Here we go. We're back. Um, that's like all of a sudden you're like, oh, you didn't take the drug. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, you know, I'm not on it. And then, and then so was those two things in conjunction? The curve of the earth is nuts. Yeah. I think about that. Long distance. In fact, the back guy stayed up 24 hours with P in there. You know, never get up to P just P right there, right in the room. You know, I mean, I said no. And then by the way, it's a human being. I mean, it's just, yeah, forget it. Um, and then just working with this guy, Tim Monica and like his voice, to me, it's all, the voice is everything. It's all about the voice and like where he's from and Chris was interesting because his accent started to change, you know, because he once he got out and then he did that, um, he did a couple of shows, you know, he wrote that book, which is how I came across and then gave it to Clint. Um, so he did an interesting accent that kind of changed a little bit. But yeah, just the voice of just hitting the voice. I would work this guy five days a week, you know, and I had tons of stuff. I had so much information that Taya Kyle had been so generous to give me so many home videos, you know, correspondence, you know, I used to work out to his, which I just did the other day. It's so funny. We're talking about this. I literally just did it two days ago, um, worked out to his playlist. I had both of his workout playlists. Oh, wow. And I, and I blew up two huge posters and one was him just like this and with his gun. And I would do that and look at him every morning. It was just like this beautiful ritual that I felt like I was with him every day. How long did you take to prepare? I'd have to look back. I think I did it fast, but I think we had about six months or five months, but like, you know, full on that's it, nothing else. I didn't have a kid back then. It was like that was it. Yeah. Yeah. That's there's there's something very unique about someone doing a film about an actual person. Yeah. Like a great actor doing like denier when he played Jake Lamata, raging bull. Of course. Like that, that was one of the first one. I mean, he became a different person. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You have to, you have to, there's like emerging of you and that, whatever that idea or the soul, whatever of the person, it sounds so hokey. You know, I get it. But if you asked me what my memory is of of making a sniper, like memory, like on in scenes, it's not that like, I've been in a bit of a bit of a bit of a bit of a I was acting. It's just, that's not my memory. What is the memory? Of like, okay, now we're going to do this and it's like me as him doing it. Wow. You know, that's that's that's that's a mind fuck when you stop when like the move. Well, the good thing is you do a clan who takes the piss out of fucking everything. I think so. Yes, we would go to dinner at night. And, and I learned from Christian Bale and American hustle, like he just stayed in, because I didn't understand this. Stay in the character all the time. You know, you hear these stories, but you don't know what the real is like, how does that work? You see a cell phone? Do you like lose your mind? Like, how do you, what is it? How do you do it? And B. It's like all I over thought it. Bail will just stay. He was played this character this from New York in American hustle. And I go in there the first damn, met him. He was his accent and the rest of the movie, even like on weekends, it was, it was him, Christian. And I could, we would talk about stuff in his kid, but he would just speak in that voice. And I was like, oh, it's that simple. It's not some big thing. Once you get the voice, that is weird. But I took it, I mean, and it's wonderful. Because then you feel like you're not acting and you're in the voice. And I do it all, like, it's. Like it's not some big thing. Like once you get the voice, that is weird. You know, but I took it, I mean, and it's wonderful. Because then you feel like you're not acting and you're in the voice. And I do it all, like so, so I would be in that voice of Chris for the whole movie and then we would go to like a restaurant when we were like up in Lancaster shooting or something and Clint would then make fun of me and my accent as Chris and Order of Steak and it was just, it was great. He's fucking sabotaging your performance. He's making yourself conscious. That's crazy. That's crazy. I always wondered what it's like to be around someone who's like method or what it's like. But I don't know. I wouldn't, you know, method is also a term that, you know, what does it mean? Well, the method, what would have, it started in Russia, right? And then, you know, that book on acting that I should know, you know, what's his name? He came and then the group theater started and it was like, you know, and all these people then disband and there's Harry Meisner and there's, yeah, Stan Slofsky, exactly. There was this other guy, Doc Tango, that also talked about that everywhere, it's very interesting. And I read all this in grad school and then the group theater came in and then, Eli Kazan was a huge part of it becoming popular because you had this guy that was sweeping floors of the actor studio and then started directing plays and then all of a sudden he said huge movie director and he's putting Marlon Brando who was part of the actor studio starring in his movies, you know, and he's doing it. And so it all just sort of erupted. But it then it branched out. And so there's people that are dogmatic about it about it's only using your, you know, your substituting. So if I'm doing a scene with you, like you aren't you, you're my brother, you know, but it's evolved into it's like what works for you. To me it's like you use your own experience plus your imagination. You know, but that's the sort, that's the, you know, sort of a very layman's 52nd, you know, telling of what the origin of the method is. But I went to the actor studio which is based in the method. That's where I went to grad school. Is it, it's very valuable because I didn't know shit before that. I mean, I did a couple of plays at Georgetown. I didn't know any. I mean, I just loved acting, but I didn't do anything about it. I was terrified as a kid. Like we did this thing in high school where we had to, as seniors, we would put on our show where we would make fun of our teachers. And I like, I could do my Latin teacher, Mr. Burke. I was like, and I actually sang in it. We sang it. And I was like, but I was terrified Joe for the whole year at sleepless nights for a year leading up to it. That's how scared I was in public. I remember doing like a fifth grade presentation with the poster boards about lock-in-hobs and the poster shaking so hard because I was, because I was so nervous. I was like, how am I going to, what's this fear thing? Isn't that weird? I know. But then in college I did a couple of plays, but I still didn't know what I was doing, but I loved it. And I was like little stuff. I was like, as long as the server and dangerous liaisons. But I still remember like, I closed the door in a rhythm, rhythmic way and people laughed. And I remember I was like, ooh. Oh, this feels good. And then so I applied to grad school there. And then all of a sudden there was like, I got a huge foundation of like, what I could do, you know, that your insecurities are actually your attributes, your fears or stuff that, you know, all this thing that you're a sensitive kid, this is all good stuff. And I never felt that way before about any of that night. This teacher Elizabeth Camp, who was incredible, who then passed away in my house years later. She got sick. Yes, crazy. Pass away in your house. Yeah. And Venice, California, she was sick. So we put her hospice there. But she was incredible. And she did this basic technique class. And it was the first time ever. Because I didn't, you know, grow up therapy. And none of that was even, you know, in the vicinity of talking about your feelings. You know, I love my dad, but I grew up in, you know, the 80s in Northeast Philadelphia with the Irish Italian upbringing that wasn't part of the deal. And then all of a sudden, in grad school with other guys and women. And we were like laying down. And she wants us to go through an experience of loss and betrayal. And we were children. And it's like, what the fuck? And actually I could take all that stuff I'd been ashamed of. And I could use it and bring it into art. I don't know. Really clicked with me in a huge way. So and I use it even to this day. All the movies I do. I always get the actors together and do like a workshop for a week that's based on dreams that she also taught me. And I just find it invaluable. Any way you can just, how can I just get to a place where we're just talking to each other. And I don't, you know, what could, and then all this stuff I feel it's okay. Right. Right. Yeah. Well, you're doing a guy like Chris. It must also be kind of easier to keep the accent than to try to reestablish it right before we see you. You just said it. It's a logical thing. Yeah. That's it. It's a logical thing. The idea of me talking with an accent or even thinking that it's an accent. Because you don't think about it anymore. The whole point is I'm not doing it. If I'm doing a scene with you and I'm thinking about how I'm talking, it's over. It's a wrap. It's not real. Right. But if I'm just talking to you and it happens to be the voice that I've been working on for however long time, then we're in it. We got a shot. Yeah. And if I'm stopping it, there's no way I'm not thinking about it. Yeah. So yes, Joe, that is the reason. You know what's a really underappreciated talent is voice actors who do audio books. I was watching a video of this guy because I never knew how they did it. And I kind of assumed that whenever they had a change accent, they probably had a pause where they were. But there's a video of a guy doing the voiceover for Lord of the Rings. The Lord of the Rings audio book. And he goes into Smiggle, he goes into the Golem character while he's doing narration. There's no break. He just smoothly transitions into snoot. It's great. It's fucking incredible. And it's nuts. And it is absolutely masterful and completely underappreciated. Yeah, I agree with you. Because if you watch this guy do it, I don't know the gentleman's name who's the voiceover actor. But I love audio books. That guy. Listen to this guy. Oh, it's Andy's circle. Yeah, holding a debate with some other thought that used the same voice but made it squeak and his. A pale light and a green light alternated in his eyes as he spoke. Behind. Plemmiest. Set the first thought. Yes. Yes. Came the answer. Amazing. Fucking amazing. Like that. What a master. And you're talking about a master actor. Yes. Yeah, you know, because he's been in a lot of movies. He's directed. He directed that great movie that was like Jungle Book, a version of Jungle Book, the Christian Bale actually played the Panther I believe. He's incredible. And I got to meet him. He's like this guy's like a one off generational talent. Yeah, he's insane. He have to be. To be that good voiceover. Yeah, and he's just a great actor. Yeah, you have to be. Yeah. I agree. And my mother watches this show kill me that I'm saying. My mother watches. First of all, she loves Turkish soap opera. So she watches her. Turkish soap opera. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Why them specifically? I don't know. She just graduated from Hallmark into Turkish soap opera. And she's a model. And then she's evolved even further. She just watches a screen where there's two people AI images. And it's just a person telling a story. And I often I'll come down making breakfast because when she stays in New York, she has the room down there. And I'll be like making my daughter breakfast. And I could hear it. And I could go to the bathroom, which is right next to her. And I was like, well, these guys, these boys, I mean, because the guy is carrying it all. It's just an image. And she'll watch for hours. And I'm like, what's going to happen? Is he going to make that firm going to hire him? Is she going to, did she see the note? Like he's, it's amazing. I was like, yeah, it's really an art form. Turkish. Yeah. I remember the first time I came down. I was like, oh no, what happened? Because I'm just hearing, I'm like, what happened? And I walk in and I'm like, mom, what are you, what are you watching? I'm like, oh no, this guy's the best actor in the world. This guy. And so she just reads the subtitles. And she did it for like, she's watched. It's called, if you look up, he's like, what's a called circle? Is it Dove Bird bird or something? How can I forget it? Oh, baby. Is that it? Early bird. Early bird? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Explain this. So it's a soap opera. There's like 360 episodes. She's watched them all like five, four times. And she'll come in and she'll like do a marathon. So she'll come in and make some food. She's like, that's the way he moves. This guy's the best actor. That's him. That's him. Yeah. That's him. Is it speaking in Turkish? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. This looks like, yeah, that's it. Yeah, there he is. Oh, so you've got a, a knee. I'm in the deal. Yeah, there he is. I did your, you caught on, choke you. And so she likes this. And she does the voice out, which reads the, no, so that's, that was the middle stage. Now she's graduated to it's different now where she just watches two AI images and it's a story. But she did this for a good like eight years. But why was she COVID? Why was she into this? I don't know. She must have come across it one day on somewhere. And then that was it. She just got hooked. Oh, I mean, hooked isn't even the word. Yeah. By the way, it's pretty good. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You watch it? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, he's great. And the woman and it's great too. Yeah. Do you consume a lot of films? Do you watch a lot? I watch a lot. I watch a lot. I love television films. And then, you know, like eight months ago, I know I'm late to the game, Kim McGruff cross podcasts. The only eight months ago. Yeah, pretty much. Yeah. Yeah. That's interesting. Isn't it? Yeah. Yeah. What made you get into that? I can't remember, but it was your podcast. And I'm trying to think what it was. And then it was like, oh, and then I came. And then once you watch something on your phone, it suggests other things. And then you had two guys on that I thought really interesting. And then they do a trigonometry. Yeah, trigonometry. And then that had to find that very fascinating. Other great. Yeah, great. And so that's how I just started. So now it's like a huge part of like I have this whole little thing, like often I'll go to bed and my daughter's listening to your voice. But I do put on headphones sometimes. Because I love like just at the end of the day, listening or watching, I'll put it on the side table. Yeah, it's very, I podcast incredible. It's very soothing, very soothing. That's interesting. I hardly ever listened to them anymore. I love TV. I love it. I take in a lot of content. Have you watched the beast in me on Netflix? I do. Oh, dude. Holy shit, dude. And that guy, Terry Russell's husband, Matthew Reese, the bad guy. Yeah, yeah. How fucking good is that guy? So I did a movie with him years ago called Burn About a Chef. And we had never met. And there's a scene where my character, he was trying to get sober. And he went off the wagon. And he goes into this guy, their old nemesis, their were nemesis with each other, his restaurant after hours. And it was like a pretty dark scene. We never met me in this guy, this actor, right? Before we shot. And I come in and then I don't know what was pretty locked in. And there's one scene which wasn't really scripted. And I took those sous vide bags. And I put it over my head to try to kiss you trying to kill himself, which by the way, I was like, oh, this could work. If I don't get help, those things are strong and tight. And then we had this experience show where then he was ripping it off me, trying for me not to kill myself. And I don't know him that well. But we had, that's the thing about like making art together. Like we had that, it'll never, every time I see him, I've seen him maybe six times at like certain things or something. I always feel like we're bonded forever. Just based on this one experience that we had, he's an incredible actor. He's just, and I, the end of that show, him in the end of it. Oh, God. And Claire Danes is like, off the chart. Did you see that show she did with Jesse Eisenberg? What's that? There's another series she did. Oh man. No, no, no. It was like, Fleischman, something with Fleischman. Fleischman is in trouble. Yeah, Fleischman, there's this now. Yeah, she's incredible in that too. There's a scene where she's basically having a mental breakdown and you're watching, you're like, this can't be acting. Yeah, it's like, she's in trouble. Yeah, it's on FX and everyone heard of this. Yeah. It's really good. Yeah, I enjoyed it. But and I enjoyed her at the end. There's one scene that really rocked me where I just fully, I mean, that's like, I just saw this movie hammit. I don't know if you guys saw that or not. No. That's what I love about it. So Jesse Buckley in this movie, it's basically playing like the most difficult role ever, the loss and all that stuff. And I fully, Joe, I'm watching it sitting there, fully believing that this person is going through this. Do you know what I mean? Yeah, I guess. When you do that, when I believe that you're actually going through it, I mean, that's it. That's in like her performance in that movie is so, she's so good dude. In terms of the clear name to Jesse Buckley. Jesse, no, well, clear names. Yeah, clear names. And Jesse, but with the major. But Claire Danes is so good in the beast in me. There's moments where we have her fucking lips or touch. No, she's touched. She's like, she's on the level. Yeah, right, she's on the right. No question. Yeah, no question. Yeah. She locks in and this very crazy way. She was creating fucking homeland too. Yeah, I never saw Homeland. Oh, it's great. It's really good. She just locks in. She locks in in this very strange way where you fucking 100% believe her. Yeah. Believe it behind the eyes. It's the greatest. Yeah, I mean, that's the heroine from this industry. It's like, yeah, when you're around and you're creating this thing and it's just an all of a sudden, it's like, whoa. Yeah. Yeah, holy shit, it's happening. But it's like I have this conversation with Ethan Hawke. I was, because I was asking him about, but I felt like that would will just real, you know, that vampire scene. That's because I was, I was operating it, right? I don't know how you felt watching it, but I was on stage at the very end. Yes, yes, yes, yes. I was like, I fully believed it. Yes. And those people, and then when I went to the audience and they're just like, right, they didn't know what the fuck's going on. Right. Like that was one of those moments I had on this movie where I was like, oh, my man is locked. Yeah, the fucking. Oh, 100%. Yeah, 100%. It was very uncomfortable. You felt that. Yeah. Yes. Oh, 100%. Definitely. I was, I have this conversation with Ethan Hawke about that. I go, what is happening when I believe someone? Like I was talking about the scene in that movie with him and Julia Roberts, but they, oh, yeah. Yeah, of course. There's a scene with him and Kevin Bacon. Yeah, when they go to the house. Yeah. There's three guys. Yeah. Oh my God. Amazing. Yeah. He's been in tons of stuff. Green book. I know him. Yeah, Jamie will pull it up. I can't, I'll fuck his name up if I pronounce it. What is it? Sorry. Oh, wow. It's a martial law league. That's it. My Herschel. Oh, yes. I believe it. I know that's Kevin Bacon. I know that's Ethan Hawke. I believe he's going to shoot him. Yeah, no question. I believe it. Yeah. Like, I go, what is that? Like, what is going on? I go, because is it, it's almost like a form of hypnosis. Yes. Like, yes. Yeah, that's it. You have to actually be there. You actually, you have to actually be there. Like, yeah, you're saying the lines you're supposed to say. But what's happening is like, you really are there. You really believe it. And that if you don't believe it, the audience doesn't believe it. And we've all been there before. Like one time I ate an edible and I want to go see one of those Marvel movies. And in the middle, I was really high. Right. And then I was like, this guy's acting. You know, it's just like, of course. He just made, you know, a really sensitive and tuned. I did angry because I'm like, I want to go on the ride. I'm like the best watcher because I want to, I want to, that thing starts. Yes. I want to go on the ride. Yes. Like, like him and Denzel in training day. Yeah. Like that there's a few scenes where you're like, okay, this is really, this is really happening in the car. Yes. That's the one. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And when he talks so good in that movie. Yeah. He's great. Yeah. He's great and everything. But he's sick in that movie. But he's also, when you talk to him, you realize, okay, this is an actual artist. Yeah. He's a unique dude. Yeah. He's not a guy who's like trying to be a movie star. No, he's an artist that does movies. Yeah, but I don't know how many people, I don't know. It's like how many comedians who just want to be famous are going to, I don't even know how you could do it. You have to love it. Right. It's just too hard. That's not enough of a fuel. It's not. It's not. It's not a fuel. It won't take you far. It's not a fuel to keep doing it. Right. Because if you don't love it, I think you would find it monotonous and maybe boring and tedious and inconsequential. You're going on a road trip with an eighth of a tank of gas. You're not going to make it. You're not going to make it. You're not going to make it. You're going to stop it on the gas and pull out the parking lot. But it's not that. Yeah. It's a long drive. And my experience in the 26 years, I've been in this is like most of the people, it's not all that I've worked with. They love it. Yes. They love it. Yeah. If you want to be great or something, you have to love it. Yeah. I can't imagine. Yeah. Because it's not even that you want it yet. You want to be great at it. But you just love doing it. Right. Right. And the love is how it becomes great. And then the fear is when you get famous or people get popular early, that can be confusing because you start to have like, I have to maintain a certain, you start getting careful. Like I was thinking about when you said like what is that thing when it just, it's useless. The key to that is willing to fail. That's what I learned as an actor is like, oh yeah, just don't take it too seriously. Hey, we're rolling the camera. Let's just, here, let's see what happens. I'm going to go on a limb. Maybe it won't work. But like, yeah, be willing to like completely fail. And then many of you do that. It's like, oh, and all of a sudden there's this reservoir of space in your head and you're sold to actually create even more of an imaginary circumstances. Now, if you haven't done your work, you're fucked anyway. But like, but once you're there, it's like, once you're like, oh yeah, everybody, we could just fail. Let's just, let's just fail. How do you make sense? It's 100% make sense. It makes sense because the only way you're going to really find out what it is is to like try it all kinds of ways. Yes. Yeah. I was just having the conversation, you know, Brian Callan, our mutual friend. He, he texted me last night. He's like, I got a new bit and I just ate a dick. I have to go up on stage with it tonight. It's fucking terrible. He goes by another something in there. And we were, we were talking on the phone right before the show. He's like, dude, am I fucking new bitches bombed it. He dick last night. I don't know what to do. But I know there's something there. It's like, you've got to be willing to bomb. You got to be willing to eat a dick. If you don't, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know any if you're careful, you're, it's, you're over. You can't. Careful is death. I talked to Chris Rock once and he told me that that bit that he did, it was one of his all time classic blitz bits. I love black people. I hate and word. Right. He goes that bit bombed for like a year. Right. Get it to work. He's like, I know there's something in there, but I have to find it. Yeah. And he took a fucking year. I think we're talking about a year of going up at the store, going up at the improv, going here, going to the last factor, going here, going there. Fuck. Trying to figure it out. A fucking year, man. And when you're Chris Rock, you're already Chris Rock. Right. And you, you know, you could talk about getting your dick sucked. You talk about something people to laugh. And you're like, I think there's something here. I got to grind this fucking thing down till I get an edge to it. And it took him a year. Yeah. Like you have to be willing to fuck around. And to suffer through all that. And enjoy the suffering. You start to like once you do it enough, fail enough in front of people. It starts to be easier. Yeah. And then you come out on the other end. And you're like, yeah, and I'm so light. I'm so light. Yeah. This wasn't as big as I thought. No. And then you have to do it again. That's, and then you put out a special and then once you put out a special, you start from scratch and then you're fucking terrified. Because now you're a famous comedian with no material or terrible material. And you have to figure out a way to make it good. And that plays in what I was talking about. Like when you have, when you've achieved something and then there's that pressure you put on yourself that it has to be that good or better. And then all of a sudden you're in a different game than just like the doing. I think that that play it's safe games, the scariest game or somehow think that it's somehow that controllable. Because really all this stuff we're talking about, it's really kind of out of our control. You know, when it's working, I don't feel in control at all. Right. You feel like a passenger. Yeah. And that's by the way, that's the high. Uh huh. There's nothing fun about controlling everything. There's nothing fun about that. But when you're like, whoa, wait a second, what's happening? Like the zone is the passenger. Yeah. It's like being an observer of something. Sports too. I think it works in every field. Oh yeah. It's like, yeah, that's it. Oh yeah. And it just takes a ton a year of doing the thing. You know, because there are moments that I can even think of where, because you do think that's okay, it doesn't matter. There are a couple where like actually, if this moment doesn't work out, like it may not be over, but you're definitely going to go down along the ladder. Yeah. And it's like, okay. And that's that pressure. You know, yeah. You got to love it. How do you pick a project? How do you decide what you want to do and how much time do you spend deliberating on it? Mm. Because you're in a unique position where you can do a lot of things. Yeah. You can kind of do whatever you want. So it's like, what gets your juices going? Like how do you decide what to do? It's all about something igniting in me that like, for example, when I was little, I thought like, oh, obsessed with Vietnam. I was obsessed as a Vietnam, the war in Vietnam. And my math teacher was, uh, was a recon and Vietnam bill calm. And I was like obsessed with this guy. And he was fascinating. He was a pole vulture and he that was his cue for the chalkboard was a broken one of his broken pole vaults sticks. Oh, wow. And he would always, and he always wore sweatpants and he would lean against the thing. So all day long, half of his sweatpants would be full of chalk. And he would always smoke cigarettes on the athletic field and stand on the bench. And so he'd always be perched there. And like my dad, he would never put out his butts. He would always save them. So he always smelled like tobacco as hands. And then my, this other guy, his father came and talking about this book guns up, which is an incredible book about machine gun or V. And so, and then I asked my dad if I could go to the military academy, like I would do something and then like, you know, thin red line destroyed me. The Terrence Malick movie and the apocalypse like obsessed with and all these films. And so I always wanted to do something about plan. I always felt like I had a love enough and an interest enough that playing a soldier would be something that I felt like I had a reservoir. So that led me to Chris. That was that. It's all specific things. It was just Joseph Merrick, you know, the Alpha Man. Like when I was, I had no money and I took it. I got a one. I'm tower heir, went to London and like tracked his steps at hospital road and where he went out just because I was obsessed with this guy, Joseph Merrick, the Alpha Man. And then it wound up, you know, then making it, you know, doing the play Broadway where they originated. You know, and then stars born was really about, I just love, I always wanted to direct I don't think I dreamt that big. But I really realized what I loved about the process of the industry and is the making of it. I never felt like I fit in just acting. I never felt like I thought like the first like like you, like I went to LA with a job. Like I went to grad school in New York. I thought I'd just be a theater actor if I was lucky. If I could make a living as an actor, this is a home run. My dad was terrified because he came from North Philadelphia. He only got to come out of the neighborhood kind of. There were a couple of other guys. But then he became a stock broker and then his son's going to do acting and be 70 grand in debt in grad school. You know, Fannie Mae thank God, but like, you know, and I didn't know if I was going to pay it off. And but that said, we grew up like upper middle class, but still I was like, I'm paying for grad school. It took a loan out. And then so he was terrified. And then I got a job on this show, alias, a Broadway LA. But the minute I got there, I didn't know anything about check the gate. I didn't nothing. You know what I mean? I didn't nothing. I just love movies. And so I was obsessed, Joe, obsessed. I would go in the editing room and I found out like very hard when I was when I went there. I got very depressed. I was like, this is high school all over again. Me too. That's exactly what I was like. What? I mean, I could, I went to grad school in New York City. There's guys that I could relate to and talk about movies. I was in heaven. Then I get this job that I think's going to be the Holy Grail. and I'm miserable living in the first floor of this woman's house. Just like it was crazy. I was like, I didn't know I could be this depressed. I mean, depressed. Like I need water and like the idea of going to the Rite Aid on sunset and Fairfax was like too much. And yeah, that was rough. It's depressing. Yeah. When you first go, especially when you're in that. Why it's going to get in weird environment. Yeah. And no one just know. I was on a show that was awesome. And everybody was exploding and like, no one. It was like, who's this guy? So not only that, I'm there and everybody's like, you know, I'm just like, you know, I've ghost right. Right. So there's that. So your insecurity is just, you know, it's just, you know, astronomical. It was for me. It was also one of the first times that I ever moved somewhere where I didn't know anyone. Me too. I knew nobody. JJ Abrams hired me and then a burkey. This guy was the only guy that I knew that he introduced me to. And then I met Jennifer Garner was like the second person I met. And then yeah, I didn't know anybody. It's weird. Yeah. I remember I was on the set of the show. Brian Klugman. I didn't know that guy. Who's like one of my best friends. You know Brian Klugman? No, I know he is though. Yeah. He's we grew up since we were like nine. Oh, wow. Yeah. I was on the set of the show and a girl gave me a hug. And I realized no one had touched me in weeks. And the hug she gave me, I was like, oh. It was like my battery got recharged. Like I didn't realize I needed it. Yeah. You know, people say do you need a hug? Like I never thought like nobody needs a hug. Right. No, I fucking needed a hug. I was very similar. She's like, give me a hug. She hugged me. I was like, oh, thank you. Yeah. I felt so good. It's weird. It's a weird feeling. It's a hell of a place to go. It is like, wow. Yeah. Yeah. I had a hard time. Well, the whole environment of LA is so strange because you you have the primary industry. If it's not the primary industry, it's most certainly driving all other industries. It's a bunch of people trying to make it. So it's a bunch of people with a hole in their soul that need to fill up other people's attention. And they're coming there to try to get attention. They're coming there to try to make it. And the one thing that they have to do is audition. So you have to try to be accepted by someone. So you'd be judged. You go in there and you get rejected over and over and over again, which just fuels the same like need that's inside you. It like makes it even worse. And everybody's concentrating on this one thing, like trying to get success. And then you realize like, oh, my doctor wanted to be an actor. Oh, the waiters an actor. Like everyone's trying to do this thing where you have to get chosen. So then people calculate how they behave and talk and what their political philosophy is and their life philosophy is based on becoming and graciating themselves with casting directors and with executives. Like getting these people to like you. And then these people realize that. So they have like, they're controlling the twigs that work the puppet strings. And it just becomes this very strange environment of a complete lack of any like real critical thinking and any real like embracing any alternative perspective some things. Everyone is just trying to align their stars correctly so that they can make it. I mean, that was my experience was more because I went there with a job. Right. And you know, New York for me, I don't know. I went on 2000 auditions. Like I remember when I first booked a job and I was in the city, I booked some commercials and extra work, which was great. But the first job I booked, I remember I was like, I was terrified because I got to the point where I was a, I was a door man in a hotel and I would audition and that was a great life. And if I got a call back, it was great. But then when I had to do it, I remember literally like, whoa. Because I got to the point where I was a door man in a hotel and I would audition and that was a great life And if I got a callback it was great, but then when I had to do it I remember literally like whoa, I have to do it like wait wait what I'm actually What was it was the first thing it was that I played Jake the downtown smoke in the section of city with Sarah Jessica park And I couldn't drive a standard and never learned how to drive standards They sent me to Odell's Dribing school and all I thought about was like don't have her head hit the dashboard We pull into the corner And I still messed it up and they had another guy do it and then I just had to do this thing You know in the cameras you need to go you okay, you know like you're pulling in. Yeah, but I worked so hard on it No, but LA for me it was I think it for me at least was the geography Going from New York City where You know you can go to bar six which is on sixth avenue no matter who you are You go with there a couple friends like you just feel like you're in a Cool place or a place that's vibrant And LA it's like if I wasn't at work. I was in I was in that that first floor the house or my car rental car Yes, and that was it and like and the world which I could feel because I was seeing posters everywhere and billboards Which I had never been except for driving to Atlantic City, you know and seeing who was gonna you know Gonna be you know has a residency That it was really the stimulus the stimuli of that city aesthetically and how compartmentalized it is so what I felt like Like it's if you're not in you're out right and I just remember thinking like some somebody somewhere in this town is having a ball right now It's not me Do you know what I mean? Yeah, and then that just leads to how can I cope? You know and like you know not getting into bars clubs, you know And like girls not really looking at you, you know and all that stuff and all of a sudden it's like seventh grade And I'm 25 years old and it's like and I should be happy because I paid by the end of this year I'm gonna pay off my student loan, but I'm fucking miserable what's wrong with me You know it but to me was the geography of it You know New York City is so wonderful because no matter what you're thinking like when I did the alpha man I would take the subway to 42nd Street and my preparation for the play was getting off the subway going to the Theater because the amount of thousands of people that are forcing me to be present. Yes Was wonderful. It was like doing a 12 minute relaxation because you're just it's life Right, right, right, right, and you're like get through you know and then by the time you get to this theater You're like, okay You know, but LA it's like you're in your car and the thing you pull up to the studio the thing To that you walk and you know, and all of a sudden it's like okay here we go You're like okay hold on second Yeah, that thing that New York has that LA doesn't have is all walks of life are all Intertwined you're walking down the street together There's a billionaire and a homeless guy and a fucking you know, near duet and an office worker and everyone's walking to where they go And they walk into restaurants and they get in cabs and they get on the subway and everybody Intermingles and LA It's you get in your car you drive to a place and then you go to your house and you don't ever Like walk or if some weird interaction happened on set or someone said something you're like Oh, then you're just a home Thinking about it right dinner. I made there's no like well I went on it did this after that, you know, and I actually took a golf which is crazy And I would play at the Malibu had this public golf course and I would say I got you something because I'm an early morning I wake up early I've always had so I'm up at like 5 30 and So I did like a 6 47 tee time with these two guys And that was actually nice. I did that for six months and I would play But like you just try to find something that you know I just need to interact and do something else something that makes you human. Yeah. Yeah, yeah for me But I have to say like I do love oh interesting. Yeah, Michael Vartan who was on alias huge Did you ever play pool with him? No, oh he was he would go all the time. No kidding. Yeah Oh, yeah, yeah, he would go all the time. Yeah to that one place that had like tons of I'm sure you know it probably Hollywood Bill yours maybe yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah Hollywood Bill yours was the spot. Yeah Yeah, it's in New York. That was a big thing for me too It was like almost hijacked my comedy career because I was doing I was playing pool like eight hours a day I was playing tournaments. I was traveling around and going to tournaments and When I came to LA that was like one of the few things that made me that made sense to me like oh I get it pool players I know pool players right hang out with them. They're normal people. That's a great asset. You had there Having something. Yeah, Marshall Arts was always like huge Having something where you have something that you do because if I was only doing I lose your mind. I go crazy And I went there and I fell in love with the movie making that getting back to my original part and I would go in that So I'd ask JJ Abrams if I could sit in the editing rooms So I would basically shoot my one scene a week which was like hey, how was your trips and me? You know, I didn't have a big part right and then but I would spend the rest of the day in the editing rooms And then I would ask Kendall and who was so generous that one of the showrunners of I could just Shadow him and just be around all the time and I would take and I would take everybody's daily some the back then It was in VHS tapes. It was Carl Lumley Victor Garber Ron Riffkin all these great Victor and Ron were from New York these great New York actors that came out and I would just watch their dailies and learn You know just learn and and that's when I was like I love this like I fucking That's what I love. I love them people love things. Yeah, and I do man like I can't get enough of it I am a hundred percent fascinated with people that love what they do I can watch people make furniture There's a guy that I watch on YouTube who just makes desks and tables right out of like what is it called live? What is it called when they take it when it has the actual Outline of the wood What is it called they take slabs it takes like slabs of walnut It makes these tables and he narrates while he's building it describes the process of it and how he's trying to precisely Align all these joints and these you know he's like it's got pegs and holes Yes, the best slide it into play that's it live edge. That's the other great thing about what I get to do So you do a movie like a sniper and you get to be with these people who have dedicated their lives to this thing And you're watching them do it like in maestro. I got to go to the London Symphony Orchestra Each person since they were four Have been doing this and they're all unicorns. Do you know mean and stars weren't all these musicians? It's like even burn. I got to go to these restaurants and study under these people I mean that's the thing that's like that's the greatest thing in the world. Yeah, it's nuts It's not and like even this movie the access I got to have to the seller and all the stuff and all the people It was like I learned so much more than I ever knew What it expands you as a human oh no question you know more about what it is to be a human like oh There's a human who just plays the flute. Yeah, you know We were talking in the green room last night about Andre 3000 was that was a name. I'm sitting right Oh, I almost said 5000 but that's wrong Andre 3000 from outcast. He plays the flute now It's all he does. He plays the flute like a friend of mine ran into him in downtown in Colorado, he said he he was in in Denver just walking around with his flute and no one was bothering him He's like, oh shit. He's just fucking playing the flute. Yeah. That's the guy loves what he does Just I mean apparently he made an entire album where he just plays the flute. Yeah And he's just like not into doing anything else. Yeah. Just into like being an artist and playing the flute. Yeah Stop right yeah, it's like Fuck I wish I was that guy. Well, you seem to be I mean you did you know Hunting and Bill Yards and already you've got like two up on most people besides what you already do by two things that Are that I think are gonna it's help Me figure out who I am And I think the only way you Really figure out who you are is to do difficult things. Yeah And when you're doing difficult things you kind of learn about yourself You learn about oh, why do I have this desire to take a shortcut? Why don't I go with the long? Why don't I do it the right way like what what it is? What is it about? Oh, yeah getting good at something? I mean, I think me at my base. I'm very lazy. I think everybody is. I mean It's a fault setting. Yeah. No question the fault setting for humans. Goggins talks about it. Yeah, like Goggins talks about like one of the things about Goggins He always talks about how when when he was fat and lazy like he used to be fat and lazy now He's like the most disciplined. You know, it's ever lived and he forced himself to become that yeah, but he's default He goes he goes he goes even now you go sometimes I look at my shoes for like a half hour Poor football's motherfuckers on. Yeah, I mean, I'll be doing something during the day I'm like I can't wait till my daughter's in bed and I'm upstairs I'm just laying down on the couch and I'm just whatever's on Yeah, and that's my go for the day. I'm like what's going on here? Sometimes that's good though. Yeah, I View that as a reset. I think it's important. I enjoy it. I don't kill myself over it But I do recognize That there is a feeling but then I look at you know I look at the sort of landscape I'm like well, it's hard for me to to categorize myself as lazy if I just look at the facts Yeah, you know, but I do feel and it's what you're saying it's that default setting Blacking with everybody. It's like normal for human beings to see comfort because it's difficult to acquire especially tribal societies back when we were just hunter and gatherers and just trying to figure out how to stay alive Like the idea of relaxation was impossible. Yeah, and if you could get to time. Oh, that's what I want I want to stop chasing antelope Just look and take a nap or maybe they found a relax state in that because you when you're doing those things You know for a long period of time I feel like I am relaxed in that but it just takes a lot of work. Yeah, you know a lot of over and over But the bet that the true high is when you're doing these things where it first started out and you were horrible at it And then all of a sudden you're going out on a hunt or whatever and you're like I'm relaxed I'm never relaxed on a hunt. Well, I've never hunted so it's not a relaxing thing I mean is it fulfilling rich physically relaxed like your body's not tense Like because of what I do you can't shoot a gun if you're tense right and possible to hit what you want That's a beautiful thing about shooting is like you know on the exhale and stop like all that stuff I was like oh this is I had no idea right because the first couple times they just just shoot it See how you do we just think about like the tiny movements that would deviate the path of the bullet over You know a lot of these guys are shooting on mine. No, it's nuts The first couple times we know no training all they see it. I mean it wasn't even near the target You know, it's like oh, yeah, this is a hole And all you're doing is this it is squeezing a trigger and how much is involved in that like the synchronization of the mind The eyes the breathing But even the rescuer in the first time I didn't have my my boot was I was like like my boot was up and not like that And they didn't say you know and then the recoil through my shoulder down to that I was like oh yeah, no I understand why you do that. Yeah, just it all just goes out All those things. It's like wow But I think through those things you learn more about who you are through difficult things and getting better at difficult things That's where you learn more about who you are and you realize like oh I can kind of apply This mindset to everything and you see with your children. Uh-huh. I am my daughter who loves a draw if she sees somebody who's my daughter I would daughter that loves to draw to it. It's amazing So I'm I bet if my daughter drew with your daughter She would stop because you would see how good she is and she gets so frustrated This just happened the other day and you know and she'll just rip up what she's doing Which is wonderful. I have it right here So she this I saved this I was like don't rip it up. She did this yesterday And I was like don't rip it up. I'm gonna make it my bookmark That's cool, but I'm watch her process of like dealing with difficulty and and it's like and just trying to explain like it's it's okay Like you know and being frustrated is okay But I could see myself and her and what everybody goes through But isn't that awesome when you're watching your kid go through these things. Yeah, it's just the greatest thing in the world It's awesome watching people get obsessed with things and then progressing. Yeah, oh, yes, and when it's your own child This is the more it's amazing. Yeah, it's amazing. It is cool. Yeah, like cartwheel took her forever to learn it But now she could do it and I was like you just keep at it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, it's uh Learning Through someone else's eyes that happens to be your child is one of the most magical things ever It's magical because it's the it's it man. Yeah, it's it it's a different kind of happiness. Oh, yeah one that I never knew was right I was capable of I'm so glad I had kids late because I'm 51. I just earned 51 a couple days ago And I had my daughters eight can be nine in March and like I just got lucky that I was able to Be in a place in my career that I could choose like you said what I do and work from home and just I'm just there through for all of it and it's awesome as much as I love the heroine of being in the moment You know an acting in a great shot or whatever you're doing and everything's together There's like seven of those every day with your kid right like seven We were eating dinner last night at a restaurant and by the way, she was so excited I'm coming here because she hears all that I was like daddy tomorrow But we're sitting here at a restaurant and I'm just looking at her and a little the schedule hat on And I was like this is the kind of like is this the greatest thing in the world? She's like yeah, it's greatest It's it that's it. It's crazy. It's like free jolt. Yeah, right? You just get these free jolt through You never know when they're gonna come right it's like walking up the stairs together It's not like in the moment like it just happens. It's the it's the best Yeah, it's uh, it's a very different experience and I feel bad for people that never get to feel it It's one of the few things like I don't think everyone should have children and I'm not that guy that says yeah Me neither if you don't have kids you don't have a life. That's both. I don't I don't believe that everybody's different Everybody's different and I think we we wall need to respect that everyone's different but Man for me. I Shutter at the thought of being who I am right now if I had no children. I don't know if I'd be alive I would be different. That's true. I don't know. I wouldn't be nearly as compassionate Dave Shepelt said something we once it was brilliant. He said not only have children have as having children changed The amount of love I have he goes. It's changed my capacity for love. Yes Understand everything everything there's like before and after. Mm-hmm. Yeah, it's true all the things They say oh, it's just true. It is true. Yeah, there's no doubt about it It also made me think of everyone as a baby I used to think of people as static. I used to think I meet Bradley Cooper. He's 51. That's a 51 year old guy but when I Had children raised children you start saying oh This is a baby that became a person and it's just life experiences genetics environment all these different factors Here you are now But you are a product of this path and this journey that you've taken through life And I give people way more grace because of that. Yeah, I give them a way more charitable way more Compassionate way way more understanding of even people that suck. You know when I meet someone that sucks. I'm like I wish I could have met them when they were five and see what it was and maybe to help them and it's hard for me to hate people That is that is Not served me so well over the years, but ultimately it has but it's yeah, it's hard for me not to Feel just any other human being how hard is to be alive Right it is there's just like I don't know it was I think it was hardwired to me as nothing to do with like anything just like Yeah, it's hard for me to even people that are like mean to me. Mm-hmm. You know it's hard for me to like Stay mad at them. Yeah My wife said something. You know that as I get older as you get older. Yeah, yeah, when you're young It's like, yeah, I'll never forget it. Yeah. Yeah. I'm gonna remember that. Yeah. I saw your true face Yeah, it's true. But yeah, as I get older. Oh no question my daughter was talking about some horrible story in the news of someone who fucked up their whole life And all these different things in my wife listens to her and he goes It's hard to be a person. Yeah, man. It's hard to be a person being a person is hard We were all just sitting there like nodding our head like yeah, yeah, you can fuck this up And we're all gonna fuck it up at one point in time and maybe when you think that you're never gonna fuck it up again You fuck it up. Oh, you've ever fucked it up and you're like how did I do that? How did I do that? I thought I had it together and I fucked it all up worse than I've ever fucked it up before because nothing stays Dagnant nothing nothing everything's changing all the time and it's just hard to manage all these different things It's hard to manage your emotions. It's hard to manage conflict. It's hard to manage relationships It's hard to manage life work balance pressure is hard. Yeah Not even in the macro or simple level. It's just hard to be existing in a world where you really we don't know anything And then you're and the only thing you do know it's not gonna last and you're gonna be gone and you're bombed on by bad news The news is just bad. It's all the time. It's people getting shot and run over and war and bombings and invasions and It's just exhausting Yeah, and that's like in the background of your mind constantly when you're going about your day is like this is fucking Algorithm that you're being fed. It's like oh Yeah, and at the same time It's a miracle to me that the democratization of information that we live in now that you can choose Points of view to learn about what people think in a way that when I was growing up three stations news There was there wasn't right, you know, there's something wonderful about it to you know I've just talked about this the other day like you know that everybody's algorithms telling him no I'm not on social media. So the truth is I'm not on it all no I'm not really know what the fuck I'm talking about So I should do it for two with my friends like go on for two weeks and he's right And I'm gonna do it just to experience it what what is that experience all I have is that one tick-tock moment for 20 minutes Because I'll never leave you've never had desire to get on it I do you know I do just the same way I don't put a television in my bedroom Which is like if I do I may never get out of bed. Yeah, you know, it's fear. Yeah. I was like I don't know just all that stuff. I guess you know Yeah, I sort of learned that people people you know the world where we'll get smaller I feel included because the main thing is like I just don't want to feel alone right and to me It feels like social media is a place where you don't feel alone because you're just learning about it And there's all these people talking to you But you do feel alone too Ultimately because it's it's the drip as opposed to the real what we got back to when we first start talking It's the illusion of it. Yes, you know if it's taken it But but it but it is worthwhile too It depends on how you contextualize it right and like anything in life Yeah, I think there's a value to it. Oh, no question and those by the way the fact that I should information watch You show in the go on trigonami and The guy who went to the prisons and you're the KKK guy in the guy in the guy in the guy's position Blue my mind and I learned all this stuff in those three hours Just because I chose to you know, that's one of the great things about your show is I can feel your curiosity And then I'm learning from your curiosity What things that I would never normally know how to go on to yeah, that's the most That's the best of this show for me. It's the best is that I get to pick who I talk to So I only talk to people that I'm fascinated by or someone who's interesting to me or something like oh, that's gonna be cool Like I don't I don't go I gotta do this one right there's never that it's always like oh Yeah, what is it? Yeah, how do you fucking study that? Yeah, how'd you get involved in this like where'd you learn that? And I'm like glued to it. Yeah, it's not like it's in the background. I'm like bam You know because you're so interested and it gets back to like the acting if you're really interested or not Then it's gonna be hard for me to listen to watch it Yeah, that's why this I think the only reason why it works because there was some for sure Joe There's no way you can't sit there and say like here's the pitch There's sitting a room Me and whoever three hours basically unedited They're like it's not really where we're at Like I don't know it's gonna know the most people will listen to it. I'm sorry Right, but it's like no the the the nuclear the nuclear fuel is no, I'm actually Gonna be curious About what I actually want to learn and then it's like oh, so we're actually gonna watch two human beings talk to each other Oh, that's kind of great. Yeah, but that's your nuclear power That that's why the show is so magical Well, that's the only I mean the crazy thing is there was no And the way you don't edit it the way that the pauses are there You know, it's even so much as when you're like I gotta take a piss and then like it's back I'm always like whoa, what just happened yeah, we're supposed to go to the bathroom with them Like it I'm so sucked down so Maybe start following people to the bathroom. Do you know what I mean? It's like Wait what yeah, what do you mean? How come how come it just where'd the time go? Wait? What just happened? Right? Yeah Because you create that room that I'm in the room with you Podcasting is where because it kind of just appeared and no one thought anybody wanted it It's fascinating I mean think about it I do think about this a lot especially because I've watched your show in the last eight months is like in the world It's moving into this one direction. There's this other deep deep need for connection Yeah, you know, and then this is this is one of the examples this deep You know live theater Live stand up You know, we still do need to communicate That hasn't gone away in that way in a carnal not carnal, but in a In a human to human interaction When I love AI I talk to AI with my daughter. I think it's dope. I think it's fascinating Fascinating But it's not the same yet yet No, it's interesting very interesting. It's very it's like I use it as a Companion like a writing companion So what I do is I have like I put my phone up And I've got it. I'm like a little kickstand I put perplexity on when I write so I'm writing about like mine and Aztec civilizations and what happened when they got invaded and As I'm writing ask questions like how many people did Cortez come with? 600 how many muskets that they have? 13 they conquered the entire fucking country of Mexico with 13 muskets Like and you find out things and so I use it like as someone I'm asking questions It's all knowing you know Entity that sits on the desk with me and I just and I do it always with my voice I just pressed the little button and I do it with the voice to I do all I love talking to him It's incredible. Yeah, so good at recognizing what I'm saying. Yeah, it's a weird name like to know chit-lan Like I gotta spell that one right is not gonna understand what that temple is but once you use it that way it becomes like Like a genius that you're hanging out with right? I haven't gotten to that level. I go like how was your new years? How do you do that? You asked of a I'm like I'm curious how they're gonna process and like how they're gonna try to communicate with also It it changes and becomes more like what you're asking from and right which is weird. Yeah Yeah, you certainly use your rhythms and vernacular and yeah, so CES the computer electronic consumer electronic show they just Highlighted a sex robot that's connected to AI and I'm like this is the end This is where it's gonna like get really fucking weird when you can actually purchase a companion that interacts with you And you seen it Jamie seeing the new one? It's fucking weird man It's fucking weird because this is the thing that everyone's been afraid of and that this is coming That you're going to have an artificial human being that instead of learning like oh When I act shitty this person doesn't like me when I act nice They like me. I feel good They feel good when I say something nice to them and you see them light up It makes me feel good. It makes them feel good. It you hug them. Everybody feels good It's like we're learning to interact and communicate with each other But there's a lot of people that aren't doing that right now. They're just at home They're fucking playing video games. They're interacting with people only online and they don't get contact with the outside world So this is yeah Love ends the AI doll So like right now that doesn't look real It's not more than your average AI companion Like Basically, but what they're not telling you is you're gonna fuck this thing. That's what's weird It's like look it go back to the options co-worker Jim crush Goth Raver or trad wife I'm the woman of your dreams. I can be more than one version of myself for you Whether you want to roleplay an exciting scenario or design a whole new personality Your wish is my command. Well, you're never gonna develop a real personality then like Kids now are so fucked touch me like you mean it and I'll respond with built-in sensors in my thighs breast but and vagina Feeling your caress brings out a moan a bro. This is dark like that's the actual Sex robot that thing you're looking at right there What my soft textured skin my supple curves the tiny central details of my body Everything about me is meant to feel natural. This is fucking creepy man because all the things that are a part of being a human being that are designed to emphasize and Enhance our interaction with each other and then this this mutually beneficial cooperative environment of a community They're all gonna go away You're gonna have this thing that loves you no matter what and does whatever you want it to no matter what and you're gonna Have a whole nation of fucking sociopaths that only interact with their AI companion. Yeah, maybe But Whenever these like you know think it about AI and I I read this great book called the maniac by Benjamin Leba to talk about Jan Newman and like it's I stopped fearing AI and it's thought about like it's just like you know There's so much I don't know the older I get I don't know anything I just keep knowing less right and It feels like that's if that's the evolution that that's the evolution. There's so much disparate communication now Porn is such a huge thing. It's just another level of porn. You know, it's a carnal level of porn really and But when I think about me as a human being that's really the only litmus test is like I'm Constantly like is this person telling me what they really think You know is this real right? I think that they're at least for if I was doing that right and I was sitting at home There'd be a part of me that knows that I'm can't again, I'm controlling all of that Uh-huh and that's not what really makes me feel serene. You know, it's like Do you know what I'm saying? It's like playing a video game on god mode where you can't die right? They're no fun and you know what for some reason I never video games I had Nintendo technical you know double dribble, but I never Zelda, you know But I never got it. I just never got into video games. I never want to control everything It's like I want to be in the thing That's surprising and I'm having to recalculate and understand why I feel this way Yeah, so I Don't know if it'll I think I think the thing that maybe will change to say more everything is it's the lack of jobs and what how we find purpose in life You know is a huge that that you know what what that transition civilization will be yeah But this feels like just another progression of our escape through porn in terms of the sexual Which does affect our intimacy with our partners in a massive way because your brain is cycling back through your That that rush whatever was released in your brain from that other thing now you're with this person and it's not the same You know markers of stimuli. So you're like how are my You know that's where it fucks up to that's where that that I can understand that Why it's not healthy for me to look a porn because then I'm it fucks my intimacy Well, they really say that about young people because a lot of young guys before they ever have any sexual interaction or watching porn Yeah, I mean yeah, I mean watch these guys have come on that studies Yeah, I mean clear it makes sense. You know, I didn't grow up looking it You know, I didn't my dad didn't have playboy I didn't grow up I still remember they were like cards in the back of a bus that had you know solicit You know naked women on the back of playing cards I remember in the school bus one day. I was like I saw a car and I picked it over and it was like a naked I was like oh, what's that? You know, I didn't see my first like porn video till I was like in my late teens So I didn't grow up with any of that. Yeah, um But you know, it's it's it is what it is. It's where we're headed It's like in my late teens. So I didn't grow up with any of that. Yeah. But it is what it is. It's where we're headed. But all the more reason to create environments like this. And that's why I do love what I get to do. Like if I can somehow explore something cinematically that I'm personally, again, that goes back to like, yeah, I can't explain it. It was Will, the thing. I'm just going to explore this. If there's something I feel like I want to do it, if I can explore it and be real, maybe someone is going to attach to it. Like I have a huge believer in art. Yeah. You know, I think art is, you know, in any form is a key to our communicative ability and not feeling alone. It really comes down to me at least, just not feeling alone. Part of a community. Yeah. That's it. Because me alone, me alone. And if I'm controlling a robot, it's still me alone. I guess that's what I'm saying. I want some part of my brain, even though it's, even if you could create a world, like virtual reality, doesn't really do it for me. Like the world's created. I'm like, you know what I want to live on Mars? And you're a dinosaur I'm talking to. And then we're married. Do you know what I mean? And whatever it is, it's like, I still know I'm controlling it. And it'll never really, for me, I don't know if anybody else. So I don't think it'll ever really solve it. Right. It's not really resonating. I don't think so. I don't. It'll be escapism, which we do of many other things, smoking weed, whatever it was for me, or whatever it is. Not that weed's that's a communicative thing, that actually. But like anything that's escape, it's just a higher form of it. Well, it's a disconnect too. That's, I mean, it's a disconnect. Art is a connect. It is. When it works, it's a connect. Great art is expression of someone's humanity that you can feel like this person did this thing, or they're doing this thing right now. And I'm watching it like, wow, like going to see live music for me. Well, music is like our touch to God, no question. Yeah. That's why the first thing I wanted to make with music. It's like music. Two people singing to each other, then in love, that's it. Yeah. Because first of all, I'm sure you've sang a little bit. If you're not loose, it's going to sound pug-ed horrible. Like you were wind and string instruments both, right? We're wind and then strings with a vocal cords. Like, and if that's not loose, the sound's going to be her, we're not going to be able to communicate. But if you're loose and you're singing to somebody and they're singing back to you and you're in love, you're actually in love. Whoa. Yeah. Wow. That must be crazy for like, like people that do a duet that are in love with each other and they're on stage. Like 16,000 people. No, it's not. I mean, the little taste I got during the Stars one, because we jumped on real stages. And we're saying live. It was fucking crazy, dude. Crazy. We went to Glastonbury Music Festival. 80,000 people. Chris Krasavas and gave us four minutes of his set. Me, Matty Libertique, the DP, Steve Martin, sound guy. I had my, like, costume in my bag. I went into the bathroom, came back out as Jackson Maine. And we had four minutes. I'm saying, I was like, what the fuck is going on, dude? I mean, Joe, talk about, you know, it was crazy. That's what's so wild. And then doing it with Lady Gaga, who's actually like, I made my band with like this, you know, so I could pull it off and I could believe it. And then I'm singing with her and the minute she opens her mouth, it's like that thing comes out. Yeah. And your whole body is tingling. It's crazy. Yeah. It's crazy. Yeah, you can't replace that with AI. I don't think so. No, no, it's impossible. It's impossible. But you can get oddly close with some music. And everything, like art too. Yeah. You know, you look at AI artists. Incredible. Well, that spooks me out. Like, how do you feel? I mean, this is one of the things that's really going to be a giant problem for movie making is you can create AI characters that are assembly, they would they would they would they essentially done is take a conglomeration of all of the acting that's ever been done and all the range that anyone has ever shown. And they can manipulate it. Make it more morose. Yeah, we get more amazing prompts of real people. Yeah, we know that with the sag strike. That was part of the thing. So a whole AI element. Right. And like what where we landed is what was the thought from the people from sag? Like what were they? Well, just protecting our ability of our ownership of our likeness so that you can't use it without a compensation. Right. Because they were doing that. Well, I mean, I think to build these machines, you have to prompt so that and then you're prompting using what's existing. Yeah. And then how do you how do you know, it's just reframing how do you allocate funds to someone when you're using a prompt that's based on the human being who's an actor and you know, do you patent your likeness? You know, we're just moving in. It's the Wild West. Yeah. It's the Wild West. But charted. Oh, yeah. Yeah. In every way. You know, like there's podcasts that are AI driven now. You can watch a discussion and that would be a podcast. I think Glenn Beck just released the first Glenn Beck completely AI podcast. Right. That was like, OK. But does that scare you? No. It doesn't scare me either. No, it doesn't scare me with that with podcasting. Because I think one of the things that people come to podcasting from is this desire to be like a dose of humanity is how I describe it. I want real interaction between two real people. And I feel it. And I know it's real. And there's something about that that gives me comfort when I'm driving my car or when I'm on a plane. And I'm listening to these two people interact. And I'm thinking like, what would I say? What do I think about this? Oh, I get where he's going from. OK. Oh, wow. That's his perspective. That's interesting. And then it makes me rethink things or think about things with fresh eyes. I don't think you're going to be able to do that. But also, if I know it's AI, if you tell me to, I'm not going to trust anything. It's saying anything on that level. Yeah. Because it's not me I'm listening to. Right. It's fascinating for a while. And then it's like, well, I kind of want to just not feel alone. Right. Back to that. Well, there's an emptiness to AI music. I love a lot of AI music. But there's an, I love AI covers. Like they've done some AI. No, I've heard, you know, the 57. Hell, yeah. Bro, I'm good. I bought, yeah. Yeah. How good is it? Yeah, no, it's sick. It's sick. I was like, if that guy was alive, there's a real person. He'd be like one of the biggest artists in the world. He's a fucking dynamo. Yeah. But there's an emptiness to it where you know, like, there's no human. There's no humanity. There's no soul. There's no, you might enjoy it in the moment. But you better have some real shit too. But the truth is, I listen to that. I don't know that there's no soul. Because I'm not seeing the person sing it. You know, and so much music is manipulated anyway, the voice, whether it goes through the system. And you know, but if I'm watching a human being, that's why people love to go watch people perform live. Yeah. You know, I don't know that guy that, you know, that AI thing, that 50 cent is a, if you told me that was a guy, but like, oh, I can't wait to see him. I would have no idea that's not a guy. We play in the green room when no one's. No, I know. And they're like, do is this guy. Yeah, he's not a person. But of course, how would you know? But everybody has the same reaction. Like, oh, no. Right. Right. That's how the reaction is. Yeah. I don't know what's wrong with me, but I don't feel that. I'm like, cool. Yeah. I don't know. But we've been through things before, you know. I think this is a bigger one, though. No, no, it is, but relatively speaking, it's probably not. And contextually, you know, the printing press, all the Russian and you know, all that airplanes. Here we go. Yeah, cell phones. Yeah. AI music. Yeah. And AI film, I mean, you can produce a full feature film with prompts now, which is just nuts. Have you seen any of the AI Star Wars clips fan made? Yeah. Yeah, it's nuts. Fuck yeah. And then a couple of buddies did some stuff that was fascinating. Yeah. It's cool. Yeah, I don't. It's like, if the ocean's flowing, what are you going to? Right. I mean, it's going to happen. Yeah, I mean, you build the dam. OK, it's John Henry, dude. It's John Henry and the steam engine. I always think about that song when I was a kid. They said, must have played on PBS. You know, it's like steam engine's coming, bro. Yeah. It's like, you know, you maybe able to lay the track one guy could, but then he died. You know, it's, it is what it is. And once I sort of give myself over to it, you know, I don't know. It feels like for me personally, it's a waste of time to be emotionally upended by it. I agree with that. That that's all. I think that's a healthy perspective, because I think it is inevitable, but it is also. And the truth is, we don't know what's inevitable. We know some things are inevitable. There's a movement, but no one knows. We just don't know. We may not be around by the time it happens anyway, meaning like who knows. We just don't know anything. Right. That's the truth. And that's what's so terrifying. That's why we want to escape. Yeah. At least me. By the way, I'm saying all this generally, but that's I go back to like, what do I feel? It's like, OK, so how can I, you know, this is totally out of my control. So why am I terrified? Just breathe through it. OK, it'll be an adjustment. Because the other thing, I think people change. I don't know what you think. People do change in life. Like I just think we change. Like I'm not the same person I was five years ago. Of course. Some people don't think that. You know, like you're always the same. Like I don't think that. Those people are silly. Yeah. I really people change. People change. They change by the minute. Yeah. But I mean like, major changes. Yeah. You know, and I do everything back in your life. And you're like, I've lived so many lives. Yeah. Like it's crazy. If you live a good life, I think that's the case. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You're going to change. And if you don't, like how, why not? Yeah, maybe if you don't do so many lives, did you just nail it when you were 21 and ride that fucking boat right into the rocks now? Because everything else is changing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You have to change. But it's just this change is a strange change because we're essentially creating an artificial life form that it can interact with us in, right now, in a way that you can manipulate like this AI sex bot. But eventually it's going to interact with you. And you're not going to be able to manipulate it. It's going to be a life form. Yeah. That's going to be something. Yeah. The entertainment aspect of it is just a side effect. The real. I don't even think the entertainment yet. That's not even the thing. The thing is life's going to change. That's what I feel like too. Oh, the storytelling. I'm like, I don't think that's our biggest concern. The storytelling thing is going to be weird. But like, that's not we're talking about it. Like a minute to minute life existence change. Right. Most probably. It's essentially going to be a life form. And you know, there's a lot of technologists that are looking at it and they're saying this is should be studied by biologists and not by people that are involved in technology. Right. Because this is kind of a life form. It's just a life form. It's fascinating. He's a human thing. So what we do. Oh, yeah. It's like he's a Mark Zuckerberg building the size of Manhattan for a place to be able to create and generate a computer for an AI. You know, like the amount of energy that we're, you know, it's just fascinating. Human beings. Well, they need to be a new, nuclear power plant. Yeah, it's just a world of. But isn't it fascinating? It's just art and like. Yeah. And then if you have an enemy, there's competition. Right. Right. Yeah. And that you better create one so that you could be motivated. It's really interesting. I just, you ever stop and think like what is 50 years from now look like? Oh, it's, you know, I think about again with kids. My daughter and I, we walked through because I live in New York. We walk, we talk about it all the time. Like what's going to be here when you're my age? It's like when you think we're, you know, we talk about it all the time. But whether she even needs to get a driver's license, you know, she's eight, you know, it's really fascinating. Right. Like our way most. As opposed to now, right. I was eight. I mean, I remember having a beeper, you know, and I thought that was like crazy. Yeah. Yeah. And a star tag phone. Yeah. I got one when I moved to L.L. I remember that you started in the fucking future. I could, any excuse to fuck it. Yeah. Pull up the antenna. Yeah. I got the extended battery. Oh, shit. Yeah. Of course. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I was like, I was like, I was like, I don't, this is not going to work. Right. Yeah. My, my thumbs are too big. Now I hardly ever even actually type. I'm, well, I do want to write. But when I talk to people, I just talk text. You do. I do not do that. Yeah. So good. Yeah. So much quicker than me. Yeah. I always have a hard time turning it on and then knowing it's not a voice memo or the thing. I got to, I got to look at it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's the embracing of it is inevitable. But it's like where is it going and what is it going to lead us to and how many different jobs are just going to vanish? That's what's really scary. Giving people purpose and meaning because so many people, their purpose and meaning is their occupation. And if your occupation is completely irrelevant, it just doesn't work anymore. It's like, you know, again, I think back to me and my, my brand and my grandfather was a beakop for 35 years. I don't think he would say his purpose was that, you know, I think his purpose was his family. And my purpose is my family. And it's not my job. You know, I get to do something I absolutely love. I don't know the people's purpose innately is their job. You know, I think it's a, I do think for me, I just like, you know, gods and all of us. It's like whatever you want to say of God. The need to communicate to create experiences that we don't feel alone because it's fucking terrifying being on this little thing who knows where we are. And then we're gone. Yeah. I mean, it's a horror movie. Yeah. So what we got to band together and communicate. Well, I've thought about that too. And people say, you know, jobs are going to go away and we're going to have universal basic income and the problem is then you'll, no one will have any motivation. A lot of people lost without meaning like, but why why? Because when, when did working even become your purpose in life? Like this is a, it's a means to an end to provide, you know, but it's a construct. Yeah. It's not the only way human beings can live. And if we've learned anything about ourselves as a human species, we can adapt. Yes. Yeah. You know, highly able to adapt. Right. But what does that adaptation look like? And how do you educate people to not just seek a safe job that's going to provide for your family, but instead seek a purpose, seek a thing that gives you fulfillment, a thing where you feel like you're contributing to the world or, or like maybe it'll lead to an explosion of human created art. Because I think one of the things that's going to happen for sure is people are going to really greatly appreciate things that other human beings have made. Because like you got to go, oh, well, this is where, but this is handmade. This is made by a guy in Wisconsin. You know, he's got a shop, you can watch a shop on each. It's all huge. Yeah. Yeah. We just got to get more people to embrace that kind of life, like giving them purpose and creation. And I think most people are creative. And it's just that creativity is probably like pushed out of you when you sort of conform to society's ideas of what you're supposed to be doing with your life. Or you feel like you're told in a competitive environment that you're not creative. Right. You know, if you're not, if you're not helped along the way in those developing years, by at least somebody, it could be knocked out of you. Yes. No question. Yeah. I mean, I even look back and think of like a couple of people that believed in me. And I'm like, yeah, without that. I don't know. Oh, yeah. Even with how much I love it. Yeah. Yeah. Um, I think, you know, children are almost all creative. They're always playing and fucking around with dolls and fucking around with Legos and they're moving things around and they're using their mind to, they're drawing, they're doing stuff that's creative. It's just after a while that part of their life just kind of goes away in atropies. And then they embrace the grind. And so it could lead to some sort of person that yeah, yeah. The hard part is going to be people that already set in their ways. And when their job just goes away, when it just becomes irrelevant. And that's about governing. Yeah. And what do we do? Yeah. No, it's the government's terrible at everything. They're not going to get people to be creative. More just like how do we deal with that, you know, any transition can be various states of volatility. What do you think movie making is going to be like? I mean, how much of a play is AI going to have in filmmaking? I mean, it already has a play, you know, in terms of what certain houses use, you know, whether it's writing or special effects or I don't even know how much AI is used, you know, I'm sure it is. I'm sure it's used at every level just like in every other aspect of the workforce. But I don't know. I don't know. All I know is like, again, telling stories where you don't, that you feel like you can relate to it no matter how. And what's wonderful is like, you know, I'm watching Avatar. Like I saw a movie the other night that I didn't believe anybody in it. You know, and if I'm not believe it, I just can't stay awake. Yeah. And I just love Avatar. And I love sci-fi stuff. And I'm, and Leah, and we were watching, because we watched three and two. we were watching one so in bed we were watching one parts of one. And I was like, I just gone from watching this movie that like, I didn't believe anything. Anybody was doing the whole time. So I was out of it. And then I'm like watching Avatar for two seconds. Two people are, yeah, they're on the thing and they're blue, but they're talking to each other. Right. I don't know. I don't think they're, whatever they're doing. They're talking to each other. Yeah. So Avatar was fascinating because of Avatar depression, you know, about Avatar depression. No. There were so many people that loved Avatar so much and connected with the idea of living on Pandora, being in that world and being the Navi that they wished that they were there. I get it. And so they were developing Avatar depression. It was like, they were talking about it. Like it was a psychological condition that were affected by. That's how good that movie was. Yeah. Yeah. The people who were the pressers, they were the giant blue person. The color blue. That alone. You know, the color of blue that James Cameron landed on. Just what do you think that is? I don't know, but that blue is pretty wonderful. Do you think it's the ocean when the sun hits it? It feels like, you know, the Caribbean or something. Right. Yeah. It's light. Exactly. There's a light sand and overhead light through water. Yeah. It is weird that because if they were red, by the way, I'm like, when's 4 and 5? Come on. Right. Right. I haven't seen three yet. Is it great? I loved it. I loved one and two. Yeah. There's a great ride. It does not work. I heard about it in Orlando, right? Yeah. I can't wait to go. Yeah. Are you on the? Yeah. It's a VR ride. You put a helmet on and you sit on this thing. It looks like a motorcycle. Oh my God. And then all of a sudden, like you feel wind. It's got like like physical elements to it and smells and mist. You're flying on one of those dragon things. Yeah. You're flying around that. And dorm. It's incredible. But that movie was so impactful that people got depressed. Mm. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I think it happens all the time. They just have a term for it now. Yeah. But I'm sure it happened with Star Wars. Dancing with wolves. Yeah. Oh, really? Yeah. I mean, how many people wanted to be a Native American and live with the Native Americans because they saw Kevin Costner do it. And like, oh, this is better. This is better than living in the town with all those assholes going to the salutes. Yeah. It's like, you know, there's something about that. There's something about like living in harmony that appeals to people. You know, and I think that has always been the appeal of, you know, there's a lot of people that were kidnapped when they were young by Native American tribes. Like there's a photo outside in the lobby. I don't know if you saw it of, um, Kwanaparker. He's the last of the Comanche Chiefs. And there's a lot of like city, city streets and areas all around Austin that are named after Comanche is like Kwanaparker Lane and all his day. And his mom was Cynthia Ann Parker. She was kidnapped by the Comanche, which was nine. They killed her family. Um, wiped out her whole family in Oklahoma. It's documented in the book Empire of the Summer Moon. It's an incredible book that all talks about the conquering of Texas and the, the Comanche fighting the Texas Rangers. But this woman was kidnapped when she was nine, married the Comanche chief. And her son was Kwanaparker. So her son was half colonizer, half native half Comanche and he became the last Comanche chief. And this lady they rescued her when she was 30 and she kept trying to escape. She wanted to go back. Right. Like no one ever like went to the Native Americans and then wanted to go back to regular Western life. They all wanted to stay with the Native Americans. They all, they loved that life. There's something about this ancient way of living subsistence hunting, living on the land. That was just talked about. And on your show on the show about the need to go out in nature. Oh, yeah. I couldn't agree more. I mean, it's like, oh, right. You know, it's very important. I think it's a vitamin. No question. Yeah. Yeah, Native American. And also like you think about, I mean, yeah, I'm a fan of all that. This has got great writer. I'm Scott Mommenay and Sherman Alexey, you know, just writing about it's pretty. Yeah, it's fascinating. Yeah. But people that were that went and lived with the Native Americans never wanted to go back to the West. People that, but that lived in a Native American life and then moved to the West, they always wanted to go back. Like it's never went the other way. And it was, but somehow or another, the way of the Western people, the way the settlers won out by like sheer volume and numbers and this concept of progress. Yeah. Technology. Yeah. I mean, that was the reason why they were able to pull it off in the first place was the cult revolver. Because without the revolver, they all had muskets and the command sheet. Yeah. Like five, six arrows and they would run at them. And no Gibson movie, remember the end of the Mel Gibson movie? Which movie? Yeah. A pocalypse, yeah. Yeah. You finally escapes and he gets to the beach and then the boats are coming. Yeah. Oh, fuck. Yeah. And just watch them go through the whole thing. Uh huh. Like the muskets coming. Yeah. The muskets and then the rifle. Yeah. And then the rifle. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, that was the crazy thing about the Aztecs and Cortez. It was just they had steel armor and you know, they were riding horses and everybody's like, these guys are gods. Like this is crazy. They have metal and that's all it took. 13 muskets, 13 muskets, 600 men. Yeah. Concord, Mexico. It's just it's it's it's it's weird the way progress moves. It's because I mean, you can call it progress, but is it even better? What is progress? It's like technological innovation and adaptation to it. I don't know if it's progress. It all feels very overwhelming. And I think that's where the downside of our ability to have so much access to information or me have so much access information is that it starts to take my breath away. And then that's why it's like what's just simple. Well, that's why it's smart that you're not on social media. Right. Yeah, because that's the that's the main tap into the overwhelming. But I still feel overwhelmed, you know, even though I'm not on social media, you know, whatever my news feed is, you know, I mean, what I can actively look up and listen to is still, you know, 100 times access when I was a teenager. Oh, yeah. You know, the fact that I even have a phone to do it, right. You know, so I even feel that, but you're right. I can't even imagine what social media does. It does a lot. And it does a really does a lot for young people. They're just being wired in a way that no human beings have been wired before. Like just their whole, all of their interactions are different than anybody that's ever lived. Yeah. Which is so strange. It's like, because there's been minor changes over time that have led to like just the invention of cable, right? Just that. That changed everything. Yeah, it changed it for me. I probably wouldn't have wanted to do this. I mean, there was a movie theater. My back here was train tracks and then a movie theater. I loved it. Watch Stand by Me 100 Times. Would walk in the pretend that I was there. But then like Comcast came through and Prism and HBO and all of a sudden I can watch taxi driver 14 times and the elephant man and Popeye and Apocalypse Now and Raging Bull. Like, you know, from 12 to on that I would never have had. It was like platoon for six months. You know what I mean? It's like there was one choice. So yeah, it's interesting. Well, it's weird too now that you have instantaneous access. Like now it's not even, oh, Apocalypse Now is on at eight o'clock. I mean, we just pulled up the clip that I was talking about, which is which is middle of a conversation. Wonderful. Yeah. Yeah. It's great if it doesn't overwhelm you. Yeah. If you use it and it doesn't use you. Yeah. But the problem is, I feel like that with me. I feel like that with so many things. Don't you? Yeah, that's why I love books, though. I still love books. It's like a physical kind of thing. I do. I love books. I don't necessarily read books very often. Most of my interaction with literature is just audio. Just because of a time thing. For me, my time is just it's too difficult for me to manage. I have a hard time staying with audio books. Yeah, yeah, retaining it. I start thinking about the rhythm of the voice and the, my brain goes up. to other things. Who's the person talking? Where are they sitting? I don't know. It changes. Well, that's probably why you're a great actor. Yeah, maybe. It has to have something to do with it because you're considering this as a human being, absorbing their humanity. Right. Well, this is like words and unlocks my imagination. Yeah. It's like, I'm here and it's like, I don't know what's going to come. Right. The words are in your head. The voice is in your head. Yes. Yeah. You have to sign a sound to them. Yeah. They take on and they change and they morph and you don't know what's going to happen. What's probably a real value to that just in terms of the enhancement of your own intellect just to constantly be doing that. And as you're reading this, be in gross and absorbed in this person's writing and then like being taken on this journey. Yes. Well, it's like stimulating all these parts. Yeah. And then you're just going to be back in Rome in the Olympics. Yeah. You know what I mean? And the guy was just coming and taking, you know, wearing two sweatshirts to like intimidate. You know, like it's amazing. Yeah. It's put it. The good thing that's maybe changing is like it does ask a lot of the reader or the viewer to use to come out of with their imagination. Yes. And then there's something about you taking all that away and you're just receiving that'll be in, it's very new. Yeah. That's a huge change. There's not so much communication going on. It's just receiving. But there's all those, the mastery of like that guy doing Lord of the Rings and like the taking in what he's doing, you know, then realize this one fucking person is doing all these different voices. Yeah. It's crazy. Yeah. But it's you have more access now to other people's creations than ever before. Like you can be absorbed and other people's work all the time now. Yes. And then obviously on your phone, I'm sitting here, I'm bored. Let me just get someone's creation and plug it into my head. Or somebody's thoughts on something or research they've done. Yeah. That's what's amazing. Oh yeah. And that's what I've learned on your show to just, you know, that just that I didn't know one had access like to that or or was frowned upon or like, well, you're not smart if you talk about this. Right. You know, let everybody decide. Right. And the truth is we don't know fucking anything. No. You're not a gatekeeper. So when it comes to what you should or should not be interested in or should remember discuss, I remember being in college and there was a student African American student who I really was friends with and I remember him saying like, man, the one course he's like, it's just not they're not telling the story. And I remember anyone and he talked, this is in 1995 or four. Friends with him, I remember him saying, man, the one course, he's like, it's just not, they're not telling the story. And I remember when he went and he talked, this is a 1995 or wait, not graduated in 97 from college. Yeah, so like, yeah, four, I think I was a sophomore. And like, he was just what he was talking about was like other ways of looking at history. And like, can't we just look at other stuff as fascinating? You know, now it's like, there's whole, you know, courses on it or sections that you can read and learn and hear what people, you know, that's kind of amazing. Yeah, it definitely is. I think it's amazing as long as you could be, you know, like, not strict, but as long as you can be, you know, what's the word, you know, that you're like, okay, I'm looking at it. This is not, you know, the Bible of what it is, let me just see here this take. Uh huh. You know, that's only healthy, I think 100%. Yeah, the problem in the fear is like, oh, no, you're going to get an in the cult and the group and the thing and all of a sudden there's a movement and you know, but whenever that happens anyway, there's so much infighting and the thing get just diluted anyway. Like, it's, there's no, it's never going to work. Right. Last thing about the Bible itself is the Bible is the series of stories that were an oral tradition for who knows how many years of course, eventually wrote it down and then they translated it from dead languages and eventually to English, you know, like, what is this? Like, what, what was the original, what, what is the meaning of this? Like, what and you don't even have to go back that, that far. It's like just how we take it, you know, label, you know, all the, all they are labels of words, language, you and our communicate using these system of symbols, vocal symbols that we both think mean something. Yeah. But when I say protein bites, it's like you're looking at that differently than I am. So it's so impossible anyway. We're just desperately trying to communicate. Yes. That's all we're doing. Yeah. Yes, Britley and have a story. What's our story? What's our story? That's going to be the weirdest aspect of communication through technology is that we're going to get to a point where we're communicating without words. That's going to get really weird. Telepathy. That to me is scary because I don't trust my thoughts. Do you know what I mean? Like if I learned anything as I've got an order, I was like, oh, yeah, let that watch through me. I don't have to judge myself for that. That was crazy. Right. Whoa. Right. No, no, no, it's okay. Let it watch through. Judge me about my action. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I do believe not by what's going on inside my head. Yeah. Yeah. But then managing the thoughts and deciding what to act on and what not to. And imagine like trying to consciously control your thought. I mean, all of a talk about control trying to control. Well, I think it's going to be a completely different way of interacting with each other. That's going to be as crazy as internet communication and what we're dealing with now. That's going to be another level of crazy because we're essentially going to be telepathic. And that's inevitable. That's in the war. I mean, Elon said that to me because you're going to be able to communicate with no words. Like, okay, what does that mean? Yeah. What does that like? Language is it going to be in? Is it going to be in a new, you know, it's kind of exciting. It's very exciting. Yeah. It's, well, it's very weird. Yeah. It's both. We're going to be different. Yeah. I just hope I'm around to experience it. You will be. Yeah. Yeah. It's going to happen fairly quickly. I think it's going to happen within the next couple of decades. The things are going to be unrecognizable. And if less than that, yeah, I mean, that's just being like really charitable. Yeah. That is, it's probably going to be five years. Yeah. I mean, you've talked to enough people that are on the front lines of it. And there there is one sort of constant thing that it's sooner than you think. And everyone on the front line is fucking terrible. I know. All of them. I know. Even the ones that are working towards you know, they're all like, that's true. Well, I don't know. This is good. I love doing it. Yeah. I know. Strange stuff. Hey man, I'm glad we did this. Oh, it's a lot of fun. Joe, you know, it's a real quick. It's just fun to see the progression of it. It's like I'm here. And then like the elephant man by the end of it, I've just see your eyes talking to me. It's like I forgot the room and Jamie and the other thing. It's I understand the gift. I get it. Well, it's because we're locked in. Yeah, but I get it. I get it. I get it. Because I have a, you know, I love watching you have guests on. And then through the time, you just start to, things just start to shed off or it gets more, eat more awkward or like the rhythm gets off. And it's just so fascinating. And so I was so honored to be able to be in like, you know, the seat and experience it. Oh, it's my pleasure. Yeah. I'm honored to be able to talk to people like you and to be able to experience, you know, as you're talking, I'm experiencing life through your eyes. Yeah. Getting a better sense of what it is to be a person. And it's just like these little thin layers like you're building a mountain with one layer of pain at a time. That's it. Yeah. Everything is that. Everything is that. Yeah. Everything is that. Yeah. If if you're living a good life. Yeah. Yeah. And I think you definitely live in a good life. Oh, thanks man. It's been a pleasure getting to know you, man. Your cool is fucked. Yeah. Thanks, Joe. My pleasure. All right. Um, everybody is this thing on is out now, right? Yeah. Co opens wide tomorrow tomorrow. Tomorrow. Tomorrow. Today as this podcast comes out. Correct. Yeah. Go check it out. It's awesome. Thanks, man. I'm traveling to do a man. Thank you. All right. Bye.