We recently had a remarkable conversation with a man called Steve Robinson, one of the last independent journalists in the state of Maine. And he told us a story that stunned us. It's about the Chinese takeover, the takeover by Chinese drug cartels of the largest state in the Northeast. It's a story about what happens when immigration laws are ignored, when state and local governments failed to do their duty. We have a documentary out about this right now. It's on TCN. The documentary is called High Crimes, the Chinese Mafia's takeover of rural America. It's shocking. Watch it now. It's available only at Tucker Carlson dot com. Thank you for doing this. You're the best journalist in Maine. You're one of about six journalists in Maine. I don't know, but if it weren't for you, I don't think anybody would have any idea what was happening in the state of Maine. So let's go to the story that has kind of defined your coverage over the last couple of years. And that is the, one of these two strong to say the takeover of rural Maine by Chinese drug cartels. I'll stand back and let you describe the scale of this and what it is. Well, I mean, it's shocking. I would say there's probably 300 to 400 properties throughout the state of Maine that are under the control of what the Department of Homeland Security under President Biden called Asian transnational criminal organizations. Chinese Mafia, I think is a better term and an easier way to understand it. This first came to light in the end of 2023 when a reporter from the Daily Caller News Foundation, Jenny Tayer, is a fantastic reporter. I got a leaked memo that said, hey, there's 270 plus of these sites in Maine and there's another 800 in other parts of the country and that caught my eye. I grew up in Maine, spent my whole life in Maine and I figured if there were 270 sites in Maine with this criminal activity was occurring, I would be able to find it. And so I contacted Jenny and I worked with her and eventually got more information about some of these sites that she knew about, identified the property owners and we visited some of the sites, started identifying some of the patterns. And I basically looked at every the mortgage record for the past six or seven years in every county in the state of Maine and all the electrical records for electrical upgrades for commercial graded power which is required for these marijuana grows, some other financial records and mortgage documents and was able to identify well over 300 Chinese marijuana grows unlicensed operating in the state of Maine just from looking at records and piecing the puzzle together and then decided I need to go visit them to see what the story is and to confirm it. And so I drove, I mean, easily 10,000 or more miles around the state of Maine to very, very distant remote places, schools, factories, former shoe factories, former scrap metal yards. There's the debtories of the industrial economy. Yeah. There's one of these next to my high school basketball coaches house, one of these next to, you know, the guy who ended up marrying my high school girlfriend, he's going to Chinese marijuana grow next to him. There's a Chinese marijuana grow next to the first place that I got drunk with my high school friends. There's a Chinese marijuana grow on my camp road that has since been busted. There's a Chinese marijuana grow on my dad's road in St. Alden's, they're everywhere. They're in former schools, former nursing homes and we were able to find them. It was easy to find and it turned out that one of the first things I would do when I showed up and scope something out. I mean, you can smell it. You can see the upgraded electrical work. You can see the license plate out front from New York City and you go and you talk with the neighbors and the neighbors. You know, you just knock on the door and say, hey, I'd like to talk to you about your neighbors and they kind of get this look in there. I like, finally, like finally somebody wants to come like here, we've been going through what we've been seeing. they're eager to share their story and the story is always that in the middle of COVID, a young couple that spoke decent English, were of Asian descent showed up, bought the house, came over, introduced themselves, gave them a bottle of wine or a bottle of cognac and introduced themselves and said, well, you know, we're getting away from Boston or getting away from New York because of COVID and, you know, this is just going to be our family get away. And then they never saw that couple again and from then on, it was a steady stream of other individuals of Asian descent who did not speak English. We're not personable. Sell them left the house and every 30 to 40 days. You all would arrive. Usually it dark hours, you know, 3 a.m. 4 a.m. and be there for about an hour and leave. Then there obviously was the smell of cannabis, very pungent and all the windows blacked out in the electrical work and odd chemicals being dumped in the backyard and some other indicators sometimes they would burn to the ground because they were trying to pass through too much electricity through. But I guess it was a period of seven or eight months. I spent driving all around the state of Maine and seeing story after story after story and interviewing all of these people and seeing how scared people were, how terrified people were, how well known the story was amongst people. Why were people afraid? There were for a number of reasons I think. I think there were some people who were afraid of being called racist. If they were, everyone in Maine is afraid of being called racist. I noticed it's the mean weakness of the state. Which is what I found was the exact opposite. I found that they were willing to tolerate behavior from their Chinese neighbors that they would never have tolerated from Irish or French or English neighbors. Like absolutely, you know, illegal dumping, breaking the transformer every other week and causing blackouts in the neighborhood. They would never have tolerated this behavior from white neighbors. But because of this inclination to not be smeared as a racist, they were willing to tolerate it. But they were also scared because they knew the signs of a criminal organization. You know, they knew what was going on. And the marijuana economy in Maine is big. It's bigger than blueberries, potatoes, and lobsters. So there are enough people in the industry who are talking about this. And so there was this kind of secret hidden knowledge of what was happening in this state. But it was like, you can't talk about it. I'm a little bit confused for a couple, I mean, there's so many questions. I'm glad we have time. Maine has effectively legalized marijuana. So there are weed. And some kind of criminal enterprise has funded all these weed dispensaries, medical marijuana dispensaries are in every town. They're the only new buildings in most town, as you well know. And the idea, the way that was sold, your dog's getting mad about this. And he's very upset with this happening to me. The way this was sold to Maine voters was we're going to take the crime out of marijuana. Like we're going to regulate it. If you want marijuana, you want cannabis, you can go and get it. It's got nowhere to come. It's going to be safer. Yeah. And the tax money too, the tax money is our schools are going to be so much better. Our streets will be safer. There'll be so much more revenue for the people. The buyers and the marijuana peddlers, I have to liars. I know a lot of them are liars. Anyway, whatever. This is the opposite of what was promised, correct? Yes. I think that there we unintentionally created a system that was so ripe for exploitation by criminal groups that you have to wonder if it was done intentionally. Because why would they, I mean, there's so much marijuana in Maine. Everyone you know grows marijuana in Maine. That's a value is fallen dramatically. I don't know if they're selling an ounce a weed for right now, but like not you can stuff your mattress for it at $40 or $50. That's crazy. If it's triad weed, $40 or $50 an ounce. If it's triad, I don't know. What I want to do is a child in 1983 was $100 an ounce. Yeah. And that in 1983 dollars. So it's dramatically cheaper than it ever was. So why what's the motive for illegal weed grows? They have the advantage of not paying taxes. No regulatory compliance. They're not paying their labor significant amount of money. They're using pesticides and fungicides illegally that reduce their product loss. They can also export marijuana about two thirds of the product that they grow illegally leaves the state of Maine. Legal growers aren't allowed to do that because it's not federally legal yet. So they can sell in the black markets like New York for a period of time, which was a the black market early on into Maine's development of triad weed. Later it was a gray market where they legalized it but didn't really have a formal system for the sale of marijuana products. So anytime you can bring your product from Maine to a black market state, you're going to get three or four times the price. And this is something that a Chinese criminal organization can do, but the mom and pop trying to run a cannabis edible store or whatever can't do. They can't export their product out of state. So if you have all these built-in cost advantages, you can get a significant amount of money off of it. And they also consider it very low risk and they were right to consider it low risk. Because when the state of Maine legalized marijuana, just like what happened in Washington state and in Oklahoma and in California, it changes the culture and law enforcement. We sent a signal to law enforcement that marijuana was no longer a problem. It was legal. The people voted, stopped paying attention to marijuana and cops who busted significant marijuana busts were kind of laughed at. Like, yeah, that's just pot. That's legal. Why are you doing that? Fentanyl is the priority. And we also have all kinds of legal marijuana growth happening and that functions as camouflage for what the Chinese are doing. So it might not be the most lucrative activity, but it's pretty damn lucrative. But it's low risk, very low risk for them. Because at worst, you know, you're going to get arrested during a mug shot taken, you're going to get $2,000 bail and you'll be released and probably never have to show up at court. Go to New York, get a new driver's license with a new name, come back and find a different marijuana grow to work at. So really no one suffers any consequences from this incredibly lucrative activity that they're engaged in. So the more you learn about what's in the products, the food and the drugs that you put in your mouth, the more terrifying it becomes. All kinds of ingredients you can't pronounce, you don't know where they're from, you probably don't want to know actually. It's bad and the effects are obvious in people's physical health and in life expectancy. So it's probably daunting by now. It's critical to seek out alternatives you can trust. As alternative to this synthetic garbage that people put in their mouths, we strongly recommend R.E. Fountain from Peek. It's a clean electrolyte designed for rest. It's got triple biomass, magnesium and no sugar, no artificial sweeteners, all real ingredients. Restylistides can destroy your ability to function and R.E. Fountain can help. It's not a sleep aid, it's not a sedative, it's not an arkotic. It's what your body actually needs to recover overnight and thrive. Everyone here on this show raves about a difference it makes. We wake up feeling sharp and clear and ready to dominate the day. Thanks to Peek, big big difference. So if you care about real health, Peek could be and should be part of your daily regimen. Right now you can get a 20% off for life when you start your first month. Go to Peek that's p-i-q-u-e dot com slash Tucker. PeekLife dot com slash Tucker. You'll feel great in the morning. You said there were illegal Chinese cartel grows all around where you grew up. Where did you grow up and what did your family do? I grew up in Dexter Maine. It's kind of in the center of the state, Southwest Penobscot County on the border of Somerset. And my mom worked in hospital, she was a medical assistant. And my dad worked for a period of time at Dexter's show until our good friend Warren Buffet bought it and closed it and ruined the town of Dexter and they worked in car sales for pretty much the rest of my life. Your father worked in the shoe plant, your grandfather worked in the shoe. Yeah, my grandfather also worked in the shoe factory as well. Dexter shoes, it used to be a prestige brand, probably 800 to maybe even higher than that. If you include the Milo factory, so probably all over 1000 union jobs, making shoes. But Warren Buffet thought that he could do it better. Did he? No. And what happened to Dexter Maine? The town has collapsed. It's scary. It's sad. It's heartbreaking to return to the public schools, the largest employer in the town. My high school earned my literally baseball coach used to own one of the general convenience stores in town, not anymore. It's owned by a member of the Patel family. Crazy Bob's discount tobacco also owned by a member of the Patel family. Did they made it a lot better? No. No. I knew that. I think seven Chinese marijuana grows that we're operating in Dexter, despite the fact that Dexter opted out at the state's legal programs. So these were de facto illegal. You could look at them and tell that they were illegal, that they weren't licensed because Dexter did not participate in that marijuana program yet for some mysterious reason, the Dexter police know where they are and haven't taken any action on them. Right so the town's economy collapsed when Warren Buffett came in and over time shut down the factory and then it was invaded by people from Asia who took over the businesses and then started seven illegal marijuana grows, seven. Didn't happen that fast. Didn't happen exactly that fast. So I think Buffett's acquisition of Dexter shoe was in like 96 or 97. And it kind of it limped along for a little while and there were some other attempts. There were some other businesses in Dexter. It was a town of about 4,000 people at the time. I think it's now down to 3,500. But when I go home, I don't recognize anybody in Dexter anymore and my family, my friends for the most part of all moved away. I see Dexter in the headlines a lot for fentanyl raids and busts. But the town has really been hollowed out. And I think it was the collapse, the economic collapse and the despair and the town just created a low real estate prices for entrepreneurs from foreign countries to take advantage of. Yeah. And just bleed it of whatever was left. And we've actually we as in the United States have created programs that help them. We've taken money from the United States taxpayers to help both the, I mean we don't necessarily need to get into the Patel Hotel cartel, but they're taking advantage of small business administration loans. And it took until just recently with the election of Trump to stop SBA loans to foreign nationals and non citizens. I don't know why we were giving SBA loans to to non citizens. That's interesting. I just want to because I'm familiar with what you're talking about. I just want to say emphatically that there's been not only no improvement. So these stores, which are often very often the only store in a town. That's pizza, that's pizza coffee, the, you know, the center piece of town. It's the town. It's the town. It's the town hall. Yeah. Of course, everybody's there. And they've been taken over almost exclusively by foreigners from the subcontinent and they have, I've been to many of them. They've all gotten much worse, much worse selling drug paraphernalia, garbage products, hostile, have you seen any improvement? No. Also, I mean, they're selling cannabis product derivatives that were legalized by the farm bill that legalized hemp and unintentionally created this huge world of dodgy unregulated drugs that are available for miners. And in many instances, it's these specific convenience stores that are selling these hemp-derived products, which are, I guess, THC or marijuana adjacent. And we'll give you kind of the similar experience, but our, while the under regulated and untested dangerous, every illegal Chinese vape is for sale. I mean, it's, it's the most degrading thing I've ever seen. It makes me want to get a gun every time I walk into one of these places. It's such a, it's just parasitic behavior in the most obvious way and in the hostel. So, and there's no, there's, we have no, we have no immune system as a state to repel what's happening because there's not enough capital to come in. There's no, there's no competitor to foreign money coming in with an SBA loan and buying up to its delicatessen index there. There's no one else who could possibly buy that store. And there's no, and there's no one who would want to, frankly. So I've seen, and I hate to get sidetracked, but it's, it's such, it's such a big question in rural America who runs the general store, the convenience store, the gas stations or whatever you call it. It's the, it's the center of every little town. And if all of a sudden in the space of five years, they're all run by non citizens from India and they're all getting worse and they're all engaging business practices that are almost like intentionally degrading of the people who live there. Like no, we only sell generic cigarettes illegal Chinese vapes and some kind of weird, non regulated narcotic and bongs and crack pipes. That's literally what's happening. Yes. And there's garbage piled up outside. And the whole thing is like beyond belief, you have to sort of wonder like what actually is this or these incredibly profitable businesses. The seems like a scam of someone. But last thing I'll say, I know this for a fact, a lot of these places, if you look at the tax records, they trade for 300 grand or something. But most of the transactions off the books and cash. So they're dodging taxes actually. And they shift around from one trust to another trust and then back to another trust. There's very complicated, very complex financial schemes at play. And what is this is clearly a scam of this a criminal scam. I don't think it's just in the state of Maine. I think it's probably all throughout. I know it's in New Hampshire as well in Vermont. What is the scam? Well, they're certainly not making money off the hotels that they operate in the general stores. If you look at a town like Lincoln, Maine, something similar has happened where one family from away from out of state has come in and purchased competing rival gas stations. But there's one gas station that's still owned by a local. And so naturally, the people who know the guy who owns the store and don't know the guy who owns the other stores will go and patronize the guy that they still know. So as business has declined to these other general stores, somehow they're still thriving. And initially their employees are locals and manors. But then eventually there's a new class of employees who are brought in, who are brought in very likely on visas, who are also from away. So I think that if you look at some of the, yeah, from I think that if you look at some of the cases that have been filed, even under the Biden administration against operations that look a lot like what's happening in Maine, their immigration scams. They're using these businesses as a pretext to get SBA loans and also to get access to the visa programs so that they can sell legal entry into the country to people back in. So they're selling, they're selling those visas to clear. I don't have proof that that's happening in Lincoln or Dexter, but there are indictments. And there's one I know of very well in Texas where that's exactly what was that. It's made every town where I've seen it and it's, you know, a dozen or more worse. Yeah. Okay, yeah. There are million scams, but like if you roll into somebody's town and degrade it on purpose and make it much worse, you know, I think that's a moral crime. And there's been no response at all. Okay. And I was actually, I was asked to about a food pantry operation that they were trying to set up in Dexter. They're trying to raise some money to help give out food to poor people. And I asked that, you know, how much of the new owners of Dexter Variety and Tostellic Dustin contributed to this charity operation. You know, their new, you know, pillars of our community in small business owners, how much are they given? And I was never given a very good answer on that. Yeah, the answer is zero, of course. So you may have seen a recent story about a smartphone that got smuggled out of North Korea. The device is programmed automatically to take a screenshot every five minutes. So the government and Pyongyang knows exactly what its subjects are looking at. There's no privacy at all in a police state. So that seems like something that only happens in North Korea, but unfortunately, it's not happens here to all over the so called free world. In the United States, for example, data brokers monitor everybody's online activity, which you read, click, buy more everything you do. And then sell information about you without your knowledge or permission to advertisers and even data scammers. And by the way, other governments express VPN is a way for you to fight back express VPN is an easy to use service that hides your IP address and encrypts all your internet traffic that makes it unreadable to people who would steal your information and then sell it. It works on every device, a single subscription covers up to eight devices. Tech experts consistently rank express VPN among Americans top VPN services. There's a reason for that. You get an extra four months of Express VPN for free just by scanning the QR code on the screen or go to expressvpn.com slash Tucker and get your four extra months for free. Expressvpn.com slash Tucker. But that's only one aspect of how the United States taxpayer is subsidizing this what's happening here. The about, I would say a third of the properties in the state of Maine that would go on to become illegal Chinese marijuana grow houses or purchased using mortgages through a program called the Community Development Finance Institution. It's a designation that you give to banks. The entire purpose of the program is to help marginalized communities access financing. The idea is that if you were an immigrant in the 1990s, you could prove regular income. You had irregular finances and trouble accessing a mortgage. So they created the special program to take away some of the risk from the lender. So there's one bank in New York, Quantic Bank that has the CDFI designation and on their website they advertise that they'll help non citizens for nationals by property in the United States. This bank advertised on trying to use the effort. Why would be helping foreign nationals buy in places where there's a housing crisis and the people were born there can't find a house to live in. What is going on? And then why under COVID would we supercharge the program with an additional transfer funding? Why would we put that program on steroids? I don't know. I know. Because you want to kill people because you want to kill and replace the people who populate your country. That's why replace them with other people. Obviously. Yeah. Looking at the mortgage records, having to actually look at the physical records themselves, I caught onto this Quantic Bank pattern. And it's just a quirk of how the registry of deeds records work that you can search by the lender. And so I searched Quantic Bank just to see, did they loan to everybody? Or are they just suddenly new domain? And I would say 95% of their loans were post 2019 and exclusively to people with Chinese names from New York and from Boston. And in further reviewing those records, I found there were two individuals, two loan officers who were originating almost all of those loans, 95% of those loans. And one was a Taiwanese national and the other was a Chinese national who graduated from a university in China. It's affiliated with the PRC's Economic Warfare program. I actually got phone interviews with them. They're on our X page. You can go listen to them. I asked Ying Shan Wang. I said, did you know that these properties of all these loans that you're doing were becoming illegal marijuana warehouses? What? No, no way. Wow. I have to say something about this. I want to put a stop to this. Did they? Not, I don't know. I'm unaware. I'm unaware. There's been a lot of letter written letters written by politicians about the CDFI program, but why we're doing this? But the horse is left the barn at this point. I mean, they have the properties now and they have the means to generate as much cash as they want. This was a gold rush in me. That's what it was. It was a, when we legalized marijuana, there was a vote in 2016. The state, you know, came out and said, yes, we want adult use marijuana legalized. They formalized the program in 2020 and created an adult use program and a medicinal program which are very distinct. And the medicinal program is vastly under regulated compared to the adult use recreational program, which is counterintuitive. But the medicinal program is like the wild wild west. But when we did this, we created just a pig scramble for a five to $10 billion market for this drug. And the forces that we unleashed and the forces that were brought to bear on Maine to access that money, we weren't prepared for. The local police weren't prepared for it. The sheriff's weren't prepared for it because they were told this was going to solve the crime problem associated with illegal drugs. They can legalize something. There's no more crime. In 2021 in Turner, Maine at 57 Konaan Road, there's a hanger right next to Twitch oil airport. The police have been there many, many times. We got police records from early 2021 where they had been called there for what they were told as a hostage situation. And when the police show up, there's Chinese individuals who only speak and they're running out the woods, total chaos. They can't really discern what exactly is going on. But it's a civil dispute and they decide it's not their problem. But in their notes, they say that they believe it's the properties under the control of a, quote, Chinese game from New York. That was in early 2021. That was in their notes. And in the incident report, they say that they was going to their job to do something about it. You think there's never been any arrest made in connection with that facility, which functioned according to the state police as an illicit marijuana grow controlled by Chinese gangs from New York, the Office of Canvas Policy, which regulates all of this has suspended numerous licenses for Chinese marijuana growers from out of state who are affiliated with that property. There's never been any arrest made at that property until December, last December, a guy named William Robinson, not relation, was shot in the head there by a drug dealer. And the guy who shot him was later, allegedly, was later arrested hiding at a marine in San Diego. You say there are, you believe around 300 Chinese gang controlled drug operations in Maine. There are grow houses. There are flop houses. There are prostitution houses, masquerading as massage parlors. There are some, I guess, financial hubs that you might say in Kittery and Old Orchard Beach and southern parts of the state. There are other facilities that seem distinctly militaristic, dink character. Does that mean? Your hair stands up on end when you go by. I've knocked on the doors of a lot of marijuana facilities, but in green bush, in green bush Maine, where's the, it's about 35 minutes north of Bangor. Very rural, but there's an area where there are multiple adjacent properties, all control, all fence stuff, motion sensors on the road so that they know if someone's come in while in advance and blue collar workers I've talked with who have had to come out and do some service of those properties have talked about being surveilled by crews of, you know, eight young Chinese men close crop haircuts, fatigues and fatigues. What there was described to me as fatigues standing around the perimeter of the property and when they need to access the property to do some load testing if they're, for example, an illegal worker, they're physically stopped and prevented from accessing the property and they're escorted off the property and to Chris $100 bills tucked into their back pocket and they say coffee money, coffee money, coffee money and they push them off the property. Things are completely out of control in Maine, obviously. Yeah, completely out of control. Yeah. I should just say for the record it's pretty estate out of 50, nicest people low as crime rate for my whole life, 56. So a long time. And um. I should say for the record is pretty estate out of 50, nicest people, lowest crime rate for my whole life, 56. So a long time. And you're describing like something's really, really dark. How many of those facilities have been shut down by state of local law enforcement? It depends on what you mean by shutdown. You can execute a search warrant on one of these facilities. You can go and you can arrest some people. You can destroy their plants. But the very next day, it can get spun up. And all they have to say is that they're getting a license. They're in the process of getting a license to operate legally. And then law enforcement can't touch them. I saw this exact same, this exact thing happened in Franklin County. There was a raid at a location in New Sharon. And I showed up the following day, because I wanted to get, I wanted to document it. And there was a big white truck from Grow Generation, which is a marijuana growing supply company, a fairly big one in Maine backed up. And there was a crew of workers offloading material. So we've been raided the day before by the sheriff's and the following day, they're spinning it right back up. And they emailed the sheriff and said, hey, just so you know, like these guys are right back at it. I'm watching them. You can come over here and he said they said they're getting a license now. So I can't touch them. And what we learned in January, so if I get pulled over without a driver's license and I say, I'm going to get a driver's license, they let me go. I don't think so. No. No. They take my car actually. So how is that? I mean, with respect, with actually with no respect at all to the sheriff you're referring to. How was that? Like, how was that? So it's kind of genius the way they set up the scheme in that the property owner is never the one who is there growing the marijuana, or picking up the marijuana or trafficking the marijuana. And so they're never held culpable for the activity happening at their property because they can always have plausible deniability. Oh, I was renting to my cousin. I was renting to a stranger. I just found this guy in WeChat and rented the property to it. My idea, this was going on. I'm so upset that this is happening. Thank you law enforcement for doing this for us. So in January, the director of the Office of Cannabis Policy, handpicked by Governor Janet Mills. My name is John Hoodac. Admitted. What's his name? John Hoodac. John Hoodac. He came from Colorado. He has a long career. And he'd succeeded there at the cannabis legalization. He's been involved in cannabis. Brookings has only destroyed Denver. He came from the Brookings Institute. If he was Verizon AT&T, T-Mobile, then you're overpaying for your phone. That's just a fact. The companies don't want you to hear that, but it's absolutely true. Why is that? We'll think about it. Your monthly payment funds thousands of retail stores. Their retail stores you're never going to go to. You're also probably paying for unnecessary perks you'll never use. There's a better way. Buy what you need. It's called Peer Talk. Peer Talk uses the same 5G networks as those other companies, literally the same cell towers. So it's not off grid or done with a wire between cans. It's the highest tech available. But Peer Talk doesn't charge for the add-ons that send most bills to the roof. Instead, Peer Talk gives you unlimited talk to ex plenty of data for 25 bucks a month. 25 bucks a month is probably less than half what you're paying. You get the same service, exact same service. Go to peertalk.com slash Tucker. You save an additional 50% off your first month. The switch can take less than 10 minutes. They do not hassle you. And you don't have to switch your phone or your phone or you don't give up anything. You only save money. Peertalk.com slash Tucker. Peer Talk. Wireless Buy Americans for Americans. How do you spell as I assume? Hoodac. H-U-D-A-K. John Hoodac. OK. And he is in front of the veterans in Legal Affairs Committee testifying for the first time this year of this session. And he admits that he's been giving licenses, medicinal marijuana licenses, to individuals that he suspects have ties to Chinese organized crime. Or he's giving licenses to people who provide addresses for their grows at properties that have been previously rated for their connections to Chinese organized crime. And as hands are tied, there's nothing that he can do about it. He somehow finds a way. How about say no? That would be racist. The state has no immune system. That's exactly right. There's no immune system. We have no defense. And if you look at where I'm from Dexter, you're at Dexter Ripley-Krin at Cambridge. All these towns, three different counties represented. But you've got one criminal group that's operating in three different counties. So three different sheriffs have jurisdiction and multiple different local police departments. And some of these towns don't even have police departments. But they're not, as a matter of course, sharing intelligence. So in order to take down a criminal operation that's straddling three counties, you need to get cooperation amongst these three sheriffs who don't just always cooperate. So it requires a Herculean effort amongst law enforcement to coordinate one of these crackdowns or one of these raids that are going to be effective at actually arresting people, detaining people who could be witnesses, who could explain more about what's ultimately happening. But in by and large, there's no effective enforcement. And the main state police have been AWOL, totally, totally AWOL. The one police who are out. So just to be, I just want to make sure I understand this. You were tipped off the story by a DailyCon News Foundation reporter who had a state-generated list. CBP, this was generated by Customs and Border Protection. I'm so sorry. Okay, so it was the feds. But it was a government agency identified these places. So it's not like you're just guessing. Yeah. And the main state police, that was a couple of years ago, they've done nothing. They've been involved in three raids and two of them were in Belgrade about a mile from the state police headquarters. And the reason they were, they raided those is because six months before we started drawing attention to them, one of their troopers had been inside, seen 500 or 600 marijuana plants talked to the Chinese individual who voluntarily let the trooper in. So all this is admissible. Talked to the Department of Agriculture, talked to the Office of Canvas Policy, confirmed that it was an illegal grow and didn't do anything to it for six months and allowed it to continue to operate. So it's my belief that those two operations in Belgrade were CYA that didn't want it later to look like, they would cover up on their part. So this is just corruption. I mean, you're describing corruption. I mean, what else explains it? The governor of this state has yet to utter a single word about a vast criminal conspiracy operating in her state as a result of this conspiracy. We don't even know how many people have been killed. In Freedom Main, there was a House 555 Belfast Road been busted by the sheriff out there for functioning as an illegal marijuana grow, subsequently turned into a flop house. And there was a carbon monoxide poisoning incident. There were, we think, about four or five Chinese migrants living there, poisoned by carbon monoxide hospitalized, two of them died. Somehow, the exhaust of the heater just piped back into the window. It was an accident, officially, on paper is what law enforcement have determined. Somehow, the propane heater, the breeze must have caught it and piped it back into the window. And there was no outpouring of progressive goodwill or mourning for these poor Chinese migrants who died at a flop house in Freedom Main. But I mean, it was an attempted mass murder, in my opinion. There's no way the exhaust just accidentally pipes back into the house. No, this was an attempted hit on Chinese migrant workers at a flop house. This was triad on triad violence, which we've seen. We've documented. There have been burglaries. There was the shooting I just talked about at the marijuana grow and Turner. And that individual, after he shot who was his friend in the head, turned to one of the witnesses who I've talked with, and said that he was a higher hit man for the triad and that there were 40 more, just like him. Maybe he'd watched too many video games and there were too many movies or whatever. And he was lying or maybe he was telling me too. I don't know. So there's more than one Chinese criminal organization. They are multiple families for sure. Multiple regions, I think, is safe to say. Yeah. And the governor has not said one word about this. No, who is the governor? Janet Mills. She was attorney general under Governor Paul of Page. She was a district attorney before that. She spent a government employee for basically her entire life, came out of Farmington, dropped out of Colby. She claims on her own free will and then graduated from the University of Massachusetts in 1970. Although she's not listed in the program for that graduation ceremony. It's the weirdest thing. But she's been governor now for about six, seven years. So it makes you wonder like, what is her position on illegal drugs, which are destroying the state? I think any fair person will say that. The state under Governor Mills has embraced restorative justice and harm reduction. And the idea that if you stop enforcing laws against drugs and you pass out needles and Narcan, that that is going to be good for society. I think the plane objective evidence is that that's been a complete failure. But on the, I guess the Chinese criminal conspiracy in the state, we've approached her at events and tried to ask her about it. And she won't answer questions directly. Why? So that is a, that's the million dollar question. So do you have any evidence that suggests a motive for ignoring something destructive? Well, part of it could just be ego. It could just be that it's the, you know, it's the main wire. And it's, you know, we are the conservative outlet in the state. And maybe if she acknowledges the problem of Chinese criminal organizations in this state, it's in some way validating the work that we've done to expose the problem. And if you accept that the work that we've done on Chinese criminal organizations in the state is legitimate valuable journalism, then you have to ask, well, what about the other investigative projects that we've worked on? Which I also think are our valuable journalism for the state. So maybe it's just a, the only journalism in the state. Let me just correct you. The only journalism in the state. We'll all do respect to your friend, Steve Collins. There's really, there's no journalism in Maine at all. And 1.3 million people, largest state in New England, bigger than the other five New England states combined. I mean, it's a real place. No journalism. A lot of stenography, the what you're doing in propaganda. But so I'm just, but I'm interested like, that's a huge footprint across a huge state. So a lot of people know this is going on. And she hasn't said word one, much less done anything to stop it. It does feel like someone's getting paid. I am increasingly of the belief that there's a lot of bribes being paid in the state. Small stuff to code enforcement officers, police departments. It's really the only way that explains the lack of action. And we were, we did discover in reviewing property records. There was a, there was a raid. This was in 2024 in February. The kind of targeted the area around my hometown. The town that my mom grew up in. I mean, from this marijuana house that was raided in Coronna, you can see the church that my brother was married in. And that my grandmother used to go to. It's a big beautiful Maine house that will probably have to be destroyed now because of the poisons in the mold and everything that afflicted the house as a result of it becoming a marijuana grow. But there was this coordinated raid with the sheriff's very effective law enforcement action. And in the days after that, there was a real estate transfer done for a property in Coronna, Maine in the same town for a 12 acre property, a tear down, really a hunting camp. And it was a transfer of a property from a Chinese woman living in Massachusetts to another Chinese person living in Guangdong Province, China. So struck me as unusual. Oh, did it? Yes, a little weird. And then on the real estate transfer document, it said that this was a gift to mother. And my mom was from Coronna. And so I thought to myself, if I told my mom that from other day, I was giving her 12 acres and a tear down in Coronna, Maine, she would probably slap me. So again, this is an unusual gift to your mother. But what really struck me as unusual about it was the fact that the attorney who processed the real estate transfer was Paul Mills of Farmington, Maine, who was the older brother of Governor Jim Mills. What? Wait, the governor's brother is involved in this? The governor's brother has been involved in notarizing deeds for individuals connected to Chinese organized crime and was the real estate transfer attorney, specifically for this property, which he helped transfer as a gift to the ownership of a Chinese national who owns multiple marijuana growths in the state of Maine. And it was done days after a law enforcement action in that area. That's shocking. That's shocking. Here's a depressing but true statistic, nearly half of American adults, they would suffer financial hardship within six months if they lost their primary income owner. That's a telling sign that people are living on the edge, many of them, economies fragile. That's true for millions and millions of people. What do you do about it? Well, life insurance is one of the best ways to protect yourself from potential hardship. We recommend policy genius to get it. Policy genius's plans offer life insurance policy, starting at just $276 a year for a million dollars in coverage. It feels complex to buy life insurance. They make it really easy. They help you compare different quotes from the markets top insurers to get the lowest possible price, the best deal for your family. Policy genius lays out all of your options really clearly, coverage amounts, prices, terms, no guesswork at all. It's all very clear. They handle the questions, they handle the paperwork, they advocate for you throughout the process. So if you don't have life insurance because it seems too complex, they are the answer. Your family's future could be guaranteed to a great extent with policy genius. Go to policy genius.com slash chucker to compare free life insurance quotes from top companies sandwich you could save and to what extent you could protect your family. Policy genius.com slash chucker. I don't know what the fee on a real estate transfer document is. But I'll tell you, I called Paul Mills and told him that I was from Massachusetts. I was looking to do a gift transfer in Corinna and I was wondering if you'd help process this real estate transfer for me and he told me that he didn't do work in that area. But you had evidence he just done work in that area. Exactly. So that you said I'm calling from Guangdong Province and I'd like to open another illegal drug operation in the state. You think that would have been different? I don't know. I don't know who called him or I don't know if he was maybe a useful idiot or maybe it was an element of Chinese culture where they think that they need to pay some kind of a tribute to the elected official in charge to their family members in order to get some kind of protection. We've actually done that before. Right. But actually I called Paul Mills as myself and we had a 10 minute interview about this property and he said their friend asked him to do it. And couldn't remember who? Remember who? Couldn't remember who the friend was who asked him to do it but he remembered a lot of details about it. Is the governor's brother? Yes. The sitting governor. And I printed off copies of the real estate transfer record with his name on it, with the address in Guangdong Province where this new owner of 12 acres and a teardown in Corinna Maine and I have the code enforcement officer on the record saying this is an illegal marijuana grown. We would not authorize it because right off, it out, we went to the state house so we passed out, I printed out 50 copies of this real estate transfer record. I passed about the politicians, I passed about the other reporters, I sat in the governor's lobby with a camera focused right on the door just waiting for an interview and they actually canceled one of her meetings with school board members and snuck her out the side door so that she wouldn't have to answer questions. And even though I scattered, I blanketed that place. I was like South Korea flying over North Korea dropping flyers trying to get people to pay attention to this stuff and no other outlet in the state of Maine covered it. Nobody else covered it but you? No. I have so many questions. I just wanna pause and ask the obvious question. So that suggests such a deep level of coordination and terrifying corruption. I mean, are you worried for your safety? Yeah, yeah. I mean, it's difficult to know how worried you should be a situation like that. Right. Yeah, what exactly is the... We've been in the late danger. Chinese drug cartels to control huge swaths of rural Maine and people are dying. A governor herself is saying not one thing we're trying to stop it and the entire rest of the state's media is ignoring it. That sounds like a level of corruption that would have been unimaginable in this country five years ago even. Yeah. So and if you're the one guy saying something about it, which you are, I don't know. I mean, where does that leave you? Before I'd even reported anything on this, I had Excel spreadsheet working on a database, track keeping track of records of sites we'd flagged from financial records, tax records, electrical records, sites we'd visited and confirmed sites where we talked with the neighbors. And at that point, I'd identified maybe 150 or 175 of these sites and actually sent it to the Bangor Daily News. I hadn't reported anything about it. But I was scared. And I thought that if we all reported it at the same time, it would kind of diffuse the attentions. And I was like willing to give up the, I guess whatever the prestige of being the one who gets the scoop to have us all come forward and report on this problem. And they've never used it. They've never reported on it. They've never touched it. I don't know. I mean, it just maybe they're pride of not relying on, I'm not a journalism school graduate. So maybe they don't want to use it or some dirty trick by the conservative media that I'm trying to pull on them, but they haven't used it. And I, at the same time, is it reflects poorly on the democratic administration that runs the state? Maybe that's a, yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's a, sometimes the simplest explanation is the correct one. It's also could just be laziness, a lack of curiosity. I mean, this is a story that can't be told merely sitting or discovered, merely sitting behind your computer. You have to actually be going out and talking to people and knocking on doors and taking some risks. It is around the same time though that after I'd been out like the entire day, knocking on fields a lot in Madison and that area and beautiful town, it used to be. And I realized, I was like, man, this is sort of, this is a real vast conspiracy. It was kind of dawned on me how insane this entire thing was that this was being allowed to happen in Maine. And I was like, the law enforcement has to be on this. And I don't want to be the guy who comes along and reports on this and like dicks up this big investigation that they're about to close the loop on. So I drove to the main state police headquarters and I walked in with my laptop and I told the receptionist. I have an instance of a vast criminal conspiracy currently operating in the state of Maine and I would just like to turn over some information to somebody to anybody because I don't want to interfere with some active criminal investigation. And I waited in a lobby for 15 minutes and then some woman came out and said, there's nobody here who could talk to you. And by contacted, but where was this? This is right in Augusta, the Department of Public Safety Building, Augusta is the capital of the state. And then I contacted the, there's nobody here who can talk to you. This is in the public safety building in the state capital and you say I have evidence of a vast criminal conspiracy. And you're a sober, sane person. Probably the single most famous journalists in the state of Maine at this point. In fact, you are. And what can talk to you? Granted, it was 425. Oh yeah, right. Okay. I might have been a Friday, so they'd probably clocked out by that time. But I contacted the director of communications for the state police and reiterated what I'd said. And I contacted some other members of the state police that I knew through family connections. Some fairly high ranking who used to be very big fans of mine when they heard me on conservative talk radio, but don't want to talk to me anymore. And reiterated what I'd said. And you know, I was, the communications director told me somebody would call me on Monday. And that was must be 120 Mondays ago at this point. So they have no interest. No interest in talking to me or hearing from me. The troopers I've talked with are, they're mystified by the decisions that they'll issue were making as well. Who's making those decisions? Well, the Michael Soshchuk, former police chief of Portland who everybody in Portland was glad to see him live when he got picked to be the head of the department public safety. So he runs the main state police and the main MDA, Michael Soshchuk, Michael Soshchuk. And he runs the main drug enforcement agency and the main state police. And he's a cabinet nominee of Governor Janet Mills. He also has yet to utter a single word about this criminal conspiracy. I mean, just hearing this story, which is one of the most shocking stories I've ever heard in a lifetime of hearing shocking stories. It makes the hair in your arms stand up because it feels like there's this great evil, there's this great destruction of human life, there's this great crime taking place in public, everyone can see it. Chinese drug cartels control a lot of the state of Maine. And it feels like everybody's in on it. And you're the only person saying anything about it. I mean, do you have trouble sleeping? Sometimes. Yeah, I mean, it's been a battle for sure. Why are you doing this? I feel like I owe it to my state. You know, I feel like I had such a great childhood, a wonderful childhood as a latchkey kid. And I loved Maine and I loved being able to grow up and ride my bike anywhere and be safe. And I feel like the people, my people, are being taken advantage of by powerful forces that they're unequipped to repel. We don't have an immune system for this. And the only thing that I can do to fight back is to put a spotlight on it and to expose it. It's like my riding around with my grandfather in a pickup truck in Ripley, Maine. And he sees some garbage on the side of the road and we stopped and I ask him, what are we stopping for? He's like, this garbage, we gotta pick it up with some garbage, we didn't leave it there. He's like, yeah, but I could trash bags and we got time and it's our town, this is our community. It's my version of that. We're taking out the trash. We're picking up our backyard. That's what needs to be done. And as an analyst who's doing it, I love this state. I don't want it to become just like a festering gang bang for third world criminals. And so it's becoming very fast, faster than I've ever seen anything change. Okay, so now to the question of the watchdogs, the constitutionally protected watchdog class we call the media in Maine, there are three big papers. One in Bangor, one in Lewiston, one in Biggest of Portland. Press Herald Daily News, some journal. And they've been around a long time, they had big staffs at one point. Like where are they? Why no coverage? It's blowing my mind. I mean, they'll cover something if there's a press release. There's a raid that a sheriff does. I mean, Sheriff Dale Lancaster in Somerset County is probably the best sheriff in the state of Maine, probably the best law enforcement official in the state of Maine. Old school, no excuses, no BS, kick-in doors, then he's been responsible for the vast majority of the successful search warrants that have been executed. And a lot of the arrests, he's been very successful. And who put out a press release and there'll be some coverage, but they, you know, they'll be very careful not to know any of the patterns. You know, they're very diligent about not recognizing the patterns and what he's done on reporting. Yeah, you've put online, and unfortunately, since it's Maine and it's considered far away in remote and people don't pay attention, it hasn't gotten the coverage deserves in my opinion. But you've put the facts out there. Like they can follow up on that at any moment and they've decided not to. So, you know, reprinting press releases is not journalism. Of course, it's a transcription service. Who owns the median Maine? Like who's responsible for this? So we're really ignoring a crisis. So the largest newspaper company currently is owned by the Maine Trust for Local News, which is a subsidiary of the National Trust for Local News, which is a nonprofit funded by George Soros. It's a George Soros controls the median Maine. He funds it. He specifically funded the transaction to acquire these papers from Reed Bower, along with Hans Ewarg Weiss, who's a Swiss national who made his fortune doing illegal bone cement experiments on humans, who's been in trouble in the past for illegally donating as a foreign national to US political candidates. So has an act for trying to influence American politics as a... Why would George Soros want to control the median Maine? Yes, on Maine's, going back to the 1980s, Maine's been a cheap date for people looking to trial political ideas. Beginning with the shutdown of May and Yankee our nuclear power plant, there's really just three media markets. Like you said, just a handful of newspapers. And if you want to get a ballot initiative done or something like that, it doesn't take a lot of money. So you can come to Maine and you can close a nuclear plant, you can get gay marriage referendum passed, you can get marijuana legalized as a referendum for a small amount of money. And then you can go to another state and say, well, we've already done it in Maine. We can do it in this state. And so we become kind of a Petri dish for political experimentation that particularly the progressive left has taken advantage of in a very successful way. Their name was always the whitest state in the United States as long been and was a target for that reason too. And they said that out loud, Maine's too white. And so there was a sense in which it was targeted because of its demographics. I mean, they said that, I'm not guessing at all. Yeah, I mean, going back 30 years, I mean, under Governor John Baldauci, we, Lewiston famously became a sanctuary city for some hollies. And can you describe Lewiston? What does Lewiston mean? The Atlantic, I think described it as Little Mocha D. Shoe. Lewiston, it was a mill town. Yeah, it used to be, it was a Franco-American town defined by the immigration of French Canadians coming down to work in factories. So it was an urban Franco town. Textiles and paper. Yeah. And biggest mills in New England there, whether the Anderson-Gugg and River, working class people. And then Jason Town Auburn frequently referred to as LA, Lewiston Auburn. It's the second biggest metropolitan area in the state. But now, I would say it's a no-go zone. It's not something that people feel safe. The people who supported turning Lewiston into a sanctuary city for... day. It's a no-go zone. It's not something that people feel safe. You know, the people who supported turning Lewiston into a sanctuary city for smallies have now spent so much money as they can to get as far away from Lewiston as they can. It was us too many of them. I have to drive through it frequently for work. How does it look? Yeah, third world. I mean, it's not doing great. And there are people who will be, you know, partisans for Lewiston that it's on the verge or come back and you get in trouble if you criticize Lewiston. But we cover police reports. We cover crime reports. We talk to Lewiston police officers. We know what's happening at Lewiston. There are 16 and 17 year olds engaging in gunfights on the streets. And when the police show up to talk to people and nobody will talk, people are getting shot and nobody will talk. People who get shot won't talk about who shot them. So the police are frustrated and they're all just, you know, looking at the clock and wondering when they can start collecting their pension. But it's just a symptom of the law enforcement is just retreating across the board. Whether it's the crime that's happening, the drug crime that was happening in Portland when they're basically allowing open opioid use and not arresting people, including people who are selling narcotics. Whether it's the gun crime in Lewiston or the Chinese organized crime, all of this, there's just law enforcement have that pulled back. What's so scary to me is that Maine is now considered a blue state. A lot of the state is not blue at all. It's not in favor of this. It's the southern parts of the state's coastal parts of the state, the first district that has been completely changed demographically. And now is totally in the hands of the Democratic Party. But what's interesting is the Republican candidates in Maine, the ones who are lining up to run for governor, for example, in this coming election, none of them from what I can tell I've even mentioned demographic change crime and drugs. Those are not issues that Republicans want to talk about. Even though they are the issues, they're the only issues. I think drugs that I've seen a lot of them have talked about drugs, but there's a lot of focus on the cultural issues, trends, athletes, the governor is very focused on making sure that boys can participate in girls sports and dominate girls sports. But again, this is an issue. I'm against that. Obviously, I think it's a humiliation ritual. Like so many of these things. However, is that what destroyed Lewiston? No, exactly. That's not the biggest issue. Right. So how many Republicans are willing to say, hey, how about no more Somalis in our state? Like no one voted for that. Why would you do? Why are you doing that? By the way, there are no jobs here. So like why are you bringing poor people into a place with no jobs? That is a fringe radical opinion. There is again, there is a tremendous fear of being socially I think what happened, these people, I mean, I think you kind of popularized the term gay race communists. I still don't know if it was someone else, but I do. Well, okay. Well, I love it too. I think that the gay race communists increased the social costs of participating in the public sphere during COVID, helped by COVID to such a significant degree that good conservative people who might not be explicitly political, but who just are conservative in client, they have a conservative disposition with true from politics. Because if you went to a school board, you went to a town council meeting and you spoke out, spoke your mind about what you wanted to see happen in your community. It wasn't just that you disagreed with somebody, it was that you were a bad person. And if you owned a business, well, there's going to be a Facebook mob that was going to go give you one star reviews and you were a bad person. We're going to drive you into the ground. If you don't want, you know, porn books with cartoon, you know, blow jobs in them in your kindergarten classroom. If you don't want that you're a bad person. And so conservative just said, you know what? Screw it. This is, it's not worth my time. The cost is too high. I'm just going to go take care of my family and my church. I'm going to efficient. I'm going to hang out with my my rotary club. We seeded the public's square to the gay race communists and they took over with you. I think that's a really crisp and accurate analysis. But there's also the problem of how the state of Maine's government acted. Right. So I have a friend, a lifelong friend here who got into an argument with the state about COVID regulations, he had a restaurant and he came on my show on Fox and mentioned Janet Mills. And she and the other women who run the state, I think the state is run entirely by women pretty much. It's a matriarchy. Almost every single official in the state is a left wing woman angry, left wing white woman, some angry, left wing smiling woman. And gay white man from New York. And gay white was saying the same thing. The rainbow bullies. Yeah. They descended on him and drove him out of the state. They said inspectors armed to shut down his business for criticizing her. And he's now operating business in another state. has been here his whole life, multi-generational. So people are afraid of the state government under Janet Mills. Do you think that? It's the biggest problem in our state. I mean, there's a it seems like she seems, Janet Mills seems like a criminal. The state seems to be run like a criminal enterprise. That's my view. Every Maine wire reporter gets the the spiel. Forget what you learned in civics class. We're reporting on a criminal organization. They steal from people and then they hand out money to their friends and to a dependent class in order to buy votes. That's how you approach reporting on state government and Maine. If you're a reporter from the Maine wire, how many reporters do you have working for you? We have eight, we have nine full-time employees, including myself at this point. So I'm not overstating because probably unlike a lot of people watching this actually following news from the state. I'm interested and horrified. You really are the only organization covering not a you came from talk radio or you're like giving opinions. Now you're really just a pretty straight news report. Here are the facts that we found we got in the truck we drove around. Here's what we saw. Yeah. I mean, I'm an opinionated guy. I'm not sure what percent. But I try to I try to do the investigative journalism, but I also just try to be honest about my opinions about it. Yeah. Well, you know, I try to I try to be, you know, yes, I'm yes, I'm conservative. Yes, I think it's a I think it's a bad thing that Chinese criminal organizations have taken over my state. Yes, I think that's a bad thing, but I'm also going to be able to report facts objectively. So how hard is it to hire reporters? Where do you get your reporters? You know, could you be bigger? I mean, why wouldn't you have a hundred reporters working for you? Could you do that? Yeah. I mean, if if we had the resources and could find the people I could keep a team of 15 20 reporters busy around the clock full time and pursuing stories, a list of investigative stories that we have to work on that are, you know, not maybe not the same size and scope as triad weed is long, but there's so much or has crime. And it's so overlapped with government virtually every government program is being taken advantage of. The government itself is handing out no bit contracts in a way that's, you know, hard to separate from organized crime. Yeah, I mean, it's it's been very difficult to find people to move to main. I had really a heartbreaking moment hiring my most recent producer to do our own podcast and substack project. And I'm talking with him, he grew up in Bangor, did everything right went to high school state at a trouble, went to hustling, got a degree in film production and is, you know, beginning ready to propose to his girlfriend. They've already proposed, so I'm not, you know, spilling the beans here. And I said, so what's keeping you in Maine? And he said, we just haven't been able to save up enough money to get out. And that was like a fucking dagger in my heart. Imagine that just haven't been able to save up enough money to escape Maine. And it's like, where do you escape to even? I guess Texas, Florida, Tennessee, some red states, some free states, maybe you can get to. But hearing that from him was like, man, you know, so I mean, that's, I think that's part of, you know, I would like Maine to be a place where people want to live. But right now it's not. And it's very hard to hire people who want to come here. It's like a deployment to a war zone. You know, when my reporters lives in Portland, I gave my gun one out of my iron and he was going to be living in Portland. All legally, all legally transferred by the way. Yeah, whatever. You know, I mean, when your government is committing crimes like this, it's hard to take seriously their laws, which is part of the problem. Everything degrades. It's like really you're totally corrupt. You're allowing Chinese drug cartels to control my state and you're worried about whether they're the right license to carry a firearm up yours. But that's that, that phenomenon, by the way, has trickled down into all of the legal marijuana businesses who invested in some cases their life savings to build a business, do it legally, do things the right way. Now they're seeing that the laws are being enforced only against white people. The marijuana are only being enforced against white people. So increasingly, you're seeing more people adopt to the same tactics that the Chinese mafia is shipping out of state, blowing, you know, growing more than their licenses allow, you know, cutting corners. There's a pretty famous case, a guy named Lucas Royce in Farmington, Maine, who was, he set up a business called the shoe factory, which was an old shoe factory building where he was built these rooms and people who wanted to grow marijuana could rent from him. And they would grow their marijuana at this property. And he got reported to the Office of Cannabis Policy and the Office of Cannabis Policy immediately referred him to the drug enforcement agency, the federal drug enforcement agency. And the DOJ got on top of him and they wiretapped his phones, recorded his conversations with his father, and are still to this day pursuing a case to try to send him to prison for doing a smaller scale version of what they knew, they knew. And I can prove that they knew because there's the public documents and documents I've obtained through Freedom of Access Act requests, what they knew the Chinese organizations were doing at the same time, including at that facility in Turner, where William Robinson was shot in the head in December. So they are, if you're, if you're a French Canadian last name, they're going to stick the DOJ after you. They're going to try to lock you in a cage. But if your last name is Wu or Huang or Chen, you don't get the laws applied to you. You get arrested, you get $500 bail, maybe maybe 10,000 or 20,000 if it's Somerset County. And then who knows if you show up at your trial or if you're making me really radical? Has to the governor's brother who's profiting who has provilly profited from this, it, is anybody in main state media mentioning this is anyone following up on this? No, the governor has never responded to this. It's just like you report this and then it just disappears. National media reported on it. Yeah. I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, they got plenty of attention in the national media. You know, I've done a segment with CBS to their credit. Peter Schweitzer, who's a great author journalist who's been spent a lot of time working on the China topic and the drug topic. You know, helped me get in touch with CBS and they came up into the segment on it. NBC later ripped off that segment and basically plagiarized all of my journalism, but that's fine. It's got national attention, but not the palmills part of it. And the local newspaper reporters don't seem to be interested in it. It's weird. I was, I've been accused of a xenophobia for reporting on this, you know, huge criminal organization that took over my state and that's ruining all of these buildings. That's one thing to have, oh, it's just itty. It's online, progressives, you know, elected elected officials. You know, I actually, the only time I've ever testified on a bill was when, although there was a lawmaker who introduced a bill that would have given me a little Rico statute to help crack down on organized crime operations like this. And I figured I testify because I've seen more of these than anybody in the state. At this point, you know, I could be a self-enointed expert witness in Chinese marijuana. You know, I've got a degree in Chinese marijuana. And so I testified neither for her against this bill and just was there to answer questions about how this operates. And the, as we included the clip in our documentary that they didn't want to hear, they shut down my testimony and said, can we hear from, you know, an actual expert about this? And they pushed me out and they voted down the bill, voted against the only piece of legislation that would have empowered law enforcement to do anything about this. So they've, they've reacted very negatively and hostilely to my attempts to just show them what's happening in the state. You know, with, I think we've gone above and beyond in terms of the evidence that we've provided, the documentation that we've provided, because we know that not being in a stab, like being independent media, being conservative media, there's going to be a higher standard of proof that we have to meet. And I think that we've met it and gone way beyond it over and over and over and over again. And still, they will not acknowledge it. And specifically when it comes to, to Paul Mills, who his clients are involved in more marijuana grows than the one we've reported on is building in Stangerville, Maine right now. It's the biggest building in Stangerville. It started construction in August of last year. And it's just now finished and it's coming online. And it's going to be a big, big productive marijuana grow owned by the client that Paul Mills transferred the property credit to. Yeah. So the point of Maine is it's majestic nature. The governor, Janet Mills, who really can't overstage really, it's shocking to know about Janet Mills, but they have bulldozed chainsawed, flattened, clear cut, forest, and Maine for solar panels, because that's like environmentally positive or something. I mean, it's like strange. It's part of the criminal organization. It is. And they hate nature, they hate nature amazingly. What's the environmental impact of these grows? Every single house that has had one of these Chinese marijuana grows, the best use for it is potentially practice for the fire department. They all need to be torn down. They're super sites, super fun sites. We don't even know the extent of the damage that's been as a result of the Chinese pesticides and fungicides that have been imported from China illegally into California and then shipped to Maine and used at these sites as few against actually. Yes. So their California has a really bad problem with this in the Siski National Forest. They have what they call hoop houses, massive greenhouses. And they are operated by Chinese criminal organizations there, often in concert with the Central American cartels. And they've been investigating these from an environmental perspective because they've weakened their drug laws so much that no one cares about illegal marijuana, but they do care about water diversion to supply the cannabis. And they care about the contamination of these pristine wildlife environments with the chemical runoff. So they have the environment police out there working to fight the Chinese mafia. They've found pesticides, fungicides, fume against in Chinese labeled mylar bags. And they found some shipping labels that they were able to trace back to a property in California, which they obtained a postal warrant on and found that this particular house was also shipping to a gross supply store in Massachusetts and a house in Monmouth, Maine, which is in Kenneback, maybe 20 miles away from Augusta, the state's capital. It's on a academy road. It's about maybe a thousand feet from a school. We went to the house and knocked on the door to try to see if the owner wanted to talk. No one was there. It very clearly had been turned into a marijuana group at one point, but was not active. And we went and talked with the neighbor who was a firefighter. And he said, oh no, it's active. There's people there in the mornings around two o'clock in the morning, five o'clock in the morning. And there's activity there. So you kind of drew the conclusion that potentially this was a shipping hub or receiving hub for these pesticides, fume against in chemicals that were being sent imported from China to California and distributed to Chinese marijuana. And they're not legal here because they're poison. There's no licensed regulated use for many of these pesticides and fungicides. They're because they're so deadly for humans. But it's it's it's even worse than that. So there's they're using chemicals that are not licensed for use in the United States and are deadly. Sometimes some of them aren't even licensed for use in China, which is not notorious for their concern for environmental rights, human rights, environmental degradation. But they're also not very well studied, used together in like eight of them together, 12 of them together. They're not studied when you burn them. They're not studied when you apply them to marijuana and eat the marijuana. They're not studied when you apply them to marijuana and smoke the marijuana. They're not studied when you use them in all these different combinations and then do a gas extraction process to extract the THC oil and a more potent version of this pesticide fume again. They're not studied at all. They're unknown. They only identified a lot of these chemicals seriously. They only identified a lot of these chemicals in California because they brought in the weapons of mass destruction unit from the Army National Guard because the conventional labs couldn't test for them. And there's no lab in the state of May and they can test for them that I know of. None of the cannabis labs can take cannabis grown at a Chinese marijuana grow that has used these pesticides and test it and determine that it's contaminated. They may be now because I've shared the information with them directly from the chemists in California who are identifying them and trying to lead the fight against them. They may be able to test for them now. But the consequence of it is that you could take a bit of marijuana from one of these grows that's been treated with these heinous deadly chemicals and tested it one of the labs and get an A plus test it approved. No bad chemicals. This is safe for consumption because they're not capable of testing these chemicals. Yeah, because it's just a different process. It's just that each, you know, it's not like you put a sample of cannabis and a machine and it says, here's everything that's in it. There's each different pesticide or bacterium or arsenic. There's different processes to test what's in people in these other bodies. Yeah. Well, they don't know. They don't know. And these, so these mylar bags. Well, first of all, the house where we knew these products were being shipped. We knock on the door and do a story about it and a week later the house hits the market for sale. Not suspicious at all. And the following week, I get a call from a grandmother who had just taken a tour of the house as a perspective buyer with her two grandchildren. And she was calling me because she and her grandchildren immediately developed respiratory symptoms after walking through the house. And they were concerned enough that they Googled it and they found my article and they called me and they wanted to know, what do we do? We've just been exposed to dangerous unknown Chinese neurotoxins. What do we do? Like, fuck to find out, man. I'm just a journalist. So the end of Mills is the steward of the environment, the big environmentalist governor. Sure. Sure. Yeah. I mean, if she's supported by the natural resources council of Maine and the main renewable energy association and all the other corrupt trade groups that turn around and profit from from the sale of solar panels made by Chinese slaves in Western China. Yeah, sure, she would position herself that way and presumably future Democrats will position themselves that way. But these, these same mylar bags, by the way, that we've seen in California that we've identified, we know to a certain extent what these chemicals are. Thanks to the weapons of acid destruction lab, the most recent bust in Somerset County by Sheriff Dale Lancaster. He had a he photographed that he distributed with his press release, the same exact bags. They're coming here from California shipped to your legal illegally from trying to be distributed here. And if they're in that one grow in Somerset County, you could assume that they're in all these grows and they, they dump mad science concoctions of pesticides with sawdust and ammonium nitrate and a little fuse and a half cup beer can. And they let it smolder and the smoke fills the house and it covers the marijuana plants. And so the mites won't grow and the mildew won't grow. So you have minimal product loss. Are you serious? It's very effective at mitigating any kind of pesticide or pest damage to your marijuana product. But it, it coats every corner of the house and these dangerous chemicals. So we have no way of testing for them. There's no real estate disclosure. There are houses right now for sale by the same real estate agent who sold tried to sell this fucking house to the grandmother I talked with. There are houses that are for sale right now on the market that have very likely been contaminated with these pesticides or at a minimum. The black mold that comes with a house that's kept at 99% humidity and you know 80 degrees so that marijuana can grow. They're on the market right now being sold with no to school sure whatsoever. And this is a state with one of the most profound housing crises in the country because of immigration and Airbnb and big companies buying up residential real estate like people can't afford houses here period. Yeah also just assholes from Massachusetts in New York moving here. Well, there's I didn't want to say that. But yeah. True. So I just say for the record. If we're talking about mass deportation. Yeah, the Massachusetts mass. I get it. I've got some dirty jokes and that's a big, but I'm not going to share them. So so it's it's reducing the amount of available housing for main people. It is poisoning the state's environment which the government claims to be a steward of. And they know it's happening. Right. I just want to this one. Yeah. I just want to be totally clear on your journalist working with other journalists trying to expose the scale of this disaster, this crime. But it's not like government officials don't know. I'm going to talk about the governor like people who run the town managers in all these little towns, the select bin all these little towns. They've got a no two, right? Yeah, I would assume. I mean, I know that the Lincoln County sheriff has videotaped surveillance evidence of illegal dumping going on out behind these sites. There's uh, much highest out in Washington County at a marijuana grow. I visited there. You could almost study the ages of marijuana cultivation there by looking at the strata of the styrofoam or up. I guess some fiberglass, um, uh, substrate that they start to marijuana plants and because they were just layers and layers and layers where they've been growing marijuana. Uh, because they just take it when they don't that they throw it out in the backyard. And so just the entire property is a beautiful farm in, uh, much highest that overlooks the water. Uh, just like could be someone's paradise. Uh, and the soil will be permanently contaminated with, you know, God knows what chemicals and fiberglass. It's everywhere distributed throughout the property. Every single one of these places has like an unknown level of contamination, water contamination, soil contamination, uh, the danger to people. Um, the processes they're used to extract the THC and the CBD, the psychoactive, useful chemicals in marijuana. These same processes also can collect the oil soluble pesticides and fungicides in higher concentrations. So when you concentrate the vape append to 99% THC, you're also concentrating, uh, the, you know, some of these pesticides and fungicides. And then those are being sold. I mean, from the Chinese grows to, you know, two thirds of them are leaving the state. They're being sold, uh, New York, Massachusetts, the Southeast United States all over the place. And people are unknowingly consuming these substances that have just not been studied at all. Um, so we wouldn't even really know if somebody was experiencing side effects of, uh, you know, unintentional exposure to some of these carbonate poisons. I mean, it's, we, there's, there's so much that we don't know about the dangers of these chemicals. And you can't help but wonder if that's intentional. Of course it's intentional. And I've read, I've read, uh, unrestricted warfare, you know, they explicitly contemplate environmental destruction and unrestricted warfare. Um, you know, the, the book written by Chinese colonels in 1999, uh, booch basically laid out exactly what they would do to us over the next 25 years. Um, and we know thanks to Philip Lindsey Key from the Daily Colored News Foundation who reported, um, just last week that, uh, there was reporting we did index your my hometown about a mile from where I grew up, uh, at a illegal marijuana row. We found an abandoned BMW there and there were two shirts over the driver's seat in the passenger's seat that Chinese writing on them, uh, for the C issue association of New York. I was like, huh, that's weird. Took some pictures of it, didn't really think anything of it. Uh, this by this place, by the way, is like a mile from a military facility, US Army Reserve, Garrison. And later, Philip was able to connect the dots between two individuals arrested in Carmel, Maine. Uh, one of them was a ways on whang and, uh, film from a Chinese Communist Party event in New York, where two of these individuals who were arrested their mug shots, they're on video at this event. And then ways on whang is featured while he's out on bail, by the way, is featured in Chinese state run media, uh, back in his hometown doing classic United Front Fork, talking about how he's going to come back to the United States and he's going to bring home the bacon for his hometown, bring home American investment for his people. Um, based, and he is the executive director the association of those shirts were linked to. So thanks to, I guess, you know, the work we did on the ground and Phillips advanced knowledge of of Cantonese Mandarin, the culture, the language, and how these Chinese, but been, been Evelyn, associations work. They're all front groups, by the way. You know, the Chinese consulate in New York should be gone. It should not be allowed to be operating in the United States. Like the president of the United States should close it down immediately. All those Chinese consulates. They're like military basis from a hostile foreign power. They should be gone. And New York should not be allowed to, uh, issue licenses to foreign nationals because it's hurting every other state. But thanks to the license drivers licenses, their identity documents, the, the state of New York is printing a false identity documents for criminal organizations, aiding and abetting them. They're all coming here with drivers licenses from New York. And you know, a month later, they get a license to grow marijuana here in the state of Maine. And it's, it's a mess. But we're spending our time arguing about Israel and Iran and all when the country's dying. It's the amount of energy that's being expended on things that don't really matter that much to exclusion of things that really do matter life and death questions like the ones you're describing is really upsetting. And Iranian has never come taking a shit in my hometown like the Chinese communist are. Yeah. Uh, you know, nobody, nobody nobody from my high school classes died from my rainy and fentanyl. Uh, you know, I guess, you know, they're, I guess if we take out their nuclear program or we committing ourselves to a permanent technological subjugation of the Iranians forever, we forever, forever, are we going to 100,000 years from now, going to be keeping them no nuclear weapons. So we're going to do because they're going to be pretty pissed off if you go take them out now. Is that the position? Not to straight outside of my, my lay index. I don't think that anybody advocating for this cares because they don't care about the country in the first place. Yeah. Well, wars wars profitable. Yeah. I wish that it was as profitable. Like how do you make it profitable to just enforce the law? country in the first place. Yeah, who wars wars profitable. Yeah, I wish that it was as profitable. How do you make it profitable to just enforce the laws that we already have here in the state of Maine? Like how do you just enforce the laws against people who are engaging in tax evasion? They're breaking the marijuana laws. They're breaking the environmental laws. In some cases, they're jumping their meter to steal electricity. There's no one Indian on a convenience store that I've ever been to in Maine that's following tax laws. I mean, that's just a fact. So, why aren't they being audited? We have the main revenue services, you know, they should be following up on that. Yeah. So, here's my question you were speaking earlier about the unequal application of the law in the state, along the racial lines. So, these grows are just proceeding on impeded. There's no real penalty. People are dying. Nobody cares. States being poisoned. Nobody cares. It's brothers making money from it. It's great. Media won't report on what would happen to you if you torched one of these places. Like it's in your town. It's next to your house. There's a grow. You burn it down. No one's hurt, but you eliminate that problem from your town. What would happen to you if you did that? I'd have a very good alibi. I guess I'm the only re-let me rephrase. And I want to say I'm not even bother to say if the record I'm not encouraging that. It's not up to me. So, I'm not getting involved in what people would do or not do. One of them burned down, by the way, just last Friday. Yeah. And wilton saw a big one, a big one. And I was inside it. And after a burned, after a burned, I have an alibi for the time. Wait, let me finish my question. I'm just saying, any time something happens to one of these, I have an alibi. I'll just state that for it. I don't know what it is yet. You're out of state. I was with Tucker. But if you're caught doing that, I guess let me just say, you're busted by the police. The same police you didn't bust the trainees, drug cartel that was running the police. What would happen to you? I think I would go to jail for a very long time and probably under hate crime statutes. My jail sentence would be increased. You know, it would be the a racist act of violence against a marginalized community. It's marginalized being the Chinese drug cartel. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I, that's what I think would happen. I love your family, but I mean, six, seven generations. I mean, since it was in Massachusetts, I mean, as far back as 1820, 200 years ago, I mean, as far back as we care to look at that stuff. I don't know. I might, one of my grandfather's father was adopted. So there's some some empty spaces there. So we don't know. But I mean, as far back as we've been able to, yeah, research. So a foreign drug cartel can come to your town, destroyed the town. Yeah. Come here. Crimes in plain sight. Yeah. There's nothing anybody can do about it. But if having watched the total collapse of law enforcement, you decide to enforce the law informally by getting rid of the drug house, not hurting anyone, but just destroying the property, you go to jail. Yeah. That's, that's tyranny, right? Or what would happen if I went to China and decided, hey, I'm going to go grow a bunch of pot and sell illegally all around. Oh, and it's going to be poisoned to with poisons that I've illegally shipped in from the United States. Not saying we want to become any more like China, but the, uh, the unequal application of the laws is so obvious that it is going to encourage this. What you're talking about, vigilantism, because you have, it's marijuana and made it such a huge business. You know, we're known for lobsters, blueberries, whatever. But if you look at it in terms of economic value, and if you add the, the gray market and the black market to what's actually being taxed, it's way bigger than blueberries lobster and potatoes combined in terms of its economic value for the state. And there are a lot of people who spend their considerable amount of their time, energy, and treasure trying to build businesses around this. Following the rules, doing the right thing, trying to follow these weird, murky, hard to follow regulations that change all the time and the regulators are punitive. And if you complain about them on Instagram, they're going to give a U.S. surprise inspection and write you a ticket. Only if you're white and all of these business owners are being under because of the unequal enforcement of the laws, because the dumping of the Chinese grown marijuana, which comes with all these built-in cost advantages, you don't have to pay your laborers. You can steal electricity, you can use pesticides and fungicides, you can grow way over the plant limits, you have no regulatory compliance costs. So you can go sell your product for half what the legal main business owners can sell. So they're going bankrupt and they're looking at a government that's not enforcing the laws equally. And if you don't think that they're contemplating vigilantism, you're crazy. They absolutely are. They absolutely are. Why wouldn't they just pay off Janet Mills' brother even more than the Chinese drug cartels are paying him? I don't know. I don't know what that would accomplish. I don't know if they've considered it. I don't know if she's open to to to bribe from the other side. I do know that the highest ranking official in the New York, the Chinese New York consulate was here for her inauguration in 2019. What? Can you restate that? The highest ranking official for the Chinese consulate in New York was at her inauguration. Janet Mills is in the original world. What a communist Chinese official from New York be doing it. Janet Mills' inauguration is governor of Maine. That doesn't make any sense at all. According to Chinese state-run media, taking meetings with Senate President Troy Jackson, Matt Dunlap, the current state auditor, former secretary of state, had just returned from a trip to China, handling the inauguration of the first female governor of the state of Maine. How's that gone, by the way? Objectively, I think that we have yet to devise a measure of political science or social science by which you could say this state has improved under Janet if they found one, I can't tell you. Nothing's gotten better. I think that the best example of the people of Maine lacking the immune system to repel something like this is Woodville, Maine, which is a town of maybe 300, 350 people. It's in Ptoff Scott County. Northern Ptoff Scott County, maybe 45 minutes an hour north of Bangor pretty much. Pretty very rural. Really just like one road going through it and a lot of dirt roads. They've got a three person select men. Manfred's the chief select men. Great guy. No nonsense. Manner, you'd love him. He'd fit in around here. They had an obnoxious Chinese marijuana grow right next to their town office. You can smell it. In Woodville, Maine, an hour north of Bangor, which itself is like far from the mass juice that's bordered in the future border. It's a long way. This used to be a lumber bell or a sommel. It was like the day's mill back in a former Maine. It was a prosperous business that made lumbering wood for people to build homes so that middle class families could live in that instead of growing marijuana in them. This place was obnoxious. There was effluent always running across the road. The people were angry and mean and nasty. They wouldn't pay their taxes and then someone would show up from New York and just slap $100 bills on the counter until the clerk said, okay, the taxes are paid and then leave. At one point, they had to call the animal control officer because there was a Cantonese speaking individual on the front yard beating a border colleague with a stick and I'm beating a border colleague with a stick. Why didn't the townspeople shoot him? You'd have to ask Manfred, look, I don't want to be judgmental, but you can't. I mean, that that like crosses so many lines that you give up your right to life at that point, I would say. They took the dog away. I mean, the dog is, you know, was clearly very severely abused. When the animal control officer showed up, the guy just picked the dog through a wall of her and said, take him, no good, no good. And I could see going into the town council meetings that I could see this happening, like the black of an immune system to propel what was happening and cross the line from journalists to like, I don't know, local activists. And I was like, why don't you guys just write an ordinance that says that you can declare that an illegal cannabis business and start finding them $10,000 a day until they shut it down. And if they don't pay the fine, then you put a lean against the property and turn off the electricity because if they can't have electricity, they can't grow marijuana. If they can't grow marijuana, they can't make money, they will leave. Just write an ordinance and do that. And they were like, Jesus, that's not a bad idea. And they wrote the ordinance. They passed the ordinance. And 30 days later, I reached out and they were like, well, how do we enforce the ordinance? Well, get your code enforcement officer as the ordinance says, get your code enforcement officer to go declare it from an exterior inspection and illegal cannabis business and start issuing the fines. And I'm like, well, jeez, I don't know. If our code enforcement officer will do that as a couple of times, she deals with, I don't know. I still don't know what the status of it is. But these guys, these particular, this particular marijuana, growing it up applying for a license with the office of cannabis policy to grow legally. And when the inspector showed up, they were already growing hundreds of plants. And they couldn't explain to them that that's illegal and you're disqualifying for getting a license. But this is like the one place that ended up not getting a legal license after being caught growing marijuana illegally. But it's still owned by Chinese nationals because these are effective real estate investments too. The real estate's an effective way to hide capital from the Chinese government itself. That's happening all over the United States. And it's really affecting residential real estate prices. Of course, and it's not just China that's dumping money here as a safe haven and destroying the ability of our kids to buy houses. You said something off-camera, I hope you will elaborate on a little bit. So one of, I think people listening to this who don't aren't familiar with Northern New England might say, wow, you know, the people sound pretty passive in the face of the total destruction of their state, their way of life, their culture, their economy, the land itself. How could they put up with that? And you said something, oh, I think this is fair. You said the best part of Maine is that people are instinctively hesitant to bother other people. But that's also a weakness. Yeah. I mean, you, manors don't want people up in their shed. So they don't get up and other people shed. And I'll sleep, but you know, and I'll say that there are, I was more scared knock on and knocking on some of the doors that I knew manors own the properties because they might answer with a gun, you know, the Chinese, the individuals who are at these facilities growing marijuana, it's my belief. Most of, in most cases, they are victims of exploitation by a criminal organizations. They're being paid maybe a thousand dollars a month. You know, they're being exposed to chemicals that they have no idea what the consequences of that will be the mold. They're living in conditions that any American would look at and be like, that's slavery or that's, you know, human trafficking. That is unreal. But they could be doing it voluntarily. I still think that they're victims. But they're very, the survival in most cases when you try to ask them questions or interview them and they can't speak English or they pretend they can't speak English and they call someone in New York and do an interview over the phone and they don't want to answer any questions. But the, they very much, the people who are operating this know about that culture and name, and they exploit it for a reason. They're very, like they came, they came to Maine with a playbook that they'd run previously in Washington state, California, Oklahoma to camouflage themselves with illegal marijuana programs. But they knew that once they got to Maine, there was going to be this live and let live type culture. And they took advantage of it. And that's what pisses me off so much. And the Yankee Reserve that, you know, it's got the highest incidence of English ancestry of any state is what the world has done to Great Britain. You know, in the same dynamic, like you come in, living off the charity of the people who built the country and then you give them the finger, then you just throw what they built, then you take more money from them and they do nothing. And the only people who speak up about it get arrested for speaking about it. Like because it's your leveraging Anglo politeness against the Anglo's is what you're doing. Yeah. And I mean, they even have a word for, what is it like, Bizo, yeah, the white liberals, they're very strategically taking advantage of this, this deep-seated fear amongst white people in Maine to be labeled as a racist or described as a racist. And there's this, even the stereotype about this, you know, rural redneck and it's true of Maine and it's true of any other state, like this world. Yeah. Yeah. These people are just racist. And I encountered over and over again in every county that I went to, people who went out of their way to be as fucking nice to these people as they possibly could in Franklin County. There was a guy who plowed him out for like two years because they needed to have the driveway clean. Blame a plow out means. Sorry that it snows in Maine for people who are unfamiliar. It snows the Chinese were apparently unfamiliar with that. So this was what challenge they had to surmount as they're trying to make a marijuana pickup. When the U-Haul, the sprinter van is coming to pick up, you know, 500 pounds of marijuana, you can't have two feet of snow in the driveway. So there was actually a marijuana grow that was on the Department of Homeland Security's list. And this is in Chester,ville, Maine. It was, I think 200 West Road. And they needed help plowing. So this Chinese guy walks up the driveway of their neighbors and holds out a phone and it's a woman in New York who negotiates in a arrangement where they plow the guy out and so they'd bring their tractor down and plow the driveway and they did that for them for free. Like for they didn't even negotiate like a price. They were just like, yeah, we'll go plow your neighbor. They did that for them. That's what they're like. because they were just like, it was a guy who turned the Chinese poison their children. Sorry, it's just true. But you've described the way every rural community probably in the country was certainly, no, they later abused that relationship to the point where the woman who was living at that property, I think she's in her 60s. Young, a young Chinese man, maybe 20s or 30s, came over and asked the elderly Chinese woman if she would go mow the lawn for them. So let last question, it doesn't seem like, and you're the expert on politics in the state, but it seems like pretty hard to make a change, you know, the governor's leaving in the next election. Thank God, however, there are a lot of people like the governor in state government, like the whole state government, not the whole, but a lot of it is truly corrupt. So I don't know. I'm not that confident that anyone in Maine is going to fix Maine's problems. Can the feds do anything? Can the Trump justice department begin to fix this problem? Yes, absolutely. And I think that you're seeing glimmers of that. I mean, it's fun to fight about the training stuff, okay? Yeah. But if you've got military age, male Chinese in uniform, you know, throughout the state, you get thousands of Chinese here illegally working for drug cartels, like that's a national security threat. No, they control the former Maine National Guard based in Gardner. What? Yeah. It's a former Maine National Guard based. It was decomissioned and sold to a big brick military garrison surrounded by barbed wire, but there's an illegal Chinese marijuana grow operating out of that. It's about a two miles from the state house. Actually, yeah. And just down the road from there, there's another one that does operating. I have an old meat walker used to be run by Johnny Wu, Johnny Wu lost his license, been weighing came in and then now it's operating under her license. Okay. Sorry. We've been talking for almost two hours in every every sentence shocks me. So, whoa. Okay. I think you've established this in national, this is an imminent national security security threat. So what could the feds do and why haven't they done anything? They need to treat it like a national security threat. First of all, you know, I think that there's there's maybe an illusion that Maine isn't doesn't have anything that's a vital national security interest, but there are, you know, there are internet lines that run, you know, international internet route lines that run through Maine. There's bath iron works, defense contractor here. There's some military facilities. And there's the, there's a huge like a 5,000 acre, I guess a national guard complex in Woodville, the town with the border collie was being beat. So I know there are also like training facilities in Maine that are like widely known. Yeah. There's the longest runway I think in North America, bomber runway in Bangalore. It's also as an incredibly long international border. Yeah. Plus it's an American state. Yeah. So there's the oldest American needs to be treated like a national security threat. And the northern border needs to be treated with the same seriousness that the southern border is particularly our northeast border. Right now we have, we have basically the thin blue line protecting America from illegal aliens from Jordan or from Algeria or from China from sneaking across the main border are like 19 and 20 year old cops from four, five, four, five field Maine happening to pull somebody over and see something that's not right and bringing sea, but yeah, especially in China controls Canada. I mean, Canada is now a colony of China, which can be used for its resources, actually, obviously. And they're exploiting that border. So to answer the question about what's kind of feds do treated like a national security issue. That's what you can do. They've moved to see that more effective than fighting about trainings. You know, a training has never tried to kill me. Yeah, I mean, I'm not for trainings. I mean, not that I know I'm not that I know I was on jay barking about trainings, but yeah, yeah, I know. Yeah, this is real. And the scale of and the scope of things that are affecting the quality of life and the people of Maine, the the transgender athletes with all due respect to the female athletes who lose to the male athletes who are pretending to be women. It's not as big as this. Not at all. No, it's not. And yeah, exactly. And it needs to be treated like a national security threat. And there needs to be a whole of government response to it. You need to use the environmental protection agency to go after these facilities that we know we're using unregistered poisons. The problem is, is that the weed, uh, scammers are not just Chinese. They're American too. And why not? A lot of there's I know money. I know I know I know I have a million friends who grow marijuana. I'm not against everyone who goes marijuana. I'm saying, um, I know a lot of people grow marijuana. I think because they're afraid to smoke marijuana from the Chinese trucker tells us this poison with good reason or whatever. This is an agricultural state. A lot of people grow marijuana. Yeah. I don't use it, but I get it. I'm talking about like the organized money interests in the United States who are constantly lobbying the federal government for their own economic benefit. Yeah. Right. Yeah. A lot of that. Yeah. Billions of dollars of that. Well, I would say, you know, Bobby Kennedy should treat this like a national health emergency. It is. Uh, with whatever your feelings are on legal marijuana, uh, it's here. It's happening. People are consuming it. It's more popular. There are more daily active marijuana users than daily active alcohol users. This happened just I think within the last year or two. Um, so it's happening. And to the extent that these illicit Chinese poisons are making it into that supply, it is a national health emergency. And it needs to be responded to it just like that. Um, but there's also there are powerful economic interests that align with what the Chinese are doing in, uh, the Baptist and bootleggers fashion. Like there are marijuana companies that want to become the Budlighter Corres Light of marijuana. What do they benefit from? Uh, a harsh, strict regulatory environment that they can, uh, comply with easily costs that they have the capital to deal with, but the little mom and pop cannabis producers don't. So they tolerate and allow and maybe encourage this kind of wild wild west of which the Chinese marijuana growers are part because they know that the Chinese criminal organizations, polluting the marijuana environment in Maine will lead to calls for greater regulatory crackdown and it compliance regime that works favorable to their long-term economic interests. So there are, uh, you know, wealthy companies that give a lot of money to politicians. I would have looked into, um, who are the biggest donors to Governor Jan. Mills and our girl committee in 2019. Who were the big cannabis companies? I should just say, um, you have a, you know, the son of a man who worked at the shoe factory, but you have a fancy college degree. You've got a million different potential life paths and you've chosen to stay in Maine and do this job, making much less than you could have made. If you'd left with your college degree and, um, I'm just grateful that you did that. Well, thank you. This is making a difference. Thank you. I'm, I'm grateful for the, the help and encouragement that, uh, you've given me and, um, the, you know, the attention to, to be here. I know. I know. Why is it falling to you to do this? Honestly, honestly, Tucker, you're like my psychotherapist because you know, I feel like, uh, I'm moving out to it with zoom lenders. I feel like I'm taking crazy pills as I drive around and I see all these marijuana sites. I'm like, how has it taken this long for somebody to tell this story? So for finding for somebody else to be like, yeah, that is fascinating story. It's, it feels gratifying, to the work that we've done. And I have to say that mean it's been, uh, like a team, a team-wide work that my reporters have, uh, you know, had to tolerate me just disappearing into the woods of Maine where there's no cell phone signal for days at a time to do some of this work. And, uh, our digital media producer, Graham Pollard is, he's one of the best in the country and he single-handedly put together the documentary that we made on this. Uh, and he's just so wildly talented. And a lot of this I don't think I could have done, uh, without their help and their assistance and also the readers and supporters of, uh, our organization, the Maine wire and a lot of the people who were very brave and gave us tips anonymously. People in government, people who work for utility companies, town officials, you know, it's the initial start, sorry started coming out. People came to us with a lot of, uh, harrowing information that they were too scared to, um, put their name to, but ended up being very useful to us and connecting the dots, uh, and, and being able to tell the story that we've told. That's be it, man. I think, I think you're in danger and I know that you know you are in danger. So thank you for doing this anyway. Thank you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's a more. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.