Hello, yo, it's going on man. Yeah, good to see you. Thanks. Thanks. I feel a little overdressed. Sorry about you look good You know, oh look at that a little bit of starry night there. Yeah, you're really into that. Oh, yeah I got I guess is that yeah, so you remember yeah, yeah, yeah, it's on the phone Starry night what you like about starry night. It's not what Vango saw That night it's what he felt How do you know what he felt? Because this is not a representation of reality and anything that deviates from reality is Reality that has filtered through your senses and I think art at its highest is exactly that if this was an exact depiction of reality It would be a photograph and I don't need the artist Okay, so even photographs that take you to a slightly other kind of dimension as you gaze upon them It's more than what was actually going on at the time and that's That's art taken to the craft of photography. That's why you like it. That's one of the reasons why plus I think it was the very first painting Where it's title is the background think about that This could have been called you know in the full painting obviously this is a Yeah, yeah, so there's a town there. There's a cypress tree. There's a church steeple It could have been called a cypress tree. It could have been called sleepy village It could have been called rolling hills, but no it's called starry night and everything in front of it Everything in front of it is just in the way and how often do you paint something where the title is the background That that's my point and in this particular case the background is the universe and so so for me This was a pivot point in art and it's 1889 which is recent given the history of Paintings and you know that go all way back. So yeah, there it is that your favorite painting ever I have to say yes, you have a vest and a It's not what are you doing Yeah, I have four or five ties that have this painting on them in different ways Yeah, so what's it put them all in I'm all in what's interesting is that the Town is wait, have you seen starry night in bacon? Somebody did look and dig it up on the screen. It's somebody did it in bacon. It was just Weird Yeah, so yeah, how weird go back to the original one please What's interesting about the original one is that the town is realistically depicted the trees or recognizable as trees if you ever saw a sky that looked like that the end would be here Exactly plus that swirling is not Wind and it's not clouds because if it was it was clouds you wouldn't see the stars right. Let's start It's how he felt that's all I can tell you by the way That's is a real evening. So that's sorry. It's not even the it's early morning The crescent moon when it's that orientation means this is before sunrise and that white object lower on the horizon That's sort of glowy. That's very likely Venus and that enables us to trace what's over? What set of weeks this painting was actually Painted so it's it's kind of like forensic astronomy Has anyone done an analysis of like where he must have been yeah? Yeah, that's well known. Yeah, he was in a real place and so that he did pull this out of his ass Right, I mean it was he painted what he saw folded into what he felt Yeah, that's how art should be I think yeah, otherwise what would he need artists for Make cool shit the cool stuff is something that they felt then it came out of them. Yeah And they feel stuff they artist feel feel the natural world in ways different from the rest of us and That's why they're artists do they or do they just express it with oh, sorry Yes, they not only yes We all can feel it but to be able to express it that that's a whole other talent right just to keep you know What I think about often? Why do why do we all know who Paul Revere is? Right, we all we it's a household name yet is there any other war ever fought in the history of the world Where a household name is the name of the person who told other people the enemy was coming We we can mention his name, but we can't list the generals that all fought in that war why it's because A poem was written about him and he had this mundane job Let me tell people the enemy is coming and so the artist in this case the poet elevated the mundane To something that forces you to to reckon it with your understanding of this world What's Joyce Joyce Kilmer's most famous poem? It's about a tree Dogs piss on trees you drive by trees. You don't even know they're there Yet a poem about a tree. I'll never see something as lovely as a tree. Oh my gosh So the art forces you to pause and just reflect on things that you took for granted things that became ordinary in your life And they were elevated to To they get beatified by the talents of artists. That's a word Oh, be out of five you never know be out of five yeah, I'm using it loosely It's the intermediate step between being an ordinary person and being a saint The be identification of someone in the Catholic Church. I would have thought it's making something more beautiful Oh, babe, okay, I don't it could have similar roots be at be be you yeah, yeah It could come from that but To be it be be out of five is the first steps on route to sainthood Yeah, that's if I remember the word correctly. Here goes. Oh, you got it pulled it up definition to make supremely happy Christianity declare to have attained blessedness of heaven and authorize the title blessed and Limited public religious honor. She was be out of five six years after her death. Yeah, so I think you can't become a saint unless you Previously been be out of five. I think that's the rule But I'm looking at the number one definition there to make supremely happy So that's interesting. Yeah, that that moved ahead of it definition of be out of five. Yeah So it's a to be out of five. Well, the verb was up there. You had on the screen Roman Catholic Church He be out of five one Diego and Indian belief to have a vision of a Virgin Mary Synonyms canonize sanctify holocaust create so I think if you take something ordinary and you subjected to the interpretation of an artist It can be be out of five and elevated on a level where it becomes a household recognition of its importance in this world So my brothers and artists my brothers and artists. So I have a fine art, but also In paints and he teaches history of art So I I've had this sort of baptism my whole life Being exposed to him. I'm that you know the the sibling scientist But the they have an artist in the family. I just everyone should have an art I've got an uncle and of course the the whole steam movement science technology engineering and math The artist got in there say wait. I'm a sort of stem the stem movement Science and they're meant they want to throw in the a To get art as part of that movement science technology engineering art and math change it from stem to steam It's a steam so you get full steam ahead steam is a better word in that well They both good words for what they need But that just sounds like a bunch of awesome stuff like it does and yeah, I'm not throwing comedy and You know it seems like you're getting very it's like the LBGTQ a Like things get really squirrely when you start adding more letters. Yeah, you can add letters But if it doesn't spell anything then the memorization has to kick in but steam you don't have to memorize that It's already there for you. Yeah, so it's cleverly conceived. I think it the abbreviation was it's tacit recognition that these are elements in society that advanced civilization and and grow the economy actually so in fact there's hardly any growth economy in the world that isn't growing because it has meant not having been touched by science or technology Everything just think about it So if you're around running you don't have them on your show But if you're on around saying I don't like science science is bad science is evil Okay, well then you will Dine poverty if you like the officials who believe that as well Well, fuck thinks that science is bad in 2019 and how do they express this they express it through science? Okay So you know I'm saying like are they saying it online? I have a book coming out in a month called letters from an astrophysicist Okay, yeah, it's not it's not out yet. I've got it. It's not how did you get a copy But I don't even have my copy yet, okay What I'm saying in there There's a whole chapter on just angry people who don't like anything including science and one of them It's a it's a it's a riff He just says I hate it and it's science and that science is bringing some of the worst things It's ever happened to humanity and pollution and this goes on and on and on and on and on and so I reply It's letters from an astrophysicist and I reply as as calmly and as rationally as is possible when you get attacked that way, but what I'm saying is Not everyone embraces everything that science does and some will cherry pick it You have the science deniers for global warming of science deniers with vaccines You have science deniers with GMOs. Yeah, there's there's all manner of science denying going on in modern society and You know we in a free society What are you gonna do right? People can think what they want, but if thinking what they want influences policy Which then affects everybody then your science denial has consequences to the economic health of the nation and by the way It's not only economics. It's your the economic health It's your physical health because medicine flows through advances in science as well as our security Well, there's people that deny some aspects of science while conveniently using other That's where it gets weird right? You're driving a car that's relying on GPS You're using a phone to complain about the global warming hoax. You know you're correct one one of my more more sort of popular tweets was you remember when they we had the photo of the black hole from a distant galaxy and It was banner headlines maybe a year ago less than a year ago banner headlines and first photo ever of a black hole and it was an astounding Engineering achievement to accomplish that. It was multiple telescopes all around the world Pulling the data to get it right and it was one of the greatest collaborative efforts. We've ever undertaken in my field of astrophysics Okay, and everybody was loving the results. So all I tweeted was scientist report first photo of a black hole public Scientists report humans are warming the earth. Oh You're getting boarded up. Okay Scientist we produce the first ever image of a supermassive black hole 55 million light years away. They're response Scientists we've concluded that humans are catastrophically warming the earth Response that conflicts with what I want to be true so it must be false. Well, that is the cherry picking of science It is the cherry picking of science But the global warming thing is very much connected to a certain type of ideology of a certain type of person thinks of the Matter to me no nonsense person what I'm saying what yes, it does matter what I'm trying to say is That is a demographic That has cherry picked science to deny human-causical warming There are other demographic demographics that have cherry picked other science to deny other things and it's not all located in one political spectrum I mean one political branch So you tend to find liberal folk complaining that the conservatives who have embraced know the global warming platform are Denying science and they need science on their side and many of those same people are rubbing crystals together to be healed by the crystal energy or their denying vaccines thinking that there's somehow bad for you and so so all of this requires some or total rejection of mainstream science and We we're living in that world now, and I don't know I don't think it'll stop the progress of civilization But it can certainly slow it down and occasionally stall it Well, that is a certainly a problem But how big of a problem is it like how many people are really in denial of science in 2019 it's got to be for me in a free country That's not what matters what matters is in a free country that you elect officials who are not Officials yes, you you elect people who are scientifically literate. Yeah, they don't have to be scientists I Or if the not scientifically literate they should be self aware of that and Then listen to people who are right So don't you think what they're doing though is They're they're doing what their constituents would like them to do. That's why I don't be politicians over the head Ever I don't do that where where where republic where democracy Whatever they believe if they think earth is six thousand years old and they got elected It's because the people elected them believe this he earth is six thousand years old or because they're willing to let that one go because they believe in Oh, possibly That's a good point because you have a portfolio of thoughts and beliefs or because you're such a profound Christian I mean, he's so profoundly Christian that he's just plenty of Christians who are connected to science that don't Including the Pope by the way, you know, can you get more Christian than the Pope? All right, he believes in science now Just new Pope is pretty interesting. Yeah, if you read if you read his encyclical from a couple of years ago It's it's it's a scientifically literate doc document yeah, and no this okay So it's not he's still religious right? So Jesus still rose from the dead and there is still miracles and all the rest of that in the New Testament So that he's not in denial of that but given that he is saying oh my gosh Here's something we the religious community and scientists can partner behind and that if we want to save life on earth And so we have to be better shepherds of what is going on on this earth and one of them is we don't want to flood Low-line countries in the South Pacific where the average sea level is ten feet above sea level or whatever it is You're gonna lose these countries if you keep melting our our our The the the ice caps because that would include a north and there's no land in the north So the glacier ice that's land-based ice right because any ice that's in the water floating that can melt and it's not going to change the Water level so it's why you can do this experiments really cool fill up your glass Some a few cubes of ice in a glass of water Fill the glass up as much as you possibly can without spilling it and the ice is bobbing above that level Okay, because ice is about 10% buoyant on that about 10% of an ice cube will be lifted above This is this is the this is the iceberg equation right? All right, that's the tip of the iceberg well You see the 10% above and 90% is not visible to you This is by the way I don't want to get too many off-ramps here, but that's one of the one of the things that they did right in Titanic Okay, if you look at the earliest Titanic movie that was in black and white They see this huge iceberg on the horizon and then it can they can't swear away from it because it oh my gosh It doesn't have to know no The iceberg that cuts the bottom of your boat is a little bit of ice sticking out above the water because 90% of it is Underwater and that's where the damage occurs and in the James Cameron Titanic The iceberg that they hit above water was looks like a little chunk of ice It'll that couldn't hurt anything all the damage was under work. Anyhow, so back to this So do this experiment and then let the glass sit there and let the ice melt and The water level will stay the same Because when ice melt it gets takes a lower volume than it was when it became ice Mmm, and that's why pipes break. I thought pipes break just because the water expands Yeah, I just described that in the opposite direction. Oh As it freezes it but it know it gets larger That's what expansion means what kind of what's with your vocabulary here right? No, but I'm saying like So your ice cube is sitting 10% your ice cube is sitting 10% above the water level and it melts and becomes water The water takes up 90% of the volume of the ice Right, so that just melts back into the water and it doesn't overflow Even though it was sticking above the water line when you had the glass So now let's do the opposite. Okay, there's water in the pipes. Right. Can I tell you something that might blow your mind? No Sure How many times is your mind? You at least once a day yeah, at least you need your mind blown. Okay? Here's how it works. Okay So let's put water in the pipes Okay And then the temperature drops Now pipes have a certain strength copper pipes, you know that they're rigid Okay, I'm breaking pipe. Okay, so no one has to choose it's so the water's in there and now the temperature begins to drop okay The water wants to turn to ice But it can't Because the pipe is containing it So it just sits there, okay at 32 degrees as water even though the temperature outside is dropping below 32 degrees Okay, and it still sits there gets the 30 degrees 29 The pipe is squeezing the attempt of this water to become Ice and the active squeezing it prevents the temperature from dropping Okay, and you the temperature drops depending on how strong the pipe is and and the temperature gradient across it as the outside temperature continue it gets to now 25 degrees the pipe is still holding on to the liquid water That and it's still 32 degrees inside there and it holds on to and it's keeps happening and it keeps happening You get a point where the pipe can no longer contain the water and the water freezes Spontaneously it just goes right down to that temperature and the pipe is helpless in the face of this So the point is the stronger the pipe is the lower the temperature has to be outside For the freezing water to break so theoretically if you had a pipe that was made of a stronger material than copper You can get even lower than you get an even lower temperature. How low can you get? Uh Because that when when things freeze they have to expand so watch not only when water freezes Water expand when it's it's it's a it's a remarkable fact about water that is shared by very few other ingredients most things when they cool They shrink as all men know So So most most materials because things cooler the vibrating molecules Slow down and they take up less space water is the opposite of that as it passes down through so so I'm gonna describe to you an extraordinary fact about water and why we're alive today Okay, so watch let's take a lake that has fish in it Okay temperature drops outside And the lake slowly begins to get cooler because there's a tent time lag between the air temperature and the waters That's why the first freeze the lake is still there. It's got to be called longer. All right, so what happens the water gets cold on the surface okay and It begins to Okay, the water is cold on its surface and it begins to shrink So that water false it's shrink that makes it denser it falls to the bottom fine It does that down to about four degrees Celsius As it goes from 40 degrees Celsius to zero degrees Celsius the freezing point It begins to expand and Become less dense than the water So now as the water wants to actually freeze It stays on top When it does freeze you freeze the top surface of the lake Well, how about the water below it it's insulated From the dropping air temperature and the fish don't die Imagine if ice would denser than water what would happen? You'd freeze the top layer It would sink the bottom is frozen freeze the next layer It sinks and fish would be systematically forced to swim in shallower and shallower waters until they were all Freeze dried on the top surface of the lake and all fishes would be dead Every winter. I think it's every lake Fish what you suppose to say fishes fishes is a double plural you could do that yeah Your fish would be dead. You never called deer. Would you say all deers? Well, because generally it's one if you had multiple kinds of deer Yeah, so if you had like sit could yeah, but but but it's rare that they're all in the same place You generally have one kind of deer on but the ocean has many kind of fish in the same place. Oh Yeah, that's interesting. So you would say fishes fishes It's a double plural. It's different kinds of plural fish. Oh Yeah double below my mind. Oh, you know, you know, you know it again. Oh, no No, no, no, I never thought it was that way there many fishes in the oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So sorry dishes in the sea yeah, so Multiple plurals of different kinds of get where ocean water freezes Because that's what it's all did salt water. Do you have the refreshes up there somewhere to normally that happened where There was two or two little oxygen in the water and somehow the frozen fish got pushed out in a wall of ice Is this South Dakota? So there's two little oxygen. I don't know. I can't explain that I don't have it there if you look at the if you look at the green in the water most likely it's algae So that happens with certain lakes that get polluted with certain types of you can kill the lake by doing that Yeah, like and well you get it in the ocean to get these zones But that's how you get frozen fish though. That's incredible But yeah, so don't stop go back up. Yeah scroll down So you could read it fish fish frozen a wall of ice South Dakota's lake and these national wildlife refuge. That's incredible man. Is that a video Jamie? Yeah, I could just the pictures though. I don't know how they froze because they can just swim to where it's not frozen So I'd have to do more homework on that one to see what what caused that wow So so so my point is because of this property of water that ice floats It insulates the bottom layers of the lake and fish can survive over the winter because of this work too, right? Insulate so you can inside you get a like a nice spot. Yeah, sure. Yeah Yeah, I mean if you put a barrier between you and the changing elements outside that's basically an insulating layer Do you have an ice fishing? No, I never never It's a good one New York City person People go ice fishing. I'm sure in central women go ice fishing you get away from their husbands. They do. Yeah, okay Why do people golf? You know, okay? Ice fishing is particularly weird because you have to continually scoop out the ice and maybe even drill again, right? So that works because Frozen water is less dense than non frozen water and it's one of the rare ingredients for which that so and it's likely there would be no life on land or Anywhere on earth that that we're the case if the opposite of that we're the case so water is a very special ingredient to life on earth It's cited by many religious folks is saying see earth is sacred for these it's in the list of special Ingredients for what make earth habitable for life That that is a really strange thing though that if you can contain it somehow or an incredibly strong pipe Yes, it won't freeze. Yes. It won't freeze. What is a temperature variant though? Is there a number well? That's why that's why pipes don't freeze when it just hits 30 degrees outside That's not when you hear it right? It freezes when it gets really low when you crack and then it'll it'll break the copper like its paper It'll tear it like it's like it's not now on the flip side of that Try this at home take an ice cube that's like at 30 degrees Okay How would you measure that pull out an ice cube and just because they'll be at near zero Fahrenheit? If you if you have a good freezer just pull out and leave it on the counter put put it on a wooden cutting board Okay, and just let it sit there for like 10 minutes and its temperature will come up They'll be a point where it hasn't melted yet But you can take it and squeeze the ice cube And you can force it to melt by squeezing it Because you're forcing it into a smaller volume that it currently contains and the only way you can accomplish that is If the ice turns to water then it will occupy a smaller volume So the active squeezing ice can actually melt it? So if you had some sort of a pipe that could physically construct like something that had threads in it That could wind down to a smaller size you could stick a cylinder of ice in it and you could slowly crank it down Yes, yes, yes, it would melt yes You can melt if you had some machine that squeezed ice Yeah, and the colder the ice is the harder this the more you The harder it would be for you to squeeze it to to accomplish that So it's sort of fun with ice in fact, you know what else you can do This is a harder experiment to do if you take us a a mesh like a screen mesh That's to be sort of wider openings than a screen doorwood So what would this be like a fence like a a chain link fence and hold it horizontally and get a big block of ice and just place it on top A block of ice that's heavy What will happen is the ice the weight of the ice will melt the ice in the contact points of the chain itself Because it's feeling that pressure to squeeze into a smaller volume But by the time it melts the ice has now passed through the grate and it will rephrase on the other side So you can actually pass a block of ice through a chain link fence vertically just by pushing it Yeah, it's pretty it's pretty cool. It's a slow experiment, but it's wrong I mean it depends on the temperature the ice and how and how and how much it weighs Because the pressure is what this is why this why you can ice skate Why can you skate on ice? Because the edge of the blade is very high pressure on the ice and it's melting a bead of Water and you're actually gliding on water when you're skating you're not skating on slippery ice Really? Yes. I thought you were just cutting the ice with the blade. Well, so the blade have you ever seen a sharpened blade? It's not just flat. There's actually a concave cross-section to it. So each edge the left edge and the right edge is is basically a knife edge Okay, not quite as sharp as a knife, but it's you can feel how it's it's sharp so that when you lean on that edge Either your inner edge or outer edge Your entire body weight is being held up on this on a very narrow surface area of the blade so the pressure is Extreme It's like you know thousand pounds per square inch. You don't weigh a thousand pounds, but you're not skating on a square inch right so you Do the math on that and what you can have is You will skate and you're actually what makes it so slippery on ice skates is because you're moving on a bead of Water that freezes right behind you as you go past it Dude Yeah, so it's possible for ice to be so cold. You can't really skate on it Because even that pressure is not enough to melt it. How cold it have to be that I last I did a calculation was really cold like Tens of degrees below zero. How does dry ice work? Oh, it's just frozen carbon dioxide. That's all So here's the difference here's the difference you have a block of frozen H2O and a block of frozen CO2 so there they are it turns out the air pressure on earth is High enough at sea level is high enough to allow the ice To melt and sustain a liquid state Okay, the CO2 Under air pressure normal air pressure It wants to melt, but it can't sustain a liquid and it goes straight to gas If we had much higher air pressure You could you could have CO2 melt and have liquid CO2 So now watch what happened. So so Can I blow your mind again? This is just this is really good stuff. Okay. It's good like physical chemistry. So here you go So watch it happens. So what happens if I reduce the air pressure Okay, well the transition from ice to water is still the same. It's not affected But the boiling point is affected As you know cooking times have to be adjusted on mountaintops Because when you boil water is not 212 degrees Depending on the height of the mountain there's less air pressing down That that's preventing it from boiling Okay, the boiling point is not some absolute fact about the water It has to do with what the air pressure is sitting above it. Do you have extremely high air pressure? Water has to go to much higher temperature before it boils So our so the boiling point of water that's reported in all textbooks is at sea level at one atmospheric pressure That's how you get 212 degrees if you start reducing the atmospheric pressure it's 210 degrees 205 degrees 200 degrees 190 degrees 180 degrees No, yes, and so that's not as hot as 212 degrees. She got to cook the food longer All cooking times are increased for this reason So now watch I'm not done with you. Uh-oh. Let's keep reducing the air pressure Okay theoretical. Well like possible on earth No, no, like Himalayas. Yeah, but or take it up You can ascend in some kind of copter or some kind of device Air balloon whatever, but I'm saying you can do this experiment in a in a laboratory Okay, okay, you keep reducing the air pressure boiling point keeps dropping. It's 170 degrees 150 120 100 degrees Fahrenheit 80 degrees Fahrenheit 50 degrees Fahrenheit 40 degrees Fahrenheit 32 degrees Fahrenheit Holy shit. What happens? The ice melts and becomes water The water evaporates and becomes steam and all of that's happening at 32 degrees There is an atmospheric pressure for which water ice and steam coexist And it's called the triple point of water and all ingredients have a triple point Wow, what is the bars Mars is very close to the triple point of water so you can have you can have a simultaneous bath in certain regions of Mars a simultaneous bath because the air pressure is so low. It's like 1 100th earth's air pressure. It's very very low So you know a place where a pot of water ice cubes and steam are coming out all at once It's at the triple point So so here's the lesson here is we live life in our world At one atmospheric pressure at one The room temperature atmospheric pressure and we define what is normal based on that life experience Based on how our senses interact with that environment but the actual universe is far Freakyer then what we that what our senses are exposed our five senses are exposed to on earth What did you think about Elon Musk's idea about nuking the poles of Mars in order to make it warmer? Yeah, so some of these are kind of behind the sky ideas, right? But let's let's get to what he's trying to get at what you want to do is you want to introduce warmth You want to block the ozone that you want to block the ultraviolet So that you can protect organic life All right, so we have an ozone layer. It's three oxygen atoms. Oh three and Oxy- ozone likes ultraviolet light So ultraviolet light comes from the Sun and gets eaten by ozone Gets eaten and when you do that The ultraviolet light doesn't make it to earth surface. So even though they say aware where Sunscreen and Sunblock 45 yes That's for the one percent of the ultraviolet it gets through the atmosphere If you're above the atmosphere you are fried so the because ultraviolet is highly hostile to organic molecules and what we're made of as life So you want to protect you want to give life a chance So you want to not only heat Mars you want to find a way to block the ultraviolet light coming from the Sun So you need some mechanism if not ozone where it just live underground for example, okay? and so so I don't think we should think of the idea as a literal thing But just it's a general principle of what you want to accomplish on Mars in doing so So you want to warm it you want to protect what could be the future of Biochemistry and then you seed it and you and then you wait You want to wait too long you want it so to speed it up if you could and then you terraform Mars SpaceX has I visited him a couple of times. He's he's got a mug you can buy there Then it has Mars on it, okay? and then you put hot liquid in it and Mars turns to an arable Blue-green marble So yeah, it's very good and it doesn't tell you that when you so I got a Mars mug You know and you show it off and oh my gosh. What did that happen? Is it earth mug, but it doesn't look like earth There's a lot of people that go on Also, we think there's a lot of Water that was once on Mars which is a certainty and we think it's just sitting below in a permafrost So you wouldn't have to bring water To Mars by the way in the really distant future you can just redirect a comet and get all the water you need But how far distance that the comets everywhere do we're in a shooting gallery? Yeah, that's not what I asked. Oh Away do you think it is before we could read the right how far away in time? Yes, okay, sorry We know how to do it, but there's no real incentive so there's no Engineering funded engineering plan to do it, but we don't have to do it on paper. We know how to do it in a conceivable way Oh, yeah, so there so first of all it happens with it without us because we are in the shooting path of Countless thousands of asteroids and comets So what you would do is you'd find one that's headed close to us anyway in the seventh orbit down the line or the hundredth orbit down the line and then you Slightly deflected in such a way that it would then collide with Mars or even Earth if you wanted Earth needed to more fresh water Yeah, I heard that there's a possibility But it is a state the problem is if if something really big that would fill lakes Worthor if that collided with earth that would just be bad for life on earth Because it's a spontaneous deposit of energy that can change the climate and do what you want to do that on a planet that you're trying to Terraform isn't that the speculation of how water got here in the first place So if the jury still out on that there's their tags in the oceans In the water molecule that tell you That the water must have come from more than one source. So that's what's confusing things We we want it to be a simple thing it all came by comets or it all came from inside the earth through volcanoes volcanoes emit Lakes and historically Lakes and oceans worth of water just out of there Calderas so So the problem is what as we sign signs over determined this plenty of comets to have delivered all the water There's plenty of water that could have come out of out of Volcanoes to give us all the way so but in the oceans it's clearly a mixture and so The final word is still out on that What do you think about what's going on? Why now with the protesting of the building of this largest and latest telescope? Yes, the the the TMT 30 meter telescope which would be To you know the largest ever by far of any kind of telescope the history of astronomy is one where Bigger telescopes become bigger buckets To collect light that's the only telescopes today are the same as telescopes when they were invented They're just bigger right the principle behind them is bigger because what they're doing is simple All you're trying to is get as much light as possible and the more light you get The dimmer is the object you can detect and the farther away is the object You can see and so for every generation of new large telescopes that have been built It is it has increased and deepened our understanding of our place in the universe So that's just the that's the background the proposal is for a 30 meter telescope largest ever On the big island of Hawaii in Monocana where there are other telescopes there Other that's where the kek is right. Yeah, I think if I The kek is I think they they cited it in a place that sort of tucked behind Most sight lines to it, but that's not so much what's important here. It's that the native Hawaiians from what I've read View the mountain as a sacred place and so To put a telescope yet another telescope there becomes sort of invasion of sacred land and so so yeah, it's it's a there's a standoff last I looked I mean people protesting in the streets and There's some native Hawaiians who embrace this because it means jobs High quality jobs engineering jobs because you got to build it. You got to maintain it. There's an entire Supportive infrastructure for that that means jobs And it's done in collaboration with the University of Hawaii and The only other telescopes are partnered with the University of Hawaii where people are educated there and so so at the end of the day You have to ask well how are you gonna make decisions going forward? Are you gonna make them democratically then you take a vote or you do you want the natives to To be the deciders of their own fate and is that democratic? Okay, so the natives vote Okay, or is it the few people who are protesting? Did they win the day? I mean it's it's complicated and it's very it's very there a lot of nuanced issues going on there There's a branch of thinking that the the United States government and and normal municipal Leaders have no authority over it. There's some who claim that this is Native Hawaiian property that does not belong to any Municipal entity of the US government so therefore Even state representatives have no say right so there's a lot going on there Okay, but if I were to weigh in this is how I would do so okay, I would say first I Think what should happen is I don't know if they even have if the the infrastructure I don't know how the system is set up But if they could set it up this way If the mountain is viewed as sacred by the natives The natives should have Entire say of what happens to the mountain. Okay That's how I think that should be so now What you want to make sure is that whatever decision gets made and voted upon By the natives that it's fully informed You know you don't want to vote being misinformed or under-informed in any election Let alone whether you're voting for a telescope on your sacred mountain Okay, otherwise you're voting out of nowhere right? Yeah, you're you're you're influencing your future based on partial information and Decisions based on partial information are bad decisions no matter what okay, so I would say hold a vote with the natives and Make sure everybody's fully informed and here's a bit of information. I just want to add to the information Okay, you know what we do as astrophysicists we study the universe Rather passively at that we sit there at the end of a telescope and wait for light to reach us It's not a petri dish where we stir it or heat it or freeze it or crack it or We're just kind of there Commuting with the cosmos My PhD thesis was significantly fed by data that I obtained from mountaintops at telescopes I got my data from mountains in Chile Setter Tolo and it employed all the natives the local people That's another telescope that so there's all these telescopes that all have specific Access points to the universe they're not all asking the same questions Right and so it's the collection of all the data that gives us the complete understanding What we think is a complete understanding of the universe so What we do is try to understand our place in the universe and all I'm going to say is that If you have power over what happens on that mountain and It's sacred to you because Whatever that is It is something important to you and your sense of your understanding of your place in this world That's would be spiritual significance. I can tell you That what we learn as astrophysicists From those mountaintops gives us a deeper understanding Of who and what we are in this universe So I would say Whatever is your concept of God Be it the the creator of the universe the spirit energy that pervades all of space and time whatever is your concept The discoveries of astrophysicists Bring you closer to it. I get your perspective. Let me be The opposing view I'm not trying to know I know you know this is just information I'm putting this is information and I walk out of the room and then you all vote Right, I'm not you know, we believe in democracy here and majority rules. That's it. That's kind of a good thing It's kind of worked Right, but if it's not majority rules. I don't know how they're gonna make decisions But let's say Invent a future where that the natives vote if they vote. I want to make sure they heard what I just said and And and now take control of your own fate. I just don't think they care I think they've decided that that's a sacred space and they don't want anybody doing anything to it Then that's their decision them. You think that's okay. I know I don't I don't judge People's But if you wanted to make out convincing appeal to them no all I would say what I just told you that's it that is all I would tell them And when they vote I want them to understand That fact I could take it one step further and say Mountain tops because of the access they give astrophysicists and and by proxy us all to the universe Our sacred places to scientists Okay, now it's not sacred in a religious sense but it's sacred in a in terms of a pathway To knowing and understanding who and what we are in this universe We place great value on that So but it's not our land it's with you know So specifically these things have your peers didn't come to Hawaii and find find legions of scientists They're conducting experiments. Okay. They found native peoples governing themselves So so that's that the consequence if it gets voted down and that's permanent and there's no way around that That telescope is still going to be built. It just won't be built in Hawaii Well, where will it be built? They have to be built on mountain tops. Yeah, so there are other mountain tops. Yeah, you want to be above you know Schmitzi clouds and Hayes and and You want to dry environments so there's less rain. I went to the clouds. You visit it. Yeah, very good to the kek more than 10 years ago with the first time and It was I got very fortunate. It was a night where the moon was not out. Yes Moon is not this astronomers Favorite thing. Yeah, you want the darkest sky you can we were worried as we were driving up there There was really cloudy But we drove through the clouds You got to the top and we got to the observatory and it was the most amazing without telescopes just we there was telescopes there But without telescopes It was the most amazing view of the sky I'd ever seen in my life and it changed my perspective of our place in the universe It was like we were on a spaceship Like we were flying through the universe because of the diffused lighting in on the big island because it's all set up So that it doesn't ruin what they're trying to accomplish at the kek when you minimize reflections in the wrong place It's amazing Not only that if there was a moon out and you did ascend up through the clouds The moonlight illuminates the clouds and you are an island in the middle of white Cotton yeah And you're not even connected to the earth. It's what you imagine Mount Olympus would have been I've been out there for the one that happens With the gods up there and there's kind of that's their place. It's there so so So yes, and so any my my brethren my fellow astrophysicist who have also observed from mountaintops By the way, it's becoming a lost art because when I It's not lost but if you're coming something we don't do anymore Something called service observing where you put in your observing program and it's handed to a technician at the telescope Who points the telescope gets the data and sends it back to you? So the next generation Doesn't have the experience that my generation did because there was a pilgrimage to the top of the mountain and you converted your life's Path you converted your life's schedule to become nocturnal and in so doing You you know, this is the journey was long enough because you're in the middle of nowhere now You got to go nocturnal and by the time you're ready for this you are communing with the cosmos. It is you the detector the telescope and the universe and There's an eerie silence up there too because you don't hear any it's the hum of maybe the the draw the motor or of the telescope But that's it and So all I'm saying is if they choose to not have it the telescope will go somewhere else one of them is the Canary Islands These are also volcanic Hilltops not as high as As Mount Ekea as at 14,000 feet by the way I should have checked in what temperature water boils at the top of Mount Ekea we could have rounded that story out but I think it's around 180 degrees actually I think I did actually calculate it one time but anyhow so So you'd find a mount up and we'll put it somewhere else and the data won't be as good But that'll be a consequence of it and none of that'll go to Hawaii How do you think that's gonna get resolved though if you had a guess I don't know I I Just don't know a lot of people are against it including Jason Momoa Aquaman's against it. Oh uh-huh Who's out there protesting? Yeah, and so we need to get celebrity types to put the weight of their name behind it It magnifies the cause of others even if they're in the minority and so I like I said I think natives should I Has it been someone who all the natives are is there is there some listing so that they can all vote for this one thing You wouldn't want people voting who are not native if you're voting on whether it's so sacred You don't want to put a telescope there. You want people who have a an indigenous an Indigenous Concern for what goes on there and indigenous in reference to Hawaii's relative every usage of the word indigenous is relative Yeah, especially with Hawaii because I mean the only indigenous people are black people in Africa Because life human life began in Africa. Everyone else traveled to where they were so so native it's you set a timeframe to declare what is native and what's not and A native and it's in its simplest form is are you born there? So I'm a native New Yorker. I'm born there, but I wasn't the original settler there I would my species did not form on Manhattan Island so everybody Travel to where they are they just got there before the Europeans and so that has become the definition of indigenous All right, we you there when the Europeans landed then you're indigenous but to other life forms on that rock on that Hawaii's are of volcanic it's a volcanic archipelago You know how that happens by the way you have all these multiple volcanoes in a string you have a wonder why How that happens? Sure you did wonder what you do. You know why oh because there's a hotspot beneath earth's crust It's just sitting there Okay, and when you beneath earth's crust stuff doesn't move around the way it does on earth's crust Earth's crust shifts. Okay, so that hotspot gurgles up makes a volcano Then the hotspot goes dormant But the cot the the shelf still drifts You still have continental drift so drifts then the hotspot says time for me to gurgle again It grows up now you get another volcano And then it goes dormant that volcano goes dormant. It shifts You get another one anytime you see an a chain of islands Jet Guarantee they're made by volcanoes over enough time for continental drift to it shifted the plates Over the hotspot of earth's mantle. So do you think what they're concerned with is the eventual spoiling of this beautiful natural resource that slowly but surely people are putting up houses there and Developments and all these different things and then the scientists are saying we need this sacred land because we're gonna put a volcano And they like luck with this idea this already a I mean we're gonna put a telescope. There's already a telescope up here Enough You think that's what it is they're trying to halt the progress of civilization or I mean maybe progress is a bad word the expansion of Civilization Yeah, I mean think let's go back What did Teddy Roosevelt do he said we got to preserve these lands? Because they're beautiful and by the way he said that after he shot all his elephants and tigers Lines and tigers and bears. Yeah, I mean I I hail from a museum the American Museum of Natural History Where he's the patron saint of that museum What happened was he realizes how important this land is and how beautiful it is and he's the he's the patron saint of the National Park system So so that's the secular version of sacred Right, we don't say it sacred, but we've all decided as a community that we care about these lands And you don't want to drill on it. You don't want to put housing Was it Lyndon Johnson's wife Lady Berg Johnson who said our freeways that were so carefully building after the second world war The Eisenhower freeway project. Okay. Hi. You know the interstate system is This is our country. We want to keep it beautiful So certain stretches over there are no billboards billboards would you know Would change your relationship to nature so certain stretches of interstate are Secularly sacred if if I can say that So I remember visiting Visiting Australia and there's the the famous rock in the Out in the outback the old allura. Oh, luru. Please help me get the get my correct pronunciation of this old Luru And it said it's I'm told it's one coherent Geologic rock it's not just an assembly of rocks And so I don't know enough about the geology of it But I do know that the Australian average in ease Luru and okay iconic red rock look at that cool thing. Okay, so that is one sort of geologic thing and And climbers want to climb it by the excuse miles in circumference. Okay, so We visited it. I rented a bicycle with my wife and kids and we rode around it. Okay, so now That is sacred to The local indigenous peoples So they don't want you to climb on it. Well, I'm a rock climber. I you know, what do you care? I'm not gonna ruin it I'm not gonna they don't want you to climb on it and I try to think to myself Is there a counterpart to this? That would sort of wake up a Westerner to say I get it All right now suppose Some people from So natives from Alaska or from the some tribes from Africa or some aborigines came up from these remote places of the world Walked up to the Vatican and said we want to climb the walls of this Vatican just for sport What would we say? We want to climb the walls of St. Paul's cathedral in downtown London. What would you say no? Yeah, but are those comparable? We want to repel down the tower of Big Ben You're gonna say no get the fuck you would say no These are important structures to us. No, are you gonna say are they equivalent? Well, we built those and the natives didn't build the rock Right exactly. Okay It depends on how important that detail is to you all I'm saying is On the level of we say this is sacred. You say that is sacred And now you're gonna have different rules for whose climbing what I think it'll thwart the force should it take pause So here's an argument in full and Like supporting what you're saying look at what's going on with the Himalayas I mean, it's the human shit that they had they leave behind there all the climbers so disturbing. Yeah, the climbers Yeah, it's horrible. It's really horrible. I mean there's tons of it tons of human waste Okay, so what you do there is if it's still not a problem that people are climbing It's that they're leaving waste. You don't stop the climbers you tax them at some level Now you have cleanup crews that come up after them. Yeah, but it's your solution So you tax them you make it worth it. All right, so you understand like what he wants to leave the bodies up there, right? You know that they can't I heard that's what I heard well Why do you think they could bring tons of shit when they can't even bring bodies? Here's what I'm saying when they invented cars and Cars were killing people in the street because people have known how to cross the street They didn't know where to cross the street people don't know how to stop the cars They say well cars are actually a pretty useful thing. Do we ban cars? No, we make stoplights. Oh People across there will we make crosswalks. Oh, let's put lanes so that cars don't hit each other and Let's make airbags so that you don't fly through the windshield All right, so there are ways around Problems if you value the thing that it is that you want to do So if people even crap up there you make them bring it back Or you develop a system That enables the stuff to come back no matter what and if you can't do that You don't want it messed up then cancel the whole operation We didn't cancel cars. We got really innovative about how to keep them a big difference to treat cars and human shit It's left in your saddle of mountain. I think the real problem too is I think if you value mountain climbing And you want to keep doing it then you solve the problem. This would engineers do that's all they do Because what you probably have been able to bring those bodies back because the physical limitations of the human body It's barely you barely have enough juice to climb It's so thin the air so thin. It's so dangerous and the energy draw on you is so high leave those bodies there Was that the human shit that you're talking about or is that? No, there's no you're talking about the fact that humans were there that we got We're not very clean about our presence. That's what you're talking about right? We're just being human We have to go when you got to go you got to go when you got to go up there You just Open up the hatch and let a rip down the side of a mountain and the resulting Do you know in the space station? They recycle your urine and your then your crap congratulations to them Because they put engineers on the problem They mean they mean they cycle it they extract all the water from it and then what's left is highly dried and they roll Yeah, yeah, water is water. It's water molecule. That's the thing about by the way by the way every People's pee is in it. That's correct. Yes. You got a bottle of water here. Okay. This has Napoleon's pee and yes, yes, there are more molecules of water in this Bottle then there are bottles of water This volume of water in all the world oceans. So in other words if you Drink this and peed it out Okay You have enough molecules in your pee and your sweat and then and then the the moisture that you exhale All that goes back into the environment scattering into all sources of water or the world and there's enough of those molecules to occupy every half liter of water that That covers the surface of this earth so that given enough time you scoop a cup of water out of there I don't even care if you filter it the H20 is still there that is water that is passed through the kidneys of Abraham Lincoln Genghis Khan Joan of Arc Socrates Plato no Jesus Can I get a bottle of Jesus I'm trying to get Mike Mike Bill and Ted's excellent venture list going here Okay, you just ruined it. But yes Jesus would be included in that so would Socrates yes So that is the same by the way the same is true with breaths of air There are more molecules of air in Every breath you take then there are breaths of air in All the atmosphere of the earth So when you exhale there's enough of those molecules to scatter and there the the the air currents will do this to scatter into every breath of air that is in hell So when you take a breath of air you have molecules of air that went through the lungs of Jesus We're all connected and there's no way around it and The water that we have is the water that we have right we drink it we pee it. Yeah goes to the atmosphere Yeah comes down as rain yeah and the rain is is the an important difference is a Lot most of the water on earth is saltwater that you can't drink right there's a limited amount that's fresh water How much of a by the way all the glaciers are fresh water because that's it's frozen rain right frozen rain Here's something that no one talks about when the glaciers melt where does the water go? Where's it go just tell me you know the answer just The ocean back in the ocean okay, so but this is now Non salty water going into the ocean So you're mixing fresh water with brackish water and they occupy different places in the vertical profile of the ocean and Because saltwater is heavier than fresh water so fresh water occupies the top Right, it's not as salty as the water at the below and there are circulations in the ocean not only up and down You know northern latitude southern latitude like the Gulf Stream there's also circulation top to bottom and The combinations of all these circulations create the stability of the ocean if you disrupt that oh my gosh There are animal fishes that can't live anymore where they used to be because the salt level is different and So some animals might go extinct some weather patterns will change because the ocean affects climate So these are this is why climate modeling is so Critical yet so complicated This is because there are a lot of variables that show up Why can't we take the salt out of the water you can't it just takes energy you can do what but why isn't that been being done? You can't you have to ask you It was paying for the energy where you get the energy from it's an energy thing But we think that would be very valuable. I mean think about how many people Enough yet That's the point. Well, is it that it's pure? Just money dude, it's just money you can ask what is it cost to ship a A half-pine of water from Fiji Okay, whatever have is the square bottle that you buy in a Fiji water is it Fiji right yeah Fiji water What is it cost to to bottle that in Fiji ship it here? relative to desalinating the ocean It's cheaper to ship like to Fiji There'll be a day when that's not the case and Future wars are going to be fought over who has access to fresh water and the value of water will go up and by the way the value of water in space is $10,000 a pound So if you if you last to a comet and you say this is a lot of fresh water Yeah, you could I guess you can bring it back down to earth, but that's expensive You better off selling it to NASA for nine thousand dollars a pound Because it cost them ten thousand dollars a pound to put water into orbit So you better off keeping it up there and somehow another yeah So if you if you harness water in space you better off Trading in space with it then bringing it back down to a planetary surface at the moment the economics favor that what is the desalination? Process so it's simple you just evaporate the water. It's basically a still it's It's a distillery right so here's here is a pocket of water with that's a highly salty and you just heat it the H2O evaporates leaving sodium chloride behind and At the ends you get this salt deposit at the bottom of your dish at the bottom of your vessel Oh wait a minute what happens to lakes that used to be there that salty lakes that used to be there that aren't There's a salt deposit. That's the source of our modern day salt. This is why tweeted the other day that all table salt is is is All table salt is sea salt. It just came from long buried Pre-historic evaporated seas so salt mines and I was I was told by some geologist I had I had a narrow on the narrow usage of the word mine I think of a mine I think of a hole in the ground but mining operations include surface operations as well So there's surface lakes that that have evaporated and you get salt from that as well as the mines that you would dig down Deep below so that whole all of that is a mining operation my tweet only reference the buried ones But it's all but it's all from evaporated waters. It's all from evaporated. It's all sea salt is the point now Nuclear power plants rely on steam right isn't that part of a Just to finish the point so you evaporate the water and the salt left Maybe you want to use that make some sea salt out of it table salt And that evaporated water condenses out over here and that is distilled water Now you might want to mineralize it so it tastes good because distilled water doesn't taste good This is not really healthy to drink it as you probably know you drink distilled water It goes into equilibrium with your minerals Sucking minerals out of you so it has the same Minirality that your body does and then you pee it out and you'll systematically drain yourself of important Electrolytes yeah, so generally the water that you would say tastes good and you enjoy has some mineral bits some some some kind of mineral Minerals in it now nuclear power plants don't they the process is using that nuclear energy to create steam to operate Turbines and yeah, basically all our electricity today comes from essentially the mostly electricity is coming from turbines that Convert steam to electricity so sorry so you heat water the water makes steam the steam turns the turbine and the turning turbine Generate the electricity isn't so so you it's it's a matter of way to get the energy To boil the water. That's what it comes out. Is it coal? Is it oil? Is it is it nukes? Is it wind? Is it hydro? All of this if you get a hydro plant Oh by the way in a hydro plant they don't have to make steam because they have the water the water pressure at the base of the dam Moves through the turbines in terms of turbines and they make electricity so you don't have to heat anything Because they have the water pressure to do that anyway that is also solar power by the way Because the Sun evaporated ocean Water the water lifts up becomes a cloud the cloud moves over ground over the land the cloud rains Into the lake that is above the dam So the energy that got the water up there in the first place is all solar So you should think of hydro electric as solar as well as wind energy Because wind is the uneven unequal heat heating of air on earth surface and that creates air currents That's also solar power is also it's also learn is it can see the bullet you could come up with a combination of De-salination and power plant where you're using the heat to combine You know to make the turbines move and then you steam it off and that's where you get the water from that would be a good That's an interesting idea and I don't know how much that's been thought about what you're saying is I'm making steam anyway Yeah, so why don't I do it with salt water out? Yeah, and make that's a nice two for one kind of thing three for one You get salt out the other side get salt gets all you Fresh water get fresh water and you generate electricity. Yeah, so do patent it no I'm free for anybody once it could take that run with it I have high hopes for tidal energy because there's certain places on earth with tides are very powerful in the very And you just put some paddles in there and you sort of and it works both ways when the water comes in and out No, it's a battery technology That's the reason why LA isn't completely dependent upon solar because it seems like this is the spot to do it like it never Rains, I mean if it rains here 50 days. Yeah, it's crazy or any desert right and which would next door to the Mojave desert right? So so one of the problems is By the way the deserts are generally localized to certain latitudes on earth. It's because of general circulation on earth so the air pockets on earth There's a lot going on earth air moves in a lot of ways, but there is a there's an overriding circulation of air that has air Sort of rising up at the equator Imagine a cylindrical movement of air that that that girds the earth Okay, so just above the equator you have a cylinder rotating where you have air rising and just below the equator You have a cylinder rotating the opposite Wave so that air is still rising at the equator. Okay, so air rise at the equator It's unstable it makes clouds the equator is one is the cloudy is place on earth practically one of the cloudy is places Well, how about the other side of those cylinders where the air? Descents Okay When you have descending air you don't make clouds Well, how big is the cylinder? It's about 30 degrees of latitude wide So your rainiest places on earth are at the equator That's where you get the Amazon rainforest and the lake and your driest places on earth are at 30 degrees north and 30 degrees south Because these cylindrical movements of air have descending air there so the Mojave desert the Sahara desert the gobi desert They're all around 30 degrees north latitude So this so we live on the surface of the earth where there are forces operating that are so much bigger than us That we wouldn't even think about it Why is it and India would be a desert because it's right in that zone? We're not for the seasonal monsoons It doesn't rain much in India except when it's monsoon season So the monsoon is sort of the exception to what would otherwise happen there and That's why everyone loves the monsoon. They hate it, but they love it. It cools the weather. They get sources water There it is so to ask you the question again. Okay. Not answered sorry. Oh, so so Battery technology like what why is an LA completely solar? It should be. It's not Some of it is cost LA is so car Heavy All right, and plus you know there's a Lamborghini passing me at 20 miles an hour on the 405 That this is the land of wasted horsepower right? so Any place that has a lot of sunlight should be thriving on solar panels and you guys aren't I looked around very few How very few homes have solar panels and I don't fully understand that? You could if you did that then you'd run your own run off your own power you can do this Yeah, you can do the impide you're difficult by the way, and so so Yeah, I mean the price might have to come down a little further. You don't really see the full price of oil It's it's subsidized in ways that are not obvious to us You know we built the roads with our taxes so that car companies could sell you a car that you drove on the road That they that was built for them If they had to build all their own roads the price of gas to go in the car would have been much higher The price of your car would have been all that would have been much higher if the car companies I'll do it what I'm saying is I make a product and I want you to use it, but there's no roads oh I convince you to build the road so you can buy my car and drive on that road That's a weird way looking at it, but it's a way it's it's full cost accounting It's full cost accounting. What is the cost of coal? It's how many people died of lung disease of Neumann or ultra microscopic silo cava cano caniosis. Okay, that's the longest word in the in the random house dictionary Yeah, that's basically black long. Yes, basically black. But you can break it up the new mono ultra microscopic Silo cava with the silicates in a cano caniosis, so there's all medical It's a simple staple together to make that word so so what is the cost to their health? Their death their the air quality asthma The total cost of oil is not what you pay at the gas tank It's other things that we shell out that are not realized in the actual cost of that source of energy If you full cost accounted what all this really costs Then the solar option would look way better than it does relative to it That's all I'm telling you when you talk about cars and car manufacturers having to pay for roads Isn't that they didn't say once? Isn't that like restaurants having to pay for toilet paper no restaurants going restaurants have to pay for land that you would park your car on To go into the restaurant not in New York City, but in places where everybody has cars if you don't have valet parking I my restaurant will not occupy the entire plot of land. I just bought it's gonna be some it's gonna be a fourth of that And all the rest are gonna be parking spots. I have absorbed the cost of your parking your car in Me in my acquisition of that of that real estate for example to make a convenience of people could use your facility correct So I but I bore that cost as as Restaurant to her right or maybe I'm renting of course, but that's that's how does that relate to someone The car manufacturers being forced to pay for the roads or that they should be that would have been interesting Had they because then it would have changed the pricing of everything, but why would they be? Are you gonna make a car and no one has a road to drive it on? It's what it's your responsibility then you don't have a business, but don't you want a car? Yes, so we all agree cars are good. They move fast They get you where you want to go right so how do we as a society make it easier for people to get where they want to go Well, we all chip and we make roads It's not entirely before they were cars car nobody's thinking you know I want to go to Chicago tomorrow and I'll be back on Thursday No one is even having that thought before there were email no one's thinking No, no, you're not saying you're an email right these are not thoughts So I'm just talking about all the forces that had to align to make it actually work Okay, so now what's holding back electric cars? Well, I might not be able to charge it It takes a little too long to charge compared to my other vehicle are there enough chargers along the way Well, these were questions that were asked when people got cars if I've cars and it tastes gas is there a gas station Oh standard all says we'll put a gas station there Because you're buying cars and so it's a whole family of businesses coming together and you're paying for a big part of that It's not just the car you paid for the roads. So I'm saying I'm not complaining about it. I'm just describing as a reality I get it. I just didn't understand the the comparison to car manufacturers paying for the day So if I make a car and I want you to buy my car. I need a road So I'm gonna build the road. Oh wait a minute. I convince you to build a road. That's even better Oh my gosh. I made it a national priority. Oh, it's a security problem. We need a we need a military design Interstate system That's what the interstate is middle of there. That's why it goes through mountains instead of over them That's why they're long stretches of straightaway so you can land an airplane on it That's why they built above the road. That's why the surface roads are not the same thing as highways because the highways are not on the surface Why because they built up why because tanks can drive on them without decomposing the road? What specs did we put this to to the Autobahn? The Germans invented the modern highway system. They invented the Cloverleaf They invented the offramps. They invented all of that and their armies could move on their roads like it was nobody's business And Eisenhower said hey, we I'll get me some of that He comes that's probably not how he said it. I'm guessing but he comes old convinces us all That we need to build an innerness. I got nothing against the interstate system I'm just giving you the foundational facts for it And by the way interstate system costs as much as going to the moon about a hundred billion dollars in total cost Seems like a bargain compared to how many people use it versus how much the moon and it grows the economy There has a lot of a lot of But basically it was sold as a as a security need Because if you're at war you need to move material and personnel and you might have to land an airplane In an emergency way and so all free ways do this if you're gonna crash a plane do it on a freeway Happens yeah, but do it because you might land safely and if you don't land safely The road comes to you to get to the hospital Don't crash in a forest. We can't get to you Right I can't get emergency vehicles good call You know if you've seen this new Porsche has a new electric vehicle that about to release I haven't seen evolutionary groundbreaking technology. What's what allows us to charge Much faster you could charge up to 80% in 20 minutes because it's double the Well pull up the information with it wattage or amperage Well, well, well just just a couple of things much different battery. You can't cheat physics so So yes some batteries charge faster than others but what's what really drives the charging speed of battery is the is the voltage Over which you charge the battery and it and it goes as the square of the voltage Right so supercharged so if you charge a an electric car in your 120 volt home electricity It could take 30 hours If you go to 240 volts, okay, it'll take You know 10 hours if you go to 384 volts you keep going up that drops Precipitously and you can get a voltage where the thing will charge in a few a couple hours Yeah, we have a supercharger here. We do. Yeah. Yeah, we've some set up here for my Tesla So there you go. We'll test yes quickly the s yes. Yeah, cool. Yeah, so you charge it in at most 90 minutes I don't think they call it that anymore. I think they own the superchargers. No There's the Tesla. I think they call it a like they have like an S Raven. They've The other thing called the S anymore now. It's not the people under D. That's the that's the high they don't call that capacity Okay, now they I think they have it based on whether it's a single engine or double engine They've simplified things. Okay, so removed all the labels To make it a little slicker. Mm-hmm. So did in the Porsche is it just they? They're selling a higher voltage charger to you What is it is the battery so completely different Google ten interesting things about the new Porsche tie can How do you say it tie can that's the articles reading today? Mm-hmm So that's cool. So my concern is batteries are still kind of 19th century technology. Yeah, you know invented the battery Volta Alexander Volta. Oh, that makes sense. He's cool. Yeah Voltage Volts come from him. Oh, yeah, yeah All these guys got you know, they got famous so Tesla we got a car named after him the guy had a no as a car There's actually a unit of electromagnetic mechanism named after Nikola Tesla. Yeah, it's Webbers per square meter. I think so. It's it. It's like the the density of Magnetic field strength within a certain area through through a surface So better to charge by inductive plate the conventional charge said the Porsche claims that the Porsche turbo charging system charges at 350,000 watch it kill a watch 15 minutes 80% in just 15 minutes. Oh, that's cool. It's not clear how very special prevent battery overheating Mm-hmm. Maybe they won't be good luck. So it could be vaporware, but we'll see but Well, but it's game on that's what that means. Yes, it's game on whether it works or not It's like people test those on notice everybody's on notice. Yeah. Oh my gosh I'm gonna lose market share because people want to buy an electric car and So you want something that's gonna charge fast and that's the number one complaint that most people have Over electric car. Well, you find a way to okay So that's one way but another way is you find a way to swap batteries as quickly as it In less time they take to fill a tank. Yeah, you know how much time do you stand there with your hand on the nozzle Waiting for the gas to go in right so they would have to have a mountain of battery sitting there waiting for people to just come in Is that any worse than a mountain that then it then a than a sunken reservoir tank of gas? There's no different What why is that any different probably larger volume right possibly? But so what if it's economic you just do it right and If the battery is all at the bottom of the car and it's going NASCAR you run in pop it up Take out the battery put this one you're off. Do you think that's the future? Why not? That's better than charging the battery You don't have a car do you? I know I do as of yeah, I do have cars now I didn't used to I didn't used to expensive as hell to garage it in New York They just went up the price just went up the big the big a price point of that was when did the average cost to? Garage a car for a month in New York's in Manhattan Equal the average cost of a two bedroom home in the United States and we've passed that cost of rent Yes, so cost more to it was like something $600 a month or something to rent a parking spot Do you rent a parking spot right one spot one spot a month? 100 a month and you can rent a home in many places in the suburbs somewhere for $600 So I now have a Tesla yeah, so I I I pony it up they're expensive by the way So yeah, so I have the X so that's my so utility vehicle the X is the SUV a very high acceleration as you know and But yeah, there's there's no maintenance on it right there's no oil chains. There's no You know the only moving part is the What you turn in the wheels with right there's no pistons nothing so You know cars really should have been this a hundred years ago And then we would have had a hundred years of clever engineering to perfect that you ever see the documentary who killed the electric car I have about I know about it And I know some of the background story behind it and the electric car was one of the first cuz electricity was all the rage a hundred years ago But so electrify the cities this days there's Edison there's tests everybody wants to do everything electric and the car just come out Let's do an electric so this was not a new concept and it's unfortunate that more sort of innovative thinkers hadn't been brought to task on how to perfect the electric car Speaking of Tesla and electricity What did you think about Tesla's initial idea that? Westing how shot down to sort of broadcast electricity so the people could just pull it out of the air yeah, so the people in the Nikola Tesla fan club Somehow feel that he got wronged in his life Okay, and surely some of that is true with regard to his business Accumant and patents and and who owns the patent and who does he have good business sense? Is he a savvy or as as sneaky? Whatever other words you might apply to Edison all right, so I get that But his contributions to electromagnetism are real and recognized in the world of physics Like I said, there's a unit of electromagnetism named after him So don't come cry to me say he was not recognized by my people. Okay, he's recognized He had some ideas that were a little out there and out there on a level where It almost certainly would have not worked and here's why Okay electromagnetic energy Is a community can he between us? I see you that's because visible light is reflecting off of your scalp Okay, to me. It's reflecting off of my nose back to you You can ask how much energy is in that? Well, not much It's not much energy in visible light photons If you stay there long enough, you might feel a little warmth from it But no, you're not going to drive a car with that energy. You're not going to run a motor with it. Okay Well, what good is it? Oh, you know what we found? We can use electromagnetic radio waves Which are the lowest form of electromagnetic energy lowest energy level of all of your like We use radio waves not to Transmit energy. That's not the point of it. The point is to transmit information and Information became what characterized the modern era And that's why in the 1950s and 60s when everyone is imagining flying cars and motorized Sidewalks everything is running on energy because they're thinking energy is going to be free in the future But what they didn't figure was that information would be free or easy to transmit and to generate and to store and to to delete and whereas The energy that would take to move things into drive things that would be a problem. No one saw that coming Nobody saw that coming so As your photons get higher and higher energy. Yes, you can start doing things with them You had x-rays and gamma rays, but that's not what Tesla was referring to He was talking about moving radio waves through the space that would charge things up You can't pack sufficient energy in your radio wave to do anything we need to do mechanically Currently currently well back then would it be sufficient? There might have been something you could have done with your radio waves because the needs were no, but that No, no, I take that back that was the height of the industrial revolution. That was the age of the machine The age of the giant turbines radio energy is not touching that Right, but wasn't it possible that he was considering it for things like radios or light bulbs or household items Would it would it be possible use that power for that So now what so what happened so the radio waves if you had enough power in radio waves to generate a light bulb to power a light bulb Well, how through the air are you standing in the way of this? This energy has pathways we now send energy through wires Because you're not standing in the way of the wire. The wire is buried. The wire has insulation On a high suspension You want to move it through the air and you want to walk around like No, that's not how that works Whatever heard if you're moving enough energy through the air To power something that itself could kill you The energy powering through the moving through the air could kill you unless you Bring a little bit amount and then you store it and then use it later. You could do it that way Sure sort of battery. Yes. You need a storage system But you would still probably have some sort of residual effect of having the stuff broadcast through the air And who knows what it would do to human health if you needed that much energy right now the energy to transmit information is so low That it no it has no effect on your health That's why I can pull out my cell phone. I'm in a brick This fake brick. That's fake brick. I'm in a bill's real bro. No, it's not Yes, it is go touch it. I don't believe you good. Those are real bricks Go touch the bricks, man. Jesus Christ. Things. We have fake bricks What do you think we are? Oh, you got it thought it was a liar how weird Now, let me be honest. So it's a veneer a brick veneer Okay, so it's not structural bricks slice the end of bricks and then they mortar it in and everything real bricks Yeah, okay, so so we're both right It's real big but it's not structural It's real straight over so here I am real fake So we're inside it. I can pull out my cell phone and have a phone call. Yes, these are microwaves Of a frequency that can penetrate walls Send information to my cell phone and I can communicate using information and not have that energy kill me But it's not enough to power the actual it is not enough to power the device Correct, so in Tesla Tesla everyone is thinking he's got the solution to the future transmission of energy No, he doesn't well, I don't think anyone's saying that but he did and his fans do but back then there were no computers back Then there were no televisions, but we did have machines. It was the era of the big machine right, but I don't think he was insinuating that you could Use I don't know what he wanted to power I don't know what he would have powered with it if not light bulbs and other things You know one thing you brought up that's really interesting you talked about light reflecting off of things you wear that BMW painted a They painted one of their cars vanta black. I saw this is jet black. Yes. I saw my soul and recently Yeah, so light can bounce off of it. So not only can't drive it because people won't be able to see it at night Oh It was literally saying like this is just the theoretic. Let me just let like what you want to do you could line it with it Pull up the image of it because no, I see I saw one in a parking lot. It's very bad at Saw in a real life. It's that's not what I saw. I saw a sports car version saw a vanta black car They have them. I saw a sports car. That was not this the car. You have it. I don't know what that is what I saw BMW that they painted vanta black. Okay. Well, that vanta black is available on their badass Load of the ground sports car and so what I know it's not available commercially What do you want me to say? I'm saying that for BMW. It's not it's not something they're off I'm in LA you have all your cars here. Any anything everything showcased here What I didn't see it in New York. I saw it here in LA well, I'm sure some maybe it wasn't it BMW maybe somebody else did and I'm just saying BMW if someone did it BMW didn't make it themselves. Okay, someone must have done I mean you can do it. It's a real thing vanta black. Okay, so one of the principles of stealth is that if you send a signal to it It never comes back to you. So you have no sort of radar Measure of its existence Correct, but there are two ways you can do that one of them is you cannot reflect back Okay, but so by absorbing it right. Okay, so a jet matte black will absorb it and not reflected back But if there's enough energy coming at it, it will heat up because you can't get something for nothing here It'll heat up the skin of that and it could be bad for the occupants. That's what they said about the already the article about Yeah, if you put that in in the desert forget it well, they were saying even in Los Angeles It's so hot exactly so another way to do it is the signal comes to me and I reflect it in a direction that is not back to you So the B2 bomber is not only non reflective back to you It takes the signal and reflects it and double bounces it so that all of your energy gets sent in other directions and not back to you so it doesn't then Keep the energy that was sent to it So that's another way to do it another there's another stealth which was featured in one of the recent not recent four years ago James Bond movies Where light that comes at it the light that's behind it Goes around it coherently and continues to come towards you so that you think you're seeing What's behind it and it's not there? You are seeing what's behind it, but the path of that light went around the vessel and continue on its way to you So you think you're just seeing the grass in the tree, but there's a car sitting right there You don't know about this technology. Yeah, right now it exists only for very a look up a stealth light ray stealth and So the material has to be able to know what is behind it. You think small objects only No, no, only with it then only works in one sight line Whereas if you needed functional stealth everybody looking at it should be every path Every sight line to it should be able to see what's behind it on the other side of that side of the way it reflects things Yeah, yeah, it carries the light beam around it and sends it out the other side. Do you have a look find it? Yeah Yeah, what you have is it does look like a solid block and a person is looking at it and you see their eye out the other side It's really freaky. It's a future of stealth What are your thoughts on digital privacy? What do you mean? Well like phones. Yeah, like phones like you ever Talk to someone about something and then you see it in your Google feed. You see ads Yeah, so we don't I mean I haven't researched this but My wife We were once gifted one of these you know, what do you call those things that you talk to? Whatever the Google one is is that Alexa? No, Alexis is Amazon right so it's Google at home and she says don't turn that on I said why not Because they'll be listening and I didn't believe it first and then I started hearing stories and so so I don't have one, but it's not because I know that it's listening or not This substantiated Being actual they've said a fifth apologized for actual human contractors Listening in to conversations that people have had having sex Having arguments like it's real. Yeah, that seems like it should be a problem So what's your question to me? What am I all for it or am I what what's your question? No, my question is One of the things that you're getting out of their ability to scan things is their tailoring Things to your liking like you know, okay? Phone to tell you it's 22 minutes until you get home. I get it. You're like bitch. How do you know where I live exactly? I didn't tell you where I live I got here it is Um, and I'm just old-fashioned about this. Okay. I'm get off my lawn about this Yeah, I'm the old man in the rocking chair on the ports saying good. Go sunny get off my lawn But you're also a scientist Okay, but I don't want to okay. I wear multiple hats I'm also dad. I'm also a husband. I'm I got all these hats for all those things in this particular case I'm old man and my old man's sensibility is If you track what I shop at a store what what I buy at a store and then Send me coupons based on what you think I'm gonna buy next based on what I've bought before which is kind of the same thing you're describing You have denied me The chance of stumbling on pond something that I never thought of buying And that takes away my freedoms and I don't want that. How how have they denied you the chance of stumbling upon something different It's not Diabolical it's just in the casual flow of life. I'll give an example. I walk into a wine shop Is it can I help you and I say? If you help me find what I'm looking for It's a guarantee that I will never find what I'm not looking for And I'll end up spending less money in your wine shop That's a weird way. I look at it. It's the art of browsing dude You're old enough to remember when I got to look up this word in addiction Ary and you get through six other words. Oh, I never knew that. Where do you read that? You learn other words on route to the word you're targeting. I understand okay So that is that is how I feel and that's how I think about my interaction with this world I'd like the randomness the randomness of it in riches my life And if you're gonna advertise to me because you think you know who I am maybe you do But I'll ultimately end up spending less money because it's the diversity of how I think and what I buy and what I think of Buying and how I buy it and how much money I spend that is the richness of the life I lead You're trying to channel me into some product So something that fulfills a what do you call it when they have the the study whether you're gonna buy something or not? No, no Table of people do you like this product or not Focus group. Yeah, am I just a focus group to you? if I am You don't know me and I want to experience this world By stepping where I've never stepped before and buying something. I've never thought of buying And if you know my previous habits You're assuming I'm gonna stay that way for the rest of my life and maybe most people do Maybe I might do that But if I do is because I chose to not because you have decided that that's how I should be Well, don't you think that's just a minute. I'm sorry. You're getting a little excited Sorry, don't you think they're just doing that because they think it would be effective to advertising that way So if you go googling New nikes and then as you're looking at something and the Google ad pops up and it's for new nikes It's a hey, Neil. I know you're looking at this. We saw you. We saw you. We saw you. Maybe just need a little nudge Yeah, I mean, it's not I don't think there's that diabolical I'm the old man on the porch. I'm saying the next generation might feel completely different They might say I love it. They know exactly what I want. You heard about the case where they were The I read this I haven't re verified it, but it's completely plausible It was a teenage girl who was Googling Pregnancy tests because maybe she got pregnant. Okay, and the fact that she had searched Pregnancy tests She got coupons in the mail for baby products And a parent said what are the why what is this? She got outed That's a little weird. Yeah, but it's the kind of thing that can happen. That seems that seems intrusive certainly It's a true to all because it's pregnancy. It's true in every way. No, don't tell me. It's not intrusive because you want to buy nikes You physical things There's not just something that appears on your Google feed that you can quickly glance over what's the difference between send you mail to your mailbox and Filling your advertising space in front of your face with product. What's the one other people can see it. I walk by your computer. I can see it. Don't look I guess I'm arguing in principle rather than in detail. Okay. Well, let me take the counterpoint in On the positive side what they're doing in terms of particularly Google in terms of your driving right and in terms of using of Google maps and documenting the history of all these people driving and especially with things like ways which they acquired as they've developed a much more efficient product than Apple which what Apple does with Apple maps They shred everything you do. Yes, they do. They do they do all the way. You've been in where you go. That's correct, but Apple map sucks So you have to because they don't have enough data. They don't have nearly the amount of data Google has billions What is do Google giving you that Apple maps isn't? They're telling you you're 22 minutes from home time for you to drive home What is this you valuing that? Well, yes, and also No, okay map. Wait, hold on. They're programs far better. I can ask it How long it'll take me to go somewhere rather than it knowing what my drop what my daytime schedule looks like and then coming in like you said How do you know bitch? You know, I had that same reaction as you did and I said I wonder what what's causing this It's a little creepy and again, I'm the old man syndrome some a ten-year-old kid that's only ever known this and becomes 15 and 20 That is life to them right why would they even? Maybe they're not gonna complain about it, but I'm the old man on the porch But do you think it off my laws sort of? Intrusiveness or at the very least this connection that you have to these devices and That they have to your patterns and your information seems inevitable That doesn't mean I have to welcome it with open arms, but I agree it's inevitable I agree plus we have security cameras everywhere Everybody knows where you are if the KGB had access to people the way we in that during the Cold War The way modern the United States has access to us We would say oh my gosh you have taken away your country's freedoms Where are the free leaders of the free world and you guys have imprisoned your entire population? Oh? my gosh The KGB would give their right arm to have the monitoring devices that are actively in pro place here in the United States today We know where you are we know how long you stayed there we have records of it We know what streets you are walking on we don't necessarily monitor it But we can dig it up if we have to and with facial recognition I can track you wherever you are I feel like there's a facial recognition. I use it now. It doesn't care if I'm wearing if I'm wearing a hat or sunglasses It still knows who the hell I am yeah Yeah, it relies on so many points. Yeah so many points of cheekbones and nose eye Separations and everything I think ratios of numbers are highly powerful probes of these structure in the form of things just so you know Fibonacci sequence, right? That could be in there if you have Fibonacci head No Fibonacci is I think is a little overplayed Fibonacci is a little overplayed especially once you get a nose job So Fibonacci you can find it in nature and say oh isn't this beautiful, but you've overlooked all the places where it doesn't show up in nature So it appears so many times It doesn't appear in more places than it does appear right but in a lot of living things. No living hands Yeah pineapples. There's a lot of sunflower seeds. It's very sunflower flowers. Yeah, really weird isn't it? Yeah, I mean it's this random I mean not random, but this well if the next thing you do depends on the previous Two things you did you get the Fibonacci series. I mean That's often the case with say you know Think of things in your life you do where the third thing you do depends on you having done the previous two things in this Exactly the same way. That's not everything in your life, but you can surely find some things to do that Hmm, I think it was Camden, New Jersey where they had such a crisis. That's such that was so random. No, it's not Okay talking about surveillance. Yeah, Camden, New Jersey had such a crisis of Funding that I think there was a brief period of time at least I don't know if it's changed where they literally didn't have a police force and one Other solutions was to put surveillance cameras everywhere and The idea was to sort of try to capture all the shit that was going down Here it is the surveillance city of Camden, New Jersey Six years ago crime and the intrusive tools they're using in hopes of stopping it right? Yeah, this was I mean I don't remember this is classic after this happening. It's let me take away your freedoms for your own safety Hmm, yeah, this is this is a well known, you know Benjamin Franklin wrote about it What's his famous Benjamin Franklin quote about security and freedom? Yeah Abandons Freedom security or is getting neither or something. Yeah. Yeah, so so this is not yet They that can give up essential liberty to attain a little temporary safety deserve neither liberty nor safety Those who sacrificed liberty for safety for security deserve neither he who would trade liberty for some temporary security deserves neither liberty. He's got all comments Cover that bitch All permutations on that one Me not only any room for misquoting he understood that so your Your security you give up some security for privacy I think yes, and I don't know it's a well known place where that should be drawn And you can actually get an entire generation born into a state where they think that's normal We all now think it's normal. You have to show ID to walk into an office building Right, oh my gosh, but with that look like during the cold war you have to show you in the United States You have to show your papers just to walk into a building. Well, they're also changing. Oh my gosh system where if you don't want to travel with the passport you're gonna have to have a new for a long day a federal Drivers like some federally endorsed drivers likes. I just went through that last week Right, so when did that go into play? What is that going to? It's for everybody like next year or something It's very soon if you want to travel in a particular way if you don't drive or anything that doesn't matter Why right we want to fly correct correct correct. I carry my passport wherever I go So it's not really a problem for me, but So carry passport everywhere you go if you want to just jet out of the country. Oh Oh Brain wired what oh No, if I had four passports then you said do I want to leave the country? Yeah, oh, I whoever that anybody in a you know espionage movie there's somebody who has five passports And with it with wads of cash of every currency So so I think I worry that we're sliding towards a state Total monitoring on the premise that we're all better off for it Right, and it's like the frog in the heated water. We don't feel it day by day But it's happening because we all agree that we can beat hand padded down just to get on an airplane We've all accepted that Because of a handful of people a handful of historically handful historically handful not even a handful in this moment just historically and fill the people we all say yes take my luggage x-ray my luggage Take away my liquids pat me down and I'm okay with that well, that's a transition and I'm okay with Security cameras in the street It was okay in banks. We understood that But now when I exit the bank and I'm in the street when I'm walking and walking in the park So I don't know I don't know the future of that I really don't know I saw the movie 1984 recently not a very good way the book is better than the movie and I hate to be the one of the people who say that But I was reminded how you can create an entire state Where everyone is kept in line because somebody is telling you We are fighting this battle out on the front lines. I'd forgotten this from the book They're fighting a war on the front lines. You never see the war. You never hear about the war You know anything about the war other than it exists and you have to do things a certain way in country so that your country can protect itself from these evil people that want to take over and destroy your way of life So everybody's under control from big brother. Well, what they didn't anticipate though was These social media companies would be the the guards or the gatekeepers of your privacy Because that's what's interesting is could you voluntarily give them all your information? Yeah, it's not governments right? It's Twitter and Facebook Google and all the stuff that we use on a daily basis that has access to everything that you do this almost inconceivable to someone outside of this generation that there would be a company that would provide a service and Through that service you would give up all notions of privacy all privacy. Yeah, because literally you have a microphone It's listening everywhere you go. You have a bug right there. You can't around with you. I mean, I don't remember what you've been you've been pin-bucked Right, yeah, it is you've been pinned with a lapel you will get ads for things you talk about And that has been proven so what is that? These passive listening devices that only picking up key words. It's no big deal. It's just key words It's the frog in the water. That's I'm telling you. Yeah, so I don't know where it's gonna go like I said I'm a little old folk old phogee about that, but I think we'll resolve it. Do you think they should be regulation? Generally if you have something good and it gets abused you regulated that's the whole point of rate That's we're here alive today because of regulation because they're nefarious people who in control of powerful forces operating on society would gain at the expense of everyone else and Would not be good for the progress of civilization so you regulate Okay airlines are regulated So that you don't die all right We have the safest record now ever For commercial airlines American carriers the safest ever look at look at not only how many people have not died relative to when we grew up We grew up through at least one of two planes crashed each year You'd lose between one of three hundred people every year. That was like the baseline number That number is near zero now And way more planes are taking off in landing that in any time when we were kids so it's a double it's a double Progress point for not only the transportation safety administration but Engineering technology and everything we care about we want to fly So you regulate you make sure these are inspected this often You don't the pilots don't fly more than this many hours you this gets oil this gets replaced Um, it's one of the triumphs of modern engineering aerodynamics Aerospace engineering as a branch of what we do as civilization is one of the greatest achievements There ever was agreed Jamie. Did you find that stealth stuff? Found there are cars that have This wouldn't be a car this would be a laboratory a laboratory. Find anything. Oh, okay Look at laboratory Stealth light Something try that Clokes that people wear that sort of seems like video Oh, yeah, yeah, that seems like Yeah, there's a lot of but in Harry Potter the the the was the cloak that they wear the invisibility Cloke that would be this principle. Yeah, if it existed With that there's a bunch of videos of that But it seems like they're just using after effects like Adobe or something like that to To have fuck with the video rather than create an actual product It's because there was a woman in an office that had a blanket and she held up the blanket and you could only see The whole office you wouldn't see the blanket at all you see what's behind her behind her She lowered the blanket you could see her and then from the blanket down So why isn't that just a green screen of the back-round image? That's what it was I think she was holding up a green blanket This might be it's dark matter. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, there's nothing to do with that That's that's the map of dark matter in the universe The three-dimensional map. I've tried to give that a shot. No, we don't know what it is So don't worry about it. You don't understand yeah, but it's too goddamn confusing for me No, it's not confusing at all. It's something out there that has 85% of the gravity of the universe and we don't know what the hell it is It's not confusing. It's it's if you don't know what it is. It's confusing by nature Okay, I have more nuanced definition of confusing Confusing is I'm confused. I don't know how to think dark matter is I don't even know what to think I need something in my head to be confused Right dark matter has there's no we don't know what the hell do you anticipate a solution of that or some sort of a Sure, I want to make eyes it in Hawaii. I hope I am it might have been yeah It's not the GDT that would be the goddamn It's the TMT 30 meter telescope so yeah solutions to we you don't know part of the what it is to explore is not knowing what it is that You look you will find and all these telescopes the launched ones as well as the ground-based ones We have enough foresight We're mature enough as a field to know that even though it's designed to look for certain things that were part of the program that you set up for it You want to have a serendipity mode for it You want to be able to say let's point it in some random direction and see what shows up Without that you could miss something in plain sight If you're only looking for one thing that you think is there Extrapolated from what you knew before and the way I think of this You know there's the old saying as the area of our knowledge grows So too does the perimeter of our ignorance? hmm so as that area goes there more places to look over the fence and stare into the abyss of ignorance that awaits you so Dark matter is sitting on the other side of the fence the other way of her describes the bonfire of our knowledge Gross brighter the area of our ignorance is illuminated Okay, I had to think about The similar to what I said more things. Yeah, if the bonfire is your knowledge that's lighting the way as it grows bigger You go see more stuff. You've never you've never noticed before that's the same principle. That's a giant one though man 85% it's 85% of the gravity. So yeah, it's and you add that to the dark energy We know what that is either right dark matter dark energy comprise 95% of everything that's driving the universe So everything we know and love the chemistry the physics the biology life planets stars is 5% of the universe now so people theologians and folks able maybe God is in the other 95% Maybe okay, yeah, maybe God's dark matter wouldn't that be crazy. Well people say that surprise. Yeah But I don't know why dark matter would care about whether yeah Or then I check striped cars Yeah, depending on which religion you're in right. Yeah, all the religions got there saying wearing Yeah, don't you know I'm God? I'm dark matter We by the way just it In in letters from an astrophysics physicist Which isn't out yet, but again, I don't know how to hell you got the book, but it's There there's an entire chapter where I am conversing with people who are strongly religious There's a conversation I have in there with Orthodox Jewish person a Muslim multiple Fundamentalist Christians and we're talking about the age of the earth and why and why do we think one way or another and so That's there's a lot of intimate stuff in there that I generally don't go public with But I would did it one on one with those who had written to me about these challenges They were facing in life and they wanted to know what an astrophysicist had to say about it What's the youngest version of how old a religious person thinks the earth is what's the how what's the Six thousand years sick. That's a question. Yeah, yeah Christian. Well of all And not all Christians by the way. No, no of all religions. I don't know The age of just like a month old. I don't know enough about how old all the religions think The universe is the youngest you're gonna get The youngest universe you're gonna get from a devout Christian in six thousand years the oldest is around ten thousand and But it's far and away from billions more than zero unique one because they think you get your own planet when you die Yeah, and what's what's funny horn on that what's I want my own planet Nobody told me that I it's odd how one religious group would Would comment on how preposterous another religious groups comments are I You know I was once I don't know if you know this I was once quoted after I think the the Scientology documentary came out on HBO And everybody was talking about at least I think that was it and there was a lot of chat about it for a couple of weeks and One of the news outlets I forgot who called me up and said do I think Scientology should be a religion classified as a religion as an authentic religion and you can just well why they call me? Well because in Scientology They're aliens and if there's space beings that comes to give up this information. Oh, sorry So that's how I got brought into this conversation Because of the sectors of Scientology that involves space beings, okay? all right so my answer was We live in a country that protects the free expression of faith-based systems provided they don't subtract from the rights of others so I will not sit here and judge whether they tends from space Exhumed souls from volcanoes At least a third of what I just said is accurate. It's from from Scientology or whether a Man born of a woman is the son of God who died and rose from the dead I'm not gonna compare those and judge whether one of them is more authentic than another when they're both founded on belief system And so in this country belief systems are protected and We've all bought into that and so you know what the headline was? Tyson defense That's was the clickbait of my comment there clicks you got a Distortion there are some rational people who in the comment thread said that's not what he said Of course, yeah, but isn't it more interesting when they do do that and then inside the actual article itself They give your full quote so people can see the deception the real confusing things when they take a chunk of your quote Take it out of context. We say love to do so you know I do go to jail for that by the way. So that's interesting So for me, I'm an observer of that not a complainer about it So is that how they're doing it? Okay, so maybe I can shape this phrase differently to minimize the chance of that happening in the future Minimize the chance of you being lied about correct. So for me that is a landscape. There's some landmines here There's some trap doors here. There is something and so for me one who communicates on that landscape That's just information for me to navigate it slightly more Nimbley in the future Got it interesting Gravity is one thing. There's still hook up on gravity. Yes. I'm always hooked up on gravity um Because uh as you should be well since we've talked last I've been reading a lot about it And one of the things that confuses me the most is that we don't really understand What gravity is we know it's effects we can measure them. We know how to measure them We know what that mass is involved But we don't really know what gravity is there's a similar question in the book But they got a little more philosophical than you just did But they both lean philosophical it's science can describe how gravity works But can they describe why it works? Can we? So this is the how why yeah duality here and Allow me to just answer it from a how why point of view and then we can apply it to gravity. Okay after I say that In science if we can describe how something works and predict its future behavior We claim to understand it and we move on You can ask deeper question about it. Why is there gravity? What is the meaning? What is the purpose? and go ahead But I'm good with what I've done and I can land a spacecraft on Mars Inside of a crater in a hole in one using my understanding of gravity. So I'm pretty good with it. Okay So I'm not distracted by the more philosophical side of that. Why does it work? Okay? Einstein so Newton was Deeply puzzled by how you can have something called and which he coined the phrase action at a distance Okay, he wrote down the equation That worked He wasn't equation moon goes around the earth earth goes on the Sun the moons of Jupiter go around Jupiter He Accurately described that with his equations of gravity. Okay He said one day. I think we're gonna find some way that they're connecting to each other But I don't know what that is right now, but I know my equations work He called it spooky it was spooky to him. That's his word spooky action at a distance. All right Fast forward 300 years 300 No fast forward 250 230 years get to Albert Einstein Um Gravity is the curvature of space and time and you're moving on the curvature of that fabric That's gravity Oh my gosh, is it even a force then? Is it even so there's no need to think of it as an action at a distance and In a phrase First uttered by I think was John or trouble wheeler a student of Einstein and he I learned Relativity from John or trouble wheel effect. That's where I met my wife in relativity class in graduate school um It's space So matter tell space how to curve Space tells matter how to move It moves on the curvature of space You don't need an action at a distance. There is no action It no it can't do anything else but do that It's like you have a funnel and you take a ball and you roll it on the funnel The ball can only do what that funnel tells it to do and it'll Cirque if you give it a sideways motion it'll start spinning around. There's no magic hand coming in there It is following the curvature of its space-time continuum This construct that you provided for it So now I can describe What gravity is doing? I even have a mechanism for it Are you gonna still ask me why is there gravity? Is that answered not fulfilling enough to you even in the why department? Because it will why would a particle curve space? You can just keep doing that. That's fine But is there a point where you'll be satisfied with the answer? Oh, that answers my why? I can say well why did this Half-liter of order drop Off the edge here. Well, it's no longer the forces are imbalanced and it's a no, but why did it fall? Well, there's nothing holding it up Why did This a point where it's not especially productive to continue to think about the world that way because what I what I'm claiming is Answers to the how When you understand the how enough Are tantamount to having answered the why question? That's all that's what I'm telling you in terms of your ability to measure it and accurately use it Correct. So we can say okay, but isn't it's you got a ball. Yes We can say well, why did you go bald? Well, okay, the hair follicles at a when you start in your late 20s and it early When'd you go bald when you start losing your hair probably late 20s early 30s. Yeah, that's the that's common If you if you have your hair when you're 30 you'll probably have it for the rest of your life That's the how that goes you start losing it up right going up to your 30 So you can say well the hair follicle begins does not produce any of the the character and whatever we get the explanation Then you say well why does the hair follicle stop doing that? Then you say oh well because the DNA has it pre-coded about the hair kind of thing Well, why does the DNA have the hair well because it so But we know far more about how and why people go bald than we do about what gravity really is correct? I'm telling you gravity really is The curvature of space and time That gets us the big bang and everything we've ever known in job It's based in time, but it's also based on mass right it's based on the amount of any concentration of matter and energy and or energy We'll curve the fabric of space and time and the more movement of Matter on that fabric of space and time We call gravity and I'm good with that. Okay, but you seem a little oddly defensive about something that's scientific No, I have to say I'm good with it, but you you are because you're kind of defending it. No, you can say well Why does matter you need to know why? Why do you say no, I'm saying why does matter an energy? Curve the fabric of space and time you can ask that okay Why and I don't have an answer if I can say well that's all I'm asking well no, but I watch what I'm telling you is Okay, you don't need to go I got you to the point right we had to walk to that point Where your why got unanswered? I understand that but before we got to that point I answered otherwise But I'm not disputing that good good. So what I'm telling you is that I can answer your why question most of the time But then you'll come back to a point where there's a point where There's the why doesn't have the answer so you say why did it falling say there's a force of gravity operating on it Why did fall that way because of the curvature of space and time I'm answering your why's I understand Then well why does matter an energy curve space and time? Okay, that's a frontier. We're still working on that. But that's all I'm asking. That's good. That's fine You are a man of science So you you're a person that should probably embrace wise except Many people who ask why questions they really want to know purpose I'm not asking purpose. Well, then that's distinguished as you from many other people who ask why questions. Oh, okay I don't know if this is a purpose like why did you bang the table? I was angry. There's a purpose behind it. Okay, so so If your why is just a curiosity of What's going on? That's one thing if you are inquiring about purpose Then it's theological, okay because when you theological, yeah, I'm not then religions give purpose to life Clearly I'm not doing that right, but I just think it's amazing that something that it's such a massive part of life On this planet that we stayed glued to the ground because of gravity. Can you pull up my Instagram account? That I only post you have an Instagram account now because you had a fake one for a while. Yeah, yeah I took it over I know that I took it over he gave it you. Oh Do the guy read it. Yeah. No, no, no, no. Actually. I sorry Instagram said I people think this is a real account and it's not can I have it back? If it's an account that's an imposter and followers don't know it. It's illegal, right? So So there's there's one that says fan of Neil Tyson. Yeah, and that's a different one. Okay. That's the guy. Okay So I only post art house photos, okay? That I've taken most of which I've taken so just scroll down and look for muscle beach there it is Click on that. Okay. So here's my cap go to my caption Go full screen on that. Maybe my caption. Okay. For most of our life on earth We either resist or succumb to the force of gravity At muscle beach Gravity loses every time That's a pretty true I was proud of that caption. You call me out on that caption. That's nonsense. Oh Gravity never loses gravity doesn't even have like little tiny losses It's not like there's a war gravity loses a battle just listening to this so I was at I was in Venice, California And the sun was setting behind some guy who was doing who was doing Hand presses hand presses suspended up on the chin up bar right and it was real so and it was cool He was silhouetted. There's a palm tree. There's the beach. He's there gravity's gonna beat that motherfucker Eventually, but while he's it while he's there. He's conquering gravity You get too old. You haven't conquered gravity lately. No, I work out all the time. I'm not buying it I ain't conquered shit. He's pulling ranked now. He's I work out and you don't cuz I see your middle-aged man belly Well, I want to talk to other astrophysicists and scientists. Let me ask are these conversations supposed to have like a Theme or purpose or is it just you sit there and just whatever comes you head you send my way you and me yeah, well clearly It's just whatever How do you say this episode is about you can't say that? I don't ever do that. You don't do that. Okay. Fine. That's just episode number You know, I'll be no obligate no commitments. Oh, how the fuck could I ever have a thread thing about all the different people Of course of course is like impossible of course fighters and scientists and scholars and crackpots Different people coming through here. I can't have any agenda. All right. I mean, that's probably the only reason why this thing is successful as it is But that's a weird one for people that this one thing that is so powerful What what is oh gravity that's a weird one for people Yeah, I mean it seems like you're frustrated by all the various questions. No, no, no You seem a little little defensive there. I'm okay because I thought I thought you were taking your why to ultimately mean No, no, purpose if it's just why I'm I'm claiming that many responses to how are also responses to a why That's that's the point I'm making and I don't like splitting definitions Ultimately understand gravity. I think we do. That's why we can land things on Mars Well, we understand we do which is why your cell phone gets time from GPS satellites that is pre corrected for Einstein's general theory of relativity because they're in a different gravitational field Then you in orbit then you are on earth surface. Don't we got this Yeah We Einstein is triumphing I would run and short on time here So I set you something that I wanted to ask you what sent you an email did you get that email? I did I did It's about a black hole that landed in a in a mysterious place in our understandings. Yes. Yeah. Yeah Yeah, so let me let me just give that I'll give the the the the sort of readers died just version of this Okay, okay, they're black holes that are They're black holes that are formed at the consequence of the death of stars Okay, okay, and we think we understand the formation of stars well enough to say was stars born with this much mass and It'll lose certain amount of mass over its life all stars lose mass because there's so much pressure and so much energy coming out It carries particles with it. So they they lose mass the sun is losing mass as we speak It's called the solar wind so everybody loses mass out there The question is at what rate are you losing mass is it a lot compared to your total mass is it small? so very high mass stars are not especially stable objects they remain stars for a hundred thousand at most a million years and They'll explode and become a supernova If you're more massive than that they will not explode because the gravity is so strong That it cannot explode against the strength of the gravity and it collapses into a black hole so we expect black holes to have Slightly less mass somewhat less mass than the most massive stars that we know how to make So if you have a hundred times the mass of the Sun star it'll lose half its mass over its life and you have a black hole that 30 times the mass of the Sun or 50 times the mass of Sun fine put a pin in that in the centers of galaxies They're super massive black holes hundreds of thousands Millions times the mass of the Sun and we call it their super massive and their black holes We call them super massive black holes because that's how we roll as astrophysicists All right Well, could you have black holes somewhere in the middle of these two extremes? We do not know a Phenomenon That will give you a black hole this in be that will birth a black hole that's in between these two these two categories You can make a black hole that eats its way there fine but we don't know how to make one and We think we met my colleagues who've done this I think they've discovered a black hole That is sitting in this sort of nether world where there's no evidence that it ate to become that massive and We don't know how to explain it by the formation and death of stars and is nowhere near the super massive black hole in the center of the galaxy So it's the frontier of research at this moment So it's just a newly discovered type of black hole. It's in a mass regime That this physically impossible, you know headlines. We're reading the headline now black hole shock They show me the the Where this appears? Express this is a British I think they're British anyhow. It's a news digest for science So black hole shock theories swirl around the discovery of a physically impossible black hole So scientists don't use the word impossible unless it's violating a known law of physics So I bet that was a Editors title and I don't have a product. I don't mind a little bit of sensationalism there You can say it is a black hole that comes from an if it comes from an object It is an object. We know nothing about and if you have to discover We're not gonna say it's an impossible object. Mm-hmm every time we point the telescope to the universe We find something that we'd never predicted or understood and it adds to the knowledge base that we have whenever they do discover things and then It becomes what we know and understand like the supermassive black holes at the center of every galaxy that was a fairly recent discovery in terms It was hypothesized because we saw the center of the galaxy behaving really weirdly Things stars were moving faster than they should have given how much gravity was tugging on them and We said dude something's got to be there and it's got to be really small Because we're tracking stars really close to the middle Well, if it was made of ordinary matter how big it would have to be really really big So this has to be really really small in order for this to happen The only thing we know that could feel that small volume and have that much gravity is a black hole So it suspected for a long time. It was confirmed That as a common thing by the Hubble telescope and first photographed by this recent result in the galaxy M87 Messy 87 is what it's that's the name of the galaxy and you can determine how big the black hole is based On the size of the galaxy we can determine the mass of the black hole by how fast stars are moving at the distance They are from it so in other words so so where earth orbiting the Sun and we have a certain speed we're going about forgot how to put 18 miles per second I think that's the number 30 kilometers a second that's our speed around that's a speed around the Sun That's pretty fast okay If the Sun had more mass Instantly that speed is not enough to maintain our orbit and we'll start spiraling in towards it If the Sun had less mass that speed is too high To be in this orbit It'll take it to a sorry. It's too fast to maintain this orbit. It'll climb us out to a higher orbit slow us down and We'll be in a higher orbit with a slower speed So in other words for any object at Any distance there's only one speed you can maintain and have a stable orbit around it So when we see stars orbiting something in the center of the galaxy it is a straightforward Astro 102 Equation to calculate how much mass the thing is orbiting and you get the mass and you can't see it it's small It's a black hole and that lazy German is the end of the podcast This book will be available when sir comes out in in in October first week of October a very proud of this book It's my most heartfelt thing that I've ever done well when it comes out I will take a photograph and put it up on the Instagram and the Twitter Everybody know about yeah, and it's it's a It also has I letters from people in prison a person who just learned that they were Had terminal cancer. I mean there's a lot of people reaching out responding to letters. Yes, it's me responding and their letters I can't fit all of their letters some are very long tones But most of the letters and then all of my correspondences in there So it's it's my most heartfelt contribution to this universe and Star-talk is still a party. You're still going still going star-talk. We're pumping up 50 episodes television show Yeah, so we're we can see if we're gonna have a new season. We don't know yet That's to be announced, but we're going so it's always a podcast and we got a YouTube channel Star-talk YouTube channel and we're thinking of branching out into other kinds of Educational product that's still fun and comedic and the like and I love your support for this because you're you're also a comedian So you know the value and I love comedians that have their fundamental part of how we deliver a science to the public on Star-talk so thanks for that plug my pleasure my friend. Thank you always good. Always good. Thank you Bye everybody