You were telling me that you see God or evidence of God in math. Well, can you explain what you were saying? Maybe I misread what you were saying. No, no, no, no, you did not. I mean, I have been closer and closer to God in a sense, because it takes me a long time. I'm brother, rebellious. You know, I have to say, damn it, God, you've got to prove it to me. Show it to me, buddy. Just kidding. I'm sorry, anybody. No, no, no, no, no. But I really say it in that way, you know, you talk to yourself in a sense. But in many, many moments in history of physics or mathematics, things come out. You see, mathematics, you know, is this very pure word that it seems to have no connection to real world. That's right. It's true. It's complex numbers. One of them is, but it appears in quantum mechanics. Right? It's so beautiful. But one of the things that sometimes you see in equation is so amazing. When you formulate, you know, maybe it's not right. Maybe it's this and then maybe you doubt yourself. But one of the most beautiful equations was the one that derived by Paul Dirac. It's a professor at Cambridge University, but he retired in Florida, by the way. He died in Florida, Tallahassee. I mean, it's a refuge for him because he doesn't like to talk. He will sit there for five days, he won't talk. One day, all of a sudden he talked. But anyway, he formulated, he's a beautiful man. You know, Paul Dirac, he formulated this realistic equation for electrons. But in one of the equations, the solution come out to be a negative sign. Not only that, there's a square root involved, so the strange behavior. There's a negative sign you learn, but it has the exact property, like an electron and all that stuff. How come? Everybody say you crazy, you stupid, isn't that right? He's not even way, he didn't know sweat, buddy. He just say I am right. Many years later, a few years later, it is shown in Caltech, like how Anderson, to show there's actually such a thing called positron. You know, the opposite, the brother is of an electron. That's such a thing. And then if you ask yourself, how is it possible? Right? That's something, this is out of nowhere, whether this thing comes from. And then in mathematical sciences, there's a lot of things like this, like geometry. There's an even more famous thing about in geometry. It's called Calabi Yaw Manafo that related to string theory. This thing was basically a revisit of Einstein's general relativity equation, asking itself, whether it's impossible to have close curvature in space time that you actually don't require even gravity to be there. And they show that Calabi was trying to prove this yauching dung yau is one of the great mathematician, right? He's at Harvard, but he retired now, he goes to China, right? He was the one who tried to disprove this thing, but he turns out to be true. That is true that you can have close curvature in space time that without gravity even. So that added even more reach in this world. That from mathematics to real world, we already have in our hard time understanding Einstein and this guy added even more. And his discovery was in the 70s and things like that, you know? So there's so many examples in incidents like this. I just have to tell you that you have to bow down. You have to occasionally take a deep breath, you know? There may be some ever-presence of these forces that allow us to illuminate our life. And I tell you, God has given us this all the light that tells us that we have to follow the light and do the best we can. Rather than everyday devouring planet Earth saying that we are the Satan, we are the evil people, you know, these people are constantly trying to, you know, make all of us a lesser human being. I would never allow them anyway. So good luck, you know? For those people like Elgo and all that who think that they are high and mighty, right? And trying to always, always lecture us on, on, kind of cut down on fossil fuel because we've no hurt the planet Earth. I say, Elgo, do you ever think twice? How who are you to do, to think that you can actually try to save the planet Earth even? Because they always use the word, I'm trying to save the planet. I don't know who gives them the right to save the planet Earth. Same with this experiment that they're trying to do, by the way. The experiment to say that we must cut down CO2 emission. I told you CO2 is good for, you know, for life. Because I ask Elgo indeed, when I ask Elgo the question in UC Santa Barbara is what is the CO2 is gas of life. Who gives you the audacity to cut down this? Then aren't you, are you going to be responsible for the ecological and humanitarian all these crisis? And we know rising CO2 affects even plants, especially food production. Maybe not exact number, we know, but it does positively. We have technology to help it better see better all this fertilization or this other thing. But who gives them the idea to do that to cut down this? Because it's generally going to be good for life. Because you have to push them around because nobody should give them authority. So far, I don't think anyone can answer the question for me. So I tell them to please bow down to God. Really answer to that question for us before you do anything else. Because it's ridiculous for them to keep to claim that they have the upper, moral and ethical high ground to try to prescribe everybody to live in certain conditions that they choose. But they themselves don't follow the rules. They tell us to take a bus. Elgo always tell me, even tell me what to take a bus. Elgo. Oh my God, I say, Elgo, you take a bus from Tennessee to Massachusetts. I'll be waiting for you now. Please. I mean, these guys are out of this woman. I'm sorry, Elgo, but you can still call me. Can you really soon? Thank you. But before you go, last thing for viewers, you want to know more about what you do. Can you say once again where they can read it? Please, I hope that I don't disappoint anyone, but please come to series. That's sign.com. And I want to make one plug for my good friend, how shirt-lift. As I get older and older, including my own kids, my own kids, three kids has been going to the CAM Constitution at New Hampshire. And we also wanted to invite the Tucker Carlson to come because we were a Swami came last summer. And because we are a very, very small group, we are a tiny little group called CAM Constitution. So CAMcote is using .NET. We offer basically family kind of a Christian kind of background, but we don't talk about Christ all the time. But we talk about Bibles. We talk about Constitution. We talk about signs. So I'm the science instructor that I've been doing that for almost six, seven years now. So I've been doing every year. I would give one or two classes. It depends on how many, whatever they want me to do, I would do. And my own kids came to those things. And then, you know, we play music. We have CAM fire. It's a family event. There used to be that is focused on kids. But this day, I'm sorry, too many adults started to come. So we have even people like my good friend, Lord Christopher Mountain from England. He spoke twice. So small little group. But if anybody who thinks that, you know, you have the time and even come and learn what we do here and emulate in your own city and towns and all that, you know, people from Wisconsin, please come. People from California, please come. You know, we have in New Hampshire every year, every summer we have this CAM. And it's a very good thing. So cam constitution.net. OK? And I talk to your friend, Vince Allison from Maryland. I also call him before I came. He's one of the good guy, right? Yeah. Amazing. The young people say this news is full of lies. And Canada is motorcade. Come on, dude. I'm 39. He'll be the best of Jeffrey Epstein.