The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast, my night, all day. Very nice, I mean, sure. Nice to meet you. I really loved your series. The telepathy tapes. I had long suspected that there was some sort of a way to prove that there's something going on. There's no way that that would be a thing for so long that people would talk about certain moments where people could read people's minds or certain moments where there was something that was being exchanged that wasn't verbal. It wasn't facial expressions, it wasn't body language. There was something going on. And the telepathy tapes, excuse me, the telepathy tapes, essentially proved it. But what has there been pushback about this? Like, I know there's a lot of hard-core skeptics that never want to believe. I think anytime you're pushing the status quo, there's going to be pushback, of course. But I think the overwhelming amount of emails that we've gotten from families and others that have a non-speaking child have been so excited that this news is finally out there, same thing with teachers that have been witnessing like you've said for witnessing this in classrooms and in their homes for decades. And when facilitated communication first came to America, it was the 90s. What does that mean facilitated communication? OK, maybe we should back up. Okay, thank you. I mean, so I wonder, okay, so what the podcast is about are non-speaking individuals who tend to have a plexia, which is a mind-body disconnect. And those individuals cannot speak with, you know, using their voice, speaking as a fine motor skill, whereas pointing to letters is a gross motor skill. So spelling to communicate is how many of these individuals communicate, right? And when the first, well, and with that's in mind, I just want to say one quick thing, that often people historically have looked at people with a plexia or a non-speakers, and they think that because they can't speak, they can't think that they're not in there. They don't presume competence. And none of that is true. These individuals have a hard time controlling their body, right? And so if you can't control your body, people make all sorts of assumptions, you know? And that's been really difficult. And so I think that the subjects in this project who are non-speakers with autism have been up against all sorts of different battles from people not presuming their competent, from people doubting their way of communication through spelling to communicate. And then of course, it comes out in many cases that these individuals can read minds, have a plethora of other, for lack of better words, spiritual gifts. And the parents and teachers often aren't believed about that either. So it's like there's stigma every which way that in the podcast is kind of a collision of all these stigmas and really trying to break down those stigmas and be like, here's the truth. These people aren't there in there. Spelling is a valid form of communication. And yes, many of them say they have spiritual gifts, which I think we can pretty much validate at this point. When you say spiritual gifts, what do you mean by that? Yeah. So when I first stumbled into this, which we can talk about later, if you want, when I first kind of stumbled into this, I thought this was just about telepathy. Right? And that there were these individuals and their parents and teachers are claiming they could read minds. And as I start meeting more and more and more of these families. And again, like I said, teachers not limited to just families. One thing that they started telling me was to look at these to the tip of the iceberg. And I didn't know what that meant. You know, what do you mean telepathy? It's a tip of the iceberg. And it's true because I think whether or not it's ability to see disease or illness on someone and be able to diagnose it before this person knows that there's something wrong. Reading an aura and saying that they can see a color around not just animals and humans, but plants. Being able to speak multiple languages, even though you have them in taught them or playing instruments and knowing music or being able to access almost any song and having perfect pitch. Being able to visit people in dreams. And then I mean, I think some of them were just like mind altering shocking things for me, where how many non-speaking individuals have said that they are able to speak with people from the other side. And yeah, so it didn't just start with telepathy or end with telepathy. It's a plethora of things. So do you think that this is an emerging aspect of human consciousness or do you think perhaps this is something maybe we had before we were verbal that we've lost but that lays dormant like that we don't need it. So like a muscle, it atrophies. Yeah, I think that's exactly right. I mean, I think we all have these abilities. I think this is all part of us. And in the telepathy tapes in episode five in particular, we get into animal communication through telepathy. And a story of elephants that knew when someone who was like in charge of their big game presort had died. And they'd walk days to his house and they'd kind of stay there for grieving. And then would come back every year on the day of his death. I mean, just unbelievably beautiful soft Rupert Sheldrake has talked at his written at length. It's brilliant Cambridge biologist about dogs experiments. He's done that kind of show the dogs knowing their owners are coming home. And sometimes cats. So this seems to be part and parcel of the animal kingdom, right? And many of us have had that experience of phone telepathy. Where oh, I was just thinking of someone and they call. People like to dismiss that as being just coincidence. But just why do people want to dismiss everything? Like that's the problem. I think I think they're the real fear is being full. That's the fear, which is why the problem with any sort of telepathy sort of psychic ability. The problem is there's so many charlatans and so many people get duped. Yeah. And it's really common. Yeah. It's so common. It's everywhere. These psychic palm reading signs every way you go. And because of that, it's in the realm forever of nonsense. And if you believe in nonsense, you're not a person to be taken seriously. So if you're a scientist and you're studying human neuro chemistry and you're studying neuroscience, there's no way you're going to support this. Unless it's just beating you over the head with overwhelming evidence. And then perhaps you say maybe there's something here. I think that's changing, actually. And one of the things that we look at in the telepathy tapes in episode six, which we call our science episode, is this idea of materialism, which I'm sure you've heard of. You know, this idea that at least for the past few hundred years, that the reigning philosophy around how interpret the world is, is only true if we can measure it and observe it, right? And that makes you seem foolish if you believe in something that can't be measured or observed, like a siphon on like telepathy or precognition or dreams being able to communicate with someone or any of that stuff would be thrown out as being silly. And I think there's been a massive effort to make that true, right? That if you believe this or your scientists and you want to publish this, we're going to dismiss you or ridicule you just for even daring to ask that question. Research about the type of stuff has been dismissed because it's a materialist, you know, scientists who've, for a long time run the journals. Sure. But there is something interesting here, which is that consciousness, we don't know where it comes from. You know? And so what, you know, the brilliant scientist Dean Radon talks about in the telepathy tapes is that if you think of materialism as a pyramid, right? And the base of the pyramid and all the things that have built up our world, which are biology and physics and chemistry and all those things, those have rules and properties and we shouldn't throw those out. Those are pretty much true. But currently at the top of the pyramid is consciousness and we can't explain where that comes from and why it's there. But if you just take consciousness from the top and put it on the bottom so that consciousness is the basis of all of all reality, right? That consciousness is fundamental. That all of everything is the product of our thoughts first. Then we can account for all this stuff. Then we can account for a pre-cognition or telepathy. And it's not that big of a change. It's just flipping kind of the order of the pyramid. And I think that makes a lot of sense. And so there's been a lot of scientists who have looked into near-death experience research, who have looked into the research on telepathy, who've looked into the research around pre-cognition and said, we can't dismiss this. This is happening. There's a lot of anecdotal evidence here. There's a lot of things that add up. So we're going to start the Academy of Post-material Sciences, where we will take this up seriously. And we will look at the research. And we will advance science. And I tend to believe that there needs to be a bit of a bit of a bit of a bit of a need to be quite a few funerals. But I think in like 50 to 100 years, the scientists that we're gripping on to the materialist paradigm, I really believe that that's going to be kind of like the flat earth earth in the future. Like I think what the scientists doing this are on the right side of history because you have to come for it. Right. You know? Who's scoring big in the NBA this year? You are with all new ways to get in on the action at Draft King Sportsbook and official sports betting partner of the NBA. From Monster Slams to dishing the rock to cleaning the glass, get behind your favorite players and the prop bets you can make on Draft King's, the home of NBA player props. Plus for new Draft King's customers, bet $5 to get $150 in bonus bets instantly. Take it to the rack with Draft King Sportsbook every point counts. Download the Draft King Sportsbook app and use the code Rogan. That's code Rogan for new customers to get $150 in bonus bets when you bet just five bucks. Only on Draft King's, the crown is yours. Gambling problem call 1-800-GAMBLAR in New York, call 877-8-HOPEN-Y or text Hope-N-Y-467-369. In Connecticut, help is available for problem gambling call 888-789-7777 or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly. On behalf of Boothulk, Casino & Resorting Kansas, 21 and over, age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction. Void and Ontario. New customers only. Bonus bets expire 168 hours after issuance. Four additional terms and responsible gaming resources, cdkng.co slash audio. We have to count for it. We don't exactly know where it comes from. And there's a lot of people that think that the universe is formed through consciousness. Yeah. We can get this. This is Thomas Campbell's take on things. I'm not sure if you're familiar with it. Yeah. He was a mind bender when I had him in here. I was like, what are you saying? Exactly. You have to listen to it three or four times. And then I told him, listen, let's stop here. We'll do it again because I'm going to have to absorb this. Yeah. But the concept is that essentially the universe is formulated through consciousness in some way. And that we're interacting with it through consciousness. Yeah. And that it's not as real as we want to believe it is. Yeah. And even if you just basic it down, right, like this room, what came first? The room or the thought of the room? Everything in this room. It was a thought first. Right. Everything. Everything on our planet was a thought first. Well, everything that we created. Except for the planet itself. Right. Yeah. I've always said that I think that ideas might be a life form. That they get into people's heads and then people manufacture physical objects out of these ideas. Whether it's art. I think that's one of the reasons why we like art so much. Yeah. I mean, that's how this whole podcast started, I think. Sure. You know, I was reading that book, Big Magic. I don't know if you've read that book. No. It's wonderful. Well, I guess I should back. You know, I was doing a lot of documentary work that was on social issues, right? That was all like fixing broken things in our great country. And then I had a few deaths in my own life. And I thought, my gosh, whatever I do next, I want to fix what's broken in humans. Because I was in a complete topsy-turvy thing of how these great people that are heroes, you know, police officers going in and saving someone in my other front was taking care of the unhoused in Kansas City and how they die. So I was going through my own just like kind of grief process. And thinking whatever I do next, I don't want to look anymore. I was humbled to do that work of broken social systems. I want to fix what's broken and humanity and figure out what that is. But anyway, I was reading Big Magic. And this is a book about how ideas by Elizabeth Gilbert, how ideas are outside of us. The creative process comes to you. And it's wonderful in the book. They talk about songwriters who who would or song. And if you don't grab it, you'll hear that same song on the radio or just how a story will come to you fully formed. And one of the kind of topics that comes up in that book too is you don't ask the creative, whatever this God mues that either it right to give us to you. And I'm going to tell it, I'm going to do this with you. It's going to be great. And so I said that out loud. I was reading this book. I was in this moment of just major shift in my life. And I said, whatever I do next, I want to solve the question of where we're going and why we're here and what it all means. And do we have a consciousness that does it survive? And then, and no, I actually didn't ask it. I said, I'm, yeah, I said, I'm going to do this next. And I didn't know what it was going to look like. But then started reading, you know, all the things I got in consciousness, tree communication. And about near death experiences and even since work and all sorts of things. And then I heard a podcast with Dr. Diane Hennessy Powell who was a Harvard, you know, Johns Hopkins educated, you know, taught at Harvard scientists who was saying that non-speakers that she'd tested had demonstrated a remarkable ability for telepathy and reading minds. And that was like, like a light name. It just kind of hit like this is the thing. And I really believe that something's intended for you will miss you, you know. But I think that a concept of big magic was a bit of that of asking, telling the muse, you know, to guide you. Guide you. Yeah. Guide you towards something that can illuminate this issue. So, did you have a preconceived notion of telepathy or spiritual gifts or anything before this? No, I mean, I think like a lot of people, like the idea of mediums and psychics, it felt like people that are often trying to just make money off of people in really vulnerable situations. And I've always believed certainly there's got to be people who have certain gifts like that, you know. But that the vast majority couldn't be trusted or, you know, I didn't think telepathy could be real. That seems impossible. It just seems impossible. Even things like plant communication felt impossible. Or, I mean, none of that was something that was like my worldview. You know, I was working on, you know, solving problems around paid family and medical leave and making health insurance more affordable and accessible. Like it was not my cup of tea really. And so, which was kind of great because as I tumbled into this world, I mean, I was really wide-eyed as like, wait a second. Have I been wrong about everything? And that's kind of where I went up. I was like, I had to go revisit everything I ever thought about the world because I started realizing our entire paradigm is wrong. I mean, or a lot of it is. That was my experience. So let's talk about what you saw first. Like, what was the first example where it was like an aha moment for you? Yeah, so after I heard the interview with Dr. Diane Hennessy Powell, I, you know, I zoomed with her and then I asked if I could go see her and meet her and talk about this a bit. You know, because I thought this could be the next project and I just knew it was going to be the next project, right? So one of the first things I had to do was I was like, can you just tell me about some of the emails that come in from parents? And I had to just kind of go through reading some emails from parents. And it was one after the other. Like, I didn't believe this and I didn't believe my wife or I didn't believe my husband that this could be possible. We've tested it. We've tested it. People were sending tests. And I thought, okay, whatever is going on here, these parents don't know that any other parents are going through this. They think a singular miracle is happening in their home that this child can meet their thoughts. And that this is where the story is that there's so many parents who haven't been listened to. And so I really thought this was about parents at first and then discovered, no, there's been teachers writing about this for 30 years, capturing it, videotaping this phenomenon, going on. And scared to come out about it. And I think same with the families, right? I mean, what are weird things to say this child can read my mind or this child seems to be able to do X, Y, Z things that seem impossible. And so, you know, my first thought was, okay, I need to see this as my own eyes. And so, Dr. Powell had just been reached out to by a family in Mexico who discovered that their 13-year-old daughter was a child. And her 13-year-old daughter was inside. They didn't think she was and she was able to communicate. And the reason they discovered that was during COVID, you know, that she didn't charge of homeschooling. And started being like, okay, let's see what you know and bingling them. She started spelling. She didn't know off a lot. And they think they were shocked and pretty soon thereafter she said I can read your mind. And they thought, what? And they would do tests. What did I just draw? And she'd say what they just drew. You know, what are we thinking and she would write it. And so, do they say what they see? Or how they see it? Like if someone writes something down, do they see the word or do they know it? Well, I think that's a really good question. And, you know, we've done a few experiments that, you know, again, I'm not a scientist. The experiments I was doing for the film, I mean, which is going to be a film. But the podcast was kind of me just trying to understand like proof of concept what is going on here, right? And I can only say what spellers have told me. And there's been quite a few spellers who say I can see so many eyes or I can hear through their ears. And others who seem to have a merge consciousness with someone that they're really close to, would it be a father or a teacher or a communication partner, a father or whatever? Where this, like we did some experiments with one mom, where we'd show an image to her. Her son who was sitting across the room would all of a sudden start writing what the image was. But what was so fascinating is sometimes the mom wouldn't even know what the image was. So at one point she thought it was paint. No, no, she thought there was a food fight. It was catch up a mustard and he wrote paint. So at that point, she's not obviously sending a thought, right? He seems to be tapping in the second the images in her own mind. So for us, it was a big question of is this just sheer telepathy? Because a few parents have told me no, this is bigger than that. It seems like emerging of consciousness of some sort. Yeah, in a bizarre way, if the mother doesn't know what it is and the child does, that's strange. Yeah, it's really fascinating. But I also, one of the stories that I loved, goes back, so Rupert Sheldrick, the Cambridge biologist who was in this project, he didn't believe until after the E there. I mean, I think a lot of scientists, right? Don't believe the stuff right away either. And he had a senior professor that he really looked up to, Sir Rudolph Peters. And he was knighted by Queen Elizabeth for being such a brilliant sign to fit mine, right? And Sir Rudolph Peters was in the tea room at Cambridge one time, and telling young Dr. Sheldrick, young Rupert here, that he just heard of a blind boy that he tested, who obviously is blind and can't read an eye chart. But if his mother is looking at it, he could read it. And that's how Rupert Sheldrick fell into this world. And that boy was diagnosed with being blind, but also at the time what they called, severe mental retardation, which no, we don't call that. But who knows what this young individual have, if he had a proxy or what was going on, if he had autism. But he's autism and blindness. It's a huge impediment, especially nonverbal autism and being blind. How do you learn anything? So you would assume that there's something wrong with the child. There's just a lack of the ability to communicate. Yeah, with non-speaking individuals with a praxia, they are in there. They're so smart. It's just that my body disconnect and not being able to, you know. What do they think causes that? Do they have an understanding of what it is? I don't know. There's so many wonderful experts out there looking into this. And I don't know what causes a praxia, but I do know that there's a lot of supports to help individuals who have a praxia to communicate. And the world is just making it really difficult for these individuals. Have you ever seen this young blind boy that uses echo location and he could write a skateboard and move around the... How bizarre is that? It's cool. I mean, you know, in some ways you think of echo location or being able to see through infrared is like a six sense. Like a six that we don't have, right? But it's like a sense of some other creatures get around with. So it's like what we're talking about here is almost like a seventh sense, right? It's something beyond that. But I just... There's something so beautiful about that, right? That if humans are so creative that we will find our way to get around the world and find our ways to communicate. Also, when you're missing a sense, your other senses are stronger. This has always been a suspicion. I think that's been proven. Is that correct? Yeah. The people are better at hearing things if they're blind or seeing things if they're deaf. Yeah. Yeah. I think that is absolutely true. And I think, though, as far as, you know, individuals with a plexia go, again, like it's mind-body disconnect, there's so many of the spellers I've met who don't know they had a babadiate first. They can't feel their body. You know, they want to have the boots to know where their feet are or having necklace to know where their chest is. And I think not being in your body, not knowing your have your body, leaves you to live in this consciousness space more, right? This world of thought where we can't imagine that. We're so bound to our body. We have these dis-disociative boundaries where it's like, you're Joe, what I'm trying to find. Yeah. So I think that's what heightens a lot of this for them is just not, you know, feeling as grounded into their bodies. In the wackiest of conspiracy theories when people talk about the government's connection to alien intelligence, that they recruit these nonverbal autistic kids. Because they're the ones who can communicate with aliens. I don't believe that. No, I don't believe it either. No, wackiest of conspiracy theories, but the idea being that if you were the government, you would look for someone who is extraordinary in that they're more open to this ability to interact than we would be. They do not have the burden of feeling foolish. They don't have the burden of societal constraints that we've kind of culturally put on the idea of alien life being able to communicate with them. Yeah. I mean, this is, I have received a question around, you know, could the government utilize these individuals. You're not discussing this the first thing you think about. The people think about that. They're still ones extraordinary. Yeah. You're the government like the X-Men. Yeah. I think right. Like how will the government utilize this? I'm going to emulate it for their own gain. That's it. Everybody worries. Yeah. And it's a fair worry. I mean, it is a fair worry. And you know, like we try to be very protective of the families and make sure that they're safe and that they're only out there if they want to be out there. And you know, that type of thing. But. And even they know what that means. Yeah. That's the problem. You say you want to be out there. Do you know what that means? Right. I mean, every non speaking individual with these gifts that I've ever met, don't use it for bad or nefarious means that they're interested in love. They're interested in connection. Right. Yeah. Of course. Yeah. Well, the problem is if they were used and didn't know what they were doing. You know, they would know. They'll know. They can read your thoughts and they know what's up. They know what's up better than anyone I think. Interesting. When you first start, was there stages of acceptance for you with these ideas? Yeah. What was the first stage? I mean, the first stage was I think. I never I never had the barrier of whether or not they're in there. You know, I worked. I helped start the inclusion program in my high school and I've worked cared for people, you know, with varying abilities my whole life. So that I knew they were in there. But I think the next things for me was the telepathy. And when you see it and when you talk to enough parents who are saying, all you need to do is go see it. It's not like it doesn't show up or like will it appear. For the parents who teach us report this is happening. If you go work with a speller, you just see it. So that was pretty phenomenal. And then the first person we saw being able to do it was this girl Mia. And she was still in the early stages of learning to spell to communicate. So she was being touched. It often helps like first with the wrist and then here and then here and then head and then off. And there's no touch at all. It's just like learning that body and learning those supports to control your motor. So Dr. Powell was like, no scientists will take this because she was being touched. And I think a lot of us in the room were like, wait, people think she's mom setting Morse code. Like they plan. I mean, of course, that's ridiculous. It really is. But then the next individual could do it across the room and wasn't being touched. And you know, anyone that we saw there after wasn't being touched. So that was pretty remarkable. And I don't think touch actually is. I think so. But they still really cool. So it's a tough thing that was the first one. And then I think the second one was the language stuff. And a lot of parents saying, you know, we have no idea how. But she's speaking Portuguese and no one in a house piece Portuguese or people talking about. And this has been documented. Yeah. Yeah. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yeah. It's quite common actually. And these are nonverbal kids. Non speakers. Yeah. So what is the difference in nonverbal and non speakers? Well, I think nonverbal is this idea, right? Like that you're not able to make language. You know, in a way where like speaking and stuff like they can be verbal, they can communicate. They just can't speak it. They just can't speak it without the supports of a communication partner. Like, you know, that is the goal is to type independently. Do they make noises? Yeah. I mean, I think especially with the practice, there's often a lack of body control voice control. So there is like a beautiful soundtrack that I've come to love of non speakers that will often be like some grunting or just lack of body control. And actually I think if someone sees a non speaker in public, one of the most loving things you can say is like, I know you can't control your body. I know that I know that's not you. You know what I mean? Because the person in there might want to be doing X, Y, Z, but just cannot control their body. And imagine how frustrating that would be. Yeah. So these people, they're non verbal. And when you say that they can speak Portuguese, they understand Portuguese. Do they write it? Like how does this manifest itself? Yeah. So I mean, there's one young girl thinking of in particular, but there's this again, this has come up now with, I don't know, 15 non speakers that I've met. But the girl I'm thinking of, her, you know, she will work during the day with a pair of professional and a spelling coach. You know, there's a, you know, the education system. There might be two or three people in the room in three people who are in the room this day. And she started spelling in a language and they didn't know what it is. So they looked it up and it was Portuguese. And then she started spelling in Spanish. And they were like, this is wild. And she also said she knew hieroglyphics. And why? Yeah. And then they were like, how do we test this? Because if we know the answer, she'll read our mind and no. So they had to just, which is wild. Yeah. You have to worry about this kid reading your mind. It might be bullshit. So they had to like look up pictures of hieroglyphics and not know what the pictures were representing to be like, okay, here's the feather. I mean, I don't know what I would ever think. Whatever. Whatever. And then she was up and here's this picture and this picture and then she identified them. And then they looked them up and they were right. Wow. All of them 100% accurate. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. So and I'm not saying of course not. No, no, no, no, no, no. It's going on there. Not every, what is that? Well, I mean, that is that's beyond bizarre. Did you give her a CUNY form? I mean, I wasn't there for this. I, you know, her mom reported it to me and it has the email that she received from the staff. And so, you know, the staff is just like, this is what happened today. And you know, because these individuals are spelling to communicate, it can take a lot of time. It can take a lot of time. It can take a lot of work and effort to get those that information out. So anything that comes out usually, I mean, a good spelling coach will ask this child first, right? Is it okay if I share this with your parents or is this private between us or whatever? But if they say it's okay to share, they will write a letter home and this is what happened. And that was in a letter home. This is what happened today. This episode is brought to you by Intuit TurboTax. One thing I've learned from doing this podcast is the value of having real experts around. Whether it's someone breaking down complex science, health, or even... So it was brought to you by Intuit TurboTax. One thing I've learned from doing this podcast is the value of having real experts around, whether it's someone breaking down complex science, health, or even philosophy, having the right people makes all the difference. That's exactly what TurboTax does for your taxes. Because now taxes is matching with a TurboTax live expert for your unique tax situation. Your expert is backed by cutting edge technology that cross checks millions of data points for absolute accuracy. And while they work on your taxes, you can get real time updates on their progress and get the most money back all while you go about your day, which means less stress for you and the best possible outcome for your return. It's 2025. It's time to file like it. Now this is taxes into it. TurboTax get an expert now at TurboTax.com. Our session. Your child reads hieroglyphics. What the hell? It's like what does that mean? Is that the Akashic record? Like is this child like pulling from all the information that's in the ether? Like how would you be able to read a dead language that mean what percentage of the human population can read that without AI, without assistance? It's got to be tiny. It's remarkable. It's a tiny, tiny percentage. I mean, from a scientific perspective, and this is one of the things that there was a professor, Bernie Ribland, who first I think came up with this idea. And then I know Dr. Powell kind of expanded on it, which, uh, Bernie Rimmland first saw this kind of gift in non-speakers. I think in the 70s, I mean, a while back, and was like, ESP should be a consider to savant skill. And Dr. Powell has talked about this as well. So savant skill is right. Our study or accepted by science. This idea that like, how do you know the language or math or this or that when you haven't been exposed to it or haven't been, you know, educated with even maybe the most simplest music skills, but now you're playing a symphony, right? So savant skills are being able to really excel something that you haven't been taught. And savant, there's people who are born with the savant skills. And also sometimes you can mean accidental savants. So you get hit on the head and say, I read about a guy who got assaulted and also he gets a match. Yeah. Yeah. Complex geometry and stuff like that. So, um, so what's wild is that the materialist scientific point of view accepts savants skills. Uh, we don't know where they come from. We don't know why. We don't know how people can know the stuff they've been taught, but we accept them as these real big question marks as, as it's real. So what Bernie Rimmland said and later, Dr. Powell was like, ESP should be considered a savant skill. These people know something and we don't know how they know it, but they do. They haven't been taught it. They haven't exposed to it. And that could be thoughts. It could be knowledge about the future. It could be knowledge about language. And, and it's, it's this is what the whole hope is about the stuff that they gave us, right? Is that people will start to put money behind this research. Because for so long, research around this type of stuff wouldn't be funded because it would be just dismissed. It's impossible. It's impossible. It's impossible. And one of the moms in our, in the club that he gave us who, you know, I love so much her name is Manisha. She talks about her son. She goes, a keel is the data. You want to look at the data. You want the data. Like, look at my son. He's the data. And, and some of these parents are wanting desperate for answers, you know, it's not, they're not in the question of if it's happening. They're wondering how it's happening. And I think I'm in that part too. Like when the people that are just, is it possible is it possible? I think for most of us in this world, it's like, yeah, you're like 10 steps behind man. Like it's possible. It's not a matter if it's, it's why. And that's my hope is that just can, there's like a, the, the, the chains will be like, you know, let off the scientists. These children that can read things, are they typing it out like on an iPad or the writing it physically? How do they do it? Usually, so there's different forms of spelling to communicate. Often there's like a letter board, right? Sometimes there's a stencil letter board that you poke a pencil through. So you really know when you get that letter and it's really satisfying to like get the pull poke through. Sometimes there's like just a laminate board where you kind of point to a letter. Some individuals are typing into a spelling kind of, uh, app on an iPad or there's different spelling like a type, a ac devices. Yeah. And then, and then there's a, some individuals who end up going to the courty key, you know, the typical keyboard that we all type with on a keyboard. So, so there's varying levels of ability in terms of using your body. Yeah. Using your body and the thing I think by spelling has been so, um, you know, there's such a stigma on spelling and I feel so bad for individuals using spelling because they're in there and they are communicating. But people have said, oh, but you need the support. So these can't be your words, right? Like like for a spelling partner, let's say, um, you have to kind of learn to be a communication partner. You have to learn to, um, to really understand like the, the mind body disconnect and what's going on with the non speaker in front of you. And sometimes their bot hand gets lost in space. So it's good to like pull the board away and like put it back in again. Or sometimes you have to cue them like go for it. Okay. Get that letter because that will help with their motor planning, right? So those supports are critical. But people will look at those supports and say, oh, well, that means they're not typing independently. But to me, that's just wild is saying, oh, you need reading glasses. You can't read. No, that's a support to help you read. You can still read if you've reading classes. And that's how I think of the communication. There's still no influence on the words or letters being chosen. No. No. No. And I think one of the things. So the, the, the stigma I think that really started for spelling was, um, facilitated communication. Actually, this is like the first thing you ask that we're going full circle. So for a long time, there was just no hope of getting, you know, people who weren't verbal and on speakers out. There just wasn't. And then all of a sudden facilitated communication came along. And it was developed, I think in Australia, I think. And that this was ideas of, you know, put some pressure on someone's wrist so they can really feel where they're at in space, right? Mm-hmm. Like they'll be able to, to, to spell. And it was a miracle. I mean, with all over the news, this was great. And some of the first parents that were using facilitated communication started reporting, there's telepathy involved. And this was at Syracuse University in the 90s. Syracuse knew about this and started kind of bearing that information. And, and there was a lot of like kind of, uh, you'll be let go. If you're teaching this and you're talking about this, so there was kind of big cover up. So this, this was new. This is not new that this was going on. But then, um, there were some claims of, you know, sexual assault. There's awful things that happened where what was being claimed, um, didn't happen. And so people started blaming facilitated communication. Oh, well, maybe they're pushing their hand or doing this or doing that. And I think for a lot of people who trained in facilitated communication, you're using your hand to put pressure so the individual knows where the body isn't spaced, but then you're not pushing their hand. But there probably are some cases where that had, had happened. Well, anyway, so then it got kind of just stigmatized, right? It's pseudosciences. It's not, uh, and then, so spelling evolved into these forms where it was like, no touch, do not touch. And so many of those spelling groups now, um, are helping individuals and the big tenant of this is you cannot touch them. And, um, and that's, that's where spelling's at now is that you learn to communicate and there's no touch involved. But, but I'm, I'm one of these people that thinks like whatever the individual needs to help them communicate. Right. It's okay. If you need a little touch, so you know your arm is, right. Or sometimes it helps you go faster. There's a little push like I think go for it. You know, help these individuals get out there. Right. This touch is not guiding them towards specific letters. This touch is just an affirmation just to help them, yeah. To help them relax, to help them connect. Yeah. And it was really, you know, on set sometimes because everyone's in while, some parents like hold the board and hold it there for their child. And we would use these, um, like dry erase, you know, markers on the screen to be like, is the board moving. And it wasn't. You know, it would be really interesting to get them in front of some scripts that are very difficult to read. That's why I brought up CUNY form and Samarian and maybe even that crazy Voynich manuscript. You know, you know what that is? No. The Voynich manuscript is a book that is of an unknown language. Okay. And it's highly detailed and they don't know what it is. They don't know the language. They don't know if it's fraud. Oh, look at this. This is the Voynich manuscript. Wow. They don't know when it emerged. They, uh, there's a lot of suspicion that someone created it and tried to pass it off and sell it as an ancient language in a book. But then some people disagree with that because they think that the way the words are constructed seems to be in some sort of a uniform way. It's not gibberish. Yeah. It's not nonsense. But they do not know what it says. Obviously, I don't know Jack shit about ancient languages. So I'm not the right person to be determining who's correct and who's who wants it to be correct. So they're saying that. Wow. I have not never heard of that. Yeah. What is the current state of what go? Yeah. Let's see what it says. What, whether they think it's real. Is there like a synopsis on what people think is? It's a fact. Similes. Interesting. Okay. University of Bristol subsequently removed a reference to Cheshire's claims from the website. What is the website? Cheshire published its translation in the foldout illustration in 2023. He claims to pick a volcano theories that it places the manuscripts creators near the island of Volcano, which was an act of volcano during the 15th century. However, experts in medieval documents disputed the interpretation vigorously approached for comment, Lisa Fagan, Davis gave this explanation as with most would be Voynage interpreters. The logic of this proposal is circular and aspirational. He starts with a theory about what a particular series of glyphs might mean usually because the words proximity to an image that he believes can interpret. Okay. So they don't buy this interpretation of it as real. They're pretty sure it's a language which is just fucking insane. Scroll up a little higher. Is there any debunkings of it? These are different people that have made interpretations and they seem to know what really is. No one figures it out. Veryous. Hm. Discussions. Yeah. Wow. Imagine if you can get that in front of a nonverbal kid. And he's like, oh, I know what that is. That would be pretty wild. Maybe pretty wild. Yeah, Jesus wrote this. Oh, he says coming back in August. Whatever it is. I mean, this is the fact that the child can read hieroglyphics is insane. I would love to see like, uniform or Sumerian in particular. We had an ancient language scholar named Wes Huffon and he was explaining how a lot of these interpretations for of like the Sumerian text, which is the oldest version of, you know, a lot of these like biblical stories. In fact, he was like, I can't read it. He goes, I can read all these different languages, but this one is so different than all the others. And it doesn't have anything that's like it. Like a lot of these other languages, so you can find similarities in the way they're structured, the way the sentences are structured. There's none of that with Sumerian. It's like, this is a wacky language. He's there. I can't read it. That's so cool. And he was brilliant. Yeah. So when you talk to a guy like that, who's humble about it, who also very well read. Yeah. And he's like, I don't know what that does. Give that to the kid. So interesting. Yeah. I mean, it seems like there's a lot of opportunity to really get into that with these nonverbal kids if you find one that is there more than one that has a stability to do this? I mean, I can only comment on the people I've met, but I think of all the people that we're talking to a lot, you know, for the project and now the film. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's definitely more than one. I mean, at least I know 15 or 20 who can who seem to know various languages they haven't been taught. 15 or 20. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Yeah. I'm one of the earlier children, the Dr. Powell was studying this point knew really a kind of odd language, like Russian and Japanese. And I think he was five or six and could just speak in different languages and new different languages. It's absolutely remarkable. Wow. Yeah. And is there a like even the most out there theory about what's going on? Um, I mean, this is the thing, right? There hasn't been a lot of research around this phenomenon. And I think I can only go again off of what spellers have said. I mean, one thing is that they say that there's a neurology behind language, right? The current, the most baseline language is not with words. There's three of the objects that we attach these thoughts and feelings. And that is the thing that they can understand, which makes sense that would be with telepathy, right? If you're not using words. Well, that is our version of telepathy. We make noise with our mouth and then you can read my mind. Right. Yeah, kind of. I mean, it clums you with. Yeah. But if you think of prayer, right, that's telepathy. If people who come back from a near-death experience and they say they have these communications with someone, you don't have a body, that's telepathy, right? Like if a medium is talking to someone or getting messages from someone who's past, like that's telepathy. So it seems like the baseline, to me like all this has proven for me that we have a soul or, you know, there's, or there's at least, if that word is triggered or someone, at least there's a conscious body, there's a consciousness in each of us that doesn't need a body. And so I think the language thing is like we've put words over this thing. And that, but the telepathy, the baseline is there no matter what. And if you can understand the baseline, it was being communicated. The words don't matter. Does that make sense? It does. Yeah, it does. It's, it's hard to grasp, but it makes sense. Are you aware of the history of research in ayahuasca? I mean, I know what it is, but yeah, like one of the more interesting aspects of it is when scientists first discovered it, discovered its properties and they did experiments on it. They wanted to call one of the ingredients telepathy. But due to the rules of scientific nomenclature, they realized that it had already been named Harmin. So this Harmin is one of the ingredients. It's in one of the plants that's used to make this brew. But when the scientists explored this and started experimenting with it, it was, it's somewhere in the 20th century, early 20th century. They realized that they could read each other's minds. And that they were communicating and that they were having a shared experience that seemed to be completely mental, but independently they all verified the exact same thing. And so that's why they wanted to name it telepathy, which is a way for more fun word than Harmin. Way more fun. Yeah. But this idea that we need something to access this dormant part of what is human consciousness. Yeah. And I think that type of stuff can really help. I mean, people, I think what's cool is that a lot of the research on psychedelics is kind of converging with this stuff right now, or on telepathy and the non-speakers. I think a lot of people have had these experiences on psilocybin or on Iowa, and Iowa's Ktrip or whatever, where there's this realization that like, we're way more mental. There is a non-physical world that is out there. Yeah. There's something. Yeah. And this is this work in Thomas Campbell's work. And there's a bunch of people who are considering this now, which I always wonder. Like if you get an enormous number of people that have a shift in the way they view reality itself. Like what impact does that have on reality? Yeah. I mean, I think that's a big thing. And I keep thinking you asked about the pushback around this. And what's interesting is it's not just from skeptics who don't want to believe in telepathy and that the non-visible world is real, but also from people in the spelling community who don't want people to mention telepathy, because out of fear that it's going to foil their efforts to make this like standard practice in schools. And in fact, some of the teachers and others who've been involved in our project have been getting letters from the IAC, like a spelling group saying don't talk about telepathy or you're going to have your accreditation taken away. Why, I don't understand. Why would that mess with spelling? I think the fear is, I think the fear is that if you, I don't, I actually don't know. Because most of the people I'm working with, almost all of them. Every single one of the people I'm working with has sees this happening in their homes, in their classrooms, and it's not just teachers and parents and ministers and rabbis and parapsychologists and speech pathologists and occupational therapists. Like these are all the people reporting it, right? And for them, I think the thing is truth is never harmful. It might be difficult, but it's not harmful. And what this truth means is that we've to change our systems, right? We've to change how we think about things. And I think there is a deep fear of people having their darkest, deepest thoughts exposed. That's probably not comfortable for the government, for people in control, for people who are controlling things. Oh, I think that's common whether we like them. Yeah. But, but why I think this truth might be really uncomfortable for some, but it's so important to get out there. You can't accept and love someone as a whole being unless you can see and know all of them, right? And, and the only people I feel really in service to are the non-speakers who haven't had a voice and all the people loving and supporting them are who are saying, this is real. We want this out there. And so the gatekeeping around this has been massive. I mean, yes from the science world, but also from the spelling world. But why from the spelling world? That's what I don't understand. I think what, there's so many challenges of people saying, oh, because they're using these supports, these words aren't their own. And then I think there's this conflated idea, like, oh, if they know they're, people with telepathy, they'll think their thoughts aren't their own either. And it's a weird idea because just because you're talking to me doesn't mean that I don't have my own thoughts or words, right? Like I can read a book which thoughts are coming at me. It doesn't mean I don't have my own thoughts. So you can hear thoughts and that doesn't mean you don't have your own. I mean, so it's like putting too much together that I think is talking about celebrities not going to foil spelling, but some people believe that to be true. But it just doesn't make any sense to me. Yeah. Like why would any, I don't understand why spelling would even get involved in this. I don't know. I mean, like spelling is universally accepted as being important. Well, it's, no, but this is the problem. Spelling is not, there are so, I just talked to a parent the other day who said, I'm been trying to get a communication partner with my daughter in school. So she can contribute and the school system will not pay for that. They're like, nope, you cannot have a spelling communication partner because there's- Is that a just a funding issue? Well, no, there's a group called Asha, the American Speech Language Association, who accredits speech language pathologists. And they say that spelling is pseudo science and I don't know how communication could be called pseudo science. What? And so if you're a speech language pathologist and you want to teach spelling in schools, that's considered like- Wait a minute. Why would they say, I don't understand. What is the argument that spelling is pseudo science? This is such a controversy that it's just maddening. I think again, it's because of those supports. Like because you might need a partner because you need a partner to spell it's considered, oh, well, you're not spelling independently. So spelling is pseudo science for nonverbal people or non speakers, I should say. Well, it's not, but Asha is saying that, which is making it- And they're only saying this because of the touch, the ability to touch people while they're doing it or- Or mostly these individuals aren't being touched. I think that the problem is, I mean, the problem is that no one's presuming competence. So this is why it was confusing. You're saying spelling in regards to nonverbal people. I'm sorry. Yeah. Okay. Spelling. Okay. I should be asked for these things. Yeah. So when- So spelling is kind of the catch all phrase for pointing to letters to communicate, being on a letterboard or iPad or even a keyboard, like what we're used to with a computer. So they're going by this old concept that it's impossible to have any sort of psychigability. So if you're proving psychigability through spelling, this is obviously bullshit without any examination of it. Yeah. I think that's a good summary. Back to what we were talking about before that they don't want to be foolish. Right. So this is a compounded issue. But one thing that's kind of- I thought this was fascinating is that any type of like alternative form of communication has gone through immense battles to be validated. Like, oh my gosh, sign language. In- I think in the 1800s there was a conference in Milan where everyone's like, we cannot teach sign language. Like this is- people need to try to speak, you know. Sign language went through battles for, I mean, over 100 years to try to even get accepted as a real language. It wasn't until the 70s or 80s when that happened. And then Braille, Louis Braille who invented Braille, the people at the school where he invented it was like, you guys can't use this. We don't accept this. And we don't believe you can read by touching dots. And we don't believe you can type by poking holes. That's impossible. That's not- so when they did, they would do these tests with Louis and other students to be like, okay, you write one word and you spell, you know, and you read it with your dots. And they did. And then they'd say, it's fake. They planned it. They pre-planned the words. And it wasn't until multiple, you know, variations that finally Braille was accepted. And now we're seeing the same thing with spelling to communicate. They need a communication partner just like to read, you need glasses. It doesn't mean they're not communicating on their own. They just need someone to help support their motor control. Got it. So you're just using the term spelling in a different way. Yeah. Most people are accustomed. That's why I had more clarim. Yes, yes. Super-and-use. Yes. So that seems like that's on them. I mean, if there's evidence that it works, like they should be brought up and people should say like what you're doing is a disservice, like a huge disservice for whatever reason for your own ego, for your own... Well, yeah. I mean, you think about it, right? For now, you know, decades. If you have a Praxia and you're a non-speaker and you're considered, you're not in there, people will treat them, put them in school systems where they're trying to teach them to like behaviors that are impossible if you can't control your body. And then often teach them over and over colors and shapes and teach them like they're not getting it, that they're not smart. So they've been robbed of their education. They've been robbed of an entire livelihood. So to admit that we've been wrong about this entire population and educating them wrong, I mean, that's a lot of reckoning. That's a lot of wrong. And ABA therapy, which is now what kids go into, it's a multi-billion dollar industry. And I think that they profit very much so from having kids go into this type of therapy. And I think ABA therapy can be helpful for some people. It can be, you know, but for a lot of non-speakers with a Praxia, it's like traumatic. ABA therapy. It's behavior therapy. And that's like what insurance will cover if you have a Praxia. So, yeah. I think there's a huge financial gain. ABA therapy and Ashton, I think it's all in bed together. Money fucks up every day. It does. But if anyone listening to this, the number one thing is that like, if you think of a human rights violation, right, that non-speakers aren't allowed to go spell in schools to communicate, to participate socially. Right. Because these are individuals with ideas and thoughts and career hopes and want to date and want to have friends and want to be involved. And yes, they can't control their bodies. But they can communicate and to be leaving them out. Because oh, we can't afford or we don't believe that you should have a communication partner in school. It's just mean. It's a human rights violation, I think. It's bizarre. Yeah. I mean, that's, yes, it's also very bizarre. And it's just, it makes sense when you connect it to insurance and money in an industry. That's where it gets gross. They're, they're against the competitors, which is probably truth. Yeah. Because if spelling, if you could be, if they say, hey, we will approve for spelling to be covered by insurance, every family could go do this right now. You've just spent thousands of dollars off and go to a conference, do an online thing. It's not cheap. It's not affordable. It's not easily accessible. I mean, it can be depending on where you live, right? But like, but it's, it's not easy. That would be a lot more money to go away from a VA therapy. Right. Of course. God, it's always the root of it all. Mm-hmm. You get to it. There's someone who's profiting and doesn't want to stop profiting. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And the whole industry of a bunch of people working and yuck. So you first recognize that there is some sort of an ability. When do you start expanding your idea of what children can't do? What, what, what they can and can't see? Like when, when does it get to where you're at now? Um, so like spiritual gifts. When you start accepting those kind of things. Yeah. I think the corroboration of person after person after person was really helpful. Do you remember like the first one that made you reconsider or consider? Well, okay. So the telepathy was definitely that, okay. That became pretty quickly. And it was really funny too as how like the people working on this, like on my crew and my camera guy and stuff. My DP Michael, like would quickly, we were all kind of like, okay, this is happening. Like you get almost bored seeing it. Like, because we came so common and so easy that like the telepathy quickly became unimpressive, which is so wild to say out loud. But then it would be like, I remember Houston who's a beloved individual, both in my life and also in the project and his mom as well. He, he had this relationship with stones where he could feel like the energy of crystals. And Katie, his mom is, you know, an evangelical and didn't put much stock into any new age thing. And I think she went to get him a sage and they gave her like a bite back of crystals and stuff. And she was like, come on and kind of put those in her, you know, bathroom upstairs behind one door and, you know, and Houston came home from school. Like, right hand into the primary bedroom and then went to the bathroom and found the rocks and like, was so excited and put them in lines next to his bed and wanted to put his head next to them. And he could feel the energy coming from these stones. And I always thought, okay, people believe in stones and maybe they matter because people believe in them. But like, I didn't actually think they had energy or healing gifts and here's Houston going feeling the stones. So that made me think, what? Okay, maybe there's something here, enough individual saying they could see aura's around plants and animals and people. So that was something I started being like, okay, this is happening enough enough that I believe that. And then the language was the next thing and that was pretty remarkable. And I'm not saying every non speaker has these gifts. I'm just saying the people that I've met that have been in part of this project and there's an awful lot, do. And I think probably the gifts change for a person too. How often do you see the language thing? You know, I should send out another like questionnaire, but probably every five individuals. You know, but like that's a rough number, but it would be interesting to like survey. Are there any other data points that would indicate that someone would be more likely to have these language skills? Is there any factors about these individuals like the differences in their conditions or the environment? Well, this is one thing that has been really remarkable. I think especially since the Swapadeep's came out is how much belief and just like acceptance of these type of things matters for them to show themselves. So I was talking to a parent the other day who's not in the slapadeep's of someone I've met through this and she said, look, my son after the slapadeep's came out. You know, he's about 19 said I need to come out to you. I can also read your mind. But just never felt comfortable saying it because his parents would respond well. And another teacher was telling me, look, now that this has come out and like, I've realized this to be a truth in her clinic or classroom, she will do a 10 minutes for thought sharing in the beginning of the day where they can all talk to love but they hang out. And she said it's like the one of the only times when they're all quiet and they're just thought sharing. And she said that, you know, now that the slapadeep is out more and more parents are like being told this and accepting it because when I've fell into this world, before the slapadeep's was out in the world, almost every single parent and teacher I met was like thinking this was an individual miracle happening alone in their house. They couldn't tell anyone even sometimes the spouses were fighting. out in the world. Almost every single parent or teacher I met was like thinking this was an individual miracle happening alone in their house. They couldn't tell anyone even sometimes the spouses were fighting. I met one parent once not in the in the sloppily days but you know I met her in the journey and she said my husband wants to take my child away because he thinks I've lost my mind by saying that this is happening. So you know so now that it's out there I think it's it's just thing about it. If you have kids right like if you believe in your kids I believe you I believe in you it makes a difference. The placebo fact. We know the placebo effect works if people believe in something it makes a difference. So when you say to a non-speaking individual like I want to know all of you. I'm excited to know all of you even if that means that nothing you can tell me is going to scare me or make you love you last or you know I think that's a cool way to approach anyone really. Yeah certainly and I think skepticism and cynicism is probably also contagious. I probably feel that that negative doubting energy which is very suppressing. You know just like and if you're already non-verbal and you're already like dealing with a lot of other stuff like that negativity on top of it you'd probably not want to even try. Right yeah yeah there's a shame just negative feelings. Yeah yeah. Yeah. What do you do you think this is something that you have? I think we all have it. I mean have you tried to encourage it in yourself or have you tried to explore it? Well because I would imagine if I was doing this work I'd be like let me see if I can do this. Yeah yeah and I for sure and I will you know I often pray at night and sometimes I'll also just be my thoughts to some of the non-speakers my life and hope they catch them you know. And you know there's loving thoughts usually of course and then there's been a few times where I'll see a non-speaker that maybe you know I've come to know and love in a dream and they're communicating something to me you know write the parent in the morning and say can you ask so and so if they were trying to communicate XYZ at all or or you know where they tried to communicate with me last night as usual or say and they'll say oh yeah they wanted you to know blank blank blank and it'll be what happens so but that's only happened in dreams not in real life. I mean dreams are real life but yeah so I think I think this I think the more people are open to this and practicing it it's it's it's there you'll get there and a lot of teachers are able to get it back two way to love it the where they can start hearing their students back and they said you know there's a teacher and I love this story because she I heard her on a podcast actually and it was sent to me I was like two years into my journey and this teacher thought no one else in the world was going through this and she said there's a student and he's telepathic and he carried my thoughts and then all of a sudden I started being able to hear him back and I'd be cooking dinner and I'd hear him or and he would tell me things all he just popped into my mind and he was younger so I had she had a set parameters because you can't come into my mind all the time but she said then in the classroom then they started being able to teach just do the whole thing the whole lesson without talking she'd asking something in his head he'd start typing it she'd ask something else in his head he'd start typing it and that was something that like a lot of teachers have expressed that or speech pathologist and and I've often wondered why is it easier for the educator you know instead of the parent and I think it's because parents put so much stuff on our kids right like if I'm watching my son play basketball and he's not boxing out and he's not doing this I'm like oh god oh god I'm gonna watch you know but if someone else is kids I'm like oh they're five they're just learning you know I have no care if anyone else is good is doing this but so I think with our kids we put all this baggage on them even if we're not intending it like the energy is so great where if it's just free and you're just wide open and you're just ready I think some cool bond can often happen between me and between anyone but certainly at least what my experience has been more educators than parents that goes into this two-way thing this teacher did they explain what the sensation was like like hearing the words in their head like how did they how did they receive these things so at this point there's a lot of teachers so I have like a little bit more data points on this and for her she was hearing like a voice and had very clear you know very clear was she hearing that she interpreted as the child's voice was it a child's sound yeah yeah and and that's what's so cool is for some of the individuals we've kind of gone through this will say um you just know it's their voice even though don't have a voice in the real world like you just know it's their energy imprint right like this is their voice and but then I've met some teachers who are like no it comes in as like a visual a visual packaging if you will right like or one of the most beautiful things I heard from a mom in England and I think her story is great because she knew this was going for years with scared to put it out there she finally did I'm not getting any younger I'm putting it out and then of course there's a lot of parents running in there like me too me too me too this is happening to me and she once explained it to me the most beautiful way she said um like if you say the word with a word thanksgiving you've just said the word thanksgiving if you send it to hell pathetically you receive the smells you receive the sleeping in your childhood bed again like you're crashing the uncle who's mad about that like the game of you know the sound of the football game maybe snow you you're this person walking with the pie like the prayer you say whatever it is all the things that make your experience that comes to you and there's no there's no misunderstanding what this means and feels and is and it's this whole expansive idea so um I think she she receives things that way Wow yeah it's really cool it's so cool but it's also because of the cultural restrictions that we have put on the idea of telepathic communication even while you're saying this I'm so fascinated and I believe it for sure part of me is like shut up yeah it's like that part of you is strong that and I wonder if that part of us unfortunately because of all the charlatans and because of these the cultural restrictions on just the concept of telepathy I wonder how much of that holds us back because there's some things that you do know and you don't know why you know them you know and if you're a person who goes on instincts you'll follow those instincts and you go I have no idea how I knew that was the right thing to do but it was yeah yeah yeah I mean look I think one thing is experiencing something you just believe it like I said and I think anyone who has engaged with walks into a room with a non-spaker who can do this which from my experience has been quite a few it's not hard to see it it's pretty easy to to witness it and so when you experience something over and over and over again right it's like are all these parents and teachers all around the world and speech pathologists and principles and ministers and rabbis and everyone who's witnessed this lying did they all come in this great conspiracy to decide that like we're gonna trick the world or they're experiencing something and telling the truth and the first one is out there that's like the most impossible thing to imagine the other thing I want to say too is like there's a motivation for someone who's a charlatan right you want to make money off of someone or something when they're especially in the most vulnerable you're gonna exploit this and etc etc or it's for your own ego your gain or career or whatever you know today to because non-spakers have not been able to have their resources that they need to spell an engaged in society they've not been able to have a career yet I mean somehow but very few or make money on their own or you know be in the popular crowd or have some cool whatever and and so what's to gain what is to gain and it's also to take so much energy off and to spell out something I can't imagine that you'd spell out a lie I mean there's nothing to gain in this entire population talking about this in silos all over the world right just one also very few people engage with nonverbal people so for this to be this very bizarre sort of strange phenomena that's happening with these people you would have to be in that experience with those people to even be able to appreciate what's going on yeah I think most people you know we're so accustomed to talking we're so accustomed to typing things out and communicating the way we do normally that we don't we don't even think about what the experience is like for both the parents and the child and that this is a completely different way of living so whatever these innate abilities that we may have of course they would be the ones who would have them it kind of makes sense that they would be the ones that would be so tuned into it where it was us we're sort of probably drowning those thoughts even if they do exist we're drowning them off with language with cultural expectations with social media with news and yeah with everything with all this we're bombarded we're never even alone with our thoughts anymore right we're just bombarded constantly 24 seven and you know I mean that this is the number one criticism of all social media is shaping your mind in a way that you're not even asking you know really don't have agency over it just constantly being bombarded with data and that data whether you like it or not even if you're objective it's a it's changing the way you interface with the world these people aren't experiencing any of that so I mean I think they're probably experiencing like I think they have so much input coming in you know that it can be overwhelming but right it's not informing their yeah they're not engaging yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah it's really it's really remarkable you know well beyond right yeah because it changes the way we think about human beings it changes what our potential is I've always thought that it was an emerging aspect of human consciousness but then as time has gone on I think I start to think probably more than that it probably has always been there yeah we you know they mean animals have weird abilities that we don't understand like the ability that birds have to navigate we don't understand what that is we don't understand how they're doing that well we know they do it you know and yeah they they have also there's some ability that animals have to read electrical signals yeah the read magnetic signals yeah what is what's going on there yeah what what are they doing you know Rupert Schaldrake again who's in the project he he's the biologist from Cambridge he talks about something called the mental field and that was like a good handle for me to start to understand how this could be possible and so by that we know that the fields can exist beyond something and we take it as part of science like we know the earth has a gravitational field you can't see it you know it's there but but you know it's real and we know that magnets have a magnetic field we can you know you can't see it but you know it's there and so his theories that our mind has a mental field that extends outside of the brain and this mental field can like overlap with someone and then a great example of the mental field if you will would be when you see like a murmur birds or a school fish and they're all turning exact same time they don't bump into each other they're not like having concussions left and right the bird one's the wild it's like they do it it's almost like they have a cool fish is essentially the same thing but in the water and the water and yeah it's like they have one mind right it does feel like one mind and so this beautiful idea it's not it's not it's just out there and one of the things I came across absolutely door to as well was that Mark Twain he had he coined this term mental to legacy and what he was responding to was kind of what we think of his phone telepathy but that someone would write a letter let's say he wrote a letter so I'm just going to make something up like great at Margaret right and he and he hadn't written to her in seven years and he post marked it on March 2nd well you know maybe two weeks later he got a letter from at Margaret Post March March 2nd and that would happen a lot in the time of letter swapping that at the same time both people thought of each other they hadn't written to each other a lot in time the letters were postmarked on the same day you know what happened the same day and there's such a concrete evidence there of wow and so he wrote a lot about that he thought that was fascinating you know and like Upton Sinclair who wrote the jungle you know wonderful author he wrote a book called mental radio where he was trying to do to love these experiments with his wife and she would think of something or vice versa and they just draw it out and and and he had done this so many times that he talks about this is real I know this to be true because I've experimented it and heard I can just thought share and so you know it's like we have examples of this throughout recent history but I definitely think if you go back to many native cultures I mean even the Vikings the Druids whoever like none of this would be shocking right it's they're not going to go try prove this this was part and parcel of being human and I think it still is but to your point it's just been buried by the noise that we've filled up our lives with yeah like our feet aren't the same shape anymore because we don't want barefoot mm-hmm you know our feet of atrophy and gotten withered and twisted and weak and that's one of the reason why people wear barefoot shoes right yeah because they want to engage their toes and if you don't your foot atrophy is it becomes weird just make sense that your mind or these abilities of consciousness would also atrophy because they're never used because it's so easy to communicate with words and it's the and also you're dealing with other people manipulating those words and trying to decipher whether or not this is true or not yeah yeah and I mean you know energy right you did martial arts and stuff so you understand like if someone's energy how it can impact you and I think that like most of us have sense of like you walk into a room and someone just like they're killing you or like if you're really you know I think energy is a real thing sure but I think as far as like these gifts go or whatever like telepathy um you know we've all had that experience with someone's like oh I just knew the sink it they died like I felt it like I felt it to the ground in my apartment and I have no idea and then I got the phone call or or my aunt came to me in a dream last night and said I love you and I'm always here and whatever and then like the next day they get the phone call they're aunt died and there's so many stories like that we hear just in everyday life right sure so again like it's just if we sat back and really thought about this isn't wild this is part of the human experience right and the non-speakers are just the great skies yeah yeah it's really weird to look at it in reverse though for me because like I said I did think it was an emerging aspect but now I think it's probably not it's probably something that's been buried by our technology or our progress yeah what we think is progress it's easier to communicate with people with noises and saying that but we're probably missing this thing that used to be a part of us and it comes in these little blips yeah little weird you know waves especially heightened anxiety or heightened you know anytime you're stimulated in some sort of a way which makes sense why with psychedelic drugs which dissolves the ego you have more of those right right this is right so if you tried to expand your ability in in any way have you have you tried to meditate and tried to find where that is inside your consciousness I in the beginning I think when I was starting to go into this I was meditating a lot and doing a lot of stuff but but right now I'm so focused on just getting the story out that it's like all my time is put on that and I've kind of put my own like stuff aside for a little bit here but I mean meditation I think that's the number one way to help open up anything mental right I mean that's and meditation like 23rd or 30 years ago was considered kind of fringe and out there and the idea that it could benefit you scientists looking into that were kind of like oh let's guys kind of you know and now it's that those people were right yeah the response has been insane like the the telepathy tapes shot to the top of the charts like everybody was talking to me about it and sending it to me before I ever wound up listening is that it's got to be gratifying in some sort of a way that like at least people were responding to this they're very excited about it yeah I think so and it's I think I mean definitely it's a gratifying but you know the story behind that is pretty remarkable and that's I think one of the things it was most gratifying because I had never intended to make a podcast you know I was trying to make a documentary of this and then the documentary became so big that I was like oh maybe I have to make it as docu series like pitched it to a bunch of you know well streamers and stuff and I think people loved it and they were like oh this is such a good pitch and oh my gosh but like it doesn't fit our mandate like what is it's not true crime it's not this is not that and so everywhere we pitch said no everywhere we pitched and I remember going home and feeling devastated because I thought this was the most important news in the world how could anyone like this is this needs to get out there and thinking send to the road I can't afford to go do a documentary my own I can't do this and can do that and I was just like you know and and I thought this could be a good podcast but I never made one so then it was sort of like this will be my final pitch like hopefully someone will notice and then we can get the film funded and so I made the podcast as just like a desperate like hail Mary like someone listened to this please and fun documentary and then it like went crazy and it was what was so funny too is when I first started telling a lot of families and stuff about the podcast they were like I don't know if that's a great idea because just following us so you have to see it to believe it to know that they're really not touching that they're really communicating and to leopard that you have to see to believe like none of this will work as a podcast and it was just that lightning a bolt again you know like no no this is this is it this is it you guys like this is it like I just know it's gonna be great and they were like uh you know and so the fact that it did what it did is just humbling and I think so well deserved for the non-speakers and those parents and teachers were brave enough right to tell their stories finally yeah I'm glad you decided to follow that instinct because the podcast is the perfect way to do it because podcasts are easily shareable yeah so that's how things really get out there someone tells you about it you tell other people about it you go on a podcast tell people about your podcast and that's that's what starts it yeah I mean so and I think the medium too is so I never realized what a special medium it is because you're talking directly into someone's ears yeah and you're just in their mind like and just can talk to them for a few hours and this was a story that we needed some real long yes you know exploration also it's fascinating and that's what you really want out of a podcast other than humor you want it to be fascinating yeah you want it to lock in and excite you yeah and that certainly does that and and I think most people want to believe you know yeah yeah and I would not have put my time and effort and money into this if it wasn't real I mean it is it is real and people don't have to take my word for it like they could just go start working with a speller and again not all spellers I think maybe I don't know who knows but I think these are gifts are pretty easy to see if you start engaging with that yeah well it certainly seems like it so what so has the film started have you where you are right now so we are first day filming was yesterday which is really exciting yeah yeah and so um we yeah we're off to the races we have five non-speaking members of a production team which is awesome oh wow so cool like two are specializing in like working on graphics and depicting what things that they talk about look like like the chat on the hill I don't know if you've heard of this telepathic chat room we're non-speakers hang out we can come back to that and like and like the realms where maybe they get information so or just even what it means to see auras or to see stuff like that so we have two graphics um kind of uh advisors that will be working with the graphics house on that stuff we have a scientific advisor who's going to help us figure out how to best do the celebrity tapes with the scientists that we'll be working with um and then two story kind of consultants so it's really cool to um all five of these individual jewels I believe it's the first paying job they've ever had so that's kind it's just cool have it on our team um so what is this chat on the hill okay so um that was one of the harder things to get right my head around um when I first met Katie and Houston um Katie said you know Houston talks about this telepathic chat room where he can go hang out with his friends you can kind of tune into the telepathic chat room and and that and he teaches there too and and it's a place where they can commute and talk and encourage you to teach in the telepathic chat room yeah Houston's like really special he really is and he's and and I think there are different roles that this person might talk about plant energy and this person might talk about this and I've heard this now from well let's just back up so how many people are in this telepathic chat room well I don't know but um but well I'll get to that answer let me just so because I think that's an interesting thing so Houston started talking about this um what he calls the talk on the hill which is the telepathic chat room and then I met his good friend John Paul who's also kind of based on Atlanta and John Paul would go up to his room and put four pillows on his head and his mom was like he's on the hill and this is what he does kind of get everything out all the sounds of the house so he can really concentrate and get there and you know she said he really has like um developed a beautiful really like a relationship with his girlfriend on the hill and that and I'm like what are so I don't know what to make of it only I knew that it felt very real to these parents and and and and these individuals and and people were talking about in Atlanta so I thought okay this might be an Atlanta thing that these individuals are doing this they don't have to be in the same room the same zip code that they can like connect and on the day I met John Paul um he was on the hill at one point and I asked that question I said how many people are in the hill right now and I think he wrote like 4000 something and I was like holy cow it seems like a lot he's like well people are really excited about the documentary right now so everyone's tuning in to find out like what's happening with this so I was like whoa and then and then I just like buried out in my heart is not great this is something that is real in Atlanta and then I was talking to like the next big whoa again telepathy tapes was not out yet I met a minister in Arizona who had like the largest youth um like special needs youth ministry or something and I was on zoom with him because he was like found out about the telepathy and found out about these gifts and there was a person in his congregation who could predict the future and see things happening in other spaces in the world and he was just you know I think we were connecting to be like okay yeah you've seen this okay let's talk about this and he was kind of going through his list of what he's witnessed with the individuals in his ministry and one of the things he said to me was I was on zoom the other day with another young individual or another individual from Minnesota getting these two couldn't to connect and they start talking about something called the hill they go to this place called the hill have you ever heard about this and I almost fell out of my chair and then um maybe like a few months after that I was talking into a teacher and she goes you know some of my students have you ever heard about this they talk about going to some place called the hill and one of them talks says he goes there to learn about time travel and the other one like stuck about someone from nor from Norway who talks about the bees and beekeeping and beach stuff and at that point I mean my head is exploding just like wait it's like real like geez you know and then there's a father in Israel who I have talked to a lot about this over the years and he's kept really good track too of like how to love that he's been buried in the spelling community and in the education community you know what's been going on and how teachers were required so he's fascinating but one of the things he told me he's like oh yeah we have a separate hill in Israel where a lot of the Orthodox like Jewish folks go and they have their own hill and then I when then I would get some emails we'll be like you know there's also hill in Arizona in Florida like there's different hills so it's it's a mystery it's a magical but they all call it the same thing yeah and and I don't and then they've also met like after the Slope of the tapes came out one family wrote me and said hey my son has said he has telepathy no doubt there but he can only do it with people in the room but he's never been to the hill how does he get to the hill and I thought I don't know I guess ask another non-speaker of who maybe can teach you how to like dial in to the right frequency you know I'm not exactly sure how that works but it's really it's awesome you know now is there one hill or is there many hills I think there's a few hills and have they verified that people who are communicating in this hill are actually communicating with these individuals yeah and in effect that's one of the storylines in the film that I'm really excited about like one of the subjects is a young girl who's always felt pretty isolated you know it's hard sometimes to make friends if you're not able to communicate school or whatever so but she's bringing up names and has brought up names that her mom was like no no no you know they're not in her school they're not in our periphery they're not in any of our social stuff and then once the top of the tapes came out these Facebook groups sprang up of families that were kind of going through the stuff and in that process she found I think like four of these individuals that her daughter was saying she was really good friends with on the hill and they also say they go to the hill yeah yeah and so we've like corroborated all these points in this girl's life have you tried to cooperate actual distribution of information actual communication yeah you've done that yeah it's yeah I mean that's of course like you have to imagine for everyone in this world all the families that I'm close to in teachers and therapists and stuff it's still remarkable so anytime someone says something we will try to validate it like this person just said they saw this person the hill can you verify validate validate they were there and then oh my gosh yes what did they talk about this was said and this was said hey this person says that person is on the hill and talking about blank oh yeah I can verify that that person teaches about that on the hill so like it's not like anyone is taking any of this just in stride like where you just you know I think there's still that human nature like you're talking about that like even the parents and teachers and me and the people in the front lines of this are still always trying to validate it like this happened was that true did did did you get that same thing and then there's that moment of like oh my god like that's happening with all of us all the time too that mind-blowing wow that just you know bore out it's remarkable in that the hill thing is next level it's next level and why is it the hill why do they call it the hill universally well it used to name that the chat on the hill he named it yeah well the other kids name it I think they're all saying it as well though right they're all seeing the same term yeah but I mean just like you know someone named this cup and we're all calling it cup right I think like it just spreads so he think that child Houston he named it and then everybody else accepted that name yeah he didn't hear it from someone else I mean he might have I mean that's the question like what is the name like why on the hill well I've asked people that in one one individuals like it just feels more like a hill of thoughts like just this like mound of just like thoughts and energy and like being and so I wonder what they're seeing well we're working on that for the film that's like why we have these two graphics non-speaker advisors so they can work to make us understand what it looks like to them and then once actually once the top of the tapes was done I started releasing something called the talk tracks where we like keep going with answering some of the questions and one of them was this a young man who reached out after episode two and he's like I want to help a volunteer for you and I was a go work with some non-speakers that's going to be the best thing in the world and he witnessed the till up at the right away he witnessed a few other things and he ends up in the first talk tracks episode getting to the hill and his story is really beautiful as to how as a neurotypical man he was able to do that but people need to listen to because it's really cool so he figured out how to get to the hill yeah yeah and what is he describe it as well he said it's divinely protected that it there seems to be divinely there seems to be like some sort of guide there that like you can't just go in like halibird and can't go rip it off you know like they're like like it seems to be guarded and that only people with good intentions can go and I think I mean I hope people don't try to start going there I really really don't this is a non-spinning I know it's like one of the pains actually for me is that like oh and putting this out there like but I do think the non-speakers are in charge there it's their space is a beautiful space and and and I don't think anyone can just get let in you have to really be open open but not just but have a good good intention right completely pure pureness and love are a big part of this and this person who's typical regular person got in there have they had any experience in the past with any form of telepathy before this well the reason his story is so beautiful so again he's an episode one of the talk tracks and what happened is he had he was a pass with any form of telepathy before this? Well, the reason his story is so beautiful. So again, he's an episode one of the talk tracks. And what happened is he had, he was diagnosed with a really rare, like, auto-mune disease, and then, like, stage four cancer. And he kind of realized, like, I need to save my life. I'm going to die if I don't learn to, like, think, control my thoughts. And he was able to cure himself. And he sent me scans and the cancer zone was all gone. But I think that that attention to thought and how thought can change your world and dictate what happens in your world really did something in his brain that allowed him to live in that mental space. And I think that helped him, I think that really helped him get to the hill. I mean, he talks about more about how he got there. And it took a few times. And for him, it was all audible. It felt like static and certain voices. But then he said he did a few tests. Like, there was a, um, um, one of the students he works with. He's like, I knew exactly who it was. And I could hear their voice. I just knew it was their voice, even though I've never heard their voice. But I just knew it was their energy. I just knew it was them. And he's like, so I gave a test. And I said, I'm going to tell you this person's name and this person's name and this person's name and, you know, gave them kind of a bunch of information. And I said, when I see you next, you need to tell me this stuff. And then when he saw that person next, they, they wrote it, they spelled it out for him. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. So I do think the people experiencing, experimenting with this, have their own deep desire to get it right and try to validate stuff, you know, it's hard just to take on face value. How do you know if it's real or if it's in your own mind? Right. But the weird thing is like, if this does, I mean, I'm sure you've opened up a lot of people's minds to this. And again, if this expands and then we all agree that this is a thing and that this is a possible thing. And then people start trying to figure out what it is and develop methods to try to tap into that. This could be a profound change in just society as a whole. Yeah. Yeah. And I think the thing I hear the most, right, is people afraid of their thoughts being out there. But what's kind of cool. It's gone. You're so worried about it. Exactly. Well, that's how about clean your brain out? Exactly. Clean your brain out. You're not going to be afraid of that. Yeah. What's going on in your head that you don't want anybody to know. Totally. What are your terrible thoughts? It's interesting. Yeah. When people say that, I do because I mean, we all have certain stuff that like who cares if someone knows that that way all happens to us, right? Like you're worried about having something your teeth or something or like you don't accidentally like pass gas and whatever. That's of us. I think who cares. That's just being human, right? But when people are like that terrified, it's like, what the hell is going on with you? Yeah. I think it's the concept of it too. And also the concept, I think there's the thought that if someone can read your mind that you're more vulnerable, that you can't protect yourself. Like if you like all this person's creepy, let me get away from them. Oh, you think I'm creepy. You know, like that kind of thing. Like that you won't be able to just like avoid people. I do think you have some control over it though. And again, I can only go off of what I've heard from others. But like one of the teachers who's been just she's been such an advocate and fighter in this world for years trying to point to this. And she said the first experience she ever had around, maybe not the first, but one of the most cementing experiences was she was going to go visit a former student class and the die before. So this is wild. And I before she went out and picked like Swedish fish and you know, some doughnuts and, you know, I forgot what else. And so she comes in to give him his favorite snacks and forgot them in the car. But she went and see sat with him and talked with him. And right before she was leaving the classroom, he took out a pen and drew like a doughnut, a fish, you know, and kind of drew the things that she and it like rattles her to her car like she knew what she was thinking that I before. And now that he's, you know, graduated, she still works with him just as an unvallantier basis for the sheer joy of just being with him. And she asked him years later, how did you do that? And he like, were you remote viewing through me and how did you know at that moment? He's like, well, once you were thinking of me, that was like my invitation to come in. Like I won't just crash into someone's thoughts. It's like, I have to be kind of invited and by like, you know, like the thought. So I do think that there's a way to kind of control it. And I know that the teacher that was having the student jump into her brain a lot, the younger man, she said like, you need to stop that like, if I will invite you in when I want you, but you can't just come into my mind whenever that's not appropriate, you know? Right. Right. And so I think every individual's an individual, right? I mean, how this stuff works and is probably different for each person, but I don't necessarily think, you know, what many spellers have told me is like, good, good energy allows them them to swap thoughts like, good, you jewel allows them to do that, being invited in, being open to it. It doesn't feel like they can just go into like, you know, the person running for sentence thoughts and be like, ah, actually you didn't fund them, you know, right? The problem is like, what if people get really good at that? Like what if it expands and then people are just entering into your thoughts all the time? I think technologically that's going to happen anyway. Yeah. It's one of the things that Elon has said about this neural link device that they're enabling and said, you're going to be able to talk with that words. Yeah. Yeah. But here's a thing too, right? It's like, again, I think most, almost every non speaker I've met, their concern is love, unity, right? And so if your thoughts are other people and your thoughts are loving and about unity, it's not scary then for other people to be reading your thoughts. You're going to be caring about other people, hopefully. The real thought, the real scary thing is that there are a lot of people out there in this world that do not have thoughts of love and unity. Right. They're damaged, hurtful, evil people. Yep. And they want to destroy everything around them. Yep. And that those people could acquire this ability. But would they be able to? Well, that's, I don't know. This is the thing. It's like has there been any evidence that evil people have been able to acquire this ability? I would say what I have found and even talking to scientists about this, that the baseline baseline for this is love. There's a wonderful neuroscientist named Julia Mossbridge and she has studied precognition and one of the things she does in these precognition tests is being like how much unconditional love do you feel for yourself, for other people, for the device you're taking this test on. Yeah. And the more people feel love, the better they do. And one of the things that I've heard from so many non speakers with disabilities that the baseline is love, that love, love, love is like the thing that unlocks this stuff. What do they describe love as? Everything that unifies. I've heard that over and over again. What's love is anything that unifies. And that the best description of love ever. It is. It's a really good description. So and that was yeah, very specific, anything that unifies. So it's almost like they're tapping into some laws of the universe or laws of reality that we kind of know by trial and error. But we don't, I mean, all you need is love, but you know, this is always love as ubiquitous concept. It's like something that everybody always agrees is very important to life and happiness. But we don't necessarily practice that culturally or as a society. Yeah. I mean, but you go back to like all the all the religious teachers and thoughts, right? It's so much of it's about love and unity and we're all one and you might not realize this but we're all one. And you know, it's been interesting like there's a big question mark right now on how how did you these tests and how to prove it. And when I brought that up to a few non speakers, one of the questions is like why do you need to prove this with instruments? Like the biggest spiritual gift, the most fascinating one is love that will cause someone to jump into choppy waters and save someone and risk their own life. Just had mothers like have someone should drown in like lift up a car and save their baby. Like love is the superpower. And it's like that's it's just it's true and they're like, why aren't you trying to measure love? And it's like, okay, good point. But still people want to measure to love. And then there brings up the question of like, okay, well, is it best to do it like in a lab situation that can be really stressful that can be filled with a lot of skeptical people and throwing that energy at you? Or is it better just to go into your environment and take off the lab coat, learn this spell, go check this out. And you think of like really good scientists like Jane Goodall who when she wanted to understand like a culture of how the chimps were working, she didn't bring them into her lab. She went and like live in the jungle for months. You know, or you want to go look at the lightning bugs that light up in unison in Vietnam. I don't know if that's going to work out for you if you bring them back to Berkeley and put them in some building. You probably have to go sit in the jungle and wait for them to light up in unison. So it's like, is it smart to be trying to test the stuff in our way in our labs? Or is it better to be like, I'm going to go chill out with you in your living room and see how this works. Right. The reason why to test it with instruments is for skeptics. So once we've all agreed that this is an actual phenomenon. This is the real thing. Whatever this is, this is real. The best way to test it is really with consciousness. Yeah. And you know, I think about this a lot, like the skeptics because again, like I've said, the families and teachers, the people who, the people are like, let's just move the signs for it. We know what's happening. We know, now we know how, now why, right? And I've thought about like how skeptics can hold back that research and science and like how much time do you give to them versus like just move on without them. And I was thinking about in the term of like in the olden days, right, like a, a Voyager was going out into discover new worlds and people you can't go find something that works as flat and you're going to fall off of it or out there is the blood of the blood. And someone comes back and it's like discovered Iceland and it's like, oh my gosh, you would not believe it. Like, geysers are coming out of the earth and there's black stone beaches and black sand beaches and North or like, you know, whatever they're explaining. And they come back and some people are like, wow, let's go explore and find out more and you don't draw things of it. And some people might be like, don't go with them. Don't go. Don't even try it. They're making it up. It's not real that couldn't exist. You're going to die if you go. I feel like the scientists, there are the skeptics in our, those people in the shore being like, there is no Iceland. Don't go look and you're going to blah, blah, blah. And it's like that's such a, it's such a, um, a weight to, to, to forwarding thought and research and this is such a cool, exciting new frontier. Yes. And, um, well, the thing is, it's like there's levels of skeptics. There's people that are just objective and they're like, I need data. I need to see something. And then there's people that it doesn't matter what they see. They're never going to believe. Right. And they're not going to be the weird ones. Because there's a lot of people out there that are self professed skeptics. Those are the ones that are the problem. Yeah. Like they call themselves skeptics. Right. Okay. Right. Well, how about just be objective? Right. Well, don't just be skeptical. Right. Because if you're completely skeptical and you're always looking for a negative, you're, you know, you're going to be biased by your own preconceived notions. Right. I mean, if you're, if you're only skeptical, you're a close minded believer. You're not open minded. You're as dogmatic as like, right. As the next person who just believes they're believed, they're looking for their, this is it like, that's not skeptical. Well, that's atheist. Right. And a lot of, for a lot of, yeah. Well, I mean, there's different kinds of atheists too. There's some that I would just, I'd say they're self professed atheists for the really more agnostic than anything. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But I would say, I mean, I would say, I'm skeptical. Every time I hear something, you know, I'm like, can I be this guy? Right. Like we got to go test this. I don't know. We got to find, okay, we got to test that four or five more times. But like, be an open minded skeptic. That's the only way that's just objective. Right. Because you hear about something completely novel and you're like, okay, what is it? What is that? Is this bullshit? Because you know bullshit, bullshit's real. It's a real thing. Like that's why skeptics are important or at least being skeptical is important because there are people that tell you, if you join my cult, you will, you will experience bliss and happiness. We all give up our money to the guru and he has sex with all of us, but it's great. Like what? Right. Totally. So it's skepticism. Yes, it is important. It is important. It keeps you from getting hoodwinked. It does. I mean, yes, open mind is skeptical. Right. But this is the problem with not having the ability to read minds, right? Is that people can deceive you? And you can't really tell. And some people are terrible at it for some reason. Like some people just fall in line with the wrong crowd over and over and over again. And they never get it right. Yeah, that's so true. You have to be skeptical. Yeah. Or you have to be able to read people. Yeah. And what is reading people though, right? There's people that I've met that like right away, I'm like, this person's broken. I gotta get the fuck away from them. This is a famous story that with my friend Brian, Brian Cowan, who's a hilarious comedian who always has the worst friends, always. And one time he showed up at this show that we were doing together with this gal that he was dating. And that hurt for five seconds. And he'd always had the worst girlfriends. They're always just disasters. I go get rid of this one. Please. I go trust me. You got to move. He's like, what are you talking about? I go, dude, she's crazy. This one's broken. And he's like, no, no, no, dude, I am telling you right now. Turn it out. She's a meth head. He didn't know. She wind up being a prostitute. It was off the charts. But she was pretty. And he just thought she was friendly to him. And so she was fine. And I read her right away. I'm like, oh, everything's wrong here. And he's like, how did you do that? And I'm like, I don't know. I just knew right away you got to get away from her. Yeah. And he eventually one day ran into her after they had broken up. She was street walking. What? Yeah. That crazy. Yeah. Poor thing. But it was like, I was like, that one's going to drag it down. Like, get out of there. Yeah. But I knew. Yeah. I mean, it was a simple exchange. Like, hi, nice to meet you. Nice to meet you too. Like, oh, fuck's going to be a good thing. What's going on here? It was like all my spidey senses. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And it's not normal. That's not normal. That's not every day. It's not like everybody can meet. Like some people I meet are like, something's on. Right. Something's real about that. Yeah. You have to be able to go on some kind of instinct. We all know. And a lot of his sort of pattern recognition, a lot of it is prior experiences with similar, the way similar people engage with you. Right. And you're like, oh, I've seen this before. Yeah. Like this is a con man. Oh, I've seen this before. This is this. And this is that. Yeah. But sometimes, sometimes it's just like, this is a bad person. Yes. This one's broken. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. So yes, I think having some degree of skepticism can be good. Yeah. Emotional intelligence can be good. It's objectivity. Yeah. Objectivity. To recognize that people that are deceptive are real. You know? And there's people that have all tear your motives. And these will tear your motives. You might not understand. And you've got to be able to throw everything through a filter. And unfortunately, until we can read minds, you're kind of going on these like, did you hear that? I think I heard something. That's really what it's like. Like when you meet a person, so just something. I don't know. You'd be in paranoid. I don't know. You know? Right. And then you could convince yourself that you are being paranoid when you actually, you're not. You're actually accurate. Yeah. And you're like, oh, you're being silly. Yeah. And I'm not being silly. You should have followed your initial instincts. Right. Exactly. And I think that's what has happened with materialism being such up for years is that anyone who believed in anything would be made to feel silly. Oh, you're so gullible. You're not smart. Like, intellectual people certainly don't believe in ghosts or God or whatever, put anything in their relationship. They're all in that direction. Right. Yeah. Exactly. They're pretty great. And so that's been effective. No one else would be ridiculed in this misdemeanor feel silly. I mean, even editing the podcast, I was so certain, I'm like, OK, what? Episode 24, there's a lot of sciences. It's great. The one that took me weeks, like I was in turmoil over was having to put out into the world that the teachers were hearing to up at the back. Because I'm like, no one's going to believe this. This is so hard. But it's like, you can't censor it. This is what people's experience is. And the whole brain was put out the voices of people who have been completely dismissed and ignored. And also, if love is unifying, the love of a teacher and a student is absolutely real. Like, and it's a special bond, especially really good teachers. Oh my God. Really good educators have like the spec, because they really genuinely just want to help. And when someone did genuine and you're a child that's vulnerable and confused by the world around you and you're nonverbal and there's someone with genuine love for you, like it kind of makes sense that those would be the people that bridge the gap. It was interesting because I saw my best friend for college this morning and her husband was there. And he was like, why is there so many women in the podcast that have telepathy? Can dads do it? And whatever. And I was like, in fact, the first person, Dr. Powell, tested to just help you the test with. This girl was adopted. And she had the best telepathic bond with her father. And I know a young man in Israel who's best telepathic bond is with his father. And another, you know, so yes, it does have good dads. But I think there's more women who go into teaching and more women that you caregiving. Right. And so that's probably why it looks like more women. But I don't think it's like a gender thing that mostly women have this. I think it's whoever is in that loving open. Yeah. I think men are generally more inclined towards brutish thinking. And in ego and silly ways of viewing the world. And then also preoccupied by their status in life and what that means to them and their worth is an individual. And all that stuff is an interesting impediment to any sort of real love. Because you're just so self-focused. Yeah, that's very self-defense. That's definitely a male trait, especially in this capitalism society where you're constantly trying to achieve a higher level of status and no one's satisfied, including billionaires. Yeah, right. Exactly. It's just the nuttiest thing of all time. I know. Right. With this point, you won the game. I know. It's spread it out, man. It's over. You should, like you have a crazy opportunity with all this money. To help so many people and lift up all of America on the name. Also, why are you still just chasing numbers in a ledger? Because that's what you're doing. Yeah. You've got lost in this weird game. I actually cannot comprehend that. I cannot comprehend. I wonder if you could if you were super wealthy. Maybe. And if you went down that path. The one thing would be if you're super wealthy by some divine intervention or someone just gives you money. Some crazy billionaire who's a telepathy-tapes fan, they're dying, and on their will, they say, listen, guy, you seem cool. I'm going to give you $2 billion. What are you going to do with it? Yeah, that's different. But if you went and tried to earn it. And so your whole life, you were focused on these achievements. I want to have this and that. And I want to be important. I want to be able to influence political parties. And I want to be able to fly in my private jet. I want an island. You get crazy. And then you never have enough. Because you don't want to have more of a war. Yeah. And then you're around people. Look, we were talking the other day. Also, my friend Brian has a friend who's worth like $3 billion. And he feels poor because he hangs out with these guys that are worth $50 billion. And like that's so crazy. But that's the world that you live in when you're only thinking about numbers on a ledger. You've got caught playing a game. Right. You're playing poker. You have chips. You know, you're just all just quantifiable numbers. Well, none of it matters, too. Because who cares? You're just here's the real number. You got 100 years if you're lucky. That's the real number. Yeah. And if you're 60, you're fucking right. Yeah. You're almost at the end, buddy. Right. Like, what do you do? Well, and I just, I always think about like the impact you're going to leave behind. Like, what's your legacy? Like, you had a big boat. I mean, who cares about that? Right. What does that mean? You know, are you going to be the person who won't heat-died? He had so many things. He's not aspired to be like, will you? Right. Yeah. I mean, there's a lot of people that are like that. And if they think about old dead rich people playing poor, he really nailed it. He killed the game. And that's, you know, that's the thing that they have focused on, unfortunately. This is the problem with financial institutions. Because if all you're doing is trying to acquire more money, well, that's your game. And your game is just do that. And then as you get bigger, you eventually reach a point of like, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, you kind of control everything. Like, you control natural resources. You control land. You control building. You housing, transportation. You have everything? This is not good for everybody else. It's not good for everybody else for one entity to have so much power and only be concentrating on numbers. Right. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know where that comes from. I mean, I guess if you grow up really rich, maybe that's it. Or maybe if you grew up without anything. It's a competition. It's a subversion of what it's initially supposed to be. It's like when you put mandates on officers, achieving a certain amount of arrests. Right. Or even arrests in general, right? Or prosecutors, right? What is a prosecutor's goal? To win. Right. There's the competition. The competition is I provide evidence that this person is guilty, the defense provides evidence that he is in fact innocent. And we sort it out. And if you're just trying to win the game, well, then you're a corrupt prosecutor because then you withhold evidence that might exonerate that person. Or you don't allow DNA. Or you don't. There's a lot of that. I mean, I work with a guy named Josh Dubin, he's a friend of mine, his whole thing is freeing people that are unjustly accused. And we just because of this podcast, a bunch of people are free right now. Wow. And the shocking stories that you hear about corrupt prosecutors where these guys get caught, and it turns out there's hundreds of people rotting away in a cage that are innocent because of this one corrupt person. And because they played this game of just trying to win. And this is the same game. It's the same game of acquiring numbers, whatever you're trying to do. If that is what your game is, your game is just numbers. I mean, it just makes me wonder if people believe there was more. Like if it wasn't just like you've got this one shot and you're just gonna hear and tackle the numbers and be super rich and whatever, I would making a difference and make it. Because it does feel like, yeah, oh, Paul, yeah. We're gonna just, yeah, love it to their power. But if you really believe that there was something more, that you had a higher purpose here, that you were more than just your body, I think if you believe that to some degree, you're gonna act differently. You're more focused on difference than acquiring numbers of money. Yeah, it's just hard to get through people that are completely lost and obsessed. Yeah. When someone is completely like, say a gambling addict, for instance, they're very hard to get to. Because they're completely lost and obsessed with this thing that they become addicted to, which is all numbers. Gambling is just all thrills and food, wins, and losses and numbers. It's all just, I bet, 100,000 on the game. And I'm like, I think I've got five points on the spread. So I need to cover the spread, then I win. And then I'm out of the hole. And then it's this roller coaster, and so it's very difficult to get to those people that are lost in whatever the game they're playing is, whether the game is gambling addiction or financial addiction. Whatever it is, if you're lost in a game, it's very hard to get to those people, especially if they don't have love in their life. And so if all their status is acquired by numbers, by achieving this and pulling up in the brand new Mercedes and wearing the fine suit and having the expensive watch or whatever it is that your thing is that you wanna show up with. And there's, in this world, this especially today, there's all the lures and trappings to pull you into that. And you can never get enough. You can get hand purchase, hand created this and rare that in a limited edition. Thought, oh, did you get the new one? Oh, and then you're lost. It's just, yeah, it doesn't fill you up. I think it empties you out more really in the end. Right. But what it does do oddly is it promotes technological innovation. So keeping up with the Joneses and materialism, one purpose that it does serve oddly is this constant push towards newer and better things, which I think is also part of the purpose of human life in some sort of a strange way, is that we are pursuing technological innovation above and beyond everything. If you could see us objectively, if you could see us outside of culture, outside of language, if you were an alien race and you're observing this weird species, like what does it do? Well, it keeps making better stuff. Yeah, that's what it does. It keeps making better stuff. It gets all the resources into making better stuff and it's obsessed with acquiring better stuff, even though it has a finite lifespan. It never recognizes, or rarely. It's an odd and beautiful thing when someone recognizes they have a finite life. Yeah, yeah. I was just thinking about that. what you're saying, then I was thinking, God, for then every four years the aliens would be like, oh, but then they pass a torture on the world and they go and they compete in games in the whole, and for like once in all two week period, they're all playing these games against each other. And then they put the torch out and go home and put them better than that. Right, but it's not that subverted by numbers because the people that are playing the game, who everybody wants to see them, they don't get any of the money. The money is all by the machine. The commercials and everything is net works. The networks and the organization, where they profit in the tune of billions of dollars and literally pays zero to the athletes, which is how it grows. Another disgusting subversion of this whole thing. So the purity is in the athletes, especially if you're competing in a game that has no financial future. Now if you're the World Curling Champion, whatever it is, you know what it's some goofy ass fucking Olympic spirit. There's no, you're just trying to be the best of this thing. And I think if you can achieve something that makes you feel really good about yourself, I think there is a worth in that to see it beautiful. But and that's where sports can come in. And the underdog can win and you can work together and blah, but that's worth something. I think that's really beautifully create something that's beautiful. But yeah, just buying something is not cool. I mean, that's right. I mean, just what does it do? That's not cool. Creating something is cool. It's also one of the weirdest attractions or attractions about social media is what the stuff that people are showing you they have. I know. Which is like, you can get a lot of followers by having great stuff and like look at my stuff, look at my house, look at my car, look at my jet. And there's like the people who are wow, and you see like millions and millions of likes. Yeah. He's video. It's really, it's kids, they love the YouTube videos now. My son will watch Hot Wheels, like people being like, this new Hot Wheels goes, dude, dude, dude, you're done and you want to make these Hot Wheels things. And I'm like, what is happening right now that you're basically doing an ad for Hot Wheels? Right. It's just, I would have never wanted to watch kids on box Hot Wheels. Or Barbies or whatever, none of it. Unboxing things are strange. It's like techno porn. You're watching someone do something you wish you were doing. Oh, I wish I was that hot. Yeah. It's so weird. Yeah. But it's also very strange when you think about how many people are tuned into that where you never would have expected that in the past. Like there would never be a television show on NBC where someone unbox his stuff. You'd be like, no one's going to watch that. But meanwhile, put it on YouTube and millions of people will watch that stuff. So there's a part of it that we didn't anticipate. Yeah. I don't know. I hope it'll be a pendulum. When you brought up television, I thought, well, that replaced the dance hall, right? People used to go dance and hang out before those television. Like you'd be out doing something and how cool. Right. Or go out to the diner. The old world was flat. Right. This benefits to all this ability to communicate as well. The problem is when it's centralized. Right. The real problem with television is that television has advertising advertising limits, which you can say. And because of that, we censored language. Because advertisers didn't want you swearing on television. So the way people talked in real life, they never talked on television. Right. Yeah. And so that got subverted. True, free expression got subverted by advertisement. Well, and that is what is cool about the world we're living right now. Right. Because YouTube and Twitter, you know, whatever. True free expression got subverted by advertisement. Well, and that is what is cool about the world we're living right now Right because like YouTube and Twitter X or you know, whatever blue sky all the things podcast I mean people are free to kind of speak I Fending it made pretty quick, which is a simple scientific facts But you know, I mean there is a democracy to information now where I think Like stuff that could never have gotten out there 20 30 years ago when the gatekeeping of like you were saying Advertising and all that was so extreme. It's just changed and that's awesome profoundly Yeah, and in a way that I don't think we even appreciate because we're a part of it Right, I think it's one of those things we've become accustomed to checking the news on your phone when you wake up in the morning and having a And friend sending you things. Oh my god. Did you see this right and cool things too great music and yeah so many things get They get shared like your show Yeah, got shared to me. I don't remember who shared it to me because so many people did Yeah, because I don't remember who the first person was yeah Well, and I think that's a thing that is cool right We actually have like evidence of what the psych democratization of information looks like like the U.I.P Phenomena has become so much more mainstream people are talking about it like things that could not have been shared as spoken or not out there same with psychedelics and syllasibon and you know going on ketamine trips or whatever like all that now It's just common knowledge that this can be great for healing PTSD or you know depression or whatever the stuff with telepathy You know, I mean channeling whatever it is like all these things especially tic-tac you're like all like hours is so I'm glad you brought the U.O.P Thing up. I hate to interrupt you, but because I think a lot of the what we're hearing is an on-sounds Yeah, I mean I think a lot of what is being shared especially publicly like There's too Too many voices that I think are either intelligence assets or our disinformation experts that are doing it on purpose and then there's too much of You know the same feeling that I get You know like when I said I met my friend's ex-girlfriend. I was like oh get out There's a I have that feeling about the U.A.P thing when I hear people talk nothing seems Real to me. Yeah when I talk to people about it. There's not one I mean even when people tell me their own personal experiences I believe them. Mm-hmm. It does not register as real. It's so interesting something registers is being nonsense There's something maybe not nonsense, but maybe way weirder than what they're explaining it like like non physical interaction that they are reinterpreting as like physical interaction. Yeah that there's some there's some disconnect between their work like if someone tells me experience What they had like here's a good example um my friend Steve told me a harrowing experience of Them being attacked by a brown bear in Alaska And when he tells you this story first of all I know it's real because I know multiple people who were there. They were all there It was no one got hurt. It was very fortunate But they're they got charged by a grizzly who ran through their tent one of my friends was on its back Oh my god, like 10 yards Like you literally plow through the people and he wound up like riding its back for like 10 yards for a fell off Wow, yeah, it was just like mean it can cover 10 yards in a second Yeah, and the whole thing was just insane chaos and the way he describes how your Reptilian brain completely takes up the fear is so Overwhelming and different than anything you've experienced before. I know it happened He's telling me this I know it happened. Yeah when these people are telling me about talking to aliens and all of that I'm not getting nothing out of them. I'm not getting nothing. I'm getting a flat piece of paper Yeah, there's no fear there's no I don't know what it is. I don't know what it is. I know I don't don't get anything from their story Here it's interesting, but I don't get anything that lights any bells No bulbs go off with me. I just sit there and go wow Okay, so what were you thinking you know I'm asking them questions, but I'm not getting nothing yeah And so that leaves me because I know that For sure the government has technology that they do not want the general public to be aware of for reasons of national security or whatever it is or You know money has been Push through to finance things and they lie to Congress and they have to keep lying whatever the reason is That's real there's most certainly black ops programs that the general public is not aware of that's always going to be the case If you have those what better way to hide them than in plain sight and with a bunch of people that are air quote Whistle blowers that go out and tell everybody about all these experiences. They're not of this earth That's what I would do. Yeah, if I was the government and I wanted to be super sneaky I would have a bunch of my like really clever agents go and whistle blow Some stories talk about people that have been abducted talk about all these different things. Yeah And then on top of that there's real experiences so I think I think there is something because it exists throughout history just like to leopard the exist throughout history and go Success throughout history and and religion exists. There's something there. Yeah, there's something there That's distorted by our very slippery grasp on truth. Yes. Yeah, I think that's a very true assessment Yeah, yeah, there's also just too many stories from hundreds of years ago Yeah, incredibly similar to the things that people are talking about today. Yeah, that's the stuff that's interesting Yeah, like Jacques Vallet and exactly just finishes third book. Yeah, I mean that that's the mind He's yeah, he's great because he's not a believer. Yeah, he's very skeptical about a lot And it highlights a lot of the bullshit to the point where like okay. What's true? Yeah No, it's true. I feel only yet the only ones you can trust yeah because there's too many people that are out there telling you I know what's happening. We are about to experience a contact The all the people the joint chiefs of staff have been notified and like those people I don't want to talk to Like you shut the fuck up. You don't know anything. There's no way you know You're just taking advantage of this very weird moment in time where people aren't sure But there's all this discussion of this phenomena and you've grifted yourself right Exactly all those people there are yeah, and it's clickbaitness. That's a profit. Yeah, right They're gross no, but the true intellectual people is looking at the consciousness side of this I think fascinating that's what's like what's going on. I mean, that's where it is. Yeah, it's a conscious I mean that's why you know, I wasn't into the U.A. Pea stuff until people start saying to me like you should at least Looking at some of these great thinkers because a lot of the cestages consciousness and what are we and why are we here and like What's a hyper object? Right like like like a lot of stuff that I'm like what is going on? So you start reading about it and understanding okay like Where things might converge is an? Expiration of consciousness. Yeah, and our consciousness is confined by identity. It's confined by so many different things So many just many walls that we put up and ego and blinders and self-delusions always just weird things that we have In our mind because we don't necessarily have a very good Direction book of how to be a human right, you know or what we're just limited to by our vision, right? Like if you were to talk to a dog and be like hey, there's Does this dog know about calculus and doesn't know about like right? The you know whatever electoral college of course not like there's no way there's no universe What a dog would know about that stuff, but it could smell a cat You're sick at dog. Just let you know And there you know they haven't seen noses they could they could smell individual ingredients in a hamburger That's so fascinating and a bear is like ten times stronger than that which is Bananas amazing they can smell human beings hundreds of yards away Just a whiff of the wind and all that people it's good to focus out of here Well, and that's like we don't have that but like a dog doesn't have XYZ. What are we limited? We might not be able to see half of what's there or a sure conceive of it So wave your hand above an earthworm. There's no idea Yeah, like it doesn't need to right lives its life underground those senses are not necessary right? So that's the mystery right yeah, and our sense is most likely a battery feed You know that's the real thing is that you know there's a lot of talk from you know ancient Whether it's ancient religious texts or of Contact of something Communicating with you that's not physically there and you know you got to wonder like was this really common for people like there's There's so many descriptions of being contacted by something that's not there like what was that before? language normal Yeah, and and was it physically someone contacted you or was it an a mental space right like were you in this thought world like Almost you were astral traveling or whatever right like I mean that's the question too is are can you be experiencing something in your mind? That's not happening physically right and I think that question is for racism in the UAP world as well as in this like telepathy world right it's the birds flying around in unison somehow or another they're tuned in to some Some pattern that they never collide. How do they not collide? I mean that's like so spectacular that you're literally Hundreds of feet above the earth your fly to get knocked on conscience or both dead and no one collide Yeah, and they're going fast. I mean imagine like why would you do that like what what benefit? Evolutionary benefit what natural survival benefit would there be in a bunch of you? Flying around and weird patterns in the sky like look at that here. That is so Beautiful, I've heard this they just look like a bigger thing. So I that's gonna be it right You look a big monster. Yeah, that doesn't scare off fish. They go right to it. That big thing well That's the problem, you know when tuned to see that big thing they're like fuck you Look how crazy that is I mean it's but why would that be a benefit to like being a bigger thing? That would make you a bigger target. I know I mean it's just so weird. It's so weird like no one's falling No, no one's a little hiding. I'm gonna have falling and does that look like art I mean it really is like in a lab or dance have you ever seen wolves hunt? No, they communicate We don't know what they're doing. We don't we don't know how they do it, but they decide Yeah, yeah, there's something because they they flank animals They know how to do it. Yeah, like they know to chase animals into Canyons and then they get on the other side of it and they capture them when they're trying to escape Still up at the I mean one of the teachers That I've come to love so much and she was also in England. She said that the first time she realized something like this is going on She's working in a school where their people individuals weren't speaking And she saw people of like a bunch of her class playing at recess and she's like it was a fully orchestrated game Like this one you to go here and this one you do go here And they were doing this and then she's like but they weren't speaking and I was watching this through the classroom window And I thought they are Communicating through telepathy because how else do this is a huge organized game and she watched over and over again And then she thought in her head like I want to be in on this I want you all to teach me I want to get in on this and then one of the boys sorry She'd start hearing him in her head like if he had fallen down outside or couldn't find his lunch money or you know Something happened Skinned his knee and she would hear him and like would nowhere to go find him and she was like oh my gosh Like he used this is starting to work and then yeah, and then like one of the students Mothers died and she became and the mother said to this teacher I want you to really take care of my son as he ages he loves you like he he really respects you and she's done that in his whole life And now you know He's a grown adult and and they still communicate But she's like now he communicates with me telepathically. I'll get these huge visual packages And she's like and sometimes I think First did this come for me and my making this up But it'll be like an update on someone from you know that they knew both 20 years ago and she'll be that can't be that this guy Suddenly a priest he was so unrealistic or whatever It'll be something that makes no sense and she'll go look it up on Facebook and it proves to be true So you know she'll constantly have to double check things and she Yeah, I mean so It's it's remarkable, but I do not doubt that the wolves are probably using telepathy Yeah, I think chimpanzees do it too I think they they all have roles and they know what role to play and they just sort of like lock in on this task together And somehow another communicate like they lay in weight. They know one to wait So weird. It's so cool. Yeah, it's so cool. I mean Imagine if one day we can figure out through technology to Access minds of animals and see how an owl thinks like see like what is what is the What's the process in their mind when they lock on this? What is a predator thing? What is a what is a? Does a prey animal know when it's being watched? Yes. Yeah. Yeah, I mean because there's been that Trust me No, sometimes they don't know at all that's so how far away are you in your sometimes like 50 60 yards and they have no idea You're there Wow and there you know But a lot of times they're distracted too because they're in the rut so they're mating and they're distracted Yeah, which is a rude way to hunt them Yeah, that's how people hunt them The worst way to hunt someone I mean not always a lot of animals You got their music and not in the rut, but you know like white teal deer elk primarily you hunt them when they're in the rut Yeah, there's some animals though that are very very difficult to hunt and one of the reasons why is you don't hunt them when they're in the rut Like mule deer mule deer are the most clever and the most aware of all deer species because they're constantly being pursued by mountain lions So they're always like oh, yeah, they're totally nervous like always on on edge and they have an uncanny ability to get out of the way They just they they know something's there and they're like fuck this and they just bounce out Yeah, you got to sneak up on them when the winds blow in you got to like like people take their shoes off to creep up on them So tactic. Yeah, well you have to be yeah, because you have to especially bow hunting So you have to get ideally you want to get with the inside of 60 yards Yeah, that's really what you want especially a mule deer's not that big and elk is a much larger target But a mule deer is you know big ones like 300 pounds you you've got to get pretty close and they fucking know something's up Yeah, you know sometimes up. Yeah, you know, you staring at them and they just like You know, they're just two men. Yeah, there's also I don't know if this is real or not, but there's a company called hex and they make these they make clothes that block out your Electrical signal and one of the things like it's very hard to discern whether or not it works with you're right with mammals But it seems to work really well with fish So there's a lot of video evidence of these people putting these hex suits on underneath their their wet gear or their scuba gear and then going in the water and Being able to get like right up close to fish or they don't even know what the fuck is going on They couldn't if they don't have the suit on this is their assertion. Okay. Now obviously they're selling a product. Yeah very controversial in the The hunting world whether or not these things are real some people 100% believe in them And there's a bunch of evidence that people wear them and then they sit in a field and turkeys like get right next to them And turkeys have incredible vision yeah turkeys have better vision than humans. Yeah, I'd like to know more about that Yeah, but the the really compelling stuff to me is the water stuff because they do it in the water and the idea is that prey animals have this electrical some sort of Signal that they're giving off yeah, these animals can pick up That's really interesting. I'd like to learn more about that. That's fascinating Well fish have a thing called a lateral line. Mm-hmm Never seen that line on the fish. Yeah, so that lateral line is interpreting movement in the water Interpreting so yeah, a filmographer he says it lets them get him closer to anything Will just show him different so this is what you got the promise obviously this is a commercial right right and the problem is You know these people believe it and I don't know if they've done like how would you do a double blind study with this? You know, would you You're dealing with yeah completely different fish completely different time. Yeah, you know There's what did that fish experience? Yeah, just experience a shark 30 minutes ago. What do you know? What's going on? I think you know a lot. Yeah, and I don't know if they've done that Because I think they're just trying to sell the this thing Yeah, or may not work and it's because it blocks out your magnetic field as opposed to who's what is what is there explain your explanation for what it does as Something to do well the human body is essentially an electrical system Right, so it's kind of makes sense that we would give off some sort of a visual representation or some senses that we don't understand just as electromagnetic patterns or okay All right, what is it Google hex suit debunked? Google that HEC suit a HEC S suit debunked I wonder if anybody's ever tried to debunk it And say that's nonsense because I know a lot of people that don't think it's that works Yeah, they don't wear them, but I know I've read John Dudley who's one of the best hunters in the world He wears it every time he goes hunting really yeah, fascinating. He thinks animals can't see him as well when he wears it I just think I mean if he believes it works and that's like, you know, sometimes the The act of faith is one point in the fact of it right sometimes maybe I don't know No, I think the fact is more important because if you're doing both things if you're doing if you're doing everything Correctly, but one thing does give you like camouflage works. We know it works Yeah, there's something about the way animal see they they essentially see movement and line detection so see the frame of a human being clearly if you're wearing black and you're standing there and you're a bipedal thing They're like oh fuck that at the person. Yeah, let's get out of here But if your lines are completely broken up by camouflage and you're stand still they don't see you they see Not just they see the woods. Yeah, you know you blend in. Yeah. Yeah, that's why camouflage doesn't have to look like leaves and sticks It could just look like patches And stripes and tiger stripes right it makes sense. Yeah. Yeah. It does does make sense I mean that's why animals in nature have that yeah, you know I was watching this thing where they were explaining what Animal see versus what we see why tigers would be so beautifully colored because the animals don't see that color For whatever reason, but they do see the lines and the lines completely blur in with the grass Because animals see in black wine Right Weird shade and interesting I've found anything about hex suits. These don't a lot of tons of anecdotal evidence to video is people though a good point is like how did Fred bear do it How did he get so close to stuff? That's just their example that will you know the original hunter right those guys all wore like Final shirts and doing odor blocking. Yeah that odor blocking shit doesn't work. Yeah, I have no real No one did like a study in me to this by the way if you have odor blocking the animal smell the odor blocking And then like what the right yes. Yeah, that's Stinking fucking weird smell there's no way we smell so bad animals. There's no way they smell us like we smell us gunk Yeah, that's so interesting. Yeah, you know you get smells gunk that gets killed like five blocks away. That's how they smell us They know we're in the neighborhood. Yeah Yeah, so I don't think that scent stuff does anything. I mean maybe it blocks a little bit so maybe it helps a little bit Maybe I mean you're looking for every little edge because you're Essentially competing with the survival instincts of something that has existed in that form for a thousand years or excuse me a million years or more Right you're walking to environment. You're supposed to lose Yeah, the only reason why you win is because you have a bow and arrow right or a rifle And you know which way the wind's blowing. Yes, the big thing. Yeah, it's like if you get winded if they smell you It's over. Yeah, like the whole thing is the wind has to be in your face So if you're looking at the animal the wind has to be coming in your direction if the wind hits a back-your-neck It's over you feel it. Yeah, because I'll smell you instant Like what the fuck this wow really? continuously yeah Hundred yards away. They just start running really. Oh. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah What if the wonder is going like perpendicular? No, it has to go to them. Okay, right? That's why they always find themselves They always Bed down in a position where the wind is coming straight to them towards any threats Yeah, and then the the females will line up and look in the other way So they'll look towards The way where the wind is going yeah, and then everyone will line out so the wind comes to them And then some will look in the opposite direction Wow, yeah, and then try to keep their eyes open but again, it's because they're dealing with cats Fasting it's more though. Yeah, it's just because it's so it's so I mean it is so tactical Not just like the physicality of it and the wind and the environment, but just like the mental You know it's all pretty bizarrely Psychedelic in this weird way when when you're there the world doesn't exist and when you see these animals You connect with them in some sort of a strange way and you're you're trying to like almost not exist You're trying to like give off nothing Which is what cats do when you see them creeping up on things they're not like oh Rowing it yeah locked in yeah, this locked in almost like no Yeah, and then the whole thing is like I got to be able to move quicker than you can run away right? Yeah, it's such a weird yeah, it's a weird but it's whatever these animals are experiencing with each other It's probably some form of telepathy as well You know how do they know like how do wolves know to work together? Is it just trial and error like? Seems like they have roles that they've like predetermined roles like one of them will chase them down the other one will be laying and wait They do stuff together they coordinate Some strange way you had that wolf woman on your show right? Yeah fascinating. Yeah So interesting. Yeah, but she was most afraid of people Yeah, rightly so how many people get killed by wolves every year versus people. Yeah, yeah people are way creepy Yeah, yeah, wolves are just real. I mean clear not simple complex obviously, but clear in what they're trying to do they're trying to eat survive And that's that's their job. Yeah, yeah Well, that's was a tangent. Yeah, yeah, we got a lot of tangents But that's the beauty of the human line it is I love it does go on tangent. Yes. I think that We're we're all sort of trying to understand why we view the world the way we do and how much of that has been Projected upon us by culture and society and how much of it is things we understand innately how much how many? Things we can't prove but that are a part of this world that we live in right and I think What your show has done with the telepathy tapes, and I'm sure what the documentary has done is I think more important than anything open up this possibility to be explored You know and recognizing that it's real and that These preconceived notions that we've held on to for so long are probably erroneous We probably have screwed ourselves by Latching on to the idea that this is it. Yeah, this is all that we have and this is the way to live life and Put your suit on and go to work right. Yeah, yeah Boying way to live life Gosh, I can't imagine working in an office Yeah, I mean I think it's a pendulum shift. I mean the whole world is opening up right now Right, I mean there's just poof like so much is happening I think that people are challenging these preconceived old fat. Oh, I might have some coffee now No, I said no earlier now. I'm gonna do it cheers Yeah, like your mug with a third eye really okay, I'll bring it home. That's cool So I can't wait to say it's your coffee. See you all strong is it's pretty good. That's great shout out to black perfect Yeah, it's good. It's great So What is your hope for this stuff like in in your most ideal scenario? Yeah, you're you're obviously your show has been received in a tremendously positive way and People are super intrigued and really popular so that's great so so more more discussion But what would like in an ideal scenario? What would you like to happen? Okay, I think there's three things right? I think for one like baseline for people to presume competence and non-speaking Individuals or someone who can't control their body don't think just because they can't speak doesn't mean they can't think You know, yeah, they're in there right and then I think the second one is certainly to try to get spelling validated And in schools right like it's almost like telepathy in a way Operated as a Trojan horse to get people to acknowledge and notice these incredible individuals and just take note and help them So I get think getting spelling Validated and affirmed and make it accessible in schools that would be the next thing and then I think the third thing is I mean truly a paradigm shift I mean I want people to know because I've come to what I feel like is believe this right that there is a Non-physical world that's real our idea that consciousness is at the tippy top That's the result of this physical world. I think is incorrect I think consciousness is at the bottom of it and started everything and with that in mind consciousness then We're so much more possible it can survive our body We can communicate without our bodies We can see into the future maybe into the past. I mean whatever it is anything mental we're capable of and that helps us explain a lot more so The paradigm shift. I think is really cool If it can happen and a lot of people have been working toward that, you know I mean so I'm just like a tiny bit in a large puzzle of huge giants have come before me, but I think that That if this is gonna help more people like just be aware of the system of What is called again like this materialism? Which is the idea that it's only what's real can be you know? Observed and measured if we can get people to realize they're living in that system that system was constructed and it's not Necessarily the truth so don't be embarrassed to talk about stuff to research stuff to ask a question You shouldn't be ridiculed and dismissed just because the system tells you you should be that concept is just so hard to grasp Yeah, if you've not if you haven't Read any of Tom Campbell stuff or having considered this or listen to Rupert Sheldrick talk or your show It's like it's so hard from people to grasp that. Yeah Tom Campbell blew my mind. I mean he is like yeah Got a lot of text messages from buddies after that. What the fuck dude. I'm so confused Yeah But this is what I will say because I actually had a friend that when I was sort of like Going through my own thing She was just like just if you just start reading about some of the stuff Just reading it you'll find what you're looking for like there's so much there whether if you start reading about near-death Experiences and are even Stephen Center Tom Campbell and any of this stuff. It's just like And the reason people are researching this right? Yeah, it's not like this just happened. This has been been going on for a long time these questions So once the the documentary sound what do you hope to do next? Do you have a Game plan so we just started working the doc. I'm hoping that will be done wrapped up You know early next year Maybe we'll familiar with South by we back hopefully I mean two knows and so so after that then we're gonna do an impact campaign where you take a documentary around And you Screen it with a panel so that'd be cool to be non-speakers and you know We can get people from the Department of Education there or whatever in different cities and then hopefully that will make an impact People into the rooms talking to whatever and then after that we have a really long-term goal where we want to try to work with like a few foundations Or maybe start a foundation to open centers that can If you can imagine something Maybe like kind of like the set size of an REI and every city where non-speakers can go and get like physical and mental and spiritual support spelling help and Education or whatever you know of this physical therapy that can help and for respite care for these parents who are working 24-7 to take care of these individuals and it could just be a beautiful thing But then there's so many academics to what you've kind of noted earlier like that might want to work with non-speakers who might want to Can can you help me? and it could just be a beautiful thing, but then there's so many academics to what you've kind of noted earlier, like that might want to work with non-speakers who might want to, can you help me decode whale language or figure out how to stop blanching the coral reefs or whatever. So if there's, you know, I know non-speakers who want to work in plant medicine, who want to work in this, who want to work in XYZ. But I think the most important thing is these centers maybe could vet those individuals, make sure these academics learn to become a spelling to communicate partner. And be background check to make sure that they don't have some nefarious goal. And then this could maybe create opportunities for spellers to make money, to have a career to really contribute in these meaningful ways. So that's our goal is to create these like centers that can both nourish and support non-speakers and their families, but also allow non-speakers to engage and use their intellect and abilities to have like meaningful careers. That end more, right? More people coming out, more people understanding it, more people grasping it, more people accepting. And then this sort of changes to level of cynicism. So changes the level of negativity and it opens up the acceptance of this stuff. And then maybe we learn more. Yeah. Yeah. And it's just, I mean, in history, two people would look at deaf people or blind people before and think they're not in there. Especially deaf people. It was just like, oh, they're must not be in there. No one thinks that anyone was ridiculous to think that. You know, but we're doing the same thing to this population. So yeah, I mean, there are some of the most brilliant individuals that I've ever met. And actually I talked to a teacher right before I left here today and she said, she was talking about her student. She just had a conversation with who she said in middle school or whatever. High school. What did you learn that whole time? What did you learn in school? Well, he was being taught like he was little. And what he answered was patience. I mean, just so beautiful, so wise, right? He wasn't crapping on that like I learned nothing. They kept telling me animal colors and this and whatever. Like it wasn't anger. It was I learned patience. Wow. Because us, you know, our stupid system that has made these individuals out to be like they're not smart. Right. Has taught them has failed them when it comes to education. So I just thought that was a beautiful answer. And so, so in line with how wise and kind and thoughtful so many non-speakers I've met are. Yeah, that's a beautiful answer. That's a good way to wrap this up. Kind of thank you very much for being here and thank you very much for your series. It's really incredible. And I can't wait to watch the documentary and love to have you back on whenever releases. Yeah, I'm wonderful. I'll bring some parents with an album and a non-speaker with so you can see it. Okay. I'm a recading Houston and your mind's okay. Okay, let's do it. Let's do it. All right. We're all up in these tapes. It's available basically everywhere. Spotify, Apple, whatever. Wherever you get your podcasts. I'll get your podcasts. It's really incredible. I loved it. All right. That's it. Thanks for watching. Thank you, y'all. Thank you. Thank you. Bye, buddy.