This is the last photograph of Cuban revolutionary Cheguivara alive. It was taken in Bolivia in 1967. It's a very famous photograph Probably familiar to most people watching this This man standing right there is not familiar to most people watching this. He should be he's about to be his name is Felix Rodriguez He's a long-time CA officer in the operations directorate and and he joins us now to explain this picture and to tell us about his life Mr Rodriguez, thank you very much. Pleasure to be here So it's a remarkable picture in the longer. I look at it the more I think that Can you tell us where this was and what was happening? Well, that was in legata Bolivia that's where he was captured and I came in with the helicopter with the colonel in charge of the operation and after a while I got to talk to him and I even thought about taking the picture But while I was talking to him the pilot of the helicopter came with a camera from the head of intelligence One of the pictures we share so I asked him commander do you mind? He said no, so we took him out of the schoolhouse and gave my camera to the pilot and he took that picture What so you talked to quivara what yes, of course? What what were the circumstances even captured by Bolivian soldiers? Yes Yes, actually They thought that he had been killing Africa, but then when they captured the braid and boost to who was a French intellectual and then a newspaper guy from Argentina they confirmed the shegavara was there So as long as they there and the studio he was there They sang a special forces union from Panama to train a special battalion To operate against him because the Bolivian didn't have an experience and then they sent a couple of us from the CIA to provide them with Intelligence and the reason they sent us because we were not US citizen at the time Vietnam was taking place and they were people coming back and plastic back from Vietnam And they didn't want any American coming back and plastic back from the Latin America The time we were not even in precedence. We are not citizens. So we didn't fall into the restriction from baso Henderson That's why we were able to go there So you were working for the CIA full-time obviously carrying a weapon obviously, but not a US citizen. Yes What was Chey-like that day Why first you know a lot of people asked me, you know what I thought about she had the time was nobody She became a figure after he was dead Cuba made him a figure. Yes After after war even though they were the one who sent him to be killed Fidel could not stand him there because Fidel depended on the Soviet Union shegavara was pro Chinese So when he was in Africa in 1965 64 all the weapon he received was from red China Then he didn't want to go back to Cuba. He went to higher in the Czech Republic And they had to send people to convince him to go back to Cuba to give him an opportunity in another place But when he was sent to Bolivia was definitely mine for him to be killed Because the Soviet didn't want him to be any successful because they knew that she was pro Chinese and if he took Revolution in there would be toward the Chinese and at the time the Chinese and the Soviet hated the show very much So when he was sent to Bolivia his transmitter was not even working In December of 66 when they had a dinner with Mario Mong he had a becoming a spiral Bolivia who had been with Fidel two months before Complete the complaint process he told the Bolivians Garilla that were with Shay if they stay with Shay they were expelled from the communist party And then they had a officer in intelligence that they have sent to La Paz or enamontet to help him And as soon as he was in with all 17 people they took him out of the other picture Until she said that they had to take him out because he's visa had expired And actually he was a Bolivian citizen by then so he was definitely sent there to be killed by Cuba because He could not succeed because he would be a revolution that would be Pro Chinese and Cuba dependent on the Soviet Union So he's he's obviously he's a prisoner in this picture Did he know when this was taken that he's about to die? Not at that time No, so what happened in the moments after this picture? Well in the sequence first of all when we arrived with the helicopter on the following date Which is the 9th of October and Monday We came to his room with the office service and he would not talk to anybody Corno was trying to interrogate him you look at he didn't say any word to the point of God Say look to invade him. I constantly release you can have the courtesy of answering me. He didn't say a word So when we finished that I came out I asked all his documentation to photograph him from my government and the corner order is back be given to me He has so in Chinese code books. He has some picture of his family so many command for his asthma inside He got a diary. It's a German book was written as Spanish does his diary they photograph all of that Then while I was there they came and used the great telephone call Al digadas I was the eye of ranking officer So the the words definitely the orders to a execute him. We had a very simple code 500 share 600 kill he and 700 clip in my life So he came 500 600 but Colonel Centeno came out I told him and said look this order from your high-bolic and command to eliminate the prisoner The order from my government tried to keep him alive at all costs. So we have helicopters that take into Panama for interrogation So he looked at me and said Felix my name was Felix Ramos. He said that we you have been very hateful to us Helpful to us. But he's ordered from my president. He looked at his watch and he said the helicopters going to come several times Bringing food and ammunition taking our wounded our dead but after two o'clock is going to come up And pick up check about as dead body You can't use this here him anywhere you want because we know how much harm you have done to your country So I sent me corral tried to make that change their mind, but it does not change in mind I will view my war of honor. I will bring you dead body of shape. So we embrace and he left And surely not the helicopter came several times. That's when the mayor came and asked for a picture with the prisoner Then I start waiting and say well happened and then there was a school teacher Who came to me? I'm I'm said to say why you went to kill him. I said what do you say that? I said log We saw that you took a picture of him outside and looked the radius already given the news So at that point I knew it was nothing else to be done So I got into a room and stood in front of the inside command and I'm sorry. I tried my best He turned white like a piece of paper and he said it's better This way as you have never been got your life. So you told Chegovar. He was about to be killed. Yes I think I wait the way I say say I'm sorry I tried my best and understood what I was saying I think it took his pie balance. I later gave this pie to a soldotitu who treated me well That times measured as Ariane Tehran who he knew was the one executing the the life prisoner Bursing to the room. You're killing me. But me got me time. I won the pipe and she said no, I won't give it to you I told her in three times to leave the room when he did a look at you I said would you give it to me? It checks from see me and you see I'll see it all I will give it to you So I put my pipe here and says anyone anything you want for your family Then I will say in a sarcastic way say well if you can't tell Fidel He will soon see it right on for revolution in America Then he changed his pressure and saying if you can't tell my wife to remarry and try to be happy That was his last war he approached me with shoehand. We embraced It was a very Strange unique moment in my life because we never ordered prisoner to be executed At a time he even thought about according the telephone line and telling the pilot that my gourner was able to convince them To bring share life. I remember what happened when Batista released Fidel Castro and we'll have the to make country So I told myself look this is not the award you're here to advise not to command This is the believe in decision. So let's history wrong itself. So I let a go the way it was and that was the What happened to Che at that point? Well after we embrace Which was like a say various strange moment for me because it was my enemy at the same time I feel sorry for him. He conducted himself with dignity at the end I left the room and there was sarian terror I told him that no shoot to forget down up shoot from here down because he's supposed to die from combat one See me copy down see me copy down on he left So it was one o'clock in the afternoon believe in time when I left there about one fifteen I heard the burst and that's the time that we was a killer executed So it just shot him in the room. He was shot by M2 Caribbean that was borrowed by the This sarian from lieutenant Paris who got the automatic girls a Caribbean I understand because I was impressed and he came in and said she was like to talk to you And he told him say look I know you're coming to kill me Say no no we're not going to kill you. You are worse. You are almost our life than that And then he told me I know you're going to you to know you're going to kill him So he opened fire. I said one like this or is a bullet that hit here which is a normal reaction to try to cover yourself So he was shot and killed I came back a few hours later with the two of the captains from the operation Captain daddy Prad on Celsot, of Relion. We got into the room. His head was Facing the ceiling. He was a cover with mud So there was a dead body of two Cuban behind him that had been killing operation When was Captain Pantoha and other captain from the Cuban army who died in combat So we embraced him there and and kadiplastemic habitat. We have finished in the guerrillas in Latin America And I told him in Capitango We haven't finished at least we have delayed them for a long time So we could hear the helicopter coming and they immediately left So he asked for a bucket of water and clean his face and took all the mud out of his face I tried to claw his jaw with my handkerchief We shall loss in the helicopter with the wind And then I tried to claw his eyes and it wasn't possible They have been open too long and tried to claw his feet Pop up against several times so I gave up on it So we took the body and we tired the right side of the helicopter Where we're finishing to do the iron I tied it to the strats of the helicopter To light right pontoon of the helicopter on the right side And I remembered the pilot that I hired my name was Mantoonemicapitam I moved forward to balance the helicopter So I put my hand on the hand and pulled it out When he brought it out I was completely covered with blood Apparently it was shot in the order And they seen these plastic things I didn't allow any water to go through It was a big pool of blood in there I looked at it I didn't say anything But I thought to myself there are people who have blocked in their hands I have the hell of a lot of here So I cleaned the blood and in this right side of my pants I came in and then I saw your camera say My other my other father she leaders went to see him So we are still with helicopter running for maybe a couple of minutes And he was a priest who came on the on a mule He came around he was get down on the mule And he gave him the last benediction We showed you two picture of it With a minoch camera that I have left And I thought to myself this guy was an atte He didn't believe in God Nevertheless, he received the wrath from the Catholic Church And from there we took off and then we landed the environment A thousand of people waiting at the wrong way There was like 15 different planes from the press From the military waiting for him to arrive So I pulled my cap and run into the people So my picture was never taken And then he was taken into a schoolhouse And then he was given to a hospital in New Hampshire In early Malta Then in the evening there was a meeting And the general was telling a colonel If he did not deny this is Chegavara We need tangible provovate God he is had not put him from alaai So I said me and I said you cannot do that I said why not? I said to possibly if he did not deny this is Chegavara You are ahead of a state You cannot show the head of a human being a provost Well what do you suggest? I said well, you want some tangible provovate God one finger And we have the finger print from the Argentinian federal police And he can be checked So he ordered both hand to be cut So I left with a solid documentation for Santa Cruz My other friend is staying there And then about three or four o'clock in the morning when the press was gone They took his body They cut both hands and put him from alaai And two other bodies and they took it to the very end of the wrong way And the very hang in there with two bodies There was a bulldozer there who was making longer The wrong way then He was very right there Now later on years later when Fidell said he Found the body on the side of the wrong way with seven other bodies I can assure you that was not Chegavara Because he wasn't buried there Amazing And so what did you do? There's 1967 It was back up really quickly You're born in Cuba Right How did when did you come to the United States? Like came in 1954 for school at the Perky on the prep in Pennsylvania I spent six years in there, seven and eightth grade and my high school And I actually went off my last year to the first thing that was against Castro Was the anti-communist Legion of the Caribbean and he's Dominican Republic So I participated in that operation when I was 17, 18 years old and I came back And then after graduation I was accepted at the University of Miami for civil engineering But before I went there I learned there was something going on in Latin America Against Castro I joined with later became the Bay of Peacombation I was 19 years old at the time What was your role in the Bay of Peacombation? I was part of what I call the Special Forces or Infiltration thing So I was a group of about 36 people We got into Cuba a month and a half before the invasion to work with the resistance When I came in clandestinely by boat I started working inside the island Helping with the language of all kinds of equipment And trying to do an uprising on other areas Then actually the Bay of Peacombation Prior to us because they never told us anything If they had been able to tell us that the invasion was coming We had enough explosive to be able to blow some bridges toward the Bay of Peacomb and the Lady Advancement of Castro But then they were throwing anything We learned through the Cuban radio So at that time I was lucky I was able to make it through the Venezuelan Embassy Where I spent five and a half months In Havana Then finally got safe conduct Went back to Venezuela at the end of September How did you get from the Bay of Peac to Havana? That's a long way isn't it? No it wasn't in the Bay of Peac I landed near Havana I'm an open half before the Bay of Peac I'm working with the resistance We had a mechanism of the internal resistance To pick us up near the highway And then take us to safe houses in Havana Then we start working with them in there During that time So I was in the Bay of Peacombation And I was lucky because I did have any idea of any ambison there But the lady who was driving me around Was close connected to the Spanish Embassy And the Spanish in the Androvergara When in charge of the call propaganda Actually it was intelligence came to pick her up Because they were surrounding our building Fidel very successfully Well he did his rounder every single blocking Havana And if you were a male or military agent You were not assigned to a military unit Even though you might have been even a communist They would take you on putting custody They were baseball field with 250 000 Cubans in there The capacity for 5000 people of 5500 So they were able to deserticulate internal resistance that way Even they pick up some of my friend equating And then they released them because they had no idea who they were But it was lucky to make it to the Venezuelan Embassy And then back back into Miami Actually got to Miami on the very first of October of 1971 And then by the end of October it was back in Saikou When back seven times Because I was the only one who left the contact open After the failure of the Bay of Pick to bring people And we could put them in And for intelligence purpose What kind of equipment were you bringing in? Oh we were being explosive, we were bringing in entry machine guns All kind of hang grenades and all those things that they were still Bringing in to be able to support a future resistance But then it didn't work out then I decided actually in 1962 I decided to marry my pressing wife of 62 years I told her I said Lou brought I went to quick, I went to civilian life For I want you to know it is something serious about Cuba I will go So she made a mistake of agreeing to that Because we got married in the 25th of August I started working a company for $1 an hour called It's called Aisler service propaganda Then I was improving top-impact in company $1.35 an hour So while I was working there and remember I got married 25 of August In the month of October I got a call from a CIA guy and said, Lou I need to talk to you after you work at that company So I went to see him at the parking lot of the Howard and Joseph from the University of Miami I see the Giscar and say Felix The Marines are going to land in Cuba and we need you I look at him and say Tom, if the Marine is going to land in Cuba What the hell do you name me for? Good point He said, well, you know how to operate Radio Beacon We allow you to parachute behind a Soviet missile base in Santa Clara To set up a Radio Beacon so that our Air Force can hit with precision the air base At the time we didn't have the GPS system that we have today So I did not agree, so I took me to a safe house And my basic training was roaming from different altitude The three point of contact where you didn't break a leg I didn't even call my wife My wife went back to the apartment and of course that naivet When Kennedy went on national television and declared the October crisis So he realized it was something related to that So the day we were going to parachute into Cuba The data cruciate back down on the operation And then after that I was at a job so then I continued to work with the CIA For how long? Oh until 1976 went every time for security consideration After Colonel Santana and I were his advisor was assassinated in Paris He was the Bolivian ambassador there and he was killed and they left the science And in the Chekhovara commando Then they also sat in the idea of Mayor Pintani He was the Colonel then So we're talking to an Indian Hamburg Yermer He was the consul general from Bolivia there Also left the science saying Commando Chekhovara And they call my home and say Felix Ramos your next That's the name that I used in Bolivia. I never came out So the ANC proposed me one of those programs to change my name and go to another state Which they would not accept because of my kids So what they did they went to my home they did a security evaluation They actually gave me a bulletproof car They bulletproof my car in Langley, Virginia I got a license to carry concealed weapon that was difficult to get at the time They gave me a total disability idea and have to work They have a routine of work Put some high-room fences in my house, some security And then I signed a paper for them if I got killed related to my job My family could not You know, they couldn't do it Soodling anyway of form because what they offer me that they consider I refuse to But then after that I continue and independently to do something like I went into a Salvador Flying with Salvador in the real estate volunteer with a concept that I developed in Vietnam where I spent two and a half years in Vietnam after Bolivia and You was very effective in a Salvador way was there What were you doing in Vietnam? As the CIO officer Well, that might respond to the ability to start the rocketing of Saigon and the rocketing of the boat going into Saigon We were advising a unit called the PRU Provincial Reconnaissance Unit The CIO unit was managed paid and controlled by the CIO And it was almost impossible to start the rocketing of Saigon Indeed for psychological reason every week There will be one or two one twenty two point Soviet missiles going into the city At random, normally they tried to hit the presidential palace and the US Embassy was never did But it was psychological same And we started looking in an area It was impossible to locate these people until I was able to capture one Who was the bodyguard of two time the commander of that unit And he told me that they were hiding in an area that we never thought of Because they were entirely worried will come up like 17 feet And what they did, he told me they had 55 alon drums They sold around top of the other So they were sleeping there when the water went up When the water went down, they were on the river They fired the rocket into the area And then they came by and hired again Then they started looking in that area Which we never did before And actually on the 4th of December of 1970 I was able to establish contact with the commander of the unit We killed like 18 of them We lost three of our peer you And from there on we continued the pressure And there was not a single rock of firing to say one after that And for that I got equal to the congressional medal of one from the Vietnamese Armed forces called the Cross of Ganantry was gold star I got one of that two silver star and six bronze star during the time that I was with them And then they got the entire thing I started for a bottle from the CIA Because of the operation in Vietnam I'm sure you've been asked this a thousand times But since you worked there You worked for President Kennedy Yes And he was of course killed in November of 1963 And countless books have been written blaming Cuban exiles People participated in the Bay of Pigs for being involved in some way With the CIA in that assassination What's your assessment of that claim? But I'll tell you most of the brigade member believes President Kennedy was a traitor He was the one who definitely had the responsibility And he was responsible for failure He looked from another point I believe he was a jump-racid and ill-advised And we paid the price And I believe that actually he was killed because he tried to amend that After he was able to pull the brigade out of prison He opened the Air Force of the United States for the brigade members I became a second lieutenant in the US Army in 1963 And then he promised our special operation Which was started in Central America in three different bases And no matter many people know about it But then he was assassinated And a lot of people believed that it was only one mature I believe it were two shooters We have information that there was a Cuban Which is now a retired general Fabian de Scalante Who was a captain at the time? Who was in Dalat? And he was the second shooter in the assassination of the president Were you just... Okay, I'm sorry, you say that one more time? What's his name? Fabian de Scalante That's the one day Fabian de Scalante Fabian de Scalante And he was in Dalat that day and then he left It was something that the... And the un-crat for said that He knew that the United States was trying to kill him Would be very careful because the Cuban also had a very long hand So it was a matter either Kennedy or Castro And I think that's why he would kill So you believe the Kennedy was assassinated by Cuban forces Castro a great thing, he has remembered that Osworth was in the Cuban embassy For several hours before he went to Dalat that day And we also had the fact that there was no question about what the Fabian de Scalante was there And then Cuba denied the beginning that he was ever in the Cuban embassy Later on when they learned that we as CIA, we had pictures of the movie of him getting into our embassy Then they said that they went into a very distinct check And they found out that indeed yes, Osworth was in the Cuban embassy And they claimed that he came in there to get a Cuban visa and he was denied But I do believe that it was a participation of Cuban desecination of the president And later on one assistant of President Johnson said that they knew about it But for security consideration they denied to the public the participation in Cuba and the assassination of the president Because remember at that time they were already four offenses missile in Saikila When the October crisis took place they were already had been able to bring into Cuba four offenses nuclear missiles That's why when Khrushchev thought and he knew that the US knew that we had four offenses They had four offenses missile inside the island It could bring 20 of them that's when the October crisis took place But they were still four missiles inside Cuba that were offensive So at the time everybody said well they cannot attack Cuba because Kennedy Khrushchev's treaty It was never implemented because important part of that trade was that it would be a personal ocular inspection by American personnel in Cuba to make sure that they had taken out those four missiles And Cuba never allowed them to be able to come into check for that So that the compromise was never the Kennedy Khrushchev was never implemented at all Do you believe the CIA had any role in Kennedy's assassination? No, I don't think so I don't believe so. I know there's a lot of allegations that affect But I don't think so. I don't believe so at all I am convinced. Did you ever come across Howard Hunt during your yes I met him after he came out of prison Actually, he was coming for Christmas out of prison and the eye of mentees daughter We saw them as home at Kevin and we we run to each other into sears So I invited him to come to my home you ran into my sears. Yeah in Miami And I invited him to come to my home while I am sitting there I get a call from the Shiva station from Miami say Felix by the way Howard Hunt would be in town make sure that he don't meet him And guy was sitting right in front of me. I already had given him my car to use for the three day He was in Miami So later on I call my boss I stood you should have called me lay sooner I say what it said well I had how we're honing from my house. No, it's a yes You didn't tell me and I draw him into Sierra brought him to my home his first time I ever met him When you say why did the CIA not want you to see Howard Hunt? Because then I want to see make the they believe there is a connection between the CIA and then even though our home was working for the CIA But he was heralded as for for the way. How was Nixon? Yes, so there was a connection there. Yes, there was Interesting how did you get involved in the Iran contrast story? Well, why was in Miami? I thought I thought what would be war was going on in El Salvador I had implemented a helicopter concert in Vietnam. I was extremely effective against the the Viet Cong in there Of whizzing intelligence going into the area with gun ships and then a spotting thing I was flying on the low helicopter a spotting then and coming back with Struppen and got this in the the result So I volunteered to what was Salvador in 85 early 85 That's why I went to a Salvador then as a volunteer. Nobody was paying me anything Who did you volunteer to? Who who did you do his Salvador in Air Force? Yes, but it wasn't easy It was very difficult because you have the US military commander General Gorman for a star general who command all the military assistant to the area And here is a cue and return from the CIA trying to implement the military concept in his area But I was lucky that the device president of the United States had done Greg Who was my boss from Vietnam as his national security advisor and he knew who affected my concept was so he held me To be able to get the clearance from the State Department other people for me to go down there So I started working with the with the concept down in El Salvador was extremely successful One point in time Oliver knows how the problem with a plane That was a stocking in Portugal The he could not bring in because of Honduran closed the entrance of his plane there because of an incident They had with a plane with it a resistance And he knew that I had an action relationship with the Salvadorian So he sent a nose to me that if I could get the Salvadorian to hold all of this military equipment from Portugal until he was able to solve the problem with Honduras So I talked to the to the head of the Air Force is a minute of the Minister of Defense and they agree That's how I got involved in the into her and country thing They brought the plane who was storishing there for a while And they saw that they asked me if I could ask the Salvadorian they could do the maintenance of the aircraft from the Inicarro and resist an operation Even Salvador and that was how we got started in that operation in there But really the device president very leader to do in this operation of course when the rancontra broke They blamed that the actually they came out to say that I was sent to a Salvador To violate the balling amendment to support the Nicaragua and resistance And my helicopter concept concept was a cover-up which wasn't true That wasn't the case at all And then they they subpoena me to testify in front of Congress And it was the only one who went to Congress who was our lawyer and we saw the Munich Everybody else went with slow and mutin and they tried even the White House called me and said the boy don't grey from the White House He wanted me to bring a lawyer that the way I was going to pay for I say look I have done nothing wrong if I have to bring a lawyer for what I did. I am in the wrong country I don't believe I am the wrong country So they told me no you don't understand you know you know how this congressman are they might ask you to Push you into saying so and see that my heard device pressing and I refused like what the only one when we saw lawyer and we saw the Munich And he came out fine and the only guy that I really don't like at all because after that his he caused me to testify His community was John Kerry. Why didn't he like John Kerry? He's a funny He was not war hero To be honest with you I I was invited when he ran for pressing and the Vietnam veteran for the truth Make a big rally in the West Wing of the Capitol And at that time they asked me to be one of the speaker against him because what he did to me You know he accused me of receiving $10 million for the Nigerian cartel for the concert which wasn't true You know I was it was a pain It was very hard for my family because I was flying in Salvador And my wife called me and said, look it's from patient in Miami Herald You're picture when you were in the army that you received $10 million from the Indian cartel Because I was flying in Salvador and my wife called me and said, look, it's from patient in Miami Herald. You're a picture where you were in the army. But you received $10 million from the million cartel. I said, you know, that's not true. She said, I know, but here is so peanut from San Antonio, the courage committee. So I called from San Antonio to Paris, and I asked, and I said, look, I didn't need a subpoena with me, but send it to the Canadian newspaper because I am doing my leash, which they did. So I flew to Washington. We spent four hours in a deposition with him. He was represented by a man that was said, Mitch McConnell was the minority. So there was Robinette representing Mitch McConnell and another guy who represented him. After we finished the testimony, they wanted a close hearing. We wanted an open hearing that was nothing classified about it. I had retired in 76. We are talking something that happened in 1985. But the candidate and one did choose to come out. So he refused to have an open hearing. We had to go into a close hearing. I had the opportunity at the time. When first came in, they asked me if I wanted to say something. It was all the senator. And they asked me and said, you want to say something. I said, yes, I look at him and say senator. This will be the hardest testimony of my life. So why do you say that? I said, I'm a serial trigger. I said, senator, it's very hard to have to ask a question for somebody that you didn't already expect. I need to respect you and you are doing here. Mr. Rodriguez, because with this agree with you, we are not less patriotic than you are. I said, or you didn't even have the guts to throw your own medal when you were protesting the Vietnam War. Don't believe very soon you see in the press that I know that the hell of a lot of bad that you do, senator. He said, that was a veteran who asked me to throw his medal. I said, bullshit, it was everybody perception. What you were mad about, you were throwing away the White House fans. So really didn't hit very well during that. And then I talked to a lot of people who were working. Do you know that he would never, ever want to be in combat? He doesn't have one bullet hole in his body. And he claimed three, a purple heart to be able to leave Vietnam. He knew that there was an unwritten law that he knew that he would have won the three times in one tour. You could request to leave Vietnam. Yes. And that's exactly what he did. What he did, he expressed himself, he claimed it was from a 100. He never got a bullet hole. He got scratches. I always claimed that he had been wounded at that time got a purple heart. The third one, it was denied. The guy didn't say it was worse. He had to wait until they changed the guy to be able to convince the other guy to give him the third purple heart. And that's why he left Vietnam. And then who went with Jane Fonda, talking about our people in there, was a shame. Because today I see how our people treated military with respect and the plane. At the time when I came back, we were not even worried they were only for them. Because they were called work criminals and all of that because of John Kerry and Jane Fonda. Howard's. So what was the resolution of Iran country you testified? Well, at the end, really, actually when you look at it, they didn't have a case at all. Because the only reason they brought the Iran country here was because the violation of the Boland Amendment of using US money to support the nuclear-owned resistance. So what happened is when General Sichor, this sontransaction with Iran, if you remember, with Israel, he got the millions of dollars from that transaction. The Congress determined that that money that he had belonged to the US-Cor, not to Sichor. It's still in court today. It's still in court today. It's over $8 million. And he used a million and a half to help the nuclear-owned resistance with that money. So because of that, since the Congress determined that that was money that belonged to the US-Cormen, they violated the Boland Amendment. That's how he came together and put up the Iran-Contra here in the committees and all of that. That he went through. Let me tell you, it wasn't easy because after so many questions, I was tired. Before that, my son and my daughter went to see, I had an API agent that always I've been contact with them for my security. I learned recently, he already died from his weight of my son, my daughter went to see him before he testified in Congress and they told him, look Carlos, everybody's telling us, if my father doesn't bring a lawyer, he will go to prison. Please convince him to bring a lawyer with him. So he didn't tell me that he came to see me and said, look Felix, you're going to testify in Congress, and you're going to be on the roads. You cannot lie. No matter what happened, you cannot lie because if you do, they would ask the same question in 15 different ways, and they would know. Now, is there a sense that you are not very happy with it or you are not very content with it? You don't remember. You don't remember that they cannot do anything, but don't lie. I never lie. So I cannot find. How did you have you ever wondered how you lived so long having been through all these conflicts? I believe, honestly, I believe in God. For example, when I was in Vietnam, I bought that chocolate, who was a legend with the CIA, used to tell people that I had a death wish that I wanted to get killed, which was not at all. I was so convinced, Tucker, that no bully was going to hit me. God gave me that conviction. So I could sit in the helicopter city of Chewley, or make a command, shoot at them, because I knew it wasn't going to touch him, and I never did. So it was an old bravery, it was my conviction that I knew it wasn't going to do to him. And you were a married man at that point. Yes, it was a family. You had two kids already. And you were never worried about getting killed. I knew it wasn't going to get killed. Not even wounded. I didn't. I had people wounded next to me. My helicopter took 30 different locations to fire, to hit Cindy helicopter body, but I was shot down five times and going down and going down and sell the door for a neighborhood. You were shot down five times. But my back is in bad shape, but putting a still life. And I believe it was God who definitely was his enemy. That's why I didn't worry about it. Not that I was brave. I was convinced nothing was going to happen to him. You're right. It turned out. Oh yeah, absolutely. What was Ted Shackley like? Oh, he was the most intelligent man that I have ever met in my life. He was the one responsible, the Berlin Tunnel. Yeah. He was the first station in Miami and we became close friends until the day he died. And we were close. We used to meet. He was the head of a station in Saigon. And we developed a personal friendship. He's the one who went time to me not to fly. They had a defector in Paris who had said that they were high-yack, we're going to hijack the plane of the queue and involved in the assassination of Chekhovara. So Shackley called me at the station and said, you are going to Miami and vacation, don't fly into Miami. So what I did, I flew into Atlanta, rent a car, went back, spent the Christmas with my family and back. Then I went back to Atlanta on the 6th of January of 1971. And I had a crossing in there, so she was at the airport. I had a fly who lived Atlanta, Houston, Houston, San Francisco. Had like four hours over late in San Francisco. And then I found out there was an only plane stopping in Dallas, about an hour later. So I changed that to stay with my cousin one more hour. So when I got to Vietnam, nobody was waiting for me. So when I got in there, I went to the end bed to a dog hotel, or hotel change when I got to the embassy. They told me, and said, what are you doing here? So what do you mean? I suppose to write today nobody was waiting for me. and said, no, no, no, your plane was hijacked to Cuba. We're trying to find out how the hell we can get you out of there. That's why when we went, the agency sent me on my family to Argentina in 1973, they got our passport. Our passport, my wife and I said, place of birth, Colorado instead of Cuba for that trip. So in case I got hijacked, they could claim me as a U.S. citizen. That was the only time I was a U.S. citizen by birth for about the eight years. I have copy of the passport. Amazing. Did you ever meet Fidel Castro? No. I wish I had because you wouldn't be there. No, no, time ago. What do you think of Cuba now? You said disaster. I don't know how they are still able to stand the way it is. The economy is completely on the ground. I can understand the people who talk about socialism, who talk about progressive. Look, whatever socialism touched completely destroyed, look what happened. Cuba was one of the most prosperous island in 1958. The dollar, if you know it was the Cuban peso was higher, $3,000. You wanted to buy Cuban peso. You had to pay $1.3 for the Cuban dollar. The same day, the Dominican Republic. It destroyed the economy. Look at Venezuela, the richest country in America, and with the preserving oil unbelievable. Look how it is. Whatever they touched the destroyed. But I've been very concerned in this country of all of these people talking about socialism, all of that. They have no idea what it is. Unfortunately, we have a lot of professor in the university. The income could create this idea that they have never lived through. That's what I tell people when I talk today. People can tell you a socialism when they have never lived. When you live in there, you see what happened to you. You understand what socialism is. And we know because we suffered that in our own flesh. Have you ever been back? No, I can't. I have to read this sentence in absentia. Well, I was back the last time I was in 1965, but I was with a team to photograph a Soviet summer in base in La Cijuana in the Isle of Pines. But that's the only time that I've touched you and saw it, but I never... How did you... You said you went back a number of times in a clandestine way. How did you get in? By both clandestinely. We had people working for us in the inside who will contact us at the article. You trusted them, you were never worried about being betrayed or executed. We had to trust them. We had no choice. There were people that were betrayed later on, but I was lucky as hell. Really. I was very, very lucky. Did they get out? The people who helped you? Some of them, some of them still living in there. But they have been by nobody knew that they worked or held boss. You just go from Key West? Or how did you... Well, it wasn't between Key West and East La Moda. They will... A boat would pick us up in there, take us to the mother boat, and then we'll take for a queue from there for the operation inside you. You're hanging out. Only one thing. From the Bay of Big People who enter a queue, only one team made it by air. They were parachuted in. Only five people. Most of us entered by boat clandestinely. And there was a group of about five or six who came in through the airport with the real names, with cover stories that they were coming back from American universities. But most of us came in to understand about boat. And the mechanism was we will go to the coastline. There was a reception thing there. With lights, with this in-barred, then there was a guy who take us, maybe four-fight kilometer into the main highway, with a car from the movement will pick us up and take us to a safe house in Havana. We had to trust them. We had no idea who they were. We were lucky. Was anyone from the CIA any of these teams ever caught? No, personal all from the CIA itself, they never participated in the queue. They didn't allow them. They were only Cubans involved in that operation. We see a case officer. We don't call it the controller. We call it a case officer. Were any of them ever caught out by the Cuban government? No, no, no. Our people did. Yes. From my infiltration team, four of them were executed by firing a squad. One of them was killed defending a safe house. And there were 17 of them who spent 20 years in Cuban prison. Because when the treaty became to release the brigade from prison, our people, even though we were brigade member, were not considered who landed in the military. They considered us a spy because we came together. Right. Because we were not part of that exchange of prisoner. So my people from my infiltration team had spent 18, 20 years in prison before they were released. Did they come to the U.S., when they got out? Amazing. So a lot of people got caught in contact. Oh, yes. It was a disaster. What do you think of the CIA now? It's not what we used to be. I recall in my time we were given a task. We were running an operation. If there is any problem, then we went to our legal service. The council had to have a problem. Because the situation was happening in the past, the other version had lost their retirement, all of that because of operation. Now, when they are given a mission, they go to the lawyer first and find out what they can do, what they cannot do. And they put a tremendous disadvantage on us. In my time, you could do a hell of a lot of more things than they can do right now. They tried their best anyway. But, and the guy who really destroyed the CIA was Jimmy Carter. How? Well, I might talk to Chuck, he told me about it. We had very high penetration, for example, in Al-Qaeda, in San Pedro, Luminosa. If we had those people, 9.11, we would never happen. When Jimmy Carter became pressing, he asked for a briefing from the CIA. He wanted to know how those penetration were handled. So Chuck Lee was the one who charged me, told me a person. He was going in charge to breathe the president, Carter, on that. So he told the president of the guy who infiltrated into a cell. The guy was coming to a more and more access higher in the organization. He would come up, for example, with an operation that we are going to do a terrorist operation. So there is a very pragmatic group who will study the operation. If what's a very minimal damages, they will allow the operation to go through. Because if every time you have a guy inside, and the operation failed, they know somebody is infiltrating there. So there you have to allow some operation to go through with minimal cash. Giving Carter to say it was immoral to do that. So he actually ordered all of those penetration to be terminated. So people that took years to be able to be able to get in and set them inside the nets, like in Al-Qaeda or St. Edward, we know. So they had to be told, sorry, we cannot support you anymore. We recommend that you leave this cell. We cannot pay you anymore and terminate it. So we lost all of our eyes and ears inside the terrorist group when Jimmy Carter. And he put a lot of emphasis on satellite. Satellite doesn't get inside the head of people. So we lost that. That's why we had 9-11. We had this entire room. We also take over the embassy of a Japan in Peru at that time. If we had what we had before that would never happen. Then he was authorized. It would take a long time to rebuild that type of route of situation. The CIA seems more military force now than it once did. Do you think that's accurate? No, we have always, we have the CIA and the CIA military branch. We have our own, for example, Air Force. We have our own Navy with different specific equipment that nobody else has. I've been developed for a special operation with us. And there is a primary target priority that we should be on to. We used to call a special operation division, how they call a special activity division. That operates a primary, operational areas that they do a tremendous job. That's the thing that we never get recognized for it. People are blaming the CIA at blame for many things that happen. But there is a lot of success that can never be told. We have saved a lot of life in the process that nobody knows about it. And nobody can take credit for it. The situation. We have in our world several start with more than 100 people have died within the CIA. Most of the end doesn't even have the name. And they're only one at start because they were so classified that they never appear. So you have to be dedicated to do that because you swam the organization that receives very little credit and do a lot of. What do you think this country is going right now? Well, I hope it changed. A lot of people used to saying to you that it could not happen here. A lot of people say it could not happen in the United States. After what happened in Cuba, why have seen other places? I am concerned about this country. I hope that we can regain the presidency because this thing goes to what they call socialism. It would be a disaster. We would never know United States where it is. I am concerned because I know what happened in Cuba. Unfortunately, we have a lot of professor, high level universities who are less this. We bring Washington ahead of a lot of our bright students. And that's a very concerned to me. Have you seen that in other countries? But more than United States than any place else. They have concentrating on the rest day because they know the importance of the United States. And that's what I really concerned about this country here. I think this coming election is very important. The hell is going to be depressing. But if it's Democrat, Democrat, Democrat, they continue the way there are with the open border and all of that. In a few years, we will know the United States where it is now today. We can lost the United States. I never thought I could say that, but now I can say that I am very concerned. How can it be stopped? Well, I hope that people realize what's going on. We're always going on the United States and people realize it and both intelligently this time. See the reality of what's going on. And I want to say more, I think people in telling it would be able to understand that. Looking back, my last question, if you could do something different with your life, what would you have? It seems like you got into this kind of amazing line of work almost accidentally. I always wanted to be a civil engineer. Really? My grandson now is in the third year of civil engineering at the University of Washington, and George Washington University. That's what I wanted to be and look, he used to meet with a different place. I was never able to graduate from my school, from University. My son and my daughter did. My wife did when she was a bar university, but I don't complain. I think that I had a life that I can see myself and think that I contribute a little bit to have a better world that we have today. I don't regret what I did. No one better with it. We certainly had the most interesting life almost anyone I've ever talked to. So that's, thank you so much for a lot. Mr. Rodriguez, thank you very much for telling us all that. Pleasure. Free speech is bigger than any one person or any one organization. I'm working in cities or defined by what they will not come up with. Watch it. It's the total inversion of virtue. Hey, it's Tucker Carlson, the internet is crowded with interesting things that don't really matter. On TCN we attempt to bring you interesting things that actually do matter and a lot of them. Interviews, long form and short, videos, documentaries. You can find all of it on tuckercarlson.com, and we hope you will.