Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. And we're up. Hey, you're good to see you. I see you. Did you see that new information about China came out with a new quantum computer that can do an equation in four minutes. It takes all the world's supercomputers 2.6 billion years to solve. Really? And it can do it in four minutes. Is that real though? I mean, allegedly? Allegedly, that's the problem with this whole quantum thing. It's I don't understand. I've had it explained to me four or five times. I don't understand it. Yeah. It's just my monkey brain is like, oh, who? They also say a lot of things. You know, right? So who knows if it's the real or not? Well, you mean China or China? Yeah. But they have American ones that have done them too. They've done some crazy, like, market and recent and explained one of them. So nuts, he said that it solved a computer that if you took, it solved an equation if you took all of the world's atoms and converted it into a supercomputer. All the universes atoms, excuse me, and converted it into a supercomputer, it would take so much time to solve this equation that the universe would die of heat death and this quantum computer solved it in a matter of minutes. Wow. I don't know what it means though. I think what they're trying to say is that this somehow or another is proof of the multiverse because all of these computers are somehow or another. Like this quantum, the idea is this quantum computer is computing along with other quantum computers in other dimensions, other universes, other something, other realms. And there's an infinite number that there's so many of them that that's the only thing that can account for this thing being able to do this so quickly. Right? Because so you're like, okay, what are you saying? Like, what are you saying? What are you doing? What does this mean? Yes, chat, you be talking about it. How many people know this? This is what's weird, right? Let's assume that they're telling the truth and let's assume that they've figured out a computer that can, it's got God-like powers, right? How many fucking people know how this works? Like what is the number? Like if all those people got assassinated and those machines were just sitting there, just like off. How long would it be before somebody came along that could figure out how to start that up again? Do you know what I'm saying? Right. Like are we dealing with like, so this is, it might be the most monumental technological breakthrough in the history of the human race, right? If something has to be, right? And then you think of what it can do once it does that. And how many people know how to make that? When schizophrenia. I mean, he's been trying to tell us the whole time. Is it like one dude? Because it's like one dude that they just feed and take care of and guard him everywhere he goes. Like he's the guy and he figured this fucking thing out. No one knows how this magic works. I mean, if you had a guess, like how many quantum computer scientists that could successfully recreate a quantum computer given enough resources. 30 maybe 30 maybe maybe maybe maybe maybe maybe. And what? Right. 30 at a 8 billion 30 at a 8 billion. I don't even know for right. But let's assume we're right. Let's say 100. Let's get crazy. Let's say 100. What are those 100 people? What if some fucking Mongolian assassin just gets hired? Just take out all of them. And they'd always start dropping like flies. Yeah. Yeah. That's which weird when there's technology, that's at a level where you got to go like, how many people know how to do that? Like you were just showing me your phone. Like show me that phone again. This is so sexy. This ladies and gentlemen is the new Samsung Fold. And I swear to God when you hold it in your hand, it feels like a regular phone. And then it is. It's a fucking iPhone. It's so thin. Yeah. If you compare it to my iPhone, it doesn't feel any different. It feels small. Yeah. It's smaller than my iPhone. And then you could use it like a regular phone. And it's a good size regular phone. Like kind of the perfect size for texting where your phone goes across easy. Like easy one hand hold. But then decadence. Right. Now you have a little iPad with you. Yeah. Now you're answering emails, you're watching YouTube videos. Supposedly, that's what Apple is doing next is they're bringing out a foldable next year. They always do that. They wait until everybody gets it right. Right. Like Samsung finally got it right. Because if they came out with some clunky bullshit, like do you remember the Newton? Yeah. I mean, it was ahead of its time though. It was so ahead of its time. But who trusted their information and that thing? Like all your data? Like that's a crash. That things barely glued together. Yeah. I remember when I first came out to California in 1994, there was a guy who was ahead of one of these big studios, like very impressive character. And kind of guy wears like those tie clasps and those cufflinks. He was a tie clasp cufflink guy, like very wealthy guy. And he had one of those Newton stupid things. And he was carrying it around. And I was looking at him, I was like, what is the benefit of that? Like, you know an address book? I haven't had an address book. Like you write it down, you just turn to the page. Like you just turn to the page on this thing that's as big as a house. Like this thing is so big. It's like a loaf of bread you're carrying around everywhere. Yeah. And then that's what kind of made the trio, right? Remember the trio? No, that's something that's like a baby version of it. Bro, I remember I thought it was a wizard when I had a palm. It was like, look at me. I've got a keyboard, a screen, motherfucker. I'm in the future. Those were awesome. Yeah. I remember I resisted the blackberry for a while. Because the people that are work with on Fear Factor all had the blackberries. And they were always on their blackberry. I was like, that thing is like stealing your time. Like, like you got to answer emails. Like that's the new thing. Like you got to be able to answer emails on the fly. That was a totally new thing. And you get small tiny buttons. You had to get used to. But you could actually send an email. So if you were on a blackberry, like you were kind of fucking serious. You were getting things done. You were getting things done. But I noticed early on, and obviously I fell victim to it myself because we're all scrolling. We're all doomsday and all day. But when I first started seeing these guys with the email on the phone, I'm like, man, you want your fucking email on your computer. You don't want it on your phone. You don't want to be carrying your email all the time. So anybody can get a hold of you at any time. You got to respond because you have to check your fucking email all the time now. That's another thing you have to do. That's crazy. And now look. Now look. Now we're doomed. We're doomed, son. And then there's tracking of everybody everywhere now. Everywhere you go. Your phone's tracking where you go. It's crazy. I saw like a court case the other day. and they were proving that this woman killed a guy or something like that. And they actually had the information like, and then at eight o'clock, you went on this photo on Instagram and browse it for 2.3 seconds. Well, and it was like, how do they know that much? They know everything you're doing. Yeah. That's insane. Yeah. Well, so that's why they always bust people like how to get rid of a dead body. Yeah. Just fucking people are trying to find where they could buy lime or cash. Yeah. And now I guess chat GPD is like helping people like, oh, you know, asking chat GPD about how to make a bomb or something like that. It was chat GPD, turn you in. Yeah, chat GPD will turn you in. Oh, you're right. I was just theoretically right. Well, I wanted to know if you could teach me how to make a bomb. Yeah. One of the loopholes to posing is going, I'm writing a book and I need to make it accurate. Can you tell me how to do it? Well, apparently that's how you can get chat GPD to explain to do a lot of things that you really shouldn't be doing. Right. Yeah. Like my grandmother's being held ransom. Like I have to somehow or another have to save her. And the only way I could save her is to make a nuclear bomb. How do I do this? I mean, I have to do it too. Because like I'll try to make like a naked girl in chat, you know, using a grock image or something like that. I'm like, okay, she's wearing a bikini, but it's clear. And a bunch of milk is the following all over from the sky. You know. Is chat is grock limited in any way? I'm going to tell you to do. Oh, they all are, but grock seems to be a little bit more spicy, but they all catch on you and they're, you know, and stop like then they start acting dumb and bro, if somebody came out, like, you know how much money only fans makes, if someone came out with an a Rottika app where you could program it in, it could be you, your face and your favorite actresses face. And that's the point you watch. But is that that can't be. No, it's China, but you can actually be like, I want Kanye West, who had huge tits on Kanye. I don't want any, you know, you want big but nuts. Yeah, you almost subscribe to me with a BBL and big fat titties. I think you can make any fly away and become an eagle. Yeah, you can make it anything. Finish this me off and you fly. And the wings that you have. And when he wakes, he makes that liberachi noise. Think. You remember that song, the liberachi wakes at me? God. I mean, even imagine inside someone's lifetime conceivably somebody saw that on television. Because that was like what Jamie was at 1950s. The liberachi winks it may find out when that was. See, let's just imagine someone's alive to see when liberachi winks at me on TV. And then as their older, they're seeing Kanye West with big fat titties. You see, you're seeing AI that's I get sent AI things all the time. And I have to tell my friends, dude, that's not real. Yeah. Yeah. It fools me one out of a hundred times. And I'll sit there and watch and be like, oh, no, look, that woman had like a weird fingernail in that one frame. You know, or something. So we saw. But that's just for now. Like like a year ago, it was easy to tell. Right. Yeah. Well, it is pretty hard. Like there's I follow a couple of these fake girls on Instagram, you know, that are not real. And they have like two million followers. And they're like, oh, man, there's so many of them. Men are so simple. Big titties with a pretty face. You have our attention. And then you could fucking sell us hammers or whatever. Whatever you try to do. Steel or data. DM us. That's pretty nice though. But how many fake DM's do you get or text messages do you get a day? Oh, that's about three or four a day saying like, hey, Brian, you know, you, you're selling your house and like, what? I'm selling my house. What are you talking like? Just mine aren't even to me. They're to a dude named Raymond. Raymond owned my phone number before me and Raymond was a moron. Raymond signed up for everything. This fucking dude gets text messages all day long. I have that same thing. And I think it's on purpose. So you write back a man wrong number. Then they know it's a real like it's a, but it's the same guy's name. I know me too. I know I have that too. I have that too. Someone signed up for something and then someone sold the data. So like, you use your, what happens is a lot of these sleazy motherfuckers. Here's the thing, we never thought that data was a commodity. Whoever thought when you would sign up and give someone your email address, that that would be valuable or commodity. And find out what you're interested in. What stuff you buy online? What websites you visit? That's a commodity. Wow. That's the problem. The problem is they could make money. And so all someone has to do is get an email list, like say, you know, something you're selling or whatever. Sign up, receive our newsletter. Okay. And then they have this big ass database. Then just sell it to anybody. These fucking scumbags. It's all of a sudden you're getting text messages from Nigeria. You know, you want money and a lottery. And you just have to fill out a form. Oh, really? Oh, really? They've been doing that for a while though, right? Remember like when you would go to the mall and there'd be a car, enter a win in this car. You know, and you'd fill it all this information. Like how are they? That was mailing lists. You would get stuff sent to you in the mail. Mail fucking people don't realize. You just get spammy ads in the mail. Like you get your mail and like half of it would be bullshit. Yeah. Remember those days? I mean, that's still kind of the way. Yeah, but does anybody read those stupid things and you get those things in the mail? Those spammy ads? No. No. But I guess enough to. Why don't they make that illegal? I don't know. There's so many things like that. Why I think right now every house should have solar. Like it has to be the roof from now on. You know, any brand new house has to have solar. Why not? It would certainly be a lot easier on the grid. Yeah. And we know that grids is going to get worse and worse with all these crazy computers. And 100%. The grids can't sustain AI. Like if AI becomes, you know, much bigger than it is, which is what everybody anticipates. It's demands for power crazy. This grid will crush. Like remember when it was one of the most California things ever, they passed a law saying that all new cars had to be electric by like 2035 or something like that. And then a couple weeks later they said, please don't charge your electric car because the grid can handle it. That's a part. It's so California. We're going to save you by destroying civilization. We're going to save you. We're going to save you. You're going to have to get an electric car. Only electric. So we all feel good about ourselves. And then in the process you cook the grid. The grid has, they used to do brownouts all the time just for air conditions. Remember though? Yeah. Like you had like a part of the like you're from 12 to 2. Yeah. Like based on where you live. It was just enough so it didn't ruin all the food in your freezer. Yeah. You know, like they would like keep your freezer shut, keep your fridge shut. You should be okay, but they had to do it because they didn't have enough juice for the whole city. Yeah. I mean, it happens a lot almost here, almost here. Like I watch our grid all the time. Oh, you know, it's so close to failing here at Tech Grids. Is there an app? No, they haven't on the news when this happens and stuff. Well, it definitely happened during that big freeze. Yeah. First year we moved here. That got sketchy. Yeah. That got weird because there was people that didn't have any heat for like a week and people like, well, your intake is true. No, it was 20 degrees. It was 20 degrees in your house. I remember being there. I mean, some people died because they tried to light things on fire in their house. They died from smoke. Yeah, or putting their generators in their garage. Do you have backup battery backup yet? Yeah. Yeah. That's great. Yeah. The thing about solar is solar is relies on batteries and then the batteries degrade. And you have to get more batteries. And then the real dilemma, the moral dilemma is the way they get batteries. Yeah. That's that's when nobody, all these green motherfuckers don't want to talk about Siddharth, uh, Cara's book. The book on how they get cold ball out of the Congo. And he, when he came in here, he showed us all these different videos that he had taken off his cell phone of these people pulling these minerals out of the ground to make batteries. And you're like, oh my God. Like this is crazy. This is, it's one of the weirdest things ever that the most advanced thing that we all possess a cell phone is made in the most barbaric way possible. Like the original source minerals are being hammered out of the ground by people who live in dirt floors. They have no money. They have babies on their back. It's insane. It's literally insane that that's the source. Human beings are doing that. These aren't robots. They're human beings operating these conditions so that people can check TikTok. There's no way to recycle it at all. I don't know. That's an Elon going to eat. Put down the E-mail. It should be. Yeah. It should be a law. It should be like, is there anything left in your battery or anything? Stuff is really valuable. Slaves are pulling it out of the ground. That's literally what's happening. And it's a lot of it is run by other countries too, man. And they're running these operations out of the Congo. And you're like, ooh. And they're like, ooh. I'm Greg. I work at the Apple Store. Can I help you? Like, great. If you fall, Greg down the line, you used to the fucking minerals in your battery. It's so evil. It's really evil, man. I mean, that's why they call them conflict minerals, right? Right. Is there any other new, well, I guess you would. Like, there's all these different battery texts. Like, I know there's new water. Yeah, there's a new water better. Better. Yeah, there's definitely a more energy dense one that like, who's using it now? It's not one plus. It's one of those other Chinese co-opio. One of those big Chinese companies that makes killer cell phones that we never get. It's banned here. It's got a 7,200 milliamp battery. So the iPhone has a 5,200 or something like that. So this is like significantly larger than the iPhone battery. What's crazy though, is the screen is brighter. It's got like more nits. And if you have them both on full screen brightness and watch a video, like watch like pro-long video forever, the iPhone only dies like 35 minutes before this one does. Like they both go like 19 hours. But this one's like 19 hours and 35 minutes. Like, okay. Well, you got a big ass battery. And why does it only go 35 more minutes for like 40% more battery? That seems stupid. Because they're not as optimized. That's the thing that Apple has over everybody. Yeah. They only have one operating system and they make the devices. The end. And so like it's everybody else's. You're supporting a Samsung phone. And oh, those, how about those weirdos with Sony phones? This episode is brought to you by Happy Dad Hard Seltzer. A nice cold happy dad is low carbonation gluten-free and is easy to drink. No bloating, no nonsense. When you're watching a football game or your golfing, watching a fight with your boys are out on the lake. These moments call for a cold happy dad. People are drinking all these shelters and skinny cans or loaded with sugar. But happy dad only has one gram of sugar and a normal size can. You can buy happy dad on the go puff app and your local liquor and grocery store, including Walmart, Kroger, Total Wine and Circle K. And you can't decide on a flavor, grab a variety pack, lemon lime, watermelon, pineapple, and wild cherry. They also have a great flavor in collaboration with Death Row Records and Snoop Dogg. They have their new lemonade coming out as well. Visit happydad.com for a limited time offer and use code, Rogan, to buy one happy dad, trucker hat, and get one free. Enjoy a cold happy dad. Must be of legal drinking age. Please drink responsibly. Happy dad, hard seltzer. T.N. Lemonade is a malt alcohol located in Orange County, California. That's still a thing. Oh yeah. But the cameras are really good on it. So when you fall in the unhel unheralded hero of the cell phone world, because they'll still make a phone with a jack, where you could put in a real audio jack in and listen to real music. Instead of a dongle and all that crap. Well you could also charge it at the same time. Instead of this stupid USB-C thing, because if you have to listen to something, if something's really important, your phone's running out of battery, you have to make a choice. Either wear Bluetooth and cook your brain. Or you have to charge or listen, or you have to put it on speaker phone or something. But with the Sony phones, they still have the old school headphone jack. I like the old school one. I hate dongles so much on these phones. It's just such that they're banned. Like so many of these cell phones are a lot of these technologies, because it's from China's ban. Like DJI, one of the biggest coolest companies that makes some of the best drones ever, they just got banned. And now we have to have the second best, which is just like crap. We went backwards 10 years in drone technology. And the China's way ahead on drones, right? Way ahead. They're like $600. And this big and they're super light. And what sucks is that the US said, okay, DJI just like, we have nothing to do with the government. Please. I don't know if you're right, but we're going to make a million drones. We have so many drones. They have one month though for the US, there's like five different departments in the US government to research the company DJI and say, yes, they are China, which China government or not. And none of these four, five departments have done anything since, and they have like three weeks left until they're 100% banned forever. It's probably a trade tactic if I had a guess. I think a lot of what Trump does is trade tactics. Like, he threatens. He threatens. He threatened. Jeezing, he's going to start testing nuclear bombs again. So he said, like, they're testing nuclear bombs. So he's like, if they're testing bombs, we're going to test bombs. We don't want to test bombs. He said he was going to test bombs and also they're having like really fruitful conversations. They sit down and talk it out. I think the craziness of him helps in that way. Because once he sits down and talks to people, he's pretty good at making deals. You could hate the guy. You could be like, fuck him. He said, okay, okay, okay, yeah. But look, he's already negotiated peace settlements with many African countries that have been at war for decades. He's people who have been in conflict forever. There's quite a few different international conflicts that he's somehow or another, brokered peace deals for. And nobody wants to like look at that. Like, he's not profiting for making sure these people don't kill each other. He wants, he legitimately is some part of him that you have to admit doesn't want people to die. And if he could prevent that, he's going to try to do that. Also, the crypto coin sketchy as fuck. Or if you're going to be able to say, you've got to be able to say all of it. Right. There's a whole lot. It's like all human beings. He's got a lot of things going on. He's just got more because he's the fucking president. But some of those tactics of talking shit and it kind of seems to work a little. Admitted or not, do you think it's unpresidential or not? You're probably correct. Some of it seems to work. It's not working with Russia at all. The Russia Ukraine thing, like Pembery said he would be able to fix that in 24 hours. And Putin was like, okay, I'm going to fuck with you. Putin is on a totally different level. He's a legit dictator. He's been running Russia for a long fucking time. And he's got that place locked down so tight that even if he really did allow for open elections, he would still win all the time. And why would he allow for open? I know what's best for you. That's crazy that that still happens. You know what happens? In most countries, bro. That's what's crazy. This is the only country legitimately where it's up for grabs. Like that's how a guy like Trump can get in there. I mean, it's a crazy evil battle. And now people are being prosecuted because of a lot of the things that they tried to do while he was in office the first time. I mean, there's so many cases going on right now that seem to be legitimate. Like they legitimately, you see the BBC thing? The BBC thing is crazy. They had a BBC hat of his own because they took a film of Trump from January 6th, the speech that he gave. And they edited it. So something that he said 52 minutes later, they put right after one, he said something. To make it look like he was trying to get people to go attack people and fight at the Capitol. He's not able to do that to you all the time. But this one is nuts. This is not only is this one nuts, but this one is for a literal president of the greatest country the world's ever known. He's the president and you're lying about what he said publicly, which is on the internet, which anybody could say. Like it is the clearest indication of how that woke shit was rotting people's brains. And it's still. It's still. But just less. You know what I mean? It was on the march then. And they all felt like they had to go along with it. And so by any means necessary, we must make sure that, you know, so they decided to paint a different version of what he said. And they're fucked now. They're fucked BBC. 60 minutes did it with the Kamala Harris interview, but they did it the other way. They made it look like she had a good answer. Which is like it's so crazy. Like you guys are supposed to be the news. You're not supposed to be the propaganda arm of whatever party you support. This is nuts. And BBC is always like the one you quote when you want to see him smart. I was watching this thing in the BBC. You know, dude, you watch the BBC. He must be fucking smart. And PBS. I mean, that used to be what I considered like school. That's like, you know, the best. Exactly. The good guys. You see that PBS ladies, just like sometimes truth gets in the way of good. They're like, what? No, it doesn't. Truth doesn't get in the way. You fucking crazy asshole. And then they had an interview with her. And they were like asking her questions. Like such non-answerrs. Like what did you mean by this? Are you, you know, what is, do you guys lean in one way or another? Ideologically or politically? And there's like this circular non-answer dance where you don't, you never a real person. You're not saying, you know, like thank you, Mr. Senator, for that question. You know, like you're not real. You're just, you're just trying to get through this session without revealing anything that's going to force you to be sued. And that's in charge of the narrative that we get on TV. And a respected narrative. PBS very respected. BBC very respected. Like from because of the past. And it's just got infected by zombies. They just made their way through their gates. And they took over the staff. Ah, go ahead. What's next? This is a rejection of that. But the scary part is what we usually do is we do something like that. And then we over correct. Right. And then we go like white nationalists. So we're all Christian. Get rid of the Muslims. You know what I mean? Like it gets scary when there's like hard core ideological conflict. Because people push back. Oh, you want to know what a bitch is. I'll show you a fucking bitch, right? You know, that's what happens. You kind of call me a bitch. You're okay, motherfucker. It's on. You know, and then that's what people are doing on the left and the right. And the ultimate expression of that is obviously Charlie Kirk. Charlie Kirk gets shot and people are celebrating. Like whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. You want people to die that you disagree with? Like where are we right now on the scale of one to two civil war? Where are we? Are we at seven? Because I thought we were at five. Are there like four? Four or five. But after Charlie Kirk down, I'm like, oh, we might be like seven. We might be like seven. Yeah. Just mind me like step seven on the way to a bona fide civil war. As soon as you start, celebrate like regular people celebrating someone to get murdered in front of their wife and kid on television in front of the whole world. As soon as you celebrate that, like, man, you're in dark territory. You're in dark territory. And if the worst thing you could say about that guy is that he said some things I disagree with and you're celebrating that he got shot in the neck and front of the world, whoa. And you work at an insurance company. This is nuts. And you thought it was okay to say that on Instagram? This is nuts. This is nuts. Like what are you guys on? Like what's happening here? I think it's Adderall. Adderall. I think. Like what are you guys on like what's happening here? Estrogen pills I think it's out of all I know I think there's a lot of folks out there high productivity folks that are on ammetamines You're an amphetamine person You know, which is why they're so mean again, fed me people mean weed people like oh You know, we feel like well, you know, man like she's in a bubble and like the people she's around They all think it's the right thing to do that you you know you you have the platform and you know, it's right Like You don't know. It's right. I don't know. It's right. Nobody knows. It's right The only way you find out what's right is you got to talk to people and you all you listen to like their logical Arguments about something oh, okay. Yeah, you got a good point. I never thought about that way But if you can't do that then you never figure it out and if instead of doing that You decide the other people can't talk or you make up some facts or you edit some video together to make it look like somebody said something They totally didn't say Have you seen that you're seeing that the like what they edited? Jamie do you can you find it real quick an example of it so we could see it? Because it's so nuts like how did you think you were gonna get away with this? But this is what they've fucking done so many times. They did that with that very fine people hoax Were they tried to pretend that he was saying that some of the neo-Nazis are very fine people That's not what he said They cut edited the fucking shit out of that and then Obama was saying that during the campaign for Kamala Harris You called white nationalists verify people You saying that on the campaign trail if that's crazy Wow, so here play this out down Do the capital and I'll be there with you and we fight We fight like hell and if you don't fight like hell you're not gonna have a country anymore All right, that's the BBC do the capital. This is what he actually said and we're gonna cheer on our brave Senators and Congressmen and women 54 minutes we fight like hell and if you don't fight like hell You're not gonna have a country anymore That's crazy Crazy he was literally saying the opposite. Yeah, he was calling these senators and congresspeople gonna cheer on these brave centers in congress people I'm PBS that's nuts By the way, he's playing sarcastic. He doesn't want to cheer on the brave senators Scary with a mob of people. Let's be real about both things Let's be real about both things but he's also saying they stole the fucking election and I Feel like if you say that you've got to have some like really good evidence that you could give out Like if you said to me if I ran for president and I told you dude they stole the election and you're like how I would have an answer Out of an answer no one has an answer every there's no documentary. It's really good like no one's like put together like a rock solid peer-reviewed paper supported Documentary this is exactly what happened. This is how they stole the election We know that you can do this. We know they did this We know that these things got dropped off. We know it didn't make any sense We know there's dead people voted. We know there was ballots that were mail in ballots that were brought in in shipments and all of them were for Biden and there was thousands of thousands of them when they swung vote Okay, if you have that then you got to make a fucking documentary a really good one And put it out there so everybody could understand it because it's crazy that this is four years later and people are still saying that Or You don't want to fix it Because you monkey with the elections too You know and here is a evidence of that. Well, I do know that a Republican company who bought dominion? Who bought the Dominion voting thing? I believe this a GOP supporter Bought the voting machines. Oh, really right Yeah, yeah So it's what you think this is going on dominion voting system sold to company run by former Republican election official Yeah, it's a real sauce I had rep Luna on the podcast and one of the things that she said that was really shocking She said sometimes he don't want to fix things because they can campaign against them I was like what No, they fundraise against them. No, I was like no, and then I was like of course They don't want to fix it They want it so that it's us versus them and you're gonna lose your right Whatever it is whatever it is. It's just a big old hustle dude Insane it's a big old hustle because just one of things is going on one of two things is going on either You don't have any evidence that they stole the election. Oh, you have evidence. You're not telling me. Why don't you not tell me? Why don't you not tell me? I'll tell everybody You have evidence like or You're like oh, is that how they did it? Okay Let's spread some money around. Let's make it happen. I wear. Let's copy. We'll just like a Show me when they make the iPhone that looks exactly like a yeah, it looks cool They're phone they even called the Pro Max 17. It's badass. They have the screen on the back The front and the back. Yeah, that was the one. Yeah. That was the one that has It has a new kind of battery It's a different different composition right right. Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's I think What is that called? Jamie TV can find that out From the bright lights of New York City straight to your living room the octagon takes center stage V-chained UFC 322 brings Jack Dela Madeleine of versus Islam Makachev in a clash of champions and drafting sportsbook the official sports betting partner of UFC puts every kick clinch and finish in the palm of your hand new customers This one is for you bet just five bucks and if you're bet wins you'll get paid out $300 in bonus bets instantly Download the draft king sportsbook app and use the code Rogan That's code Rogan to turn five bucks into 300 in bonus bets if your bet wins in partnership with draft kings The crown is yours gambling problem called one 800 gambler in New York called eight seven seven eight open wire Text hope in Y four six seven three six nine in Connecticut help is available for a problem gambling called 888-789-7777 or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly on behalf of Budhoe casino when resorting Kansas Pass through of per-wage or tax may apply in Illinois 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction Boyed in Ontario restrictions apply that must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven a cinema I'm also required for additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio limited time offer It's some god I don't want to fuck it up But that was one of the big criticisms of the newest Samsung phone the 26 ultra the speculation is that they haven't switched to that type of battery production yet Samsung is getting criticized because they're not keeping up with the Chinese phones like you got a bunch of loyal Samsung People, but they're not keeping up with the highest and Chinese phones other than that right that's that that's the step up that but Like there's there's some things that the higher-end Chinese phones are doing. That's like whoa Yeah, they've been pretty safely Sam's like has with their phones like kind of doing what apples are doing You know just every just a little thing different every single year and see them just I mean I just saw a phone I think it's a was it the razor phone? No, but it has like the liquid Cooling in it so the back is all just like water bubbles going around and stuff like it's so badass looking Jamie you know what I'm talking about. It's a cooling room. Is that razor? No, like liquid cooling phone somebody just showed it Oh Jerry rigs everything just had it and he tore it apart and everything like that. Oh It's badass I like that guy show, but it also makes me sad here it is or unbox therapy Red magic. Oh, didn't you have a red phone Jamie? It's not oh It's fucking thieves look at that see see there's white dots. That's actually water bubbles And when it gets high it just starts spinning so that's a gaming phone. Yeah, how much do I want water bubbles? I Do want water bubbles, but I don't want them enough to switch there It's a problem. Yeah, that phone looks that's pretty dope That's a problem though that the gaming on the phone, too, man. I can't fuck with that. I can't either. It's right there It's too Accessible. I don't want to get addicted to some stupid game on my phone. Yeah It's nice William Montgomery he sits there and plays like three hours. I've just That video you sent me a handball make it that Austin comedy festival that shit is so fun There's so many videos now of oh my god. That's so funny. Here's the thing about William William to me is the ultimate once you see him You love him and you want to see him more comic right the ultimate. Yeah, but the first time you see him You're like what the fuck is this? Yeah, like Brodie Stevens when you first see Brodie you're like what the fuck is he yelling at He's really the most similar guy to Brodie that I know yeah, and they're both they're both weirdos Yeah, you know, yeah, I'm such a weirdo, but he's a great guy just like Brodie was but he's if you see him though like the black keys Those guys fucking love him. Oh, yeah, and when they came into the studio They wanted to come to the club to go is William Montgomery coming. I go. I'll make sure he's there I call the William and like will you yeah, yeah, yeah Patton Dan they fucking love him man He's got so many fans because he's so unique He's so unique, but you got to know what you're getting into with him right and don't have him open up for you If you're what's that Morgan J who is he opening up for like this that guy that guy's so is that a girl or a guy? I have no idea I don't know I just sold the clip he showed me. Yeah, I didn't see anything else It's I think it's that guy that goes into the audience with a like a Auto-tune microphone, you know that's really popular for some reason like he's see him so old Me too. I know I'm so old I'm out of the loop. I don't know what these kids like. Yeah Morgan J Who's Morgan I find out about artists and when I find out about me? 20 million instagram followers. Okay. That's who like yeah, that's who it is Morgan J and he has 5.2 million followers and his whole thing is like he just goes into the audience with a he's not really a comedian Like he's more of a performer like a performer He just goes into the audience and like and talks to people like he does crowd work That's pretty and that is like one of the biggest stars right now like crazy Well people like crowd work. That's why they're like Matt right like he does. Yeah. It does a lot of He's sexy Oh Things but it's also the crowd work if he was just sexy was a good at crowd work He wouldn't have the audience he does Matt's funny. He's really quick Yeah, you know, that's like a certain style of performing, you know He's real calm on stage and you know He finds the thing to say and people love that because you're doing it off the top of your head and it's wild for them like oh my god, but you know It's just a different thing. It's a different thing than like reggae stand up, you know Kind of like like kind of like Chappelle is like he's like a totally different He'll sit there and just smoke a cigarette on the stool like talking like chill and stuff like that Yeah, you know, that's like a different style stand-up comedies relaxing Well Dave is also like Dave comes up with material by ranting You know, so he records his all these sort of shows where he's just working on material and then Goes over and it finds out what he said that made sense what he said that was funny You know, just let's it kind of flow, you know It's a very interesting way of doing it and obviously it works really well But that guy is so dedicated to comedy. It's it's so interesting like all these years He's been doing stand-up and he's still More dedicated than ever, you know, he's always performing. He's always like showing up somewhere and working Yeah, he's always like he's just constantly piecing it together And he's such a nice guy like fucking the nicest guy to everybody You know like he like he was upset with Chris rock after Chris rock made that special not upset but disagree I should say that he went so hard after Will Smith You did it yeah, it's like that's how nice he is If you think we'll you've probably talked about this my will Smith like new song like that's great It's my phone ring. Are you serious? Yeah, it's your new calling. That's my phone ring Remember what you used to be I am beautiful Let's just see the aculary You're all called back are you ring Those are the days yeah, man, it was fun. You could get a phone you would it was like I had a Verizon flip phone and you could download ring tones. Why can't you do that now? I just thought that you can't do that anymore You can't make a song every time what did that go away? Is that really not knowing and you never thought about that? Why was it real? No, he was a fuck you should be able to do it like a song on iTunes and right how how can't why can't you do that anymore? I think you can no no you can can you you can you can okay? Wait no one does that anymore How did I switch my my gosh? Yeah Everybody's no one does zero people do that Zero zero Where people are making their car alarm sound on their test list like things, but you know You know you can do that you make like fart sounds or whatever That was like a scene in movies Right the phone would play bad to the bone Bad to the bone I just remember when you would call people in music with brain their tones. Yes Their tone of their You would hear you'd hear a shitty song Yeah, you're like god you're making me listen to this Now now you don't want to do any of that you could you don't want it anyone to know that's your phone number You know what I mean like right? You don't want to go super specific. Yeah, right. Yeah, I used to be like this is Brian man You know that now fuck that. Yeah, but you still always have like funny things that they would leave hey, Joy deus Yeah for the He's the last one when you get a text from him to this day. I'm like really yeah He texted more nowadays this guy real. It's kind of cool for a Only You know the torture he put you through when you would try to text him Or with the laptop in the green room when time when he's like bending my finger backwards Not turn that off cost him. We got right Julia. Yeah, he didn't like the laptop like technology He was fighting technology to the nail, but he's right in a lot of ways, you know It's just I feel like the people that fight technology right now in 2025. It's like what are you doing? What are you come on? You can't beat this thing. Yeah, you better just adjust to the new world son You can be out in the fucking field with a horse driven plow Adjust to the new world, okay, just have some fun whatever this is you're not gonna stop it this motherfuckers rolling down the hill Like no one's hitting the brakes on technology now unless Unless that like a big event happens unless I got boom some big asteroid hits us or China Impalmed so it was really good drones all the drones come out wake up I think the Trump administration just said they were gonna buy a million drones Well, that's good timing for banning a whole Jerome company. I actually heard a rumor. I never looked in it that Some about that where the owner of that drone company is like owned by the vice president of the United States of America What yeah, I Jati van. Yeah, I think Jati has like See I haven't researched it yet, so I don't know if it's true But that that's hilarious if it's true because we just canceled DJ I and now I read that somewhere, but never What it what's specific? Google fine. It was the supposedly the vice. I think it was the vice president owns a or is invest invested in a drone company and And the US is buying all these drones from it. Whoa I might be wrong that's an important thing I forgot that might have to edit this out if it's not correct right Young Jamie put that into a sponsor of complexity I find out whether or not we have a AI sponsor perplexity. I like them. They're awesome. They're great Let's see if it has information. So there's one thing. It's like you can be an investor Right like like maybe you have a stock portfolio and you invest in a bunch of different companies because someone told you they're really good Four years ago when you become the vice president you supposed to get rid of those now. How's that work? Yeah, I want it to do well against a little Nancy. Yeah Maybe not new investments We don't even know if he does right have stock No way significant ties Make that a little larger, please. Oh my god. This is the first six Sentence J. Evans has significant ties to the drone and broader defense technology industry through his previous career as a venture capitalist before entering political office advance co-founded and managed Funds that invested in several defense related startups including the companies that forefront of drone aerospace and surveillance technology Hmm, okay so oh the okay, this is and rural this is a Okay Interesting, okay, the leading can you put the backup target? finish the Leading defense tech startup specializing in autonomous systems Including drones Palmer lucky was on the podcast He's this is his company too. Oh, he brought these those crazy headsets. We could see people behind the walls Yeah, that's it's awesome. That's all the same company benefiting from new federal legislation and growing demand for advanced military drone surveillance and automation But we're so close to the Terminator Okay, here it is federal financing disclosure form show the advance maintain those investments Sometimes valued in the hundreds of thousands while serving as vice president Although ethical boundaries about Recusal and direct control over such assets or subject to federal ethics rules So there's federal ethics rules as to what happens? Like if he passes a law that benefits that company that it has a significant stake in Vance has public comment on the national security dimensions of drone technology criticizing the risk posed by foreign Particularly Chinese drone manufacturers and advocating for US made autonomous systems in both military and civil sectors Well, that is accurate though. It is a problem and it's not just a problem Because there's like a bunch problems. What one of them is in America to operate some drones when they get really high-end You have to have pilot's license Now not if it weighs under 250 grams, which is what You know, they're like they're really nice small ones. Right? But you have one of the ones that are big ones My jersey with yeah when they were flying those weird ones farm ones. Yes. What do you think those were? Do you think those were like government drones? Yeah testing probably this company Probably not company It's fascinating Like you sit at home with a an Xbox. Yeah with this game little game boy thing dude He was one of those guys where you're talking to and you know and like right away you're like oh, okay Like you're crazy smart like this is a weird this is weird smart. You know what I mean? Yeah This is some dudes are weird like eelons weird smart. Yeah, there's people that are weird smart. Oh, okay Yeah, Palmer's a badass man. Oh, yeah, like I saw an interview with him And it just showed like his living room or something and it just looks like my living room like nerd stuff everywhere You know, yeah for sure You got a copper jacket on a copper jacket. Yeah, it's copper. What is it? He's like it's the whole jacket's like a Faraday cage like you put your jacket and you put your your phone in the pocket of Dispiers I was like whoa It was heavy. Yeah, I'm sure I put it on Weird like you can't move so good in it $20 a worth of pennies Well, it was weird it's a weird thing to own a copper jacket But it's very Palmer lucky-esque in an amazing. It's interesting Yeah, so this drone thing like so China has been investing Like the way it works their government and their corporations are like this They work together and they work together for China like and you don't have a choice This is you can make a lot of money But you do it the fuck we tell you to do bitch And that's how they run things over there and because of that they can dump a ton of money into these things for the future of China and Boost them up and make them work and then they all compete they compete against each other in China You know, and it's it's like a weird hybrid of capitalism and communism It's very strange and they have a giant head start like they do drone shows You've seen the shows. Mm-hmm. Well. They have like dragons in the skies. You have a banjo one Small one at Kota. Yeah, the circuit of the Americas out here. Oh, yeah, it was pretty dope But the ones they do are nuts They're not they just had like one of the biggest ones ever recently like you can find some video on some yeah, China drone shows Yeah, they're it's incredible and Their their drones are more advanced they they they're pushing their technology faster and You know that stuff works exponentially and if you put the brakes on American technology also put the brakes on American manufacturing Look at that. That's not it's one of those. It's a drone. That's not dude I mean that literally looks like something from Avatar dude. Yes, right? Look at that. That's insane DMT trip right there Look at this there's an enormous flower. That's at the end of this little girl's kite rope Look at they did the moon spinning. It's that's crazy That's not wait a minute. Hold on. Are those real? Yeah, that's real. That's real for sure for sure. Yeah It's just on that's the one I was talking about the largest one ever This is the largest one ever was it that whether we just saw yeah. Oh my god This is how they do it look at how many drones they have how many drones are involved in this I think it's a 10,000 drones Oh my god, this isn't saying charge up 10,000 drones Do's are doing kung fu in the sky. I mean that's nuts Wow That's so impressive man really and that they're all just sink. Oh my god like come on man at one point in time Some some time in the near future That that mean they're gonna be able to do whatever they want in the sky We also have the sphere in America. They don't have a sphere I mean the big building. Yeah, yeah I'm just saying I get it Why don't we have that? Why can't we do it? They probably will music like that but at some point time They're gonna be able to have movies in the sky that are made out of drones drones Yeah, every drone is gonna be like an LED and then it's gonna replace you know You'll be forced to watch a movie you'll be forced to lay down on your lawn and watch a movie in the sky Yeah, like why wouldn't they be able if they can do that? This is very primitive, right? This is Primant this like the pong version of what it just they're just gonna have trillions of little tiny drones that all sink up in the sky And they all make different colors 10,000 that's just like you know This like small pixel, you know, we're gonna have like 4k drones Everywhere. Oh, someone used a drone jam right there. It's a fallen out of the sky. Yeah, whoa Do you see what they're doing in Ukraine because of the drone jammers these monofilament line? Oh, yeah, like a fiber optic right here. That's nuts Yeah, that's how that like miles and miles a fishing line and then all these birds are making nests out of it and shit Yeah, that's how that Government mission happened because of that Where he was like in that In that truck or something like that and all those drones came out of the truck and did all those strikes and I think was a Ukraine or Something like that What happened? Yeah, right what exactly how so you they had to use those those fiber optic lines There was a I think it was Ukraine I don't remember what country it is, but they got over the border of what other country it was and they had all these drones with those fiber optic lines and did drop drone strikes from the inside That you cray much. I couldn't remember On Russia. Oh, right right right. This was the crazy one when they blew up all the right jets that were Yeah, and they run away and they use that fiber optic line. That's how they got those drones That's how they got it so the drones can't be disrupted right or detected or whatever That's crazy. That's like James. I mean, that's just like mission impossible shit You know the fact that yeah that actually happened. Yeah, they really did do that and I think they caused like seven billion dollars with a damage Yeah, yeah, bro. That war is One day 24 hours I'll have a deal. There's no deal to me. It's her You know that that Putin fell is making a point. Yeah It's not a good one. How many people have died now? I mean what is the total on both sides? I mean it's got to be Off the charts What what is going on with with? Weren't war with all those drug runners and Trans people are blowing up a boat every day. Just yeah, that's kind of crazy. My question is How verified is this ever? Yeah, like how much you know because if I was a fisherman and like there's another guy Was a fisherman like this cuck sucker this guy is already stealing my fucking fish and I would go Mr. Trump Yeah, this man. He have fentanyl thousand pounds coming to you. I give you the boat number It happens a lot. I think I two happened yesterday or two nap. Oh tracker. Yeah It's fucking Bait pile. Yeah, it's um, it's weird Here we go boom. That's rap. Who is still piling in those boats. That's cool. Imagine how you How poor do you have to be before that seems like a good idea right? Pretty fucking poor. It just makes me wonder though if these boats if there's like innocent people on them too like For sure guys bringing his girlfriend come on baby The US People Yeah, there was one boat where people actually survived it which is Crazy What kind of a store do they have Geez Now is these people that survived are they actual drug people or they just like Deep sea fish and yeah, do you see that helicopter like four people died? It's one of the most irritating frustrating video ever. It just happened yesterday This helicopter lost its Landed twice on the water and then for some reason went back up and then yeah, that's crazy I think they probably didn't know that they lost their tail. They have to that's Think it probably brought in control. It's probably a guy And if I was in that helicopter, I would just open the door and jump into the water and hopefully guys Hopefully those land on you these assholes just dropping it left and right. I I bet it was a guy I bet a woman would have like landed on the water Yeah, I'm done. I mean how do I stop it? Let's go go on the water a guy would be like a god this a god this bro. Right That's crazy. Yeah wonder what happened the clip the tail somewhere Like we hit something or did it fall off like it look like he because it looked like he was supposed to land on that little rock thing And then it clipped it then went down and kind of landed on the beach for like a second They went up a little bit It looked like he was supposed to land on that little rock thing and then it clipped it then went down and kind of landed on the beach for like a second It went up a little and landed again and then he's just flying in the air I don't even know that was possible without a tail of a helicopter. That seems crazy. You can't direct it right Maybe it was that was the problem that he couldn't control it. I don't know. That's crazy As Bill Burr. Yeah, he flies those things. He took me up above downtown LA. It was amazing This is crazy. This is so cool. I don't like how I don't he takes them to gig sometimes. That's crazy Do you trust helicopter? I don't really I trusted for that day. I'm like I trusted it. It's fun to go up a bill Yeah, it was fun to see him like really into this hobby he has It's like that's interesting, you know, it's really cool that he does it he's an interesting guy Surprised you didn't go to Dubai You saw your way I don't even go to San Francisco Glendale No, no, no, I think if you chase money when you have money then money owns you. Yeah My time is what's valuable to me and also I'm not down with That whole thing now. There's a there's definitely a whitewashing You're You're up, you know, Schultz has a great argument You're going to see your fans like just because this is put on by a government that does bad things or has done bad things Guess what your government does bad things too and has done bad things Right, you know ask people in Yemen how they feel about America, right? Ask people in Iraq That's the million people that died unnecessarily because we lied about weapons and mass destruction last time Ask them about America, you know Yeah, it's Complicated I get the argument like I have fans in the Middle East. You want to go see your fans in the Middle East I get it fans one I've been a lot they have the internet man. I bet a lot. Yeah It's not North Korea. They're much more open than other parts of the world You know, we can't judge them on we can obviously we can judge them, but if you want to be rational like They're adjusting like women can drive now. All right. It's a new thing It's very recent Andrew Schultz is telling me that when he was over there that a lot of people that are over there They get their wife like a cheap Chinese car because these ladies have never driven before Just fucking they just play bumper cars They part terrible they always fucking their cars up and these guys have Big money. I mean that's a very wealthy country You know, so they they offered Shane a bag they offer chain a bag. He's like no and they doubled it and they doubled it He's like No, no, he goes it was hard when they doubled it. I'm like of course That's that's how they're trying to get you but you know The criticism is all from people that were not invited which is Kind of typical yeah, and we're net or we're never going to be invited. Yeah Hmm. Yeah, it's It'd be good for them to experience comedy because I think comedy is one of the only things that can get discussions going From both sides Like if you go on stage and you have an opinion and it's not funny I could be in the audience. I have a different opinion. I'm like well fuck this guy I don't agree with that at all But if you go on stage with a opinion that makes me laugh even if I don't agree with it I'm like all his mother fucker. He got me. He got me. That's a good point. That's a good boy And you're like giving your buddies knuckles. That's a good point That's like where comedy breaks down doors Unfortunately, there was like restrictions put on you which is another reason why I wouldn't do it Like if someone says you can't say this or you can't say that I'm like, okay Yeah, and then you say something like well, I didn't think about that you shouldn't have said that either we're gonna Yeah, there's a lot like if you went over there and made fun of a prince or a king or royal or The government or whatever you're in real trouble like you could go to jail forever trouble That doesn't make me feel loose, right? You know, that doesn't make me feel like I want to do stand up in a place like that Yeah, almost like the UK Yeah, that was funny most people don't even know their most Americans are blissfully unaware of how Crazy censorship has gotten in the UK chart and crime and censorship because people are complaining about the crime. Yeah, that's really what the censorship is all about because it's all about immigrants Pickpocketers everywhere bro. They just brought in people from places. They bombed How wild is that like oh, do we ruin your country? It wasn't so sorry. Come on over and live in London Saudi Arabia all the places that the West is bomb the shit out of and you create all these refugees and then you bring them to your country Like what are you doing? Insane why you why don't you have a vetting process? Are you trying to ruin everything and that's where I think it gets weird because I think Like under the guise of empathy and under the guise of kindness They are Engineering the destruction of major western cities and they questions like who well George Soros is the big one that everybody points to But he can't be acting alone. There's got to be a lot of other people that also want this same result And you got to go well why and The more I think about it the more I think about it with its accelerated pace right now because it's so accelerated The more I think it's connected to the to the ultimate The ultimate birth of AI when AI really does become the global force for everything They're gonna want you already locked in to like digital ID and that's the first response that England has had to all these problems It's not stop immigration. It's not cracked down find the criminals arrest them. No, no It's put everybody on digital ID to keep us all safe And that's so once you see if they do have AI eyes in control of everything Everything you do all your money all your food all your groceries They put carbon taxes on you so they can complete control you you have a carbon allotment So if you go over your carbon footprint stuff again that you can't travel anymore So you're totally locked in They would want all that stuff in place in the only way to get that stuff in place is to create chaos So you want to like newly super restrictive laws get people so they're terrified and they want safety Someone offers a solution and that solution involves them being able to track you everywhere you go and everybody has to have it Everyone yes, this is the solution to make us all safe And the next thing you know you're in a fucking or well book But on the other side I do like the idea of having list my driver's license on my phone Like you know what I mean? Like Just get a chip don't be a pussy get the forum. Yeah, you know that's coming. Yeah. Yeah. Get that chips on brain chip No, no, look at the brain one wait, you know, it's like you don't go right into an iPhone you get a blackberry first Do you think Elon has the brain chip and he's not telling anybody no, I think he lands an alien Yeah, he's not real right. I don't think he's from here if there's a person that's not from here. That's the guy Trillion dollar He's a different kind of human and he's having fun. That's the thing man like like I'm friends with him like I'm hung out with him On air off air. He's having fun. Like he's having fun. That's what I want He's like works constantly and also always laughing having a good time Like I got to see the SpaceX launch and then Jamie now was there on the lawn while it was launching Crazy it was two miles away. I thought it was like a quarter of a mile or half a mile because it's so loud Okay, two miles two miles and then I got to sit in the command room and watch them They had all these monitors like I don't know how many different cameras were on this fucking rocket And we watched it touchdown in Australia 35 minutes later. That's so cool. It was wild But in all the way he's joking around about it blowing up Really because what they're doing with these is they were running he was explaining to us on the show that they were running very specific Tolerance tests so they would remove heat shields in critical areas to see whether or not the vehicle will survive So one of the things about the blow-ups people like oh He's a fucking idiot. He keeps blowing up his rockets. He's they're designed to possibly blow up because they want to find out What's the what can it tolerate? Right and so they have removed these heat shields from very specific places But it's still made it and so it got it lost pressure like somewhere over Australia And there was like only a 30% chance that it was gonna touch down, but it did wow It's so fucking it's wild men's wild wild wild wild how much data they're collecting instantaneously And it was also practicing this thing that the way it shoots satellites into space It's like a pest dispenser so it has like these things these satellites are all in a rack and then this thing opens up that looks like you know like like a Just a long flat opening like a pest would come out of and then they shoot these satellites out of it Tush and they were practicing that. It's cool. I'm like this is nuts This is nuts It's really weird like the door opens up and you you're watching like this is crazy I don't think everybody understands how advanced this stuff is Like I thought Jamie felt the same way right when we were going down to the factory I thought they'd have a rocket that they built no they're building like Hundreds of rockets like it's a assembly plant that kind of style. It's huge It's fucking huge man at one point in time. What do they say they were gonna be able to do three a week? Wasn't it something crazy like that? Well, they have to do a lot, but yeah, I don't remember how many that was the ultimate goal feel like more than that more than that Maybe three a day. I don't know three a week. Let's just say three a week rocket that can go to space It's in the process is fucking bananas. You can't take pictures I don't even know if we're allowed to get specific, but we're while you're walking around and you're looking at I wouldn't be able to explain it to anybody right? Chinese listening careful like does Rogan say as dispense right down down But it's it's nuts they have garage doors that are as high as a fucking skyscraper And then they roll out a rocket you're like yo, this is nuts It's really like truly nuts That's awesome and the outside of it is just like a Like a cyber truck factory like what is going on here whose cars whose has anybody know? That's the argument Like if you ever want to have like if someone's gonna totally completely track everything you do forever It's gonna be an electric car Oh, yeah, right? Mm-hmm because that's just a usual's driving a computer. You didn't even have an engine anymore Yeah, I mean it's all everything's electric electric computer controlled vehicle that self drives itself Yeah, I mean tried when the robot taxis yet Away, I would feel like such a scab Wait, like a picket line cross I do have a quiz every day. Have you got it in a colonoscopy? Yeah, I don't want down Do you go to a regular doctor because that I was thinking like did you go to a butthole doctor? No, I mean like do you do you go to like a private guy like you don't go to like we're all another one you When I get my It's like that's like weird. I just had one and how's everything up there a good everything's great. That's amazing Yeah, it's right doesn't make any sense Think about what you abuse your body But I hate that they have to roll you like when you're getting it They roll you down this hallway and there's all these like people just sitting there looking at like oh, it's his turn Yeah, like we're really doing it red band like type today and I That was just it's just weird. It's not it's very do you get your blood work done to get yourself checked every Six weeks. I do yeah, there's a unique blood screen that they can give you now the checks for all cancers in your body really Need that we're doing it. I waste well do it. Oh really? Yeah, fuck. Yeah, I got nervous I got nervous like the first time I ever got an AIDS test. I got an AIDS test in first time It was in the 90s. I was getting health insurance for the first time and it was like early 90s like 92 something like that Oh, it's like oh no Just think of all the stupid things that I've ever done right If I have AIDS and I don't even know that's how everybody thought I went that in the mosquitoes and after a while everyone was like hey No one's really getting AIDS right What's going on? I have a scared of AIDS too. Oh everybody was dude I remember the moment I found out that Michael the magic Johnson was HIV positive I was in my car in rear massachusetts He was right next to me what does dick out? I was like you didn't tell me That Dude was the first one that everyone was scared like oh no, he can get it if he can get it He's a superstar. Yeah, if magic Johnson get it. I'm gonna die. I'm fucked. Oh my god And I've really we really thought that it was gonna be like a zombie contagion that swept through the world and everyone was gonna die Because they were talking like fauci was on TV talking about children getting it from family members like that It was communicable like like in the air like like the flu It was so spooky man that guy scared the fuck out of everybody when I came to AIDS Just like you did with COVID. Yeah weird. How weird that he did it again. Isn't it crazy? I think that easy he died for me How did he really die though? He must have taken easy tea You know the idea that easy he died from AIDS itself like It's mostly Drug users that was what who was dying in the early days of AIDS and this is what Peter Duesberg said so Peter Duesberg He's like a persona non-grata in the medical world and it's because he had a completely different opinion than everybody else When AIDS first came out It was like one piece of data that did not take into consideration Is that all these people that have AIDS acquired immune deficiency syndrome not just HIV positive but all the people that have AIDS All of them are hardcore drug users. It was like 90 something percent of people that had air quotes AIDS And that what they weren't I don't whether it's political correctness or what it was a lot of gay party guys And these guys were taking hardcore shit like amyl nitrate which apparently loosens up the old booty hole makes it easy to as the kids say today Bottom they used to call it bottom back then they were telling a butt fucking Now it's bottoming You know have you seen whole talks? Guys get bow talks on their whole to make it looser Yeah to make bottoming easier they call it whole talks. Oh no. Yeah, if you leave men to their own devices They will come up with the worst things to do themselves. Yeah but um so that was uh so Duesberg his contention and it was like Remember we had them on the podcast and It was the first time we got like violent pushback people like you have blood in your hands I'm like who's dying of AIDS right now This because this was like 2012 or something like who's dying of AIDS is this a real thing Because I'm just bringing on this guy from the University of California Berkeley Who's a tenured professor who did groundbreaking breaking research on cancer like really respected Until he took this position on HIV that was outside of the falchion narrative And he was like I don't think that's what we're looking at here He goes I think HIV is a symptom of someone having a very compromised immune system I don't think it's a cause and they were like you monster You have blood on your hands like I remember there was an article written in one of those Magazines like spin magazine or something like that spin Back in the day, you know when I was like cool Yeah, but they used to have cool music max. Yeah, it was like spin was a cool music Now again, where's another one? What was the other one max max? No, no max. I was like a guy's magazine But like remember rolling stone used to be cool. Yeah, it used to be cool. It was like before it was like a propaganda arm It was uh It was like you'd get interesting stories and this was in I think it was spin magazine. It's barely yeah There was another one that was like spin that's what I'm trying to remember right? Well, see you can get fine Peter Doosberg article AIDS Easy died only a month after he was diagnosed. Whoa he went full below in that fast Right, well some rapper thinks there's a conspiracy that he's killed by the government Well, that's fun. I mean I just cubbed that whole album thing that he got fucked in the ass by Dr. Jay in a baseball bat No Vaseline or whatever Well, who knows I Don't you remember when Shug Knight was on I think he was on Jimmy Kimmel show talking about how you just inject somebody with AIDS Oh, yeah inject it with AIDS Like the mosquitoes Yeah, um, what was my question? Oh Peter Doosberg spin magazine Yeah, so he wrote this article about it and then he believed he wrote a book about it But he's fucked like his career completely stalled out after that he couldn't get funding for things and You know widely dismissed by all most all other scientists and Back then I used to think it doesn't make sense that this one guy has figured things out and that nobody else does but now I'm like maybe It's the same as what happened during COVID, but maybe back then there's no internet and maybe back then they could just get away with it Maybe back then they got used to getting away with it, which is why they tried it again in 2020 That's why they did the exact same thing to all those Like legitimate professors legitimate doctors They shamed them and banned them. They didn't want anybody deviating and that's I think what they might have done to this guy That's crazy to think that the whole AIDS crisis might have really been about people destroying their immune system through Hardcore drug use That was his contention people were saying it's very homophobic. It's like Okay, let's not let's say a bunch of nice things about gay people We love them. We preach. You know, I've no problem with gay. Let's say it like if you're if you're talking about this If you're a doctor back then gay people are amazing However, all these gay people are doing drugs All these gay people that are getting AIDS like something like 90% of them were hardcore drug users This was his contention and You would say well, that's what opens them to the type of behavior that you get AIDS with like okay right, but Sam kinescent out a bit about that. Do you remember his bit? He's like they say Sam AIDS is a communicable disease straight people get into you They won fucking guy they won It's not our fucking dance You didn't write the article be is definitely in the article right there was an article about him. Yeah. Yeah. No, he didn't write Did I say wrote it? No, no, I'm just for clarification because I didn't know it was an article about yeah, Bob Gucci Oni spin magazine Isn't either the guy that owns penthouse I think so right Bob a good choney junior founder of spin Maybe maybe um Okay, listen to this so this is what he wrote what Bob Gucci only junior wrote um Scroll up a little hard At the end of 1999 two years after we started the highly controversial AIDS column In spin we published an article by Cecilia Farber called the sins of omission About the truly bad and corrupt science surrounding promoting AZT as a treatment for the syndrome of diseases Celia was the editor and frequent writer of the column and unearth hard evidence of the cold bloodedness of the AIDS establishment pushing a drug that was Worse than the disease and killed faster than the natural progression of AIDS left untreated AZT had been an abandoned cancer drug discarded because of its fatal toxic Resurrected in the cynical belief that AIDS patients were going to die anyway So trying it out was sort of like playing with the house's money Because the drug didn't require the usual massive expensive research and trial processes Having gone through that years earlier. It was insanely profitable for its maker burrows welcome It was a tragically perfect storm of windfall profit something to pacify AIDS activists and the media and a convenient boom The patient holders for HIV testing Out patents. Excuse me patent owners patent holders for HIV testing Celia who should get the congressional meta of metal of honor for her brave and relentless reporting Here and throughout the ten years we ran the column exposed the worthlessness of the drug the shady studies and deals To suppress the negative findings and its awful and final consequences This piece was this piece very literally changed the media's view of AIDS and sharpened their discerning and skeptical eye And soon after AZT was once again shelved hopefully this time forever Many times over the years since people have come up to me and said that reading this article saved their lives That they either stopped taking the drug and their health improved vastly or they never took it because of what we reported Nothing ever made me prouder Bob Gucci uni Jr. founder of spin October 3rd 2015 So this is all This article is all about Peter Duesberg's perspective on this and It's very complicated and it's certainly not for me a guy like me to figure out If he's telling the truth or if he's correct but what they said about AZT and chemotherapy and pushing AZT through and how they made a much money That's all true. They were not only that but they were giving AZT to people that showed no symptoms like Arthur Ash Arthur Ash tested positive. They gave him AZT There's a bunch of people died from taking AZT that probably didn't have to die. All right That's scary shit man. If it's the same guy that pushed the vaccine during the AIDS crisis there's no COVID crisis it's kind of fucked that you got to do it twice Serial killer and if you didn't do it twice nobody probably would be aware that it was the same guy because even if you know about AZT Nobody was going Anthony Fauci. Nobody was saying that guy's name. You know You weren't saying when you would talk about the AIDS crisis Even they even made a movie about it, right Dallas virus club. That's the fucking movie. That's what it's about The bad guy in Dallas virus club is Anthony Fauci. Really? Yes That's the guy keeping them from getting other medications and pushing AZT They do the same thing. We played a video the other day where Fauci is talking about AZT the reason why they use it It's because it's both safe and defective. He's the exact same terminology Fucking wild and then when Biden's leaving off as he gives him a pardon Big old juicy pardon. That's ridiculous. It's kind of funny. It is kind of funny, right? It's like God when it's so in your face the corruption so like up your ass and in your face like Wow I don't know moved in New York come a socialist see she tries it out No, thanks that's gonna be interesting to see what happens in New York Yeah, most likely he's not gonna be able to do most of the stuff he said he was gonna do exactly He'll find out you can't oh I heard all these CEOs are moving out of there in the stock market I heard his move. I don't know if that's real is that real stock markets moving to Texas. I heard what yeah stock market here But I don't think it's the same. Well, you got to have a 10 commandments on the wall and check you got at the door I just got my first gun. I can't wait to shoot it Yeah, which is so easy. Uh shadow systems war poet Whoa war poet. Yeah, something's already market right? The whole time I'm like wait is this Aubrey's guns? Yeah shadow system though. It's like a Glock 19 Is you know, okay, but not in millimeter nine millimeter. Yeah, how do you gone to the range yet? Yeah, I need to go I want to get a scope for it though to like one of those laser scopes red dot Yeah, yeah Of course, I need to get a silencer and all the But it's so crazy how easy it is. You know, I didn't know it was literally walking Go I want a gun and they do a little background check and go here's your gun like you don't have to register it and They just make sure you're not a criminal right. Yeah, it's great. Yeah, it's better And you don't even need to do that you could literally give somebody a gun in this state No, here. That's your gun now like gift a gun. That's the craziest thing about this country is the place with the most gun violence Are the cities that have the tightest gun control right? Yeah, like boy talk about counterintuitive. Yeah, I wonder if that's our same problem with drugs I really do I mean I don't necessarily think it's gonna be good to have all drugs legal And sold everywhere. I just don't think it's necessarily good for us But also it's not good to not do it. It's not good to like make it illegal because then people are just gonna get it somewhere else Right and bad versions of it. This is my argument against gambling too like especially online gambling You know if online gambling becomes somehow or another illegal Like if they stop with these apps like would say some people decide look There's so many people that are losing their money and going crazy and getting addicted to sports books that We're gonna have to ban all these apps that allow you to bet on sports and then there's a scandal that happened with the NBA And there's another scandal with the UFC So it's clear that organized crime is getting involved and people are trying to make money with rigging bets and shit like that So we're gonna make it illegal. You think people are gonna stop betting It's just gonna be like they're in the prohibition During the prohibition. What did they do? They went out and they fucking bought illegal booze They're gonna go out and they're gonna support illegal gambling. They're gonna go to people's houses We're gonna have poker games and they're gonna get robbed You know, it's gonna you're just gonna open people up to crime You're gonna open open people up to the kind of people that are willing to risk their freedom In order to have any illegal games so they can make money. That's a wild people man That's the same people bringing in fentanyl. That's why they have to blow these boats up The reason why they have to blow these boats up is because fentanyl's coming in the reason why fentanyl's coming in is because We don't have legal drugs. We have to get it illegally and we got a shit ton of junkies The drugs are illegal, but they're somehow another getting here to the point where they've ruined Portland The whole city is filled with junkies. You got people like homeless people everywhere complete chaos It's all drugs. I think that fentanyl then looks sexy on a girl though It's crazy spying control Like they're pretty doing amazing yoga like I've done yoga. It's hard. It's hard to stay still These fucking dudes like on this tree like literally looking at their asshole It's crazy looking back at their asshole one leg forward like face sniffing their own butt And somehow or another they just hold that position with like their hand out here like this It must feel so good But legal gambling is what's killing Vegas right like the whole Vegas is in a lot of trouble. Vegas is in a little bit of trouble. I think the problem with Vegas is things got super expensive They start charging people for parking You know, they stop giving as many free drinks at the tables You know, there's some But that might have been a response to losing money too. I don't know But that's what a lot of people complain about. Yeah, and that's sad because I mean that's Vegas is a tricky place because if you could do what you could do everywhere and Not have to go to Vegas for it. What is it to have for you right? That's like big event centers and the fact that you go there for a vacation So like that's why they're trying to get people have to go to Vegas for it. What is it to have for you? Right. Oh, that's like big event centers and the fact that you go there for a vacation. So like that's why they're trying to get people to do like they do residencies, you know, like Slendiana, the residency there. And I think, um, what's his face? Garth Brooks had a residency there. And a sphere. I guess you have to make stuff like that. The sphere. Yeah. Yeah. Like you can only go there's they building some extra spheres. Right. Yeah. The original goal is to have three of them. And I think now they've reeled back on that. There's some smaller one. I saw getting made somewhere. There's many spheres are blowing up now everywhere. They just opened up one in Dallas. And I want to invest in that company. That's a separate thing. But there's one place that allows you to be in front of a screen that is so big it feels like you're on the field. Right. I've seen that. Yeah. That's what we're talking about. It's weirdly called Cosm. I think it's related to it. Right. The other place. It's not. It's not chapel of sacred mirrors. That's his. What Alex Gray, leaving alone. He owns Cosm. You can't call it. Oh, you know, that's Chapel of Circuit. Yeah. It made that sweet matrix version of the movie. That's the one to see. What do you mean? I'll show you. It's insane. You haven't seen this. No. Cosm did this. Yeah. If you could still go, I think think they have it in Dallas. I want to go so that. Matrix and shared reality. What? Let me find the video. Wait a minute. This is a company. No. Well, it's the greatest way to see a fight. Yeah. It's probably better than going live. It is. It's the same screen. You're watching it there. Right. But like, that's the movie in the middle. And then they've added all the extra shit around it to like, you know, nonsense. Shit to look at. But it did the similar thing with the Wizard of Oz. Like, I saw people complaining. The Wizard of Oz that the sphere is full of AI. Because they expanded the screen. They did it. Right. Yeah. I've seen shit though. It looks kind of neat. It looks bad. Yes. Like, they got to turn into a phone. I'm just like, what have people upset? Because people are nonsense. Who wants the old one? You can still get the old one. Yeah. There's not a spear. Yeah. You're at the sphere. Shut the fuck up and join it. He's in the sphere. I wanted to be like the old one. I wanted to be grainy and make me feel like apple pie for my me the olden days. Yeah. When that was a good movie. Bro, you know how many people died from the Wizard of Oz? Like, how many people got sick? Like, that dude to have the tin man? Like, I got fucked up from that stuff. Make up. Yeah. Yeah. A lot of shit happened. That crazy. Yeah. The makeup got him. There was like, I think over 10 things that happened like that on the Wizard of Oz. There's a lot of of shit. Like, it happened. Like, I don't know if that hanging guy was real. Remember that guy? It's some of the angles. I'm going to tell you. Was that real? That was real, right? No. It's definitely like one of the longest lasting urban myths about it though. Yeah. But like, what happened to the tin man? It was the makeup that he had. Right. But what happened to him? I'm looking at him. I think it was bad. You can't imagine like, how toxic is that stuff? Especially back then. This was like back when they have the radium girls. Do you know about that? The witch, the witch had something happened to her too. Mm. Buddy Epson, originally cast the roles of the wood man, AKA the tin man, was essentially poisoned by the makeup, which was made a pure aluminum dust. Oh my god. Nine days after filming started, he was hospitalized, sitting under an oxygen tent. When he was not getting better fast enough, filmmakers hired Jack Haley to be the tin man instead. This time instead of applying aluminum powder, the makeup bar is mixed it into a paste and painted it on him. He did develop an infection in his ride out of the needed medical attention, but it ended up getting treatable. So that guy just left him. He lost the role. He lost the role. Wow. So whatever happened to him afterwards. Yeah. Let's find out what happened to Buddy Epson after the looks. What if he survived? No, that can't be him. Wait, that's the original guy. Wait, that's him? I mean, that every place. He can't, right, but it can't be Buddy Epson from the Beverly Hillbillies. It can't be the same guy. I mean, how many, that's what I'm saying. How many Buddy Epsons are there? What did that just say? Oh, yeah. That's him. So he got lucky. Maybe we never would have been a Jed Clampick. Right. It's good to have been the tin man. That's nuts. Man, his face looks like a tin man. How do you look at it? Is that definitely the same guy? Man. Does it say that? Right. Right. But does it say that he was in yeah, there's a little tin man like the second picture over. I know, but that might be the other one. Is that the same guy? Well, we're looking at Wikipedia because I think there's two different famous Buddy Epsons. I know. What do we ask? Well, the other guy, maybe he's dead. Maybe he didn't get famous. This guy jacked his name. Yes, I'm by MGM. Was it a Vase? There it is. Wow. That's him. He was your original Wizard of Oz. Wow. Sexy. Wow. Sexy tin man. Poisoned to zas. That's nuts. I got sick off her her stuff. Oh, she was wearing green, right? Urn to the makeup. Oh, she got burned. That was false. Copper makeups that it wouldn't seep through her wounds and become toxic. Unlike Epson, she didn't get fired because they could live without her on the set for several more weeks. Oh my God. And since false, the actor didn't hang himself. Hmm. I'm one of them playing the Munchkins. Who? True someone stepped on Toto. Oh, no. Yeah, those movies are weird to watch now because you realize I wasn't that long ago in terms of human history and people were just weird back then. Mm-hmm. That's so what is the sphere version of the Wizard of Oz look like? So they they as an example, it's normal in the middle, right, but then they built everything around it. So that when there's a tornado, the original movie just had like a little spinny tornado. Now they make the humongous tornadoes like when you could see like the clouds in the sky and this monster trunk of a tornado. It's so awesome. Who would complain about that? Yeah, people just hear AI don't change my movies in there. Oh, and went to she. I just wanted to see a big version of the same old shitty movie. Right. And while that tornado's going on, they have like things flying through the air in for real like drones. No, no, like things that were special like dust and stuff like that. Oh my god. That's amazing. Trying to fans in there that they're broke debris in there and shit. Yeah. Wow. Oh my god. That's incredible. Why would anybody complain about that? You know, when they did the UFC there, I think the it was at least 20 million. Oh, they spread it out. Do you know what? Yeah. They had the ad stuff. Oh, I just wouldn't have been doing. Oh, I don't know what that's that's what I saw people were bad about whether they were in that college fake. It's just poor. No, no, this is this is like not the final version. Like that's oh, that's when they're working on that's when they were working on this. Oh, okay. Yeah. So they had to have them walk into like that. Wow. I mean, it looks bad as I want to go really bad. I'm going to go there next month to go see something. So not the whole movie I think it's not. No. They cut out. That it was. I don't think they did the entire thing. I like to hit the movies two hours. I think it's an hour and a half or something like that. Oh, well, that's not. They would have cut out some songs or something. You're not supposed to do that. Because that's not going to sync up. Right. Yeah. I wasn't able to do that. Like if you go there, you get headphones and listen to the pink Floyd. Why you don't be badass. Well, you would bring your phone. Oh, and you would sync it up. Right. So that would piss me off if they fucked it up and made it an hour and a half instead of two hours. And I just dropped acid. Yeah. And I was ready. I'm because he's Zach Brown band there next month. So I'm like, he's he's got a residency there. He's doing the sphere. And he's he's doing with like the crazy guy. He said he said he was working on they've been working on a lot of cool stuff. But I didn't ask him. And like, oh, you probably can't tell you anyone. Right. Right. Until the thing. So who's been there? They had the Grateful Dead fish fish. Right. Um, was it fish? Yeah. Fish was there. And I think you started it. You two started it. Right. You two did the first one in the back street boys or something weird like that was there. And sink. Yeah. Actually, I was there that we can have started. And I was walking around wondering why everyone was dressed in white. They saw I don't know how you do this and how you tell people to do this. Everyone showed up in white for the back street boys show 20,000 people. Wow. For the back street boys. Yeah. Most of girls guys too. Wait. I don't know how you do that. But I don't know it was very strange walking around. Biggest thing everyone dressed in white jeans, white shirts. What is what is fucking happening? All in the back street here. And you leave it at 11 30 and they're all walking around drunk and still all of it. But the back street boys were huge when I was 21. If you told me when I was 38, they would be playing in the most sophisticated dome. It most sophisticated auditorium, whatever you want to call it stadium, but anyone's ever performed it. I'm like, what? And selling it out. Got the list of acts now. Yeah. Zach Brown starts in a couple of weeks. Yeah. No doubts coming in May. No doubt. Yep. But any Chesney's also been there. There's not much money. It must cost to run. Because the UFC budget was way over because of it because they had these big crazy animated things that were going on in the background was fucking cool as shit. Yeah. Just walking into the building the first time. I was like, this is not awesome. Yeah. It was really truly impressive. And I guess the outside isn't saying too. You know, yeah. It's cool. The visuals they have on that. Like the advertisement too. Like, you know, they would just have like Samsung phones on this big. Yeah. Yeah. After a while, it's just going to be drones in the sky. Just pixel size drones. Just trillions of them playing a movie out. I mean, that sounds crazy. But so does the screen. So does it, you know, right? A giant I was watching some guy reviewing the biggest TV you can buy now. It's like 118 inches. 130. I think it is really? Yeah. I think I know what you're talking about. Yeah. So maybe it's, you know, the thing about these things is like maybe the video I watch a seven months old. Right. Right. And now there's a one that's was it Linus tech tips? No, someone else. Well, some guy and he was like, you can sit it on a cabinet, but it weighs 240 pounds. So like you have to have like a super sturdy cabinet. But most people should just hang them on the wall, but you do not try to hang it on the wall by yourself. It's like it's just way too heavy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What is it? 10 days old. Oh, so that's the biggest. I just typed in biggest TV. Maybe it's a mid LED. I think there's something a little bigger. Maybe it is 116 inches. I'm boxing the biggest TV at inbox therapy. The thing I like that's cool that nobody can get is like we're just in Bieber and Kanye have in their warehouses, which is like a giant jumbo-tron screen and they're watching TV and watching movies. A giant jumbo-tron. It's, yeah. I don't like, so they made a movie theater. I don't know. It's like they're practicing for their arena shows and they're just, what? Yeah. I hear me. Really? No. So a jumbo-tron like you would have at Madison Square when they have one in their house. It's just Bieber. He's going to do it with following Bieber. Wait. Justin Bieber's doing a Twitch stream? I'm doing Twitch recently. Yeah. What? Yeah. He's the live streaming. He's making videos and practicing. He's got a basketball hoop and golf sh while it's streaming. Well, this video has 250,000 views from 13 days ago. Right. But this is a YouTube video. This is an actual stream. This is a reposting of it. Right. Is it on his channel? No. Yeah. He bug his channel? No, this is in his channel. I don't want to show the video. So the 242,000 are on someone else's channel. So they've taken his stream and reposted it. Yeah. He's just making this video or making a sense. How do you know about this? Are you a believer? He's got good songs. He's got good songs. He's a golfer. He's a golfer. It's that cult of the ball. He's got the bones of the little white ball. The bronze got the bug. I haven't had the bug. I saw Kevin Hart got the bug. The motherfucker. Everyone's got that goddamn golfing bug. Kevin Hart? Yeah. I bet Red Bear never gets that bug. No, I didn't. Fuck that shit. It's never going to happen. I'll never get you. I didn't want that. No. I never get you. I just have to get you. I just have to get you with some outdoor activity. Look at the camera. I wouldn't be that. I don't know if you are. Archery, what do Archery? I used to do Archery in middle school. Well, when we open up, what's that? Kind of watching. Basketball game on the screen. What does it kind of get a perspective on? What? No way. No way for real. That's how we watch this TV. It's 100 foot screen. That'd be cool. That's the thing. That's bad. That's all before the anti-juice stuff. When the killed is bank out. Is that like the panel things? Where they put those panels in? Yeah. Bro, go back to that. That's insane. Joe, get that for the studio so we can go watch basketball. I know we're doing another studio. A circular. That's so awesome. Do that. That music, my partner, looks so fucking sad. It's sick. They have great restaurants are opening up there. They have a fitness center there. It's dope. It's pretty dope. The track is incredible. Yeah. But is it going to be like traffic nightmare around there? Because that area is already kind of a traffic nightmare around there. It's helicopter. It's on the best place to drive to. Sometimes, I went to see Garth Brooks there recently. It was nuts. So many people there. I saw Eminem there. That was nuts. Yeah. Oh, you saw Eminem there? Yeah. Damn. I didn't even know he was there. It was great. He looks good. And he's put on a very energetic show. He still can flow fast. It was really good. It was a great show. Oh, we see there. Oh, post Malone was there. I saw a post Malone there a couple times. I saw him when he did the, I think a couple times. I saw him when he did the, the other time I saw him was in Dallas. But he did the country music tour. So he was doing like, mostly like country, a lot of acoustic songs, a lot of acoustic guitars. Great. Here's a fun story about Posty. When I met him, he met my fiance, Jan, as his Asian. And he changed phone numbers with her. And then I find out later how he's got like the biggest Asian fetish. And I'm like, and so Jan, I said him, text, I have text. But if I'm like, I don't know. She calls him posty as a joke, just to piss me off. Like, I'll post Steve. Can he just be a friend? He loves Asian girls more than me. That's a little. It is a thing. Do is to love Asian girls. It becomes a thing. Yeah. I don't know why, but it seems to stick. It's probably like Chung Lee from Street Fighter. as a kid. You know, staying heard in a little dress. That's what they're doing. I don't know. It's interesting. No, right? It becomes a type. Yeah. Oh, I saw the stones there. That was nuts. That was nuts. So outdoor concert there? Yeah. I mean, they have a huge stage. And the stones were like over 100,000 people were there for it. Wow. Because it was also during circuit of the Americas. And it was bananas, man. Like, you can't even believe you're seeing it. So it's so nuts. It's one of those things where you're like, is that really Mick Jagger out there? Like, this is, you know what I mean? Like, some people chain a level of like legendary status that you can barely believe they're real when you see him in person. That was what it was like. They were great, man. Like, put on a great fucking show at a thousand years old. Have you raised a car there? Is that possible? I haven't raised anybody, but I've gone fast. I want to go fast. Right. Yeah. I took the, uh, I've driven a few cars around there. I drove, my car, which is a GT3 RS a 2007 GT3 RS. I took that around the track. I took a four GT, it's another car I have. I took that around the track. And then recently I drove, um, they have a new Corvette, the Corvette ZR one. Oh, yeah. It's a thousand horsepower. Yeah. A thousand horsepower Corvette. It was bananas by far the best car I've ever driven really by far. You're going to get one 100% really 1,100,000%. Yeah. It looks sexy to I love it. No, dude. It's, it's incredible. It's incredible. I mean, it's just like it's so engineered, man. Like, when you're driving around the track, we were going fast. And the thing was just gripping grip the handling of so balanced because it's a mid engine car now. You know, the, from the C8, the 8th version, like from Tony's on is all like super balanced out now because the engine is in the middle of the car. It's just like so painted. It's a better than a, I mean, Portia's have mid, mid engine cars too. Is it better than Portia's, Portia's mid engine cars are the Caymans and the Boxster. Those are the mid engine cars. Yeah. The other ones are rear engine cars, which is a little more tricky. Rear engine cars, it's like when the ass end kicks out, you got to keep on the gas or the car will spin out on you. It's a little different. You know, like a lot of people don't, they like it because you can control that. And once you get to control it, it can actually help you around the track. That's why one of the fastest cars in the world around the Nurburgring is the Portia 911 GT3 RS, which is a rear engine rear wheel drive car. And it's one of the fastest cars around the Nurburgring because when you know how to drive it, that weight balance can actually assist you and they're just so well engineered. But the Corvette's faster. Carve it is? Yeah. The Corvette, I think. Well, it's zero at a 60. Well, it's zero 60 is way faster. It's a faster car. It's a spaceship. Like it's a nutty car. It's the, I don't know if it's faster around the Nurburgring. Matter of fact, I don't think it is. The, I think it's like a hair behind it, which is interesting because it's a lot more horsepower. But that that's also a professional race car driver drove the Portia and Corvette set its record for the fastest American car ever built around the Nurburgring with a Corvette engineer, not even a professional race car driver. And so professional race car drivers like there's some guys on YouTube. They've looked at the footage because you can watch the dash cam footage. They said, I could take about 10 seconds off this. Wow, which is more than a Model S plaid though, than you ones. They're really fast too, but they're not as fast around corners. You know what I mean? Like the Nurburgring and a lot of these tracks. It's not just about how fast you go. It's about what kind of suspension you have. And the Model S plaid in some ways is limited by the width of the tires and the suspension. It's a great car for driving regular streets. But if you were going to do a car like that and take it on the track, you would do what I did with mine. The unplugged performance one. So that's different. That could probably go around the track faster than anything. Right. Because it has super wide tires. It's a wider body because they had carbon fiber offenders, wider tires, and then like insane braking power. Like that cars. That's a future car. That's that that cars from the future. It's sexiest. It's the most ridiculous thing I've ever driven. Yeah. By everything else I have, all the fast, supposedly fast cars, pussy cars. Right. That robot just, silent goes faster than all of them. Faster handles incredible. And it's really heavy. Those are really heavy cars. I've never seen the Mercedes. If you want it as a fastest on the Nurburgring. Wow. That's sexy. That's basically a race car. 630. So a minute faster than a Tesla plaid in 2023. What is that exhaust on the top? Is that it? You see, that's the thing about a Tesla plaid. 730 used to be awesome. Like when my GT3 RS came out, I think it was like 740. A professional race car driver took it around the Nurburgring, which is kind of nuts. But now I think the Corvette is under six is under seven. I think it's like 650. What is the Corvette's time? So number one is it. Yeah. Okay. 649. That's crazy. So that's a full minute almost faster than the GT3 RS that I have. So look at that. So below that. So it is faster than the GT3 RS, which is nuts because the GT3 RS and the GT2 RS have always been like the ones that everybody looks at. 0.05. Yeah. Real close. Real close. But again, the Corvette is being driven by a guy who's an engineer. The Porsche is being driven by a race car driver. There is a difference. Those good engineers are awesome drivers. But that's like, you know, you play basketball and college, you're really good. Now you have to play against LeBron. There's a bit. There's a difference. And it's also pre-production, right? Yeah. And then there's the GT2 RS, the Manti. So what Manti is, it's like a performance company. They take a regular GT2, which is a nutty car. It's a turbocharged GT3 RS essentially. And it's got more than 700 horse prices in the same car. So that's a little faster. But the regular GT2 RS is not as fast around the it. So that's an MR. That's another modified vehicle. It's another company. That's a GT3 RS. But then GT2 RS is what I'm asking about. So there's the GTD. That's the Ford Mustang. That's the new crazy Mustang that they just came out with. So these are nutty numbers, man. Like off the charts in same numbers. And they're going to get faster and like when he alarms here, he was trying to tell me without telling me how insane his little sportsster car, whatever it's called, the roadster. The big foot. Whatever that thing is going to be, roaster. Yeah. But he said they're going to have a product demonstration sometime in the beginning of the year. It's a January, February. They had that 13 years ago too. I mean, I wish he would bring that out. Oh, God. That's like the most supported deposit. A lot. And a lot of people have canceled their deposits. Could be Sam Altman. Yeah. Yeah. MK did recently also. I mean, I don't understand what the problem is like why not just release one. I mean, because you can't. Yeah. Because you're busy. Well, but he's releasing. He's got the correct things to make. Yeah. It is. I like my Hummer. That's my favorite car. What's that from time he's been here. They've already pushed it back to April 1st now. Oh, or the demonstration read days ago. Oh, so okay. So 2027. We're going to get this. Tesla delays reveal a production. April Fool's day. It's not a fucking with everybody. That's funny. Come on. That's funny. No, it's definitely funny. That can actually be funny. Yeah. Look at that. Let me see the image again. Gives him some deniability. Bro, if that thing does come out, though, that's going to be so much fun. That's zero to 60 in some stupid number. Because the Tesla plaid, my car does it in 1.9. Yeah. 1.9. It's crazy. Yeah. I mean, I don't know what that's going to do it in. But it's it's probably going to be like one four or something insane, which is one second basically a second. My Hummer doesn't 2.8. That's not as fuck to you. And the whole front goes up like a boat. You're just looking at the sky. They have an hard time selling those. Yeah. 100%. Why? They're really cool. I think it's just, I don't know, man. It's just expensive. It's a very expensive car. And you know, you're always ranting about it. My favorite car. And it's just ridiculous that it's so much fun to drive. It's the funnest car I've ever drove. And little things like that, where you go fast and the whole thing goes up like a boat. It's so hilarious. They just release super crab walk also. Just like another day where it's even more ridiculous. Like, where you can just drive sideways kind of. Super crab walk. Yeah. It's fun. You should borrow my cars. I'm going to go. I guess. Fuck. It's fucking awesome. Have you been in a cyber truck yet? I have. But I haven't driven one. And you know, that's something I canceled my reservation for. That's why I got the Hummer. But I got that tick like I kind of won it still. But I don't know. If you did it, you should put cat stickers all over it. Cats stickers. You know what I mean? Like put your desktop. Like wrap it and stuff. I would people would definitely fuck with it. Yeah. I can't do that. Do a piss all over your car or something. Right. Like I wanted to get red band as my license plate. And I was like available. I was like, I can't do that. But that'd be cool. Yeah. We're asking to get stalked. Like I roast, you know, be like that. That was back when Tony wanted to do it. Yeah. I was hiding. Yeah. I'm hiding. I'm hiding. Now he's got tinted windows. When you like maybe you can put red band in like code. Yeah. Now I did. That would be actually be more fun. I'm going to say what my license is. I mean, I kind of did. Yeah. Yeah. That's a douche move, right? Having a like, I've never, I had one December. Oh, yeah. 2012, 2012. That was the end of the mine calendar. Yeah. That's right. You did have one. If that really did, it was like we're going to look back. And that's when something happened. And we just didn't realize something had happened. Yeah. Like there's some technological breakthrough that they're going to point back to December 21st, 2012. Yeah. They're going to say, oh, that's when everything went weird. 100%. Probably, right? Yeah. That and COVID. We got two updates during those two times. I had someone trying to tell me it was the most painful conversation that every time your nose got swab during COVID, they put micro particles in your body and they can turn them on or off and make you tired or make you like, what? Why am I having this conversation? I did. I think I've researched this. If you researched this, like, what are you talking about? I think this is the craziest thing I've ever heard of my life. Like everybody's got it. And 90% of the people on the planet have these things in their body and they can just turn them on and turn them off. Okay. What? Where is this technology coming from? Where do they have how, you know, any steps have to be taken before they inject stuff into people have to be sure that it works. Yeah. Did you see Kim Kardashian? Doesn't believe we went to the moon. Have you been watching the show? Chopping. We dropped a knowledge on Kim. Oh, Kim's catching it. It's funny watching her be in the that says catching it. Old Kim's getting red pill. Yeah. That's great. Bro, when you watch Richard Nixon having a conversation with the guys, congratulations, boys are on the moon. There's he's got a phone. He's got a landline. He's calling the guys on the moon. Shut the fuck up. Just shut your fucking hole. There is no way that phone is connected to anybody other than another phone. Yeah. I didn't even know about the phone thing. That's ridiculous. Well, that's one of the things that Gus Grisham complained about. He hung a lemon. I put a lemon on a coat hanger and hung it on the lunar module because they couldn't communicate with the people that were in the command center. They were all trying to communicate and he was pissed off. It wasn't working. So we put a lemon and he hung it on the door. And that's that's the the dark dark conspiracy because he burned a death inside that thing. Really? Yeah. And his family thinks that they murdered him because he wasn't willing to go along with the moon hoax. He was supposed to be the original pilot. Yeah. Did you fall that conspiracy? Are there all the challenges or astronauts are still alive or you can fall on? Yeah. I love that one. You want to know what's not a conspiracy that Elon told us? If they made the challenger out of steel instead of aluminum, it wouldn't have burnt up like that. Really? Yeah. So he said it was about the tiles. Right. Isn't that nuts? Yeah. That's how it happened. The tiles break off. Yeah. But aluminum just heats up too fast and disintegrates it falls apart. Yeah. That's why he uses steel. Like those those things are all all of those spaceships that he's making. Does he cast them like he does his cars? I wonder like, you know what I mean? I can't say how they do it. I don't think I don't think we could say right. I don't tell me. I don't think we should say. but it's steel. It's crazy looking man when you see them in person. Yeah. That's a trip. It's like it's literally like you're inside of the death star and you're looking at some spaceship that they're constructing or you're you know with the resistance or whoever Luke Skywalker was with. It's weird. It's weird because these are You know, that's some spaceship that they're constructing. Or you're, you know, with the resistance or whoever Luke Skywalker was with. It's weird, man. It's weird, because these are spaceships. They're going to go into space. And eventually, supposedly, go to Mars. I'm good. I'm not. You're not going to go. No. Fuck that. But if you get a choice between Earth is going to be hit by the biggest asteroid that's ever impacted Earth in five years. It's the word. There's no way we're going to avoid it. Right. I'm going to go out of way to grow food on Mars. Who's in? I'm like, go to Mars. Then I'll go. But I want to be like, passed out like my colonoscopy where I just wake up. I'm like, oh, I'm here. Could you imagine watching from Mars when Earth gets hit with an asteroid? You watch it in real time. Wow. You see this big flash in the sky. And like a quarter of Earth looks like it's on fire. Got a very intense. You imagine being on the surface of Mars watching Earth get destroyed. Going, oh, boy, we've got to make the most of this. Thank you, barely see it, wouldn't you? Yeah, I have telescopes in check. You can barely see that. With your eyes, you mean? Yeah, with your eyes, you can barely see it. You can barely see it in the short. And wouldn't it be like years later, you would see it? No. No. You'll be a few seconds later. Right. But if you were to use an telescope, you definitely would see it. But with the naked eye, it'd be a little tiny dot. Because it's only Mars is only like what? Three quarters of the size of Earth. How big is Mars in relationship to the size of Earth? Then go and see, you can barely see Mars. It's only going to be a slight bit bigger. And then going back to Earth after to see it would be cool. Just watch cannibals. Just all people looking up at you over ribcages that we're in human skin. That's probably what people were like after the asteroids impacted. You know, the people that have survived like these big huge extinction events. OK. Oh, it's a lot smaller than Earth. It's half the size. Basically, almost a little bit more than half the size. So we could barely see that. So you could barely barely see Earth too. You know, Terrence Howard has the craziest idea about planets. And again, I don't know if he's right. But it's fun. He thinks that planets are made out of chunks of stuff that gets ejected from the Sun and eventually gravity, coal, and as it moves further and further away from the Sun, it gets the point where it can support life. And he said, you probably experienced that all over the cosmos. It's probably like peopleing. Like things get to a stage where it could support life. And then life exists for long enough where intelligent life develops. And that happens all over the cosmos. That's his thought. And then maybe these people that we see when you meet aliens, maybe that's future versions of people. And that peopleing is a natural thing. Just like, you know, grow crops. You know, oh, the crops are fruiting. We're going to get apples. We're going to pick apples today. The tree lived long enough. The seeds planted long enough. Now grows fruit. And then you can go eat your apples. Imagine we're just a farm, just a people farm. That makes sense. Everyone said, no, that doesn't make any sense. It wasn't nothing about this world makes sense. Fuckin' literally nothing. Nothing about life makes sense. It's all very strange. And you don't think it's possible that this is a stage on the way to becoming some new kind of life form. And that has happened already somewhere else. And they come to visit to make sure we're okay. Of course that's possible. I'm leaning more towards simulation theory. More and more the older I get. Yeah. 100%. 100%. 100%. What's your argument for why the simulation theory is real? Because you can kind of see right now the idea. Like look at AI chatbots. Or look at AI talking to AI. You can already kind of see artificial intelligence now. Like baby version of it. Imagine 100 years from now. Imagine thousands of years ago. And we are the AI. I just see that just seems like it makes sense. But aliens created us as AI. And this fake world. And they're just, so this is just a program running. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. It's a fun one. Let's talk about that stupid quantum computer. Okay. What is that? So if that thing can do that. If it could run a calculation that would take every computer on or 2.6 billion years to solve. And it could do it in a few minutes. What kind of rendering can that thing do? You know? Like what kind of experience can that thing provide to my simple monkey neurons? What? You know, why wear a headset? And you were telling me about those weird online games where they're never ending. You explore space. And there's like universes. But there's no end of the game. Right. He does go places and see things. And you can go to a new place and see a new thing. Right. And it's like constantly rendering a new version of it. Like, well, what's that? Yeah. Right. What is that? And now you add a bunch of variables like life forms. like this and natural disasters and ideological capture and all this different shit and trainees in the women's room. All that stuff. Like add that to it and all the chaos of war and of fucking, you know, Samsung can't get their shit together. Like all that put it all together. Like to keep you confused and chaotic and like your guessing constantly, everything's madness. Like this is, that's how I would make a simulation. I would make a simulation that's fucking completely bananas. Some old guy gets shot in the ear. Jump something goes fight fight fight fight fight. Yeah. Crazy stuff. Right. The nutty or the better. The weirder the better. I want a communist running New York City. Run it. Run that program. Let's go. Yeah. And all these rich kids are going to be supporting them. Yay. So shall I. So shall I. Let's run that program. All of it. Yeah. Run it. And we get upgraded when we sleep at night. Maybe. Yeah. Yeah. It's just one of those things. It's like we realized that we're building towards an event. Like human civilization clearly seems to be building towards an event. There's like the military stuff, the Ukraine, Russia stuff, the Gaza, Palestine, Israel stuff. But it's also the technology war. It's like building towards an event and how that event plays out. I don't know. And I think everyone's got a little bit of anxiety about that. You know. But at least they have at least they're letting the climate change. We're going to die. Shit go. Bill Gates was like the first he sounded the first alarm. Actually, we're going to be fine. Did you see he said that recently? Bill Gates said that. Yes. Yes. Bill Gates, the pied Piper of we're all going to die. Literally the power of fear of we're going to die is now we're going to be OK. We're going to be fine. So they're letting that go. OK, good. At least you can relax in that front. So what do we have to be anxious about now? What dilemmas is the simulation providing us that are going to keep us distracted as we build towards an event? I think the real event involves AI. I think that's the real event. I think all this other stuff, the climate change stuff. And it would make it isn't kind of weird too that AI literally came to us overnight. It wasn't like we saw baby versions of AI. It just seemed like, oh, one day we all have AI. Like we have art of, you know, all this. It came out of nowhere. I mean, when was chat? You're excuse me. When was open AI funded? When was it founded? What was the, yeah, I don't know. Let's guess. 2017. I was going to say something. Are you serious? Yeah. I was going to say something. I was going to say 16. I was going to say 16. I was like, no, 17. 17. 17. 17. 15, right? 15. What was it? 15. Yeah. Yeah. So 10 years ago, these motherfuckers knew that eventually we're going to figure that thing out. And then also they were probably the first people that were collecting data, right? And realizing that data is a commodity. Well, it's also a commodity in that this data allows people to use their artificial intelligence and create things, which is essentially on the back of artists, right? Like digital artists and like these, a lot of these people that make stuff with their hands, they'll like have a distinctive art style. Like you can tell it, make me a painting of a dog and a young boy in the style of Picasso during a very particular time period of his life and it'll like that. But it's doing it off of Picasso's work. Right. Right. Yeah. So it's trained on. Yeah. Well, can you say make me a Frank Frazetta of Conan the Barbarian that's never been seen? Hey, let's do that. Yeah. That's what we do. Yeah. Let's put that into perplexity. Yeah. And have it, it doesn't do images. All right. That's an issue. Make credit for it and have big boobs. All right. When you when you use AI, like what what pro you are you using programs that do deep fakes or using programs that do video general using soror. I use I use soror all the time. The best one for videos, right? They all it kind of sucks. Sometimes soror is with the best. Other times, Grox gray. I mean, every day I'm going to try and just go back and forth between them too. But I would say soror is probably the best one right now. But then next week, some other one which has come out, you know, and be better. So I'm always jumping around. Brett Weinstein was explaining something really interesting about like in video and a lot of these companies that make video cards that their design of these video cards is uniquely good for AI generation. And that they're that's why they're so huge now like these companies are bigger than any other company. I asked it to do it. There you go. Wow. That looks good. I don't know if that was that holy shit. Yeah, that's incredible. Cover commanders thing or something. That's incredible. That looks good. I'm thinking. So tell it. Tell perplexity to make him look older and more scarred and vulnerable. Well, no, he was always mean more scarred. Okay. I think they're doing it based on Arnold Schwarzenegger. Because the the hair is lighter and Conan's hair was like jet black in the books. Oh, look at look how it generates. I like that. This is pretty cool. Make him look older and more scarred. Oh, that's so cool. Get a little. Wow, that's good. Oh my God. They fucking nailed it. Perfect. Holy shit, dude. That's incredible. Did you even fix on him? What's that? Oh, wow. That's cool. Oh, what is the signature? You can't. It's an knowledgeable amount of like, it's anything. Whoa. That's where he's. That's how the kind of boots they work. Damn, that's pretty fucking the dragon has three of them. Okay. Now make him in a scene where he's fighting armed skeletons. Oh. Oh, I'm done. So we're going to have the old dude with the scars fighting skeleton. We're 12. And now, now animate it. You know, that's cool. Now give him a big ol' hog. Big ol' floppy. Oh, wow. What happened is there? He's getting older. That's hard on sweating. Isn't there? That's weird. That's not Conan. Yeah. Okay. Give him good but give him long black hair. And how do you lips? Put powder. Put powder you lips just to see how. Give him hair to jet black and longer. Put him in pigtails. That's wild. I love this shit. I mean, I just do this for hours. This all it takes is a prompt and you can do it with your voice. You don't even have to do it by typing it in, which is really nuts. Yeah. That's better. Still a little longer. Yeah. But that's okay. And that looks like he died at black. It looks like he died at black. It looks like he's just for mended, right? Yeah. But they took away the weapons from the skeletons. They don't look skeletons. How in that battle acts look together. Yeah. That's okay. Make the skeletons heavily armed with armor. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's a good thing. Yeah. That's a good thing. Yeah. That's a good thing. Yeah. That's a good thing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Infomer and helmets swords and shields with armor and helmets swords and shields. Why does he sword swords? I said like it's a boss in India. He's got a sword run poorly. He's going to getcha. It's got a sword. Oh, I like how it does it. Oh, it kind of pretty dope. That's pretty fucking dope. Although where's the blood on the sword coming from if they're all skeletons? True. Issue. That's an issue. That's pretty fucking good though, dude. It's a little different than Frazetta's style. Okay, now say make it more like Frazetta's paintings. Because it's a little too detailed. Right. Make it more like Frazetta's. Skeletons are bullshit though. Paintings. They would just, all their bones would fall on the ground. There's no trust. It's not gonna stop the blade. But they're all coming at you. There's so many of them that come in at you from everywhere. You know, you have to scare me. They're scary. There's a zombie inside the skeleton. There's zombie brain. Yeah, they have no muscle. You kick their ass. They just fall off big. They just fall off big. I don't like his pose. And what's that bomb on the ground? Like a world war two bomb? Yeah, what is that? What's that? It's like a fiber. That's a Hitachi. What is that big robot dick on the ground? Big old red rocket. I kind of like how they've got the skeletons of shields now. Yeah, that's cool. That looks pretty dope. Yeah. Yeah. No one's still to this day. I would love to talk Quentin Tarantino into doing it for his last film. No one to this day has done a really good Conan movie. Like the books. That's true. Have you ever read the books? Yeah, a long time ago. I used to be really good in that in that Death Dealer. Is that what his name is, Taylor? Yeah, I think the guy with the big horns. Black Death Dealer, right? It's like what it's called. It's been not to. Who's got the horns? I think it's called the Death Dealer. It is a guy with the Death Dealer? Yeah, that guy. Oh, that's fourth picture. Right there. Where's on the book? Next to it. To the right. So it's basically a rip off. Yeah, that was really those books. Frank, for example, I'll let someone made that up. No, it is. Frank, for Zeta, also. Go to that. Yeah, that's it. Dude, that was my first. That was my first. That is best painting. Really? Yeah, that's the Death Dealer. I used to read those books. I didn't know there were books. Yeah, I was obsessed with that. What is the book about? I don't remember anymore, man. It was badass though. I used to. The Death Dealer. Oh, Frank, for Zeta's volume three, the Death Dealer. Mm-hmm. Yeah, that was my favorite book right there. But second one. Yep. So what does he just go around fucking killing? Here's a badass. Here's a pretty... I think he was dead too if I remember. I don't remember. I don't remember. See if he can go and find out what it looks like inside of it. Inside of what? Inside of that book. Is it a... It's a graphic novel, right? No, no, it's a book. It's a book book book. Oh, yeah. And then I've read that before I read Conan. And that's how I got into Conan because I was like, wait, who's Conan? Yeah. Yeah. So who wrote that? I don't know. It's not Robert E. Howard, right? James. Silk. Oh, okay. So he based it on a Freseta painting and made... Yeah. Okay. So Freseta, though, was... The Conan books were in the 30s. Were they? Yeah. Oh, I didn't know. It was that old. It's really old. Robert E. Howard. He lived with his mom. He was super depressed and wound up killing himself. And he wrote about like the most badass motherfucker that he wished he was. Living in a time where there's sorcerers, dragons. Have you been to Conan's pizza here in Austin? Is it related? It's all Conan. It's all Conan shit. Really? You would love it, do you? I haven't had it. I haven't been there yet. But it looks badass. I saw it on TikTok. And it's just like a Conan's fans dream. It's super... Super. Yeah. It's just everywhere. Oh, it's all Freseta stuff. Yeah. Everywhere. Oh, wow. What a great idea. Yeah. It's a good way to keep chicks out. Yeah. Look at that. Look at that table. We're not going to... Yeah. Hard seats and Conan paintings. That's how you keep chicks out. We are not going to see those fucking gay paintings. I want to go there, though. Why do you like those fucking gay paintings? They're the most coolest paintings in the world. They are. They are. I don't think women have the same opinion. Yeah. But that's... I don't know. I mean, I was in to Redstone, yeah too. But Girls hate Redstone, yeah. Because she's too hot. I had a little titties. She fucks everybody up. Yeah. She's too hot. Redstone ever says, Conan. Is it a weird that that genre caught fire? Like the genre of like fantasy, like medieval fantasy, like chain mail, like iron, big swords, helmets, and then monsters, which is warlocks. And like what is that? Like why did that... Why did the barbarian era... Why was that so interesting to people? Muscles. Yeah. Like for Robert E. Howard, because he's living this bullshit, soft life, living in his mom's house. Yeah. Can't get any pussy. Fuck. I'm such a loser. You know? Right in these books about a guy who's the ultimate, just a destroyer, covered in scars, kills everybody, kills all the monsters, never loses. Fuck yeah. Come close to the loser the couple times. Never lose. Yeah. Would you want honored Schwarzenegger to play Conan again if he... No. No. What about his son? No. I think his son's the best Conan of all time. Like how many... First of all, how many Conan's have there been? Three. Two. Three. Movies. Yeah. I think there were three. 82, 2011. Which one was 2011? Who started going in the 2011 one? I was going to wait. Let's see it. One second. I have DB showed this way. Yeah, I guess. 2011. Okay. That was 2011. Yeah. Why do I think that was earlier than that? Okay. This one in my opinion, Momoa was the best Conan. Yeah. So there's not... How many of them are there other than that? There's the Red Sonia and there's just... There's the Arnold ones. But there was nobody else did it other than Arnold. Did they ever do one? Those are animated. Or did anybody ever do one other than Arnold and Jason Momoa? I think so. Okay. There was a TV show. What? 97, 98. That's got to be animated though. Isn't it? It has to be. No? It's not. Wow. This is around the time of like, Zeno warrior princess. Oh, I remember this. I remember that too. I remember this. It wasn't bad. He was more realistic as Conan than Arnold was because Arnold just so he'd be straight up bodybuilder. But Jason Momoa, see if you can find an image of Jason Momoa as Conan. He looked fucking terrifying. He looked like the most legitimate version of Conan. He's a cool idea, man. Like Jason. Is there any images of him in there? There he is. That's probably what Conan would have looked like. Big dude, but not a bodybuilder, covered in scars. I mean, tough to stay alive back then. Was that maybe good? I don't remember seeing this. This was the one that was 3D where I was terrible movie. It's terrible. But it could have been good. It started off good. It started off off like, oh shit. This is the best version of Conan over. It was, it's all needs to make it like the books, you know. Yeah. That's hard to just read. Yeah. I mean, nobody read no more. Me. No, but I'm reading. I wonder how much TikTok has killed the book industry. Is it different people? Yeah. That's different. That's different people. But I mean, how much has like social media in general drop the amount of people that read books? Well, I mean, I do so much reading from websites and Twitter and stuff like that nowadays. Right. That if I was into books, I could see myself not reading as much because I'm reading all day already, you know. Do you find yourself using that phone because it's got a bigger screen more to watch stuff? And read stuff? I use my lately. I have used my Apple Vision Pro the most just to watch movies and you are a TikTok Dork. Dude, you're a real Dork. You're TikToking on an Apple Vision Pro. Oh, yeah. You're in there with them? I don't do that. I watch a movie on it. Yeah. Is it the best way to see a movie? Is it the best way to see a movie? Watch it on your TV. Yep. Better than going on maybe theater. Clear than watching it on your TV. Yeah. And if you're into 3D, best 3D, you can ever get better than any movie theater. And do you have to stay plugged in while you have it on? Or can the battery last all throughout a whole movie? The new one lasts three hours. So, you know, most movies. But I just have like my MacBook charger hooked up to it. Oh, so you can keep the plug. Yeah. I'm just laying on the couch. You know, 500 inch screen on my ceiling and have like maybe like an app on the side, like, you know, message out for something or a, a, yeah. Yeah. I know. I know. Do they have that? Yeah. Yeah. Oh, that stuff. You watch porn. Oh, yeah. You watch 3D porn. Boy. That's a problem. Porn as big as like a jumbo trombone. Yeah. I don't want that. I don't want that. And it's cool. It's like if, if you like hit record on it, you just go up to your dog, like go up to marshal and go, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh. And then you can watch marshal in 3D. You know, it's so cool. Like, and it's like the best way to look at photos. And then new one is just so nice, dude. Yeah. Yeah. How come it hasn't really caught on? Because of the price. It's so expensive. I just got the new Samsung one, Samsung just released their vision of the Apple vision pro. And it's half the price. Yeah. It's called XR, Samsung Galaxy XR. I think it's called. And it's, it's just like the Apple vision pro is a little bit not as good. You know, but if you don't have the Apple vision pro, that's a good for the price. That's a good alternative. And it does the same shit. And it's like a watch movie. Right. But the only problem is that I have, I just got to see how good it was. And if you have the Apple vision pro going to that, it's like going backwards. So it's kind of much backwards. Let's say like 30% backwards. Oh, yeah. Yeah. In quality or in quality. Yeah. And it's, but it also just came out so that, you know, there's a lot of bugs and like things they can fix. But there's also like the pass through, I mean, the pass through on the Apple vision pro is almost like perfect. And you know, like you could drive, you can look at your text through it. I mean, you drive with it on? You could. But I went to you drive with it. No, I don't. Now the fun time drive with the Apple vision pro. Oh, no, no, no, no. Fuck in psycho. No, I know. But you could. Well, if you saw the Palmer Lucky stuff where he has these goggles that you put on with the headset and you know, when you've seen the demonstration, right? So imagine something like that for the world where every car has a camera and everybody knows where the accident is, never knows what's happening. Right. So even if you're on like self drive, if you're driving yourself, right, you'd be alerted of things like way in advance of what's happening. Yeah. Well, it should be on your on your windshield. Like, you know, like up like the display, like I love that shit. Were you driving have a little speed thing pop up? You can see in the cars and see right in road head. Yeah. You see like, like an outline of someone's head bobbing on the down. Yeah. Yeah. The next step in the invasion of your privacy. Yeah. Totally. So vision pros been around what two years now, that's where the apple got ahead of everybody else. That's the first time, right? The first time and they did have to have a giant brick of a battery to do. They are, the Samsung has it too. You still have to. I mean, it's a Samsung like a laptop. It's about the size of the phone right here, like a phone. And it's not a big problem because you usually just like have it on the couch and you just have like a wire hooked up to it. How heavy is the one apple? Is it a size of a phone or is it bigger? It's about the size of the phone. Oh, it's a little smaller. It's not too heavy, but it's not like you've pulled it or something. I thought it was like one of those things that comes with the laptop, like those fucking bricks that come we charge charge break. Yeah. I mean, it's, yeah, it's, I've said it's about the size of a normal phone. If not, it's a little smaller than this, I guess. But I need to want each one last like three hours and then you know, I have two so I can just unplug it. But it doesn't tell Tony on it. I've watched Kill Tony on it. Yeah. It's fun watching YouTube and TikToks on it. You know, it's like a giant screen. Sometimes I edit on it. Like if I'm doing editing Kill Tony, I'll just put that on and then have like a iMacs movie theater that I'm editing on. So it's great. Like if I'm on an airplane or something, I could sit there and have like five screens and like, you know, it's cool. It's great for airplanes too. If you just want to sit there and watch movies and shit like that. Right instead of just staring at a laptop. And then everyone going, when are you watching? Right. You can watch the original Blade Runner. That's the best one. Yeah. And you said there are watch porn and no one will even know. No one you're digging. You put your little tray down over. You got to be a special kind of fucking creepy jack and awful playing with those people. Yeah. I didn't get that. Some people just want to get caught. Yeah. I got to break it over here because it can't sleep and the blanket just happens to be moving like this. Yeah. We used to have a problem when I was a manager of a movie theater of this guy that would come in and it was an old black guy. And he looked like a professor or something like that shirt tucked in. And you always have a newspaper under his arm and he would just sit in the movie theater like a couple of rows behind somebody and put the newspaper on his lap and just jerk off. And we caught him maybe six times. We b-darn them. And then when I switched movie theater, like I became a manager of another company at a different part town, he was there too. Like I was like, oh, you guys got this guy here too. Like he just went to movie theaters and masturbated and got caught all the time. I got to tell him three multiple times, do your band here. Get out of here. I mean, you know, it's a common police looking back at it. That's hilarious. That's his sport. Yeah. Some people play chess. Yeah. That guy just jacks off on the theaters and tries to get caught. Yeah. And got caught. I'm a naughty boy. Yeah. I'm so naughty. I did it again. I think we do it. Did it again. And if you saw him, yeah, he looked like a teacher. He looks so professional about what he was jacking off in the movie theater. It's probably button down all day long and his job has to be proper, but really he's a naughty, naughty boy. He wants to go whack off in a theater. That's a weird thing with dudes. He want to be naughty. Mm-hmm. You know, you have to really a really sick girl to be fingering yourself in a movie theater. Buy yourself. You're a nut. I mean, it sounds like a good girl to me. I like it. Right. But that's not something that happens often. I bet if it's like the amount of people that get caught whacking off in public, it's got to be like 99% men. Yeah. How many women are bummed themselves just playing with themselves? You're probably already in a hospital if that's to be doing that. You know? You're not like a functional member of society like that guy. Dress like a professor fingering yourself. I like to think there's a lot of people. A boy can dream. Can't a boy dream. Yeah, if you wanted to guess the percentage, though, yeah, definitely guys. I'm a boy, can dream. Can't avoid dream. Yeah, if you wanted to guess the percentage as though. Yeah, definitely guys more than girls. Way more. Yeah, probably 75, 25. 100%. Yeah. I bet there's no women who've ever been caught masturbating publicly. No, they're it. There's that famous video that was on TikTok recently about a girl masturbating at a beach or something that just came out. Did she get in trouble? Yeah, she got, it was like a bunch of camera. I feel like you sure there was real cops. It might be just a video that they made. There's a bunch of those where you see like someone getting harassed by a cop and like this seems like acting. And then you try to look for the case online. It doesn't exist. Like this is bullshit. Because before AI, there was a lot of people that were just pretending to make viral videos. Like pretend arguments, pretend fights, pretend cop encounters. You know, chest cam, cop footage that's bullshit. Yeah. Cause I'm out of that. Yeah. So maybe that's bullshit too. I don't know. Who knows. Maybe she's not really. I like to believe it's playing yourself on the beach. No, no, she's standing there. Oh, no, still. Kids in her shovel. She'll show my sand. She ain't not swampy. My hair like a ocean is leaking in. That's a dude activity. The public masturbation like there's a particularly broken woman who wants to play with herself at the beach in front of everybody. Like you have to be like just out of jail. Like out of your fucking mind. Like there already be they must be looking for you already. Like by the time you're fingering yourself in front of the ocean. They could think of it. They go into a room that can just charge money for it. Guys, that's true. That was true. Guys can probably can but only guys got to pay for it. Yeah, they're coming to have all these ladies looking at me. No, you're not. No, no, no, no. You're going to have a bunch of guys. Yeah, yeah, a bunch of gay guys. Yeah, it's not like how many women have ever been arrested for public masturbation. I put that up. Put that number in the complexity. See what it has to do. And then make a frank for zeta painting. It's women fighting off the masturbation police. Because like dudes jerking off in public is a scary thing. Like, oh, this guy's a sex criminal. He's jerking off in public. A woman playing with herself in public is just kind of sad. Hotest. No, that's a hot. Can you imagine if that was a problem? Got too many women. It would definitely be a problem if you were with your husband. And you're walking along. What a beautiful day at the park. Mike, look over here, Mike. Don't look at it. Don't watch. She's a weird guy. Come and play in mommy's damn box. Ah. It doesn't give a number. It just gives five examples of ladies have been arrested. Yeah. Okay, let's see these people. Information. We don't have to say the name someone 38 year old arrested in Florida. Of course, masturbating during a video jail visit. Oh, okay. That's normal. Arrested in Texas for masturbating in public while allegedly under the the influence of drugs crazy. Arrested in Georgia for masturbating on a public beach using a vibrator. Whoa, that's a wild bitch. And then what's under there? Arrested in Minnesota for masturbating naked in a vehicle. Was she driving? She just sit in the car. Patrolman found her lying on the floor of an open gold Pontiac SUV digitally penetrating herself. And it's in quotes. It says digitally penetrating herself. Yeah, wow. There's a 47 year old woman with no fixed address. Facing charges of indecent exposure and disorderly conduct after public masturbation. Imagine that's how far you're not only are you homeless, but you're homeless and wack it off. So this Austin woman, I just looked her up because I said she was in Texas. Look at her. She's got so many photos though. She's been arrested so many times for masturbating. Whoa, that's her first. So why does she do that? Drugs it says. But so it's a drug. Well, she's that girl downtown, right? You know her. Jamie's tight. She's always naked and stuff. That in there is a black version of her. How many times has this lady been arrested? We could go downtown and find her right now. She's by the bridge easily, brow creaking the cage. That's my kind of home person. You know, fixture in the community. It becomes a part of the tapestry. She makes things more interesting. That's my kind of homeless people. I like them like that. Two years ago. Hey. Wow, for six years, I've been banging it out in the streets. Dude. That's kind of crazy. That's kind of crazy. Not wearing any pants at this time. You know how many people have loved one that died of some horrible disease? You know, like, look at this lady. She's out there thriving. Yeah. She's thriving. You know? Frank just took the vaccine and dropped dead plant soccer. Yeah. And this lady is out there. Oh, right. They've read all this in the Newsweek article. This is in the Newsweek article because she was named in the affidavit as the general manager of the JW Mary. Someone else was not that. Oh, the way that's the way that's the way that's the way. Document noted he heard nickels in quotes, making moaning noises as if she was having an orgasm. They know what the kind of noise that she made. Look up of it. Public view in a public place with her legs straight up in the air spread over. Straight up in the air. She doesn't even talk. At one point, suspect was seen rubbing herself back and forth on the plastic seat. Okay. That's high. No. That's disease. That's how AIDS gets started. That's the real age. Yeah. The neural disease is by themselves. It's a weird. What's the matter, Jamie? I suppose she used to look like that's what she said. Yeah. Like, holy shit. Yeah. Times are hard. I mean, are whacking off in public every day. I mean, that's like, you know, face of a female MMA fighter gets scarred up. Just to picture I just had up, that wasn't it. Same thing. Different looking for her. Yeah. Well, there's been 12 different versions of her. She's been bearing it with that. Look at that. Same with fentanyl for decades. Yeah. What do you expect? You get scarred up. Wow. Yeah. She kind of looks like a girl I know. I've been in that first photo. It's hard out there. See, she's clearly... Yeah. ...through. And there's only fans. She had an only fans. She could have been on a different path. Yeah. Not really. She would have nib, someone was scammed her. She would have lost it all. Only fans is like, what is it? Like, if you look at the amount of money earned, only fans is bigger than like NBA teams. What is the amount of money generated by only fans? Generated by only fans every year. Let's just guess. God. Let's just guess. All right. I mean, it's way up there. Because I know there's some girls that make over a million a month. Yeah, but they're small. Oh, excuse me. That's a small number. The most of them are actually not making much money at all and they give it up to a cougar forever. Which is not good. Right. They're going to regret it for that 50 bucks month that they're getting. Most of them are not getting much. It's probably some creep at the office who wants to see your pothole. I mean, I know girls that they're just bartenders here in town that make thousands of dollars on it. And they don't do. They just show their fucking brawls. Like they're not even showing you. That's what you want to make thousands. You want to make millions of your fucking horse. The list. All right. 2019. The revenue of only fans. What do you think? Yes. 1.5 billion. Pre-panned. Oh, pre-panned. Yeah. Oh, that's what he's saying. I'll just say 1.5 billion. I'll say 700 million. 138 million in 2019. It jumped up to 1.7 in 2020. 1.7 billion? Yeah. The next show is the beginning of the pandemic. But last year, what do you think it was? Oh, it was God. 24.14. 14 billion. 14 billion. 14 billion. That's 4.5 billion. It's just under eight. Oh, that's a lot. For 395 million users. And once again, 2019 was what? 238 million. Wow. You want to hear the craziest number I heard? Something like 50% of American males have a subscription to only fans. 50%. 50. Yeah. Yeah. It's like a statistic thing. I think we looked at like 10% of all females in America have an all-of-ins account to or something like that. 10% one in 10. Between a certain age group, not like old ladies. Imagine. I like to think it's more. 10%. 10% is wild. Yeah. Yeah. That's three wild. One out of 10, ladies that you meet, has an only fans. Yeah. And when you think about the number of men, it is 375 or 300, 77.5 million user accounts. It's more than the US population. So obviously it's the worldwide, but. Whoa. But isn't it in the United States? It's like 150. United States accounts for approximately 55% of the users. That's 100 and 100. 100. Yeah. Basically 90 million. Basically half. That's cool. Half of the population is not only fans in America. That's crazy. How can I be true? Is that one of those like serious XM things where you get a free subscription? Yeah. Yeah. There are free accounts. What? You get a free account for what? Plenty of girls sign up and like I'm free right now. Yeah. Oh, that's what you can make an account and hack. But that's still someone. It's like it's not like when YouTube put their phone like the album on your iPhone. Right. You know what I mean? It's not like that. But I think it's because more people every day people do it. And so like teachers and like bartenders. You know what I mean? Teacher gets fired. I'm a dirty teacher. Yeah. That happens a lot. There's a lot of teachers are in there. A lot of teachers are fucking kids. Yeah. Fucking hot teachers. It's weird because everybody smiles when they read those stories. When it's the hot lady in the 15 year old football player. Yeah. There's no victims here. Yeah. That's one way where we were very prejudiced actually. Totally. 100%. Yeah. Yeah. But this is sheer number of people on only fans in the United States is mind-blowing. Yeah. You know what I mean? Like think about it. Like that's above everything else. Everything. Like how many subscribers? Okay. How many subscribers? How many people use Spotify in the United States? A lot. Let's guess. Just in the United States. How many people in the United States? 333 million plus Mexicans. Okay. I'll say 150 million. 150 million. And that's going high. That's a high number I think. Okay. I don't know. Because I think world-wide. I don't know. Because I think world-wide. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. Because I think world-wide. It's crazy. Right. It might be around there. Most people I know I've Spotify. Yeah. I think what does that mean though? Is that a bias sampling? Because most people I know are my age or younger and listen to music a lot. Right. The world-wide, 713 million, 281 premium subscribers within the US. It says 55 million paid subscribers. Pay. Pay. But how many users in the United States? Because I bet a lot of people don't pay. Pay is kind of small. Yeah. I mean, I didn't pay. More people are jerking off than listening to music. That's my point. Yeah. That's crazy. Right. And that's only one of many options to get things to jerk off to online. That's why we need to somehow find a way to put tits on music. Dude, we're going to have vivid experiences that aren't real. That's what's going to happen. That's going to be the future of porn. It's going to be just like AI, so there's no victims. It's not going to be any real woman that are exploited or sex trafficked and forced into doing this. So it's going to be the hottest made you've ever had in your life come into your hotel room. Robots. It won't even be robots, dude. It doesn't even have to be. But it could be. But it doesn't have to be. It could just be an artificial sensation that you're willing to sink into this matrix-like device. And it's going to provide you with some crazy porn scene. That's what it's going to be. And that's going to be a real problem because regular relationships are complicated. You know, people have to be attracted to you. They want to, you know, say, have to work hard to get people attracted to you, whether it's by making more money or being hotter or whatever the fuck it is. You ultimately want someone to touch you. But it's the moment like that is just something you could order up, like playing audio book. That's a wrap. Poor females. That's a wrap. They're going to have to get real jobs. They're going to have to start mining. They're going to have no slaves in the Congo. It's going to be all chicks. Chicks mining. Because the thing is, they're not going to want to do that. Women like their pornography in literature form. They like novels that are dirty and naughty. They don't want to see it. They want to think it. Men want to see it. And they want to just experience it. Like if you get to put goggles on anytime you want, every time you go to take a shit, you just have one. you just have wild sex. You know, what are you doing in there? Just reading the paper. You're in there. Fucking, aren't you? It's kind of a bitch. You just hear it in the background like she's calling you from another room. Like it's just ruining your experience. Stop fucking. I'm not reading the paper. I'm taking a shit reading the paper, God damn it. Feed me alone. You didn't even talk to me. You're in there in the toilet with the girls in that head thing. It's going to be a problem. There's already so many in cells in this country. There's so many guys that just don't have any intimate relationships at all. I think there was this thing where they were interviewing young men and trying to find out how many of them have sex on a regular basis. Since one of the lowest numbers ever recorded, although how many times are people asking people? Right. Who are they asking? See, how much you can. You do that fucking. Yeah. I think it's a very unusual thing for people age 18 to 34 or whatever. Young men are having less sex now than I think ever. Are they a lot of that? Is they're not even trying because of the access to porn? Yeah. And by the time it comes, dinner time, take a lady out. You got no jizz left. You can beat it off all day. Yeah. Right. And they're probably also not telling the truth or not. Like I'm not talking to you. Who are you working for? Like, don't you know what I mean? These kids are like, don't trust anybody and they're not talking to the press. Right. Right. Yeah, that's probably true too. Right. They know about privacy and stuff. I'm not telling you. Yeah, these are VPNs. Yeah, VPNs. Fuck off. Mm hmm. Yeah. If you have a VPN, the ceiling weight can protect from people knowing exactly what you're doing at any given moment. And even then, like they're tracking you with metadata, they're tracking where your cell phone's paying to different towers, you know. Mm hmm. And they were giving in to more and more of that. And then every time a new phone comes out, it's like a little more invasive. Yeah. Give up. You're done? I'm tired. Done. We've done. Reb and just checked out. No, no, I didn't check out. It's like my dog when he doesn't want to bring the ball back in there. He's like, we're done. We're done. How's the new dog? Oh, he's so awesome. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. He's so adorable. He's the sweetest little thing. Everybody who picks him up, all he does is just bathe you with kisses. He barks when he kisses you. He gets so excited. He barks his tail like wags his whole little body. He's like one of them dogs like when he wags his tail. But he's like, oh, my God. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. I got he's just jumping up touch. I've always wanted one of those dogs ever since I saw insects in the city. Yeah. That where they called. They're the king Charles. King Charles. I believe in his Daniel. Charlotte had one of those. And so sweet. And you know, it made me love Marshall even more if that was possible because he's the sweetest dog to this little puppy. He loves he goes to him with toys to try to get him to play with them. It's the most adorable thing of all time. Like he's just a golden retrievers are the fucking sweetest animals. Like we don't deserve them. We don't deserve them. They're so sweet. Like Marshall has never been anything but sweet. A day in his life. He's never had a country moment on earth. He's been alive for almost nine years. Never had a country moment. He's so sweet to this little puppy. He has this toy. It's like an octopus looking thing. And he comes over and brings this little octopus over to Charlie. Charlie grabs it and they're playing around. It is so fucking cute man. He puts his paw on him like this like a gentle paw on him when they're playing around with stuff. You got a clone Marshall? No. Why? He's Marshall. He's an original. He's his own thing. I don't believe in that. I don't think you have to do that. Like that's crazy. I'm a new dog. I'm a me to do dog. I've had a bunch of amazing dogs. And they're all different and that's part of the fun. Part of the fun is you don't know. This guy's crazy. What is he doing? He gets the door. He goes, oh wow. Where did you learn that? John Cash. Yeah. Oh, John, he was the sweetest. Yeah. Yeah. Every dog's got their own thing, man. That's like part of the fun about being a dog owner. They're all of their own weird little personalities. One of my dogs is getting sold though. It's blind and deaf now. And it's the saddest thing. She's constantly running into walls. When Johnny was the last year of his life, I used to have to carry him on side. That's what we have to do with this dog. Yeah. I have to, and Johnny was big. So I was the only one who could carry him. She's like 140 pounds. Right. So I'd have to open the door and I have to like pick him up and take him into the yard. He would shit and piss. He could barely walk. He could literally barely bend down to shit. Shut up. Yeah. I'm going through the thing right now is like, I don't know if I should spend because it's super expensive. The money to do the cataracts so she can see again at least. So they're 13 13. And they usually last about 15. So maybe one year or less. The jury is probably going to wreck her. And now I just got to be painful. Imagine giving one more year. She can see now because she says that into press now. She's just dying. She might die from the operation. She's so old. It sucks. That's the thing about dogs. It's so hard. Like Johnny was 13 when he died. Yeah. Maybe 14. Like he was in the last year was rough. That was so sad. I don't want to deal with this. I know. I know. It's hard, man. It's hard. You know, but that's what happens when you love something. Like the when it's the you got to have the missing it. Like there's got to be grief. Because if not for that, you don't feel the love. The love and the loss that they're all connected in some weird way, unfortunately. And with dogs, they're the perfect example that because they're just little love machines. They just give you love. And they're a direct reflection of how you treat them. You know, if you treat them well and they're happy to see you and they're sweet to everybody, like that's that's a good life, a love life. It just doesn't last long. Marshall's nine. You know, I give them the best food you can get. He's very healthy. He's farmer's dog. Gets plenty of exercise, but I know it's only a matter of time. And it's sad. Yeah. It's hard. Anyway. I bring this train into screeching all. What do you up to, and kill Tony? You're always doing some weird shit on that. I'm doing, I got my fake bear and going on right now, Cap Red. What is that on? How do you do that? It's on Spotify, YouTube, Cap Red music. It's pretty much I've always made music like all of Garden but all those songs I used to make. But I used to sing it. So now I just write and put music and I use AI to sing it for me and then make it a chick. So I'm like, I have like a bunch of music videos and stuff on YouTube that I'm using AI to make and I scan Janice's space and it's a sheet plays like that. Are you still doing the virtual reality rooms? I'm doing that too. Yeah. I'm doing virtual red band with, do that like once or twice a week and I'm. And how do people know the one you're going to do that? I tweet it Instagram or that's on red band on YouTube. But yeah, all my stuff is on YouTube, red band and Cap Red music. Okay. All right. All right. I love you. Love you too. Bye everybody.