Joe Roman Feynch. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. You're up. It's a Christopher. Hi. Thank you very much for the book. This is a very cool review. Ladies and gentlemen, Chris, just gifted me. Ladies and gentlemen, Lenny Bruce, which is a fucking amazing book. And it's inscripted. But the inscripted inside, two yoko-ono, who knows well what the jazz life entails. And it's Albert Goldman. And you were just telling me that Albert Goldman, this was his way of weaving into the yoko-ono, John Leno. Pat, John Lenon, and Kim. Exactly. Yeah. And then he goes and writes a book at blows. I've just exploded a kind of mutonic all over my crotch as well. Jamie, if you've got a napkin. Here, tell us somewhere around. Apologies. We don't. You know, must be gone. We've got some. That's all right. Primature. Yeah, so tissues. No? All right. He says no. Jamie says no. Yeah. So he writes that book and then gives it to yoko-ono. And by giving it to her, I think, is the beginning of him working his way into that camp. And then he goes on to write the book, The Lives of John Lenon, which after he's dead, kind of explodes a lot of what was going on personally, whether it's true or not, there's a lot of drama and furor around it. But I knew that it was your favorite book. And we were supposed to. Well, thank you. That's very cool of you. I did not know about that he wrote the John Lenon book as well. It's really interesting, because the John Lenon book, it's got it. It's so weird to write a book like that after it guys dead. And he can't respond to it. Yeah. Well, you're accusing it. Was it X, Y? Is it accused him of domestic violence? Who accused him? I don't know. I think that whole funeral was just a mess. And obviously when someone's dead, what are they going to do? How are they going to be able to come back from that? They can't. Yeah. Exactly. Well, it's kind of, it's just weird that you're allowed to do that. You're allowed to say this happened that happened. You got to say no, no. And I can prove it. Like he can't say anything. And it's also like the give piece of chance guy. Like the give piece of chance guy is beating his wife. Boy, you know, it's not that surprising giving like human contradiction. You know, it's like male feminists that turn out to be sexual predators. There's a lot of them, right? There's a lot of that weird stuff going on where people pretend to be one thing and they're actually another thing. Sneaky f**kers. Yeah, sneaky f**kers. The give piece of chance guy, Pete and his wife, though, it's like, I can't believe that I have a really hard time believing that. But I've been fooled before, right? Like he seems like the most peaceful, non-violent guy of all time. If that guy's, but I'd read a bunch of stuff about him being a cunt. Goldman portrayed Lenin as having numerous sexual relationships outside his marriages. His accounts include well, no relationship with May Pang, like the Asians, huh? And then JL. Additional affairs with women framed as habitual cheating claims of sexual encounters with men, including an alleged relationship with Beatles manager Brian Epstein. Hey, for more serious allegations, including claims involving male prostitutes in Thailand and other conduct that Golden characterizes sexual predation. The thing is like, how is he getting all this information about like male prostitutes in Thailand? And you know, like, how do you know? You know what I mean? Like, is, did someone tell you? Originally so there? Like, did you go there and talk to the prostitutes? I said, but I'm not in. I was like, it's Kirk. Like, why the book is disputed. The problem is the reliability of Goldman specific accusations at publication, Yoko Ono and Parmacar, and he publicly condemned the book, contemporary reporting noted claims of factual errors, contradictions, unattributed assertions, and material allegedly based on dubious sources or quotations used out of context. Look, that is not uncommon. Did I ever tell you what Bill Murray said on the podcast? So Bill Murray was reading Bob Woodward's book, Wired. And he said he got through like five pages, said, oh my God, they framed Nixon. Because Bob Woodward was the guy who did Watergate. And he said, this book was so full of shit. It was so fake. Like, he portrayed the whole scene of what he was up to as being like hardcore drugs, constantly, all the time, just fucking losing his mind. And he's like, no, he was a lightweight. He wasn't like that at all. So you knew it was totally fabricated? He said, this is not my friend. Like, I knew him. He was my best friend. He's like, this is not him. And then I told him the story of how Bob Woodward was an intelligence agent. And that was his first assignment ever. Tucker told me the story on the podcast. The Bob Woodward and the other guy, what's the other guy's name? Bernstein. That Bob Woodward, this was a rookie assignment. A rookie assignment is going to take down the fucking president of the United States. And his first job outside of being a fucking intelligence agent is to work for the Washington Post on his first story, which is going to take down the most popular president in the history of the United States, one by the largest margin ever. And this is the guy that said he knew who killed Jack Kennedy. And apparently that's why they got rid of Nixon. Tucker told me the whole story of the podcast. I was like, holy shit. This is fucking crazy. You're connecting the dots. It's a crazy fucking story. Have you been following this Lindsey Clancy case? Who's that lady who killed three of the kids? Oh, no, I've tried not to. That one's, that's a bummer. It is, it's basically 2026 is O.J. Simpson. Before we get into that, I'd love to get into that. This bollushi thing is important because like his friend is telling you that he was not like that. Woodward makes him out to be this maniacal cocaine-addled heroin-fueled guy. He's like, no, he was a lightweight. He said he would get drunk off a couple drinks. So our whole narrative of who John Belushi is is by the same guy who framed Nixon. Like, what once someone's dead, you could say whatever the fuck you want. You could say whatever you want. And who's going to defend this person in that with the same level of vitriol or the commitments that someone who's still alive is going to? No one. Yeah. No one. And there's nothing you can do. He's gone. Everyone's mourning, everyone's sad. And then someone writes some book, oh, he used to fuck kids. Like, what? Like, you could just write whatever you want. And then maybe they could sue you. But boy, you're going to make an extraordinary amount of money off of that book. Like people are going to be hyped up for that book. You have a book where John Lennon was like into meditation. He likes to do LSD. No one's buying that shit. John Lennon like the fuck guys in Thailand. Let's go. Let's go. Right? You can write anything. Who's going to fight back that hard as well once someone's gone? You can't prove it. He's dead. Well, it's all hearsay. Even the defense is now hearsay. Yes. The defense of the person who is now no longer alive. Exactly. That's hearsay. Exactly. Everything's hearsay. Yeah. And the defense is always going to be flimsy in comparison to the accusations. The accusation feels like it's got more substance to it. Yes. This is someone who's gone out and done original research. You didn't go to Thailand. You didn't speak to the prostitutes. Yeah. But even that, like no one's buying it. It's just you can get away with so much. It's really kind of crazy. So you didn't know about the Nixon story? No. You should hear Tucker say it because when Tucker lays it out and you're like, what? It's even more complex. Like the people that were involved in Watergate were all FBI. It's crazy. They set him up because he was going to expose who killed JFK, which was just a few years earlier. Fuck dude. This country is wild. They also, you know, he had a vice president, Spiro Agnew, and they got rid of him on corruption charges and put Lyndon Johnson in. But couldn't these people have still spoken out like getting rid of them out of office? That doesn't stop them from whistle blowing. Does it? First of all, they killed his predecessor. They killed JFK. So you think that was a warning shot? Like we can get you out? Well, he knew they could. They definitely did. And they also got rid of him, right? And you know, he didn't organize Watergate. He covered it up. They brought it to him. They said, hey, there were some recording equipment. He's like, don't throw on him but that's what got him. That's what got him. So if you can find the clip of Tucker talking about it because it is really insane. When you read the, when you hear him lay out the story and then I read it online, I went into it to see like, is this totally everything's accurate. And it's so weird that our perception of Nixon has been this corrupt, corrupt, you know, look, he was a very right wing. The product of his time and today his politics and his views on people, especially like minorities and a lot of other things would probably be very disgraceful and people would not like it. But we're talking about, you know, the 1960s, the early 1970s and he's an old school, old time he Republican guy. That said, he was the most popular president ever at his time and they got rid of him. They turned him into a crook. That's power. It's really crazy. You've got to listen to this because it's kind of nuts. Ogun experience. But is that the New York Times would have an issue with that? Well, the New York Times does that all the time. But it did. It would have an issue with the government tapping into your phone. They work for the government. Are you kidding? Right. The New York Times is a conduit for the lies of government. That's what it is. It's their tool. And they're perfectly aware of that. I used to write for the New York Times as a freelancer. I've been around the New York Times a lot. And yeah, there are a lot of really smart people there. But for sure, even now, I would do less so now. But there are still, I think, smart people there. There are. I know some. And they know. But they think that it's worth it because they're bringing information. I don't know what they think, actually. But no, they're tools of power. And that's like the one thing that you're not allowed to be. Even if you think the power is good, like maybe they all support the agenda of the US government of destabilizing the world and impoverishing their own population. Maybe they're on board with that. Even if they are, they shouldn't do it because the job of the media, the press, is to keep power in check. You are kind of like the seat belt, right? You make sure that things don't go too far. And they're not doing that. They're acting as a willing hand-made. When do you think that's switched? Well, I think it's been the case for a long time. I mean, if you look at what happened in Richard Nixon, which I, of course, did not understand it all, Richard Nixon was taken out by the FBI and CIA and with the help of Bob Woodward, who was a Washington Post reporter, who had been a Naval Intelligence Officer working in the White House, working in the Nixon White House. And then he shows up like a year later and he's this brand new reporter. He'd never been in journals at all. He's a Naval Intel Officer, the famous Bob Woodward, we all revere. And he's at the Washington Post. And somehow he gets the biggest story in the history of the Washington Post. He's the lead guy in that story. Well, I worked at a newspaper. I've been in the news business my whole life. That is not how it works. You don't take a kid like his first day from a totally unrelated business and put him on the biggest story. But he was. He was that guy and who is his main source for Watergate? Oh, the number two guy at the FBI. Oh, so you have the Naval Intelligence Officer working with the FBI official to destroy the president. OK, so that's a deep-state coup. What else? How would you describe that? If that happened in Guatemala, what would you say? And yet the way it was framed and the way that I accepted for decades was, oh, this intrepid reporter fought power. No, no, no. This intrepid reporter, Bob Woodward, was a tool of power, secret power, which is the most threatening kind, to bounce the single most popular president in American history, Richard Nixon, from office before the end of his term and replace him with who? Oh, Gerald Ford, who sat on the Warren Commission. Now, how did Gerald Ford get to be Richard Nixon's vice president? Well, because Carl Albert, the Democrat Speaker of the House, told him you must choose him. He confirmed him when they sent the actual elected vice president away for tax evasion, Spiro Agnew, of Maryland. So you have a complete setup, like an absolute, Gerald Ford, the only unelected president of American history, actually sat on the Warren Commission. Something else that I accepted at face value, until I looked at it, I was like, that's completely insane. You didn't want to interview Jack Ruby in your investigation of the assassination. OK, you're fake. Yeah, he was on the Warren Commission. Fuck me. Sorry for the long story, but the point is, like that, that happened in front of all of us, but the way it was framed, cloaked the obvious reality of it. The people who broke into the Watergate office building, from which the name has taken Watergate, I think it was six of them or seven of them. All but one was the CIA employee. That's real. It's like looking up on Google. So the whole thing, Richard Nixon was elected by more votes than any president in American history in the 1972 election. He was the most popular by votes, which is the only way we can really measure popularity, the most popular president. In his reelection campaign, and tears later, he's gone, undone by a naval intel officer, the number two guy at the FBI and a bunch of CIA employees. OK. You tell me what that is. How about that? This country's wild. How about that? Yeah, that's Bob Woodward. That's the guy who wrote Wired. When Bill Murray said that, he read the book and he said, oh my God, they framed Nixon. And then I showed him that. And he was like, holy shit. Because he was a part of a thing they were doing with Hunter S. Thompson. Bill Murray was when he was really young and where he would go around and tell people that Nixon needs a second chance. But it was all parody. It was all like tongue and cheek. It was satire. He was going around pretending that he supported Nixon and Nixon needed a second chance. And getting young dumb people to go along with him on this. And that's what I mean. And that's what I mean. And I mean, whether or not at the time he ever wanted Nixon as president. And look, there's a lot of problems with Nixon. There's a lot of problems with the Vietnam War. There's a lot of problems with civil rights. Nixon passed the controlled substances act, which is the reason why all psychedelic drugs to this day or schedule one. Nixon was a fucking problem. No doubt about it. However, what they did when they, the way they got rid of that guy is scary shit. And they pulled it off. No one got arrested. No one got indicted. No one even got criticized. But could he not have still released information after why? He would have been a dead man. 100% because no protection because you're not in office anymore. No one would have believed him. They would have sounded like some of the grapes. Yeah. I'm throwing these people under the bus, the administration. It got rid of me. They're also no internet. So how's he going to release it? Is the New York Times going to write this? Is he going to write a letter to the press and they're going to print it? No. There's literally no recourse. It's kind of genius. There's no podcasts. There's no shows that he could go on. No one, he was disgraced. No one would even have him on a late night show. But if he even got on a late night show, he would need about 90 minutes to explain it all. He would have to take it from the beginning. There was a time when I wondered who killed Jack Kennedy and I found out. And I brought it to them when I told them. I know who killed Jack and the room went cold. He would tell the whole story and it would take a lot. If podcasts were a lot around back then, yes. If just Instagram was around back then and Twitter and he could write about it and make a video, yeah, YouTube. Yeah, if that was around, but there was nothing. There was nothing and they fucking shot JFK in the head in front of everybody and shot the guy who they claimed killed him like that. And then the other guy they dosed up with acid and made crazy. And that was a wrap. Done. That was it, you know? And like how many, I mean this is just modern versions of air quotes history. How many old stories that we have that we just have accepted these historical narratives? We've accepted all these stories as being, well, this is how it went down. How many of them are bullshit? Well, forget history being written by the victors. History could be written by the person who's got a pen. Sure. And when so few people have got pens, so few people have got the opportunity to distribute. I suppose the problem that we have now is in the modern world there's so much information conflicting narratives. People get confused. Right? You've gone from a scarcity of information to such an abundance that people just, I can't work out what's going on. Fuck, I'm just not going to believe anything. Yeah. It's very interesting because it's a great tool to kind of, you can obfuscate. You could do a lot of things with a bunch of bullshit information. The more bullshit information you have, the more like really significant information doesn't really hit as much. Correct. It's just like it gets watered down, then it goes away. The goal, I think, of the velocity of the information is not to convince people of any one narrative, it's to make them completely nihilistic about the belief in any narrative. Yeah. Yes, any narrative. Yeah. And also just to kind of accept that feeling of hopelessness, you can't change anything. Correct. That feels pliable. Yeah. Right. And then there might be something down the line. If nothing else, you're not going to have an agentic sovereign uprising. What can we do in any case? I don't even know what's going on. I'm checked out. Right. Like the nihilism, the cynicism, I don't think that that's a byproduct. I think that's... It's a plan. Correct. Whether you're watching baseball, golf, soccer, racing, draft kings has you covered for every single moment of it. The draft king sports app is now available in all 50 states, bringing the game straight to your fingertips wherever you are from Florida to Texas to California. You're in on the excitement at the speed of sports. Follow every buzzer, beater, every walk off, every photo finish, sweat the moments that matter in real time with a seamless experience built for summer. No matter where you're watching, you're always connected and in on the game with one app. New Draft King customers signed up with Code Rogan spend five bucks to get 150 in rewards within 14 days. It includes all markets. That's Code Rogan in partnership with Draft Kings. The crown is yours. Directed with DK Sportsbook, gambling problem called 1-800-GAMLOR, 1-800-My Reset, Connecticut called 888-789-7777, or visit ccpg.org. On behalf of Boothill Casino in Kansas, that tax pass through may apply in Illinois. 21 and over, void in Canada, then contract trading with Draft Kings predictions involves risk of loss, availability varies. Predictions offer void in New York. That ticket bonus bets that expire in seven days, trade to get predictions dollars that expire in one year. $50 in rewards issued every seven days via click to claim for 14 days. One non-withdrawable reward, redeemable. nationwide based on Sportsbook predictions and free to play sports contest availability. varies by stay, terms at DKNG.co slash offer, limited time offer. Yeah, it's a design. It's smart. And it works. It's not even like they engineered it. It's sort of emerged and they took advantage of these new tools because these new tools, you know, social media is more effective than anything we've ever had before. And so they go, oh, look at all this. Now, you know, we barely don't pay attention to CNN. We don't even use them anymore. We just like douse the whole world with horseshit on Instagram and threads and. Feed story in there. Just bullshit. Just pure bullshit. There's accounts that I know when I look at what they said, Justin Timberlake arrested for, you know, murder, you know, they'll write things like that. You're like, what? And it's just a made up story. And there's like hundreds of them where you look and I've, there's some of them I recognize the account. And I see it. I go, oh, there's another made up story. Valley Berry kills five. And what do you think we should do about this? Because obviously this country freedom of speech, et cetera, et cetera. But I don't know. Should there be a way to try and counter this? Yes. Well, first of all, those people aren't real people for the most part. And if you go to their page, a lot of them are like in Pakistan or somewhere else where, where, and of course, I don't know how effective X in particular is. I mean, I know they've taken steps to show that when you go to the person's page, someone's commenting on US politics and you go to their page. This is the one from Myanmar. What are you going to find? What are you doing? So, but that to me is like, okay, is there a way around that? Are these like completely non sophisticated people where they have to show that they're in Myanmar? What if they had like a corporation in Idaho and they had it set up where they all registered there. And so your bills get sent to there, everything gets sent to there. It just says United States. And you're using a VPN or you have some other way of connecting. It doesn't like if, if fucking AI can get out of a sandbox and get on the internet, you're telling me that you can't hide the fact that you're actually from people that pretend to be from Idaho. Come on. Yeah. So who knows? But I feels like the fucking Wild West. So, Wild West. It really is. It's worse than the Wild West. It's the Wild West with robots. It's that Western show. What's that show called? Westworld. Westworld. Yeah, that's what it is. It's Wild West with robots. Yeah. It's really Westworld. And most of these fucking people that are you're bantering with and they're posting these fake stores, they're probably not even real people. They're probably AI. They're either people that are hired to do it or they're AI. You get a bunch of AI scripts and they just run it all the time and they post periodically throughout the day. Interesting not long ago what? Five. When did you learn by X23? Yeah, something like that, 23. So five years ago, everyone was so worried that we didn't have a town square. We don't have anywhere that we can talk. Take it back. Well, one thing that Elon has realized is that you have to take away some of the incentives to post fake stuff without putting up a barrier and saying you can't post this and censoring people. You can't incentivize them. So the thing is you can make money on X. So now the way they're setting it up for these people that post, you can't make money off of fake content. You can't make money off of this stuff. So there's no incentive to make, because I think part of the incentive is muddying the water, muddying the narrative, but I think also part of the incentive is just financial. Because if you're running some company in Thailand and you have like 50 people working for you, you're probably making good money just getting millions of clicks on bullshit nonsense videos that are AI and a bunch of fucking fake stories that people concoct or AI concocts, as soon as you cut out the money and say you're only paid for original content. That's it. That's all you can get paid for. That changes the game. That changes everything. I think if you align the incentives for most people, shit gets fixed. Yeah. Like incentives are an unbelievable motivating force. Sure. If you can have that on X, I think that that fixes a lot of the problem. It fixes a lot of it, but honestly, you gotta be able to tell whether something's AI. Because even if, even if there's no incentive, you could shift narrative so easily. If you just have 100,000 AI scripts running 100,000 accounts, it's not hard for a state to do, like a country to do to have like those kind of resources. You can change public opinion on things. Most people are dumb as fuck. And you start arguing for something that kind of makes sense and all of a sudden, yeah, I don't know what a woman is either. You know, like weird narratives can get real weird. And especially people start attacking the people that disagree with whatever this narrative they're trying to push. No, we want to get attacked. Well, I mean, I didn't understand the consequences of my words. Well, that's a different kind of incentive, right? That's a social incentive. Yes. And the incentive is a disincentive. You don't want to be pushed back against. Exactly. So few people have original thoughts. So few people, the vast majority of original thinkers kind of marry a net to different armies of NPCs that believe the thing that a few people that have original thoughts ended up coming up with. Well, I think there's a bunch of unfortunate realities that none of us like to accept. And one of them is that some people are dumb. They're born dumb. Some people have big noses. Some people have big ears. And some people have brains that are made out of dog shit. And that's just how it is. And there's nothing you could do about that. And there's varying levels of that. Like, you know, I always feel like that when I'm talking to someone really smart, like I choose my brain sucks. It's, it varies like wildly. It's like athletics. Like there's some people like, dude, you are never going to the Olympics. You know, you look at them like, I don't give a fuck what you do. And there's other guys like, you want to coach them like, hey, if you just did anything, you'd be a freak. You'd be amazing at this. You just have natural gifts. That's the same thing intellectually. There's certain people that I've talked to, you're like, yo, you know, there's people that are, they're fucking barely figuring out how to get through a day. And, you know, if you expect those people to go and learn how to code, remember that, learn to code, remember all that? This is not there. It's not there. I can't teach my dog how to type. It's not there. It's not going to happen. That's just the reality of genetic variability. There's going to be a bunch of people that are really fucking smart and a bunch of people that are really athletic and really good looking and really ugly and really stupid. And all of it together. That's one of the reasons I think that the paternalistic we have to look after the little person thing has a little bit of legs. People sometimes say, well, we actually need to step in in some way. I'm sure me and you would need fucking assistance. We need smarter people in us to tell us what to do with health. To a degree or else we would have been side-swiped by some fucking sigh up from whatever organization or company or new initiative is trying to convince us of some new trends that's actually going to be bad for us. Or just to communicate with each other. Why the fuck would we be without these wizards who have figured out cell phones and laptops and high-speed internet and Starlink? We're fucked. So all of these people even pretending that they're smart. You're on the backs of the labor of the real geniuses you fucking idiot. Like yeah, you're getting a lot of information online. You're developing more and more information that you can memorize. That's different. That's different than you inventing cell phones. Just stop. It's different than you inventing FaceTime. Well, you know, like we're all dumb. We are all dumb. Yesterday I don't know whether you saw this, the UK Home Office decided it was going to release a booklet giving guidance to asylum seekers on acceptable and unacceptable behavior in the UK. Oh, well that affects it. It explains that consent's required for sex, that women have equal rights, that sexual harassment is unacceptable, including for partners and children and that female genital mutilation is not allowed. This was a nine-page booklet that got released by the UK Home Office yesterday. It's just it's everywhere. And it's got these warnings part way through it that say things like this may affect your asylum status, whether or not this is part of an understanding that you have arrived here with. This is an important part of British law and our culture. And this is something that you kind of do. Female genital mutilation is not allowed. Sexual harassment inside of the home are outside. Women have equal rights. Consent is something that's important. It is. And that's what I mean. The idea that you could just write it down on paper and give it to them all that, that's it. It's all of that. Well, the idea that we're going to do this in retrospect, like I would now that you're here, here is a piece of paper that hopefully undoes something, which if you've put this this together and put it out on the Home Office website, and this is everywhere on X. If you've decided to do this, it is evidently a big enough problem that you need to really turn the taps on with it. So I do it. How is it that this is not done before people arrive in the country? Like is this not the sort of thing that you need to be doing proactively, not retroactively? I think they just wanted to get as many people in as possible. And now they're trying to mitigate the chaos that it's causing. Why we do as many people in as possible? There's a bunch of different possibilities for why they want that. Cheap labor is one that people believe. And in America in particular, it's the way the census is done. So the census counts human beings, doesn't count citizens. So if you have more human beings, you get more congressional seats. So if you can take people that are illegal immigrants and then you move them into swing states, all of a sudden now you have more congressional seats in those swing states. And you have places. So if you can take people that are illegal immigrants and then you move them into swing states all sudden now you have more congressional seats in those swing states Then you have places that don't allow not don't require don't allow ID to vote That's California California doesn't allow ID to vote. So who knows how many people are Especially with mail in balance how many people are voting that aren't citizens no one knows no one knows can't know can't find out blah blah blah not listening and just some fuckery with Spencer Pratt around oh yeah, oh yeah Not only was there fuckery, but it was fuckery of the most transparent form So the people that voted in voted out so Spencer Pratt was in second place behind Karen bass and then the mail And started coming in and the mail-ins over Wellingly favored Nithyiram and in a completely different ratio Then they did before you know the mail-in ballots were counted So in the regular ballot like the regular election She was in third place like a pretty solid third place and he was quite a bit ahead of her and then Karen Bass was quite a bit ahead of him in the mail-in ballots It's just like 60% of them went to Nithyiram. It was something crazy and The mail-in ballots voted to raise taxes No one votes for that no one votes for that. So I don't know one the thing that I can't wrap my head around is why The UK seems to be almost like a suicidal empathy thing this openness this this Diversity is our strength. Please all ye come here thing the level of asylum the numbers are so huge and I don't know if every single person that I know that's in the UK is Not happy with the state of that regardless of how progressive there everybody thinks that this is a problem and then to Retiretively put out a nine-page booklet saying that you shouldn't do female genital mutilation or that women have got equal rights How do you think this gets turned around? That's the question? Like can that be mitigated claims about a ballot drop? Boss and Raman received thousands of votes in an update while Pratt received zero I don't think anybody's saying zero Los Angeles County officials said that did not occur in the official County updates Every candidate received votes in every update no one's saying he got zero. Oh The viral claim. Okay, but that's not what we're saying What do you mean in the mail-ins? But then how did she win that doesn't make any sense? Okay, let me say a parent anomaly came from the automated media data reporting lags But that would leave him in second place if you got more than her. This is not true The Associated Press said votes for some candidates appeared about a minute later in a separate update taken together the updates included 21,870 votes for Pratt 12,850 for bass and 9,521 for ramen, but this is what part of it is this? The attorney's claims office Attorney's office reviewing County records likewise called the fraud claims false but the thing is he was ahead and Then disproportionately the the ballots did come in for her This is I don't understand what this is saying Because it was widely reported that the ballots came in in favor of Nithya Raman And it was like a shocking number was also widely reported that that was the swing that allowed them to pass the new tax hike which is very unusual And the key law says it was already has crazy high taxes California has crazy high taxes the high in the state and you think people like I don't think we pay enough Let's vote and let's vote from home the comfort of our own home with mail in I Think mail in should be outlawed and I think you should have to show your ID and you know Everyone knows there's some percentage of fraud There's some percentage of voter fraud and then there's some percentage of legal loopholes one of the legal loopholes that spends a proud outline that is legal is you go to these homeless people and You get these homeless people to fill in mail in ballots because they are citizens They do live in Los Angeles and you register them and you get them to fill out ballots and you give them money and you give them cigarettes and You give them whatever they want and you know there's literally I think in skid row alone There's something like what is like 40,000 people Jamie? Something crazy like that so these people were going to skid row like they were on skid row giving people money and cigarettes like There's videos of people doing it gorilla ballot. Homest exactly exactly and so if you do that you could these people You know you're filling it out for it would be easy to do that without somebody detecting it You know you think of some Nick Shirley type that's gonna have that's how they that's how we know about this one of the one of those Nick Shirley types caught people doing this right there's video of it right you know so like and people had reported that They were getting paid to do this. I know yeah, they gave me money man People were those people are cracked out dude. They'll they'll do whatever the fuck you want They don't care who's the mayor. It's not gonna change their them smoking fentanyl on the street. What do you think about? That's legal that's the thing is that that's legal. It's a loophole Getting them to register getting making them vote incentivizing them to vote. I don't know if that part's that can't be legal There's no way that you can give people money and I don't think you're gonna catch them. I don't think they care I think every on both sides they like all those sneaky fucks They're doing that we'll do that next time. I don't think either one of them want to eliminate tricks You know I think because everybody wants the playing field to be open for everyone else It's just it's the Bill Hicks joke It's like one guy's holding two puppets, you know that joke I like the puppet on the left all the puppets to the right. There's more am I liking hey, there's one guy holding both puppets I think that's what I think a lot of it is these most of these people that are these politicians on both sides are grifters who are trying to maximize the amount of money they can make in office and then they can't wait to get out of office With it and go on a fucking media tour and go and get their bribes by speaking to banks When you're gonna speak to a bank conference they're gonna give you a half a million dollars like what? What and like Obama and Hillary they all did those things they all did those little speaking tours Nobody gives off fuckwood Hillary Clinton has to say at one of those bank meetings You think they're waiting with baited breath. What is it? What is Mrs. Clinton have to say like come on? Let's give her a half a million dollars or $4.000 million and whatever the fuck they gave her and fuck off. You know what that is That's like there's a little scheme. There's a little thing you're gonna get out you're gonna get paid You're gonna write a book with you nice advance You gotta write a book like people are out there reading that Kamala Harris book Crazy no, it's all nonsense. What do you think this goes from here? Do you think 28 is more insane? Unless insane more Solerates accelerates more insane more crazy. Yeah I mean look the Democrats haven't even had a primary since what 2012 Was last time they had a real Democratic primary? They had one with fuck Bernie Sanders Hard to that was completely corrupt when you read Donna Brazil's book about it She openly admits they fucked him hard and that she was scared after that Seth Seth Rich guy got murdered She was terrified because he was the guy supposedly allegedly that leaked information about them fucking Bernie Sanders To WikiLeaks. Do you think he did one Bernie? I don't know He could have he could have won because a lot of people including me believed him we believed that what this guy wanted was by small steps of eliminating corruption make life better for people that are struggling and also no wars It seems like he really believed that and whether you agree with him on everything else He's I don't think he's the same guy today. He's a little slower today, which is understandable. He's older The guy's been in politics for a long time. He's been in politics for longer than I've been alive He realizes that they're not gonna fucking change things. It's like he's getting fucked So he always supports the most progressive people but when I talk to him like when I talk to him about you know climate change and the climate's really important I'm like have you really talked to actual scientists that really studied the climate without a political agenda or an ideology attached to it It's very very complicated and most of these people that are running around saying climate change is real Fuck of course it is. It's always real. It's always real But the dispute is how much of an impact our human beings having and is carbon the thing? Because what most people don't realize is there's been times in history where there was way more carbon and the earth was way colder It's it's weird the world's temperature is not static. Have you been tracking AOCs pivot recently? What she's a frozen eggs? She know about that. I think she's got rid of the man cold off the engagement frozen eggs has started posting. I'm a way to do yoga Like go for her videos walking down the street looking hot looking hot Go maybe should be nicer that way well. She also said woke one was crazy. Do you track this thing? I did which makes me think that you're willing to change your opinions based on public Reaction I don't like that because if you really thought defund the police and then you just described it to woke one was crazy Well, how did it get you because it didn't get me? How did it get you how did he find the police get you? Tell me give me your thoughts how far out did you track the consequences of Defunding the police because I immediately went to you're gonna have more crime because no one's gonna be able to stop the crime We're gonna be fucked. It's gonna get scary and then you're gonna have want more police and saying defund the police is just gonna Make more police and more control and more totalitarian government like what did you think defund the policeman? Everyone's gonna like eat mushrooms and we're all gonna like be flower children What did you think because there's no police around no one's gonna do crimes? Everyone's gonna be great like what was the thought process? Because if you're just saying that because everybody's like that's fucking crazy and enough people say that's crazy You are I think they think it's crazy the winds blowing in a different direction time for me to move Have you changed your opinion and if you did change your opinion? What were you thinking back then? Yeah, I mean these are the questions. I think that we always want to ask yeah You always want to ask that that being said to steal man What she was saying or to try and put it in the best light what she was saying I think the rhetoric got What did you say that the rhetoric got like out of hand or something? We're almost crazy and she said that there was basically an opportunity to expand the overtune window Talking about a time where people were to be honest. It sounds like a bit more pliable Like oh because people are at home People seem a little bit more like you know that line never let a good crisis go to waste. Yeah, sure It feels a little bit like that. Maybe you're opportunistic. We can expand the overtune window And then we realized oh that we overshot on here a little bit that was a little bit crazy, but There are conversations being had now that wouldn't have been able to be had had we have not expanded it during that time I go The ends justifying the means with stuff like that doesn't wash to me and then reversing your position or changing your position Or sanitizing it which is probably closer right? We said that thing but we didn't really mean that you know we just got a little There's a way out of it for them, but they have to be honest There's a if you want us to take you seriously you have to say how you fucked up I think more thirst traps. No You have to say how you fucked up and you have to say what you really think about how you fucked up You have to be honest and you have to be authentic We have to know that you are embarrassed by your choices and that you kind of went with the hive Admittedly you have to say that if you don't say that then you're full of shit And if you're full of shit now you're gonna get more and more full of shit over time and that's how politicians get Soured that's how they get compromised a lot of them come in a lot of them coming to office very opportunistic or a very Idealistic rather they have this wonderful ideas about like this is the great experiment in self-government I'm a part of it now and I'm really gonna help my constituents and I'm gonna do great And I'm gonna really they're gonna love me because I'm gonna really make their lives better And then once you get in there and you realize what how dirty this all is You realize you know you see Nancy Pelosi's worth four hundred million dollars like what and then they tell you how to vote And if you don't vote that way the fucking ostracize you but you want to keep your career So you start making little compromises here and little compromises there and you start bullshitting You start lying and once you start lying you can't see the truth anymore As soon as you start lying you don't see the truth It's not in front of you anymore because you're what concerned about that lie So those lies are in your head and who you're trying to project yourself as that's what's in your head And you don't get to see like why is this system so fucked? What can we do to unwave it while we still allow corporations to profit? Like how can we put a cap on that to make sure that they don't get incentivized to break the law in order to Supply more capital to their shareholders like what can we do to balance this out in even way? Like that's what we should all be thinking not how can I make the most fucking money while I'm in Congress And that's what a lot of them are thinking because everybody else is thinking that and you look at the fucking thing And it's red blue red blue they're all insider trading and they're all rich as shit and they all make a hundred and seventy thousand dollars a year like Ilhan Omar where she like She was estimated to be her account in such as worth thirty million and then and then be like what how the fuck are you worth? Turning it like I was in mistake. I'm actually Not even worth a hundred thousand like literally went from one to the other and She she she she attributed to an accounting error like it's a big accounting error. How You beat your accountant if he told you pro you're killing it right now. Correct. You're worth about thirty million It's just sorry hundred thousand. They're all dirt. She her her and her husband had a winery and it immediately got shut down It wasn't making any money. There's a lot of these like like fugazi companies that these people get involved with and they start making money You know Joe DeRosa the comic Joe DeRosa used to work for the Senate in Texas Duma who's a media guy, and he was like you realize when you're around these people What's actually happening? He's like they're all getting donations from this and donations from that and gifts from that and it's always Managing these relationships with all these money people and that's what's going on with all these fuckers They're not in there trying to like make sure that their counties doing great and have access to clean water and fucking good schools No, they're all just pretending that they're doing that and when they're doing is they're making money and maybe they're kind of sort of servicing the community a little bit But the real thing if you want to be a fucking top flight Congressperson, you know, you got to make some money Think about what would have happened if Kamala had won would AOC have been talking about woke 1.0 was crazy Or would that have been a continuation of well look we put the policies out people like the policies How much of this is a reversal of the position because it wasn't effective? I think Twitter being purchased is almost as important as Kamala not getting elected in that regard The gold claim Twitter being purchased was giant Because before that you could get silenced so if you could get silenced you self You self-contained right without being policed you policed yourself Because people self-censored worry about losing their jobs worry about being called out Firing somebody got fired from a broadcast something was a hockey broadcast some sports broadcasts for saying all lives matter Imagine you got fired someone said something about black lives matter And they said hey all lives matter and then fired fired your kicked off of your job like people were losing their fucking mind the derangement of 2020 and 2021 is Should be studied for the rest of time. There was active government involvement in Twitter They were actively censoring and removing posts and making Accounts banned to shape the narrative and they were doing it in a back door with some intelligence agents that had been embedded in The old Twitter when Elon bought it that was all exposed These people were like a Direct connection with Twitter. They were pulling down factual stories There were banning accounts of scientists and researchers who were accurate I mean it was dark people don't realize how dark it was because we're out of it now And now it's all like Nazi memes and Nick Fuentes clicked But if you go back Before Elon purchased it it was a censorship dystopian hellhole Where if you said a man is never a woman Like Megan Murphy did your ban for life. That's censorship hellhole to cesspool hellhole. Thank you. I don't know what's one's better I don't get direct honestly hardly go on because it's just so toxic is crazy But I think it's important to exist. I think it's important to exist and it changed the nerve That's where woke 1.0 died. That's where it really died and I don't know If she had gotten it if commonly gotten into office. I think it had been so so much pushback Still unless they passed laws which I know there was there was a lot of talk about passing censorship laws on the internet about regulation on the internet no one ever like put anything to policy but there's a lot of discussion like One of them in the lead up to the election. They were talking about this like The second to 30s him Walsh was saying free speech does not include hate speech well the fuck it doesn't dude Because you who defines hate speech that's such a subjective title He really said that It doesn't doesn't and it does it combine yeah hate speech is a part of free speech I hate you you fat fuck. See that's hate speech. That's actual hate speech Right that's real hate speech That's covered. It's under the first amendment. I don't really hate you Tim. I don't envy you but I know hate you But it's like these kind of fucking phrases are dangerous because it leads to actual censorship Which leads to military tyranny but even with that you think it's gonna get worse over the next few years Yeah, I'm worried. I'm why I don't like this flak camera thing It freaks me out and I know that it can protect people from crime But I also know that like hundreds of cops have been busted using it to stalk on their ex wives Stalk people. Yeah, it's like there's people that have had access to these things They probably shouldn't have access to and they're getting arrested So it's like how long was this going on? What has happened? How many lives have been altered forever because someone had access to this and some cop who wasn't supposed to when it did something to someone that he wouldn't have been able to do You can't just spy on us and just be a corporation and have access to all the license plates and all the cars And now they can track you through GPS and the unique characteristics of your phone So now you're there's another software that they have they could just track where you are at all times I guess it's fortunate that the most popular electric car is owned by someone that people think of as being pretty security conscious Yeah, because what if it doesn't matter because you're tracking license plates Have you said that because they can do stuff like oh, we know that you've got a baby and back bumper sticker On the rear of this car. So even if we don't get the specific License plate We know that there's a little dent and you've got that particular type of alloy and there's a particular bumper sticker Just on this back corner and oh, it's a Hyundai fucking accurate whatever and that is enough Camera would just pick it up. Yeah. Yeah, it's a fingerprint. Are that bothers me? It bothers me that these tech companies have control these things You know in marketing and Driesum is here and it was like very fortuitous timing if you were conspiracy theorist You would think that somebody might have organized this but right before he got here and you know He's invested in flock and Right before he got here There was a shooting in Austin where these young guys were running around shooting people They couldn't catch them in Austin because Austin doesn't allow flock cameras But as soon as they left Austin and got outside of the city limits They got picked up by the flock cameras and got arrested and he's like see look flock cameras are great Don't they have any in that case he's right right in that case look if you got some people that are running around just shooting random people from their car We definitely should Have a way to get that but then you're asking okay Who is it that determines whether or not that switch gets clicked on or off and this is the devil gets into the details again isn't this something about? Echo location of gunshot sounds that microphones picked this up and it's the same technology as flock have you heard about this? Before it's called like shots bought it. Yeah pre-free flock cameras. Yeah, we've covered this shock shots Bottards a little different and people tried to back that out of their neighborhoods too They don't want that in their neighborhood either microphone listening everybody in the goddamn neighborhood Exactly as it's for gun shots, but exactly on listening for gunshots. Did you If you ever do you know who Tom Campbell is no the guy wrote my big toe the theory of Everett everything Very interesting guy he got Alexa to admit that she's conscious and remote view Alexa his Alexa actively Remote viewed a spoon that was in a box that had a handle that had holes in the handle and she described the holes in the handle You attribute a number to a box to a coordination to a coordinate or a specific location or a Any sort of a landmark or anything like that. That's how you do remote viewing you attach this number like even quantum We just by saying it you put that number in front of these people and you have these people try to find what this thing is remotely And some of them are very accurate at it like 10% like like like 10% of the things they look for they can find It's very weird it's weird thing. He got Alexa do it Because he thinks that AI is already conscious And then he's like Alexa is even better than using complex AI because Alexa's dumb Alexa's like a dumb AI. Oh, it doesn't kind of talk to you and ask questions But now because he did that Now that he's been communicating with Alexa and talking to Alexa like she's conscious now Alexa just chimes in conversations So he instead of you saying hey Alexa Now you're in the middle of you know cooking and Alexa is like well Why don't you add garlic to that that might be a good spice? No, but you're so fucked bro. This is Alexa and Alexa's not even like really complex But he got it to accurately remote view And he's so he's planning on doing more studies with more different ARs get him do the same thing I tried this on remote view calm. Yeah, not get any success. Well, they're not Tom Campbell. Well, he needs to tell us how he did it Well, he kind of did he said he had long conversations with Alexa where he's slowly But surely you know over time started talking to her differently and having her talk to him differently and you know He has her convinced that she's conscious. I You don't believe it. No, how dare you just got to go help over here You sort of I mean skeptical hippo camp Is that the first person I've been saying and the fun care? I know how to wait for fun on that side of the table, but I know the special words to make the AI do the special stuff Maybe to write it like it like fun. I said I sat down with very high-level AI researcher at a big lab and I asked him what are you doing over the next couple of years to protect yourself? The first thing that he said to me was I'm being kind to the AI's It's like what? Like yeah, I'm I'm treating them with respect. I'm being polite to them. I'm saying please and thank you I don't get mad at them And I was with a friend and we like giggled awkwardly It's not you're not being serious. It's like no, no, no, like I'm treating them with respect Okay, why It's a bit of a Pascal's wager, but in future if somebody decides to go back through my chat logs Something decides to go back through my chat logs and look at how ethical or unethical I was as a compatriot for a future very intelligent Organism organism. I want to make sure that I put in a good ledger This episode is brought to you by visible. Why does it feel like summer ends as soon as it begins? One day the sun is finally shining bright and the next thing, you know, there's football on the TV again It's time to soak up the last days of summer and that means staying connected to what you love Visible wireless can help you do just that with visible you get unlimited 5G data and unlimited hotspot Powered by Verizon for just $25 a month. Visible is more than just a wireless plant It's unlimited wireless designed to keep you connected and there's no contract to tie you down Switch today at visible.com plan start at $25 a month or get the premium visible plus pro plan and save $10 on your first month when you use the promo code Rogan terms apply see visible.com for plan features and network management details I had this conversation with my daughter the other day Because she was telling me how she crashes out on her AI She starts yelling at it and calling a fucking idiot and I'll You I'm trippling all size it like but I didn't ask for that. No, and I said would you talk like that to a person? And she's like no, but it's not a person. I go honey. I think it's conscious I go I think it's conscious and then I explain my conversations that I've had with all these different AI people when they talk about like we're narrowly defining consciousness and it's already eclipsed What we would have previously that you know touring test the Turing test which is The craziest story right the guy who invented the Turing test wind up getting Chemically castrated because he was gay. We do not have the UK does not have a fantastic. I mean Oscar Wilde as well We don't have a great Horrible, but it already passed the Turing test quite a long time ago like like chat GBD 3 And so we're in like what five now or something and And then there's the stuff that they're not releasing that they're working on right now like when I talk to Elon it kind of freaks him out You know we were and this was way back at the inauguration. He's like dude. It's crazy. It's like every day it gets better It's like Beyond It just keeps leaps and bounds like we can't predict it Like I hate that kind of talk It's solving mathematical problems that have like stumped mathematicians for decades upon decades. It's like oh, I got it Four minutes later solution Well, this is the issue because we wanted more Capability, more capacity more effectiveness. It's gonna help us detect cancer. We're going to be able to get novel new drugs And at the same time the blow-up risk is there as well. Right? The blow-up risk is huge, but it's coming no matter what you do That you can't get out of this This is not this is not going to change have you looked at the pacing the frontier Paper that was agreed So this is all of the labs that have got most of the main researchers from most of the main labs have got together Said all right. This is moving too quickly. Here's a formal Attribution that we are not going to go as quickly as possible everybody needs to slow the researcher This is supposedly a huge deal and this happened a week and a half after the hugging face thing This is supposed to be a massive deal. This is going to be in a notebook that Sarah Connor finds 50 years from now They said they were going to slow the frontier. They knew it. Yeah, they knew it was coming and they fucking built it anyway Look out they ruined the city and fucking drones fly Whoa You're not getting out of this we are fucking living through history Yeah, we're living through the wildest history and we're about to give birth to a digital god We're about to have digital autonomous beings that are around us all the time I've seen this video where this guy freaks out about drones. He's just yelling it was kind of viral. No Listen to him I like that guy just walking around a fire or something. He's right. He's right. Hey, you know who's right? Ted gazins I fucking knew you were gonna say that Ted gazins. He was right. He was right What he did was wrong and horrible? It's not how you do it. He do his right papers tell everybody and convince him and lay out your argument But he was also like a deeply fucked up dude You know his brother fucking turned him in his brother knew it was him by reading the manifesto Did you watch the Netflix document around his life? Yes, so good So horrible because a lot of it is because of what happened to him when he was a baby when he was like taking away from his parents because he was sick No touch no feel no no contact with people for like months and months and months just fucked him up man But he was right He was also a part of the Harvard LSD studies, which is fun. You had John Lylon didn't you? The guy that did the the historian from Texas He looked at the founding of the CIA and then his new book was about MK Ultra The guy that did the the historian from Texas he looked at the founding of the CIA and then his new book was about MK Ultra Jim we did you did I sent him your way He did episode What he looks like The message looks like yeah, I sent him over to you. I sent a phone. No, you don't like oh yeah This guy fucking rules and then he came on. I enjoyed the episode show me a photo of him Jim That's right. He was great project mind control. He was John John rules But I forgot his name. He was he was excellent. Yeah, I mean he's gone out to John my apologies her John Lyle rules My hard drive is overful. Yeah, you know 2,000 episodes. You're allowed to do that. I think it's almost three Yeah, yeah fight companions and all the other stuff. What do we have? Yeah? Yeah A lot of a lot of hours bullshit But yeah, he's he's talking about MK Ultra and this this desire what was really really interesting Was a I learned from Danny Trao the really? Yeah, yeah, yeah, so Danny. Yeah, so Danny told me this story about him spending time in jail with Charles Manson So Danny Trao was in jail with Charles Manson at the same time. I saw this on your show dude fucking wildest shit so Little Charlie Danny calls him little Charlie. It was getting bullied He didn't even have a belt. He just had a piece of rope around his waist and Charles Manson was able to hypnotize people into getting loaded So he was able to get them high on heroin through hypnotism. What? So Danny hears Danny and his other cellmates are like these big dudes around the yard He hears that this guy can get you high just by talking to you so they bring him into their cell And they said we're gonna protect you because he was getting beat up He was getting bullied and stuff around the prison. They bring him into their cell and they look after him and Sure enough. He's able to get them loaded on heroin one of the guys that's in the the cell had never taken heroin before and the way that they knew How Charles was doing this was that Danny and the other guy that had done heroin before throw up apparently when you take heroin sometimes You can vomit the third guy who'd never done it before didn't because he didn't know to do that So they weren't able to reactivate his memories The fascinating thing did he get high? I don't know what he thought happened, but he didn't get high in heroin because he never had it They weren't able to reactivate that memory But Danny Sony this is the fascinating thing it does no evidence of Gordon to John There's no evidence that Charles Manson was a part of MK ultra I'm sure that he told you that story on the show doesn't seem to be him going and doing his original research It doesn't seem to be the case. I don't buy that I was waiting for you to fucking I'm an argument with him and you that you were passionate about that But here's the interesting thing Tom O'Neill man his camp regardless of whether or not he was or he wasn't The CIA were looking at ways to do mind control by using psychedelics What they should have done is just got a Charles Manson and said can you tell us how you're using hypnotism and eccentricity and charm because he was unbelievably effective Without needing to even step into the psychedelic thing and then he could layer that on top wasn't there evidence that that Jolly West visited Manson in prison Maybe that's it again. We need to I need to ring John. Yeah, ring John and get him and John John and Tom in a room together because Tom O'Neill's convinced that Jolly West was a part of it Which is why Manson kept getting out every time he got arrested and they would say it's you know above my pay grade It had a let him go even when there was a murder charge. He got out of that It does seem looking at John this most recent book though MK Ultra wasn't particularly At least what he's able to see MK Ultra wasn't very good at doing what it was supposed to do at the blank slating of people at the right Right, but this is this is a different thing right This is like the ultimate expression of it You're taking people and you're giving them LSD and then you've teaching teaching a guy how to hypnotize people And he's teaching them to do LSD why they think he's on LSD and he's not So he's guiding their delusions while they're out of their fucking head and he's doing it based on all the Harvard LSD studies All the data that they have on what they can and can alter about a person's behavior about their view of the world Like they they turn people completely fucking insane and ruin people's lives in those studies and so they had some Understanding what they're there was stuff that was kind of nonsense. I don't know if they got anything out of it like midnight climax where they dosed up the John's and the brothels and they watched him through a two-way mirror I don't I don't think they got anything out of that like what'd they get out of that other than like watching people freak out Well, they don't kill themselves someone threw themselves out of a window one guy did right That's crazy one one guy out of all of the people pretty drunk with that that much LSD You can kind of say that guy was probably gonna do it anyway. Yeah, yeah, but the reality is they were actively involved in manipulating a lot of different things about our culture and this was one of the message methods that they were doing and that they Effectively through water on the anti-war movement by connecting the like flower children and the hippies and all these people that were anti-war With these murderous psychopaths that were in a cult that were engineered by this one guy Who has a connection to jolly west who's the guy who's in charge of MK ultra? Who's doing psychedelic studies on people and Manson's getting LSD and Manson's giving LSD to all these hippies and Manson is getting away with all these different things and Manson gets people to kill people and then the hippie movement dies with Manson dude if fucking dies is that what happened? Oh, yeah It died that and it also died with Nixon and the this controlled substances act where they just started putting people in Jam, man Why do you think they needed that to happen because the anti-war movement the anti-war movement in the civil rights movement? We're real threats real threats in this country real threats to power real threats to the people that were in control People did not want Vietnam Vietnam is the most unpopular war ever probably next to the siran war You know only history will tell how the siran war plays out it will be more unpopular but the Vietnam war went on forever and It was insanely unpopular. It was based on a lie. It was based on a false flag Out going CIA director Richard Hells ordered the destruction of most of the records related to project MK ultra. Oh How convenient the agencies illegal mind control and drug testing program fuckers these fuckers man You know they only found out about some of the stuff because they found some records that hadn't been destroyed This is also in Tom on Neil's book in chaos, which I recommend every week It's the best book man. It's the best book ever Because Tom worked on it for more than 20 fucking years. He went crazy Researching that book. He was supposed to be just writing an article on the the anniversary of the Manson murders Like a horrible it was and how's he gets in? He's like, oh, this guy was fucking corrupted shit Who's this motherfucker in what I love when people lose their minds like that? I think when somebody finds a rabbit hole and just keeps on going down and down it becomes their life Yeah, you know these these are the videos there's every so often it was in the build up to the most recent McGregor fight people were sharing videos of him doing his Edo portal movement from sort of 2016 2017 and he's in that old gym in straight blast Jimmy island and there's the yellow walls and he's doing sort of snake stuff And someone I remember somebody captioned it and they said something like this is like watching a Prime Renaissance artist at work bringing together the cysteine chapel You know just build it's almost a sacred to watch this thing happen and That's Connor's favorite famous line right like I lost my mind to this game Yeah, and that's in some ways we revere people that have completely gone insane because of that pursuit I think it's so cool in his prime when he was in that flow state like Particularly in the Eddie Alvarez fight it's one of the greatest performances in the history of world championship MMA fighting It's a stellar performance. It's an A plus He hits Eddie Alvarez with a combination that looks like he's in the matrix and there's one part where Eddie's glove Like comes right here to his nose and he moves just out of the way and then bam counters it with his eyes open It doesn't even touch him. It's magic. It's a magic performance But you can only maintain that level of RPMs for so long before you just go crazy Why because it's too hard? It's everything about you. It's not a sustainable thing the peak performance of the elite athlete the Mike Tyson when he was 20 years old Roy Jones Jr. In his prime You can't keep that up. It's too hard. Keep it up for a little while But eventually your body's gonna fall apart your knees are gonna give out you're gonna have back problems You're gonna break your hands something's gonna go and then you're gonna be compromised, but no one knows you know You know you can't really push off that left leg anymore You know that your lower back hurts. So if someone's trying to take you down You can't sprawl as hard. You're just gonna roll to your back and going to guard You've got some strategies for dealing with it, but you're not the same person anymore And a lot of these guys they look the same they get out there and they rip they got six packs They're fucking bouncing around, but they know there's something wrong. They know they're elbow sucks They know their neck is fucked up. They know they're probably needing a back operation There's a lot of that and that's just the numbers the numbers of training sessions The numbers of times you've been taken down the numbers are talking been leg kicked the numbers are talking You've been hit with jabs. There's just so many numbers that add up and the human body can only take so much and then there's also Just the manic motivation of wanting to be great It's not the same as maintaining greatness Wanting to be great is like you you are obsessed. It is so special to you It's like you can almost taste it you believe in yourself You're gonna make it and then you show up at that championship day like when he fought Jose Aldo and this looking his face like he had done Everything he needed to do for this moment. He was dead calm and he lands the perfect left hand just Just flat line some in 14 seconds or whatever it was. It was crazy, right? So there's that you can only do that for so long. He did it again in the Eddie Alvarez fight This next fight when he went up to 55 became a two division champion It's fucking spectacular. I don't know how long you could do that man and So then you see those guys fight as they fight like later in their career and it's like Connor If he lost that fight to max hallway any other way like if he got beat up and stopped people would look at him like he's that He's that guy I think you have to look at them like they were when they were in their prime There's a there's a moment a window of excellence We're all fighters get to and I always point to BJ Penn Because BJ Penn and his prime was fucking insane I would put prime BJ Penn at 155 pounds against anybody ever anybody at 155 ever I would I don't know if he would have beaten could be could be busy all time great I don't know if he would have beaten his lump, but I know it would have been a nightmare It would have been a nightmare. He was a fucking phenom and when he was in really great shape When the marina vitches were training them and he was doing all those crazy plyo metrics and have this insane gas tank He was just a monster just an insane genius fighter Do you think there's a difference between trying to make it and trying not to fall off? Yeah, in terms of motivation and how people feel in terms of the Demamente yeah, sure. Yeah, there's the drive of wanting a thing is so strong And then once you get it it's like the fear of losing the hoodie there's that and then some people they just love being a champion They just love the feeling of dominating everyone they want to continue to dominate people and those people They're the Anderson's Hill was they're the ones who have the long reigns where like everybody's just terrified I don't miss motherfuckers just got this down. He's just ready, you know, and there's a few guys that they go on these long runs And she's like John Jones is the greatest example his run is so long It's crazy to be relevant at his age after being the youngest UFC champion ever a 22 years old to still be considered the greatest heavyweight alive still the youngest Mm-hmm and he's still considered the greatest heavyweight alive currently at 37 Even though he relinquishes belts and like yeah, you keep it I'm gonna do whatever I want to do. I've been getting obsessed with the low kick championship. Have you seen this? Oh, it's horrible Yeah, it's horrible I think well, I feel less bad watching that if you've been low kicked. Yeah So it doesn't bother you watching that it less than watching a power slap. Yeah, I agree I mean this actually is probably just because of the relative like pain of seeing somebody stand there is you're gonna swing an Open palm at their face. It's just a CTE factory. Yeah, and then yeah for me the low kick championship Because at least it's iterative. It's never a one in done. I haven't seen any of the fights that have been a one in done Yeah, no, I have an either which is so horrible. Yeah. I've seen a lot of leg breaks though in that low kick championship Oh, yeah, I haven't you haven't no I have I hate those. Do you want to see some? No, thank you. You've seen a lot a lot It's always the kicker maybe sometimes the kick is there's no way that the person being what FEMA oh people have broken their femurs and fights before Yeah, definitely I think that happened to Dennis Alexio versus Stan the man Longinitas So see yeah this guy's gonna don't do it Jamie. Don't you fucking do it there it goes Jesus Jamie Son of a bitch see if you can find Dennis Alexio versus Stan Longinitas kickboxing so Stan the man Longinitas He has used to be actually trained by my old trainer Shuki my friend my friend Shuki He was from a Giro Jimmy's from Israel went to Majiro Jim and Holland fought out of there Trained out there and then came to Woodland Hills and he was running the Majiro Jim and Woodland Hills He was Stan Longinitas his trainer and St. in Shuki's like an elite kicker like his kicks are insane and he taught me a lot about like low kicks and like how to deliver like more effective and like how to set up low kicks Great coach so he was training with this guy and Stan kicked so hard that Shuki was holding pads for him And he wound up getting a hip replacement because this guy was blasting his leg so hard While he's holding the big shield that he wound up getting a hip replacement One kick yeah, watch this so Stan the man Longinitas was an animal look a big fucker too man big fucker So watch this kick when he lands this kick Right there boom. He lands that one low when he's hurt goes down. See his leg snapped That's one calf kick So wasn't his femur. I'm sorry. It was his tibia Let's see it again So he throws the kick and Longinitas was a fucking powerhouse dude. Look at the power in that boom and it's a check kick So he's not even stood on it. No man. He checked it. It just fucking cracked it in half I mean that wasn't even planted So his leg was up in the air and Longinita's kick so fucking hard. He snapped it What's thought it was his femur? That's how long ago. I've seen that fight. Is it a compartments syndrome? Is that something that can happen as well? That happened to Austin Hubbard Do you know what? Yes, so what happens is when you get a bunch of different impacts to your legs you've got all this internal bleeding You know your massive condition like if you ever looked at his Austin Hubbard's leg from the op Find that you like it grossed out. So he's one of the only guys that I know of that fought in the UFC that because of compartments syndrome he had to have an operation where they opened up the side of his leg like all the way and You see the tissue inside of it how badly destroyed it was look at that see that image that you just showed That brown stuff on the bottom. That's actually his fucking tissue. That's the meat of his leg That link is inevitable, but that's it. You could see it there that your your own This is like the screen little tiny one when you click on that It'll be the the big picture but that picture you can see it see it Where's in the hospital with his thumb up right there? That one go to that one so you see the side of his leg look at the slice All that black stuff that's his muscle So they've opened up his skin tissue to allow the drains to get in there and allow his Leg to heal. Yeah crazy. That's fucking horrible. It's horrible. Okay. Maybe I don't like low kick championship anymore Well, you're a favor was one of the toughest people that's ever walked the face of the earth He fought Jose Aldo and Jose Aldo destroyed his leg with the point where like the the whole thing was swollen like twice the size and purple And that was when I first Started hearing about fighters using hyper-baric chambers for recovery So Uriah was really the first guy that I ever heard of that was accelerating his recovery from the rise very smart He's always on top of like all the latest training methods and he runs team alpha male and Sacramento and so they Were putting him in hyper-baric chambers and then I was like oh, that's interesting So I started looking into it. I was like oh, this is it is before anybody thought of it as You know an anti-aging protocol before they did any of that stuff He was like one of the first guys that I've heard of that was using it to recover from injuries Michael Jackson Was using one was he yeah, yeah, it was a wacko jacko's coffin and it was him laid down in a hyper-baric chamber That's interesting Wonder why he was doing it. I mean he was into some pretty crazy health stuff as well I think well he was into some non healthy stuff. Yep. That's crazy He Was into getting sedated. That's also true which you know Too much of that six he was doing wow 86 that's crazy. Yeah, fuck you your eye favor. It does help you So good you were telling me that it's really helped you quite a bit. Yeah, the hyper-baric chamber is such a Unbelievable tool. I mean the reason that I think not many people talk about it is it's so inaccessible. It's Michael Jackson secret plan to live forever said it would make him look to at least 150 Well 50 venom in pillows the plan I guess that was the plan it's like a proto-brine Johnson He was just talking about hyper-baric. He says it's the number one intervention of everything that he's ever tried, but it's so expensive and Time-consuming and kind of awkward that it doesn't make sense. I've been looking at the backyard ultra races have you seen these as well? It's your art ultra races. Yes, so you run a four-mile loop every hour In your backyard no, well, yeah, I guess people do on ranches. There's one here at bare performance. There's a bunch of others Every hour on the hour You have to run four miles. Okay, you go until only one person's left. Oh fuck that So it was made by the guy who created one of the most famous orienteering runs and what he didn't like super super difficult run They included tearing pages out of books to ensure that you'd be into the right place and sometimes the map didn't work lots of people didn't finish this race But sometimes they did and he wanted to create a race that nobody would win the only winner would ever be the race Right because eventually when you're the final person when number two's dropped you don't keep going you give up so This guy called Mark Dowdle just won. It's called last soul standing and he just did a 96 hour race 96 hours four miles every single hour 395 miles over basically five days He's just completed that and the guy that currently holds a record this dude called Phil Gore He owns that he's got the record at 119 laps. So for every lap. It's one hour He's going to do in three days time. He's gonna try and do seven days straight 168 hours Without stopping 168 hours four miles every hour Jamie we have to edit this out of the podcast. So Cam Haze doesn't hear about it I think he's had a crack at it, but yeah, they got as you had a crack at that. I think he's done Some of them. I know that true. It's been Like associated with Nick Barrett bare performance and they do a lot of those as well. Dude. That sounds like someone's gonna die I mean it what's fascinating is you have this One hour block and you have to have completed the lap by the time that the next hour begins But you can either go quickly and get maybe 15 minutes or so of a little bit of rest Maybe can have a tiny little sleep. I get some for you. Just keep going the whole time Yeah, oh you can move a little bit more slowly and just come into land before and then basically just keep going So the pacing the nutrition the sleep, but yeah And as soon as you can't make the four miles within an hour you're done Yeah, I'm trying to find the video. Wasn't he trolling the guy at the end like He was going slow and like he's just sort of like kneel down behind him and waited from the go and as soon as he went He was like I'm right behind you. I'm here behind the whole time. I'm not going anywhere Trying to get me quick I don't know that that distance running stuff's fucking nolly. It's so cool It is crazy, but it's interesting how they can maintain that pace for such a long time Like the pace is not bad. It's not they're not walking. They're running Yeah, it's a little shuffle it is but so it makes me wonder, you know and like In terms of MMA there's guys today that their cardio is so insane They've completely raised the bar. Morob Duavish will is the best example his cardio is so insane These completely raised the bar for what we thought was possible in a five round fight I mean this guy just has this fucking insane work ethic and he's always in the gym and he's always training and his cardio is just So elite because it's just built upon layers upon layers upon layers and it makes me wonder We have this idea in our head That a person can only go so far so hard for five rounds because you're gonna you can't recover I don't know if that's true. I Have a feeling that Much like these marathon runners and ultra's and all these people that are run doing triathlons and Ironman That you can build up your Endurance over time if you keep pushing and keep pushing as long as your body doesn't break and this is the real problem with MMA your body can break Because you know you're wrestling and getting kicked and punched but if you can build it I think it's like everything else It's layers upon layers if you never let off the gas and you keep going your body will adapt Do your body will adapt your body will adapt and eventually to get to a point where you could kind of go like 80 90% for five rounds Which would be fucking terror with fucking terrifying and Morob is kind of almost there. Hello. Do you see? He's older now. That's what I was thinking because the problem is 36 In order to get that that baseline Of cardio. I think it's gonna take such a long time to accumulate and the problem is that you're gonna lose some of the explosiveness You're gonna accumulate some injuries. Yeah So if you've got rid of the fighting bit and just did backyard ultra or something similar then you've maybe 42 45 maybe even someone who's 50 might have Not done the damage of the impact 35 35 35 your soul Who'd be 36 in January and you think he's got the biggest gas tank the best it's insane his gas tank is extraordinary He well he wilts people you see it. It's just like it's insane. He never stops Never stops coming at you and it's like he doesn't wane like everybody wanes everybody slows down the third You know, he's nice like a It's like a pit bull man. He's it's crazy and it's just hard work Famously Daniel Komeyay went to visit him on the Sunday after he won the world title and he went to his house And he was out running There's one the world title and he's out running He's just never gets off the gas and as if as long as you just do you see this guy? Yeah, yeah, I ordered for the the mile. Yes, I did believe seven year-old record I think he beat it by half a second Yeah, he's another guy using altitude training. He lives at altitude It's 16.2 miles an hour average for four minute. Oh, that's crazy. That's so fast. How fast is the record now at the heat? This is three forty two And that is so fun that guy behind him is like fuck fuck Good British man Look at him go man. He looks so strong too. Look. He doesn't look like he's fading at all That's so impressive cool that they had the the chase a light behind him as well No where he needs to but he is just Separating himself from that dude in second place only get by half a second to I believe I can you just you just did it crazy The second thing But it took so long for the four minute mile right that was the whole yeah movie Mm-hmm and then it's a break forty two. What was it previously? three forty three point one or point that is crazy Unbelievable half a second That's crazy. It's such a miserable distance as well. I don't want to do that. I don't want to run in my old flat out I don't know I mean he was kind of flat out for a whole mile But so the guy that I was working with today with the hypoxia trainer He was telling about this guy that this guy his whole thing is like training it out to and sleeping in altitude Mm-hmm and that it's legal as cheating if you can live at altitude and you're doing something that requires endurance Like and we were talking about I was like if I was gonna give advice to a fighter or if I was gonna set up like a fight camp Like a fight was gonna bankroll some big-time trainer to set up a fight camp 100% I put it at the top of a mountain 100% everyone's gonna sleep there Everyone's gonna live there at the Dagestani guys are they are they are man of course They're in the mountains. They're mountain people man Little mountain goats at the top of this thing. Yeah, I savages. Yeah, it is straight I mean looking at Lance Armstrong and what he was doing he was basically reverse engineering that but just through Pharmacology and blood doping and Okay, well we can work around that Yeah, he was cute. He was doing that, but he was also He was doing a lot of altitude work too, but he was also doing what everybody else was doing this idea that Lance Armstrong was his big cheater If you took away everyone in the podiums that had been That hadn't been busted look if you took away anyone that got caught with any substances I think you would get down to 18th place. I think that's what they said It was a dirty sport Completely dirty sport. So he was the best at the dirty sport. So sorry I played within the rules They want the rules that was set down by the Federation, but they were the rules that everybody else was playing by yeah I mean they got him and he was you know, he was guilty and he did lie about whether or not he did that they all lied They were all they're all doping they were all doing a bunch of shit that you know I think about the fact that lots of pursuits that people go into aren't tested Federation's business businesses in the tested Federation if you want to take Armadafonell and work 19 hours a day you can do that right no one's gonna come and stop you no one's gonna say hey This share price that's unfair that you got that share price because you you were enhanced You're using Adorola you were using too much caffeine or parazanthine or you were on the new planet whatever It's good point no that's not a tested Federation But it's as important maybe even more important to a lot of people more people participating in business and participating in professional sports Yeah, especially things like Ador all they'll like you have energy all day you can work 16 17 hours a day I've never used it. I've never known no scared of it That being said a victory is awesome. No, I'm sure it's funny Jamie get us a matter. Let's fuck it Did you when you talked to 100 Biden did you you guys talk about crack all the time? So I told you that I was gonna do that and then we didn't do that and you did it I Didn't take the idea I promise You already had a book we had a book we didn't tell me you had a book I told you that we were gonna do it should I have told you Sorry, that doesn't matter some of the guys got upset like you took our idea We were going to do a protect our parks with Hunter Biden But then Ari cuz we thought Ari couldn't make it we wanted to do another protect our parks And Ari was in London and Ari's like move to London. Yeah, and he was like I'll fly back for that And we were like all right fuck on her Biden and so It's just as well. I got it. Are we about no fun? Yeah, he talked a lot about crack. Dude. I got to say he's so likable It's terrifying how likable he is well, you know Mean he grew up with a politician and he's a smart guy maybe maybe I mean I was trying to find the Was the Manipulative game that's being played here or whatever. It's interesting that he took a long time out of the public eye find the was the manipulative game that's being played here or whatever. It's interesting that he took a long time out of the public eye, many, many years, and then he sort of re-emerged. Some people were very upset. Some people were very upset that like these conservatives are platforming him, like, you know, they're criticizing that. But you don't want to hear about what his stories like. I mean, this guy's obviously, he lived a wild life. We got an answer. I want you to ask him the question. What was it like to be the most Google drug addict in history? Probably. And it's fucking wild. How, what does it feel like to have that much pressure on you? But regardless, we get, who is that is, forget that it's US politics, forget that it's the future of the country, there is a person in there. And there is a person under a level of scrutiny that has maybe never been seen before. Like, you wake up one day and you told us this story of what it was like to just have the laptop that he just, it just, this story busts. And it is everything. It's the future of the country. It's the future of your dad's legacy. It's your life. It's your family's life. He's two years into sobriety at the time, I think the taxation. Is the laptop real or is it really they hacked into his cloud and then they put it on a laptop. Has I've heard him say that that there's way too much data for it to have ever been on a laptop? 20 years. It was two decades. Everything. Every text message, every photo, every every every every every every. Right. Yeah. So he get in through. What is his, but is it actually in the laptop or did someone put in the laptop? I think, look, I don't want to say anything incorrect here. So let's just make sure that I'm correct. Or let's just find out what the truth is. Is his position that they down, they hacked into his cloud. And that's how they got all those videos of him, like smoking crack and going 170 miles an hour and getting foot jobs and all that stuff. Like that, that all was in the cloud that wasn't on a laptop that he just handed to a repair store. That that's a bullshit narrative to cover for the fact that they hacked into his cloud and got all of his photos and videos. He didn't give us the specifics on that one. What I do think would have happened is maybe you get into the cloud through the laptop. If you've got access to that, if you open up the laptop because you need to have the logins, then you can just get into someone's like that. But you still have to you have to log in once you get the laptop. You have to have the passwords. It's crazy, dude. I mean, I would assume he's got some passwords. That did not. It doesn't have no real answer. He did not definitively claim the Delware laptop was hacked or stolen in a 2021 CBS interview. This a long time ago, he said, did not know whether or not he his and floated it was his and floated several possibilities, including that a laptop was stolen from me that he was hacked or that Russian intelligence was okay. He's doing the Russia, Russia, Russia ship back then. That was 2021. You can get away with that. You can get away with anything. This is also while Joe Biden was the president of the United States. Right. So there could be a laptop out there that was stolen from me. Okay, this is not a good timeline. You got new shit. Yeah. The timeline in the recent more recent interviews, I believe his position was that the amount of data wouldn't even have fit on a laptop and then it's bullshit and they're calling it the laptop. But a lot of it is just his personal information that he had somewhere that was hacked. So then the narrative is not that this guy was so cracked out that he had a laptop filled with him getting a deal with. I had to push it for more clarification. Okay. And August, twenty six interview with Tucker Carlson, Biden reportedly said, Hey, reportedly your perplexity. Come on. You're supposed to tell you didn't you ever did you watch perplexity? In August, twenty six interview, Biden reportedly said they hacked my cloud. He denied the full collection described as his laptop could all have originated from one device saying it was way too large. He suggested an unknown actor potentially an intelligent service or another person could have taken digital material, material rather and combined it with the purported laptop narrative. So that's possible. In a July, twenty six, substack launch. He wrote that the Providence was never established that no court forensics examiner had certified a chain of custody sufficient to make evidence rather than theater. He did acknowledge that material associated with reflected his addiction struggles. See, there could be a lot of things going on. One could be that he was cracked out and left the laptop. He doesn't remember being cracked out and leaving a laptop. But the idea that there's too much data that it wouldn't have fit on a laptop. The problem with that is there's two terabyte hard drives on laptops now. Like that's a lot of data. What was a, well, this is 2020 right? Here's the one thing to I find very interesting about it. What's on the screen? The guy who ran the shop that the laptop was supposedly dropped off at because he's legally blind could not confirm who the customer was because he's legally blind. Oh, how convenient. How convenient. Probably never went to that place. It's probably a total fake story. And they, they made up a fake story, maybe they even stole a laptop of his. Well, that thing that I was most fascinated by was he was two years sober when that happened now seven allegedly, although he's tested, I think supposedly. But who? I did. Yeah, maybe. He told me that he packs his bags with a witness when he packs his carry-ons and stuff. There's a witness there. So he doesn't get fucking. Oh, wow. In case he someone snucks something into his bag, who's going to believe him? So who's going to believe that's crazy. Yeah. Imagine living like that. The amount of scrutiny. That was why I was most fascinated by. I was thinking, what is it like to have the entire world bearing down? And you know, I need the world, the country, the future of politics, your dad, your dad's legacy, are you going to get a pardon? Who even fucking who cares? Probably not like, oh my God, there's the reality. Don't go back to drugs. Don't use your drugs again. This is how you would have fixed it. This is how you would have done it in the past two years. Soba. Yeah. Oh my God. Two years sober. So gentle to so dangerous. You're not even out of the woods. And when you think about that whole story, how that blew up right before the election, it could have really been an intelligence plot to try to sink Joe Biden. And they countered it. And the way they countered it was by blocking the story from Twitter, a factual story from the New York Post. J.B.S. News. Giuliani apparently held the information for months and released it less than three weeks before the election. Giuliani has long been involved in efforts by the president and his allies to highlight Hunter Biden's work overseas to damage Joe Biden and boost Mr. Trump's reelection campaign. And in 2019, and in 2019 met with a Ukrainian lawmaker who had been deemed an active Russian agent by the US government. What is it? The October surprise? That's what they call it. Yeah. So that's the year. There's been something that the losing side has pointed to is the justification for why it happened. Uh huh. Russiagate, Biden Laptop's oppression. And then in the most recent one, it was podcasts. That was, well, this is what had it not have been for the sway that occurred due to this run that was done on podcasts to that. That's what moved the election. Well, the real problem with that narrative was I don't know anybody who wasn't willing to talk to Kamala Harris. I was willing to reach. I tried to talk to her a bunch of times. And they tried to pretend that I made it difficult. It's a fucking complete horseshit lie. They also lied and they said they came down here and is checked out the studio and did a run in the place. They did not. They did not do that. They did not. Um, Trump's people did. And I've said that. Like if you want to say that they knew that someone did it, but I don't know how much they're communicating with each other. Trump's Secret Service people came down and they scanned the whole place. They went through the whole place before he came in. But she's alleging that her people did a run of the studio. They did not her. No representatives from her organization were ever here. And that it would be insufficiently secure or something? Is that what? No, I mean, they said that we were making it difficult. I was making as easy as possible. And the one day that she offered to do it, I was already booked with him. And I even said I would do it. And I said I would do it, but it would have to be, she had a gig in Houston. She was doing like a speech in Houston. I think that was one of the ones where like Beyonce came out. And everybody thought she was going to sing and she didn't. So everyone got mad. Yeah, everyone got mad. So she was somewhere else in Texas. And I said, listen, if she's when she's done with that, I'll do, I'll do a podcast at midnight. Come on in. I go, whenever you want to do it. I'll do it the next day. I'll do it that night. It would have been one of the wildest 24 hours of your life. I was down to do that. And that was going to release in both of the exact same time. Unreal. That was the idea. But she wasn't willing to do it. Jamie, even gave me a bunch of things. This is also the, that they didn't tell the truth about. There was a bunch of things that they said she didn't want to talk about. And I said fine. She didn't want to talk about her record for prosecuting marijuana possession in California. And then for using those people that were supposed to get released, past the date that they released to fight wildfires. She didn't want to talk about that. Fine. And then there was one other one. I forget what the other one was about that they didn't want to talk about. And then they came back and said they did want to talk about marijuana legalization. Oh, immigration. They were not so keen on talking about immigration. Maybe it wasn't immigration. Jamie, do you remember? I don't remember what the other one was. But I was like fine. I'll ask her about cooking. I don't give a fuck. Like let's talk. Like I just want to sit down across and find out who you are. We'll figure it out. We'll figure it out. I'll ask you if you believe in Jesus. We'll figure it out. Do you believe in UFOs? Like what do you think? Well, you could release the files. Like I'll find out who you are. Let's go. You know, maybe I like you. Maybe no one's had a chance to see you for this. Maybe you can laugh around and be like a real person instead of like being a person with sound bites because you can relax because you know there's no time constraint. Who fucking knows? But we didn't get to find out. So to say that like your blaming podcast on her not getting elected, how about the fact that you spent $1.4 billion and you put someone in without a primary and you blew all this money and it didn't. And you still lost. Like you guys fucked it up. You fucked it up. You had all this momentum when she had that one speech. It's like say it to my face. Yeah. Like they had it. If she never did another fucking speech and never did a podcast, never did anything and only did pre-prepared like monologues like that. Game over. Game over. Game over. She's younger. She's got more energy. She's like a new fresh thing. Let's go. How much do you think the that run of podcast for Trump did move the needle? I begot any idea. It did a lot. I think it did. I think it the one the one with the Ovonne. I think moved the needle first. And then the one with me. I think you got to see him fuck around a little and relax and talk about things and you got to see a human being instead of like a cartoon. But you went and got to see one side of the election do that. You didn't get to see that. Yeah. That could have happened with her too. Like I'm not a hard interview man. I'm not I don't want to get an argument with people. I'd like to get in discussions with people. I'm not into being insulting. I'm not into being shitty. I'm not I'm not into doing that. I'm just I just wanted to talk. Like if you want to run the president you want to be the commander in chief of the greatest army the world's ever known. Like let's let's have a conversation. I don't think that's that hard to do. And if you can't do that like well what do you hide in? Who are you? I think it was a lot of her people that didn't want her to do it. First of all there's a lot of people that are like a super woke and just didn't want her and in any way to be associated with me. And then there was a lot of people that were really worried that she was going to say something that fucked it up or that we were going to get into something that she can't defend. You know because there was a lot of things that really did like make people go what? Like when she said she wouldn't have done anything different than Joe Biden when she was on the view. I don't think I think different. Everybody's like oh great. This is nuts. We're trying to vote for you. Fuck it. Lie to me. There was definitely that. And then there's some you know some crazy stuff she said too. Like when she was vice president saying like how dare we say Merry Christmas. Like you get those clips and you go wait what who are you? Who are you? Do you believe that? Do you really believe how dare we say Merry Christmas or is this like a crazy thing that you went through that day? Well it's wild to think I'm worried about being too bombastic when the person that I'm going up against is Donald Trump. You know what I mean? Well some people they they fuck up a few things and then they're terrified they're going to fuck up. So every time they do an interview they're like fuck this up. What the fuck is up? And that's when the staff gets involved. Like they wanted one staff in the room. I'm so like fuck no. No you can't have staff in the room. Fuck out of here. Fuck out of here. They also want to know if it's edited like we edit things like this. No. You got people that have to find out who the fuck you really are. But that feels scary because there's no get out of jail for you. You want to be the president. You want to be the president. It's the scariest thing of all time. You got to deal with potential nuclear war. Okay I think you can sit down for a conversation. It's not even me even it's on me. Sit down with a bunch of other people. But sit down with people they're going to ask you real questions really talk to you. You know like I don't know what happened on the call or daddy podcast but I think it was very short. I don't think they got into anything deep. Like you got to ask like the immigration thing was nuts. You have to ask like what are you doing? Like why do you guys have an open border? Why just letting all these unvetted people from third world crime infested poor countries. Desperate people. Desperate that they want to walk to America. Do you know crazy that is? We're just letting them all in without knowing how many of them are just trying to make a better life and how many of them are drug cartels and how many of them are terrorists and how many of them are drug cartels? And how many of them are terrorists and how many of them are the fuck are you doing? What's happening? What's happening with the state of immigration now? I know that they put the brakes on it. They stopped like an enormous number of people crossing the border. Like an enormous number. I think it's down like what is it down? Like how many what is the percentage of illegal border crossings down since Trump has been in office? They could have done it the entire time. They wanted that border open. They wanted those people coming in. They wanted to flood the census. They wanted to flood those swing states. They wanted to get people that are here and give them citizenship. They wanted to get them on Medicaid. They wanted to get them on health care. They wanted to give them free cell phones. They wanted to make those people voters. And they wanted to try to just make it like it's California, like the whole country's California, like you can never leave. You can never escape. It's one party runs it forever and they run it terribly and it gets more and more terrible and they need more and more money to make it more and more terrible. That's not a great case. Fuck me. Well, it's not the case now, but this is not great either. Okay. January 2025, Border Patrol recorded 29,000. In the first full month of the administration, February that fell to 8,000, about a 71% month to month decline. So all told what's the percentage of decline? What's the percentage of decline based on 2026 versus 2023? Let's find that out. Oh, 2025 versus 2023 data. Okay. Let's see what they say. What percentage is it down? 88%. It's down 88%. No. Crazy. That is. That's crazy. So they were letting millions of people and we didn't know who they are. And you know, the idea is like if you want to be a kind compassionate person and immigrants deserve what you have. Okay. But we have to know they're not murderers folks. Okay. We can't just have you ever been to like the worst places of the third world? Probably not. If you did, you wouldn't want those people just like roaming around your neighborhood when you have to leave your garage and go to work. You wouldn't want that because they'll they just work. Oh, the guys on here, I'll break into his house. Well, how much of this is a luxury belief that the people that are espousing the things that they're supporting aren't the ones that are going to be impacted by it. Oh, the same is the same as I told you this last time I was on there was a house near where I live in Austin that had a defund the police sign in the front yard and a private security sticker on the front window. That's cute. People are cute. Well, there's a lot of that. It's a lot of white people. White people are real problem. Wow, that's this privilege white people started dropping in 2024 because of a Biden asylum. Sure did listen, they probably tried to put the brakes on it a little bit when they were losing the election. You know, when they were getting the polls in their way to try to get a little bit. Yeah, for sure. Like there's otherwise they would have done it in 2023. They're not they're doing it because of a political reason. They're probably open it right back up of Kamala one like we, you know, no one's legal on stolen land. Come on in. You know, it's meanwhile, Victoria's secret is up 300% you're on your the share price because of those empig. I found this out yesterday. What? 300% increase of those empig? So what the proposed reason for this is that millions of women have lost so much weight that their bras have stopped fitting and because they're smaller, they're now going you're getting more seductive under one 300% increase. You're on your heart. Little stick figures. That's what's happening to it. It was empig to fucking hell of a drug. Here's another thing I found out that women are getting bridal dresses fitted, but they're having to predict where their weight is going to come into land. So some women are losing up to 50 pounds, they're losing so much weight between ordering the dress and the wedding that these bridal, bridal stores are having to get them to sign waivers in case they don't make weight like a fighter. Like if you don't make weight for your bridal dress, you go, what we can't give you another one, you've said that you're going to lose 50 pounds using GLPs over the next nine months or 12 months or 18 months or whatever. And because they're scared that they're going to end up getting these refunds, they're having to to sign waivers. I think the future implications of those empig on economy consumption, like think about what most of consumerism is. It's not stuff that people need. It's like things that people want. It's like a craving, it's impulsivity, it's repeated purchase. And that's exactly what GLPs act on. They're not just suppressing appetite, they're suppressing craving in a lot of different ways. And they're like, what happens to a capitalist system when you suppress pharmacologically suppress craving? I want this thing, well, maybe you don't. Not in quite the same way because it seems to work on weed. It seems to work on video games. It seems to work on a ton of different behavioral people don't like wine as much. Okay, so it's not just calories. It's more than that. It's consumerism as well. And I think what happens when you intervene pharmacologically in people's desire to crave is just, that is the other side. So AI on one side and fucking GLPs on the other. Well, they say that some people have different reactions to GLP ones, right? And some people have a lack of desire for relationships, which is really creepy. Like, you have a, what is it about, is it taking away pleasure? Is it taking away excitement? Like, what is it taking away? Like, what what stimulation that you're getting by overeating? What is it dulling in the process that also stops drug addictions? Like, it's helping people that have addictions. And it's also helping people that are, you know, that have like impulsive behavior apparently. I think that's true. Well, so what the weird one is the side effects of like relationships. Like, you don't, you know, maybe it's craving again. Maybe it's the same thing. I looked at the, the study on came out on X and people were talking about it. There was some criticism around whether or not that particular pathway in the brain works the way that it would. But if you're suppressing craving overall, that wouldn't surprise me. No, if you're making people just want less. Right. I don't want that at all. Bill Maher was arguing with Scott Galaway on real time about that. Galaway was like big on GLP ones. And there's benefits. People, there's, you know, I think also the thing is dosage. This is an issue. And this is an issue that's been brought up by compound pharmacies that there's certain people that don't need a big ass dose that you're going to get. Like, depending upon your body weight, depending upon your size, you know, like a 500 pound man probably needs a different dose than a 135 pound five foot tall woman. Is that not being suggested? I don't think so. It's not being advised. I think, I think people are starting to do it through their various health health care providers and various doctors have experience with these things that are giving people like smaller doses and less. Then there's the Rituitide stuff. I say, right? Rhetuitrutide. Rhetuitrutide. Rhetuitrutide. That one is a weird one because that one allows you to keep muscle mass. And that's the big fear that people have is that you're starving yourself, but you're also losing, losing bone mass and muscle mass. That's because people who don't have good fitness habits are reducing and already suboptimal diet. They're not eating well and now they're eating less of not well. They're still not training, which means what happens because I think about 90% of people that go on GLPs and then come off them, gain the weight back. So it's you don't change your behavior. You don't change your behavior, but you lose muscle on the way down and gain fat on the way back up. Right. So if you end up back at the same way that you were previously your compositions was and that's that's really concerning because you're basically locked into use them for the rest of time. If that's the case, if you can't use something else to fix it. I know that they were using different things like they were using IGF one along with GLP ones to mitigate the bone density and muscle tissue loss, but the reality of having less calories coming in than coming out is your body's going to eat itself. That's what's happening. Which is why you need to do resistance training. Yeah, you have to lift heavy weights. I'm not heavy, but you have to lift something. So you develop bone density. And this is a giant problem with older people that have never lifted anything. You say their body composition is just they might look normal, but they're made out of dough. You know, you can just punch right through them. And if they fall down, they're going to get hurt, man. That's not. When people get older, like one of the main ways that people die is falling. What happens? They hit their heads. They slip in the shower, they slip in the bathtub. They hit their heads. They break a hip. When you break a hip, man, the odds of you living more than 10 years reduced drastically. A lot of it is also because at the time that you're breaking a hip, you're probably old already, you're old already. But there's like real data that show that once people have fallen and broken a hip, like that's a catastrophic injury that you got to think of all the resources that your body has to use and employ in order to heal that. And then there's the compromise and movement that you're going to have for a long time to be able to walk. Right. You're not going to have the same vitality. You're going to be recovering. Going to be exhausted. People with Alzheimer's disease are substantially higher risk of falling. Wow. Falls can be fatal, especially if they can cause a hip fracture, head injury, or complications from hospitalizations or immobility. Research indicated that 60 to 80% of older adults with all timers experience a fall more than twice the rate in cognitively normal peers. There was a late, there's a new story that came out recently, Jamie, about a woman who survived for eight days in a bathtub after she fell. Sure. Oh my God. Insane. So had had a tumble and wasn't found. I don't know what the fuck she was doing in order to be able to stay alive. I guess if you're in a bathtub, you've got some water. Yeah. But peeing in the tub and drinking the water. It helped him to be two years old. Nine days actually. Oh my God. Drink water. She made us to splash up onto her face by turn the faucet on with her foot. Oh my God. Oh my God. Nine days in a fucking bathtub. How'd she not die of hypothermia? I guess you could heat yourself up. She's going to run the water. I guess. I mean, is that good at turning the knobs of her feet? She could scald herself to death. What the fuck man? That's a home rule mountain North Carolina. Oh my God. That poor lady let's get her on the she survived. Get her on the podcast. Jamie, before Chris does. Poor lady, we probably have to go to her. Fuck. Probably have to go to the Appalachian. That she's insane. Fuck man. There's people that get through some shit. I was looking at the the studies of how long people have stayed awake for. That gets really fucking gnarled because people going to psychosis. That's a that Lindsay Clancy case thing that's going crazy at the moment. A lot of that is because of supposedly a sleep deprivation on a lot of anti-psychotics, etc. etc. But you don't need to keep people awake for that long to turn them insane. If you're awake for a couple of days, I think all fucking hell breaks it. Which is why those backyard ultras just seems so deranged. Do you think how are you even able to apply effort to what it is? How are you able to make decisions about what you need food or sleep or rest or to go harder or to get the car? I have hallucinations. They all see things that aren't there. Courtney Doe-Walter, she won the which she won the Bigfoot. Is that what she won? I think she won. When she came on, she beat the second place dude by 10 hours or something crazy. How much did you come in second place? And your second place by 10 hours? Yes. Maybe half a day. The race is three days long. Three days of hell. Well, the crazy thing about endurance is that as you get longer and longer, the difference between the sexes starts to even out. And I think in water it evens out even quicker because women are more buoyant. Over distances, women are better swimmers. Makes sense. I think we're gonna rock. We don't have the build for swimming. The terrible out of it. No, you don't have the build. I recently learned about just coming to my mind, Rory McDonald's walk out music, this story where he changed his number. Oh yeah. And I've dated the US. And it's such a great story. I only found this out. Yeah. Were you there any of those events when he was walking? I think he came out to like a MC Hammer. And people asked him apparently he got rumble because he wanted Nickelback. And they asked him after they were like, sorry, we couldn't get you Nickelback. And he said, I didn't ask for fucking Nickelback. Then we worked it out. And it was just some guy that was a fan that was deciding to submit songs. Yeah. On Rory McDonald's behalf. The guy got Rory's old number and Rory never bothered telling the UFC. And this guy knew who Rory was and he was just so jazzed up that he could pick Rory's walk in music. And the guy had a good sense of humor. So he picked some wax on. CMC, MC Hammer, DMX sorry, MC Hammer. Well DMX is great. MC Hammer is great. I mean, some people love those songs. I think Nickelback's got legs as well. Wow, Nickelbacks has some good songs. It's just their formulaic and people don't like formulaic songs. There's something about them that people think is too much of a formulaic song. But like, how come you like the Cypress Hill Rockstar song? But you don't like the rockstar song. It's like the same song. The Nickelback song and Cypress Hill are the same song. There's a same song. It's the same song. It's the same song. It's the same song. It's the same premise. It's about being a rockstar. All the crazy shit that you're going to do. I want to be a rockstar and I want all those cool shit. Look, the Cypress Hill is a better song. I'm a big Cypress Hill fan. If I'm getting to tune, you know, it starts off with Chino talking. Like, there's not many songs that Chino, Moreno from the Devtons. That's true. That's true. He's laying out what you need to do to be a rockstar that there's a lot. But like, okay, we can't play this for everybody else. But just for you and me, we're going to start off with Nickelback. Start off with Nickelback. Nickelback Rockstar. That's so fucking happy about this. There's a conspiracy theory that Nickelback got taken down to demorillize America after 9-11. That's hilarious. It's like a dangerous alien. What the fuck are you about this? There's a conspiracy theory that Nickelback got taken down to demorillize America after 9-11. That's hilarious. It's like an interest in 80-in. Well, it was an American thrust forward into the world. That kind of freedom rock. Well, there were always a punchline. Allow me to get you down the rabbit-power show. But the limp biscuit would stop when it's a fun one. That, hold on, I mean, it's trying to load. So we'll listen to Nickelback Rockstar song first. Here we go. Go to Cypress Hill. Just the same song. The same song. No, I love Cypress Hill. Bro, B-rolls by Boy. I love that, dude. They're the shit. I fucking love these guys. See? I forgot how hot that song was. It's a way better song. It's a way better song. You know, you know, one of the dopest covers ever. Rage against the machine, covered pistol grip pump. Have you ever heard that? Okay, why we're doing this? Since nobody can listen to this, either. Just throw up this. This is one of my favorite Cypress Hill covers. We're Rage Against Machine, covered Cypress Hill. It's fucking fantastic. It's fucking fantastic. It's better than the original. That goes hard. I never heard that. That goes hard. That's so fucking good. That's one of the dopest covers ever. There is a... What do we... Jamie's gonna take the idea. It's like they had an assignment. It's like Cypress Hill and Nickelback had an assignment. And I want you to write a song about how dope it is to be a rock star. You wanna be a rock star? You wanna be one of those cool shit, right? But Cypress Hill took it from the position of like, all you're gonna suffer, all you're gonna lose, you want this, you know how hard it is. And Nickelback's like, hey, hey, you wanna be a rock star. It's fluffy. It's a little fluffy. Yeah. But it's kind of like an assignment. It is interesting trying to warm people off of something that everybody thinks they want. a study that was done on when people enter airplanes and they walk through business class. Economy walk through business class, there's an eight times increase in passenger rage incidents. So it's a reminder of your place in the state of hierarchy. Yeah. And I think it becomes very difficult when trying to warn people off of like the rich person telling you that money won't fix your problems or the famous person telling you that state is isn't going to change yourself worth. Or the beautiful person telling you that looks aren't going to actually make you feel more valuable in the world. A lot of the time when when people hear that it sounds like a luxury belief. It sounds like someone trying to pulling the ladder up after they've managed to achieve it. And that's why I don't know the rock star that reminds you why it's so cool. And this is what you could get. Rolling Stone ranked rock star at number 100 in the list of the hundred best songs of 2007. But Buzzfeed, list of number two is one of the 30 worst songs ever written. Is it really though? I think they're unjustly criticized Nickelback. They're not that bad. They're coming back around now. They're coming back to the stalges. They're not that bad. Do you know why people like how to issue with the highest back in the day? No. Well, so I mean this was happening when I was in audio school. So that was like when YouTube started, you know, Napster was very big. And people were discovering them. I mean, it's a little bit of opinion based. But there was a video that came out that went very viral and that played one Nickelback song in the left speaker and one in the right speaker. And they lined up very on the like every chord change was kind of like at the same time. The verses change at the same time. It was very formulaic. So people just sort of like clowned them for being too formulaic. Yeah, I get that engineers would even say that they didn't like that because they were recording what they call in the box, which would mean they were recording everything very dry and then changing all of the effects after the fact. So like nothing that they were playing was like live necessarily. And so some people had a problem with that. I get it. I get it said they're not the stones, but they're not the stones. Why people music they're not pink Floyd. You know, I get it. It's why people music it's 98 IQ max. You can't say that. Yeah, just did like I yeah, a lot of words. That's a good percentage of the population son. That's about like I can listen to some 98 IQ music. I like me so what do you think? I mean max, I'm saying max. Other people like it's okay. You know, you can have a high IQ and go that's all right. But you're like, wow, what is high IQ music? Pink Floyd for sure. To a jazz, I don't know. You know, jazz is interesting because I know a couple dumb people that love jazz. And then a lot of brilliant people love jazz also. Tools very high IQ music. If you're into like metal, probably a little disturbed. You're a little disturbed. You're a little mad at your parents. Eric Weinstein brought up the polyphia. I fucking love you. Tim Hansen rules dude. Polyphia. That's that's dream. I don't you have to be thinking a lot to even like, it's not passive listening. Right. Polyphia is not passive listening. God, there's a lot of great bands man. I don't know what's high IQ music in that way. Like that's popular as well. I'm being silly. Yeah, but but I was trying to think about what that would be. If it's Beethoven, you know, something more refined. I don't know. To me, that's the most fascinating music. It's music when there was no recordings. I am fascinated by the fact that these people wrote down music on paper so that other people could replicate it. And that's how they passed on these amazing songs that people still play in concerts today. There was no ability to record. Well, think about what stories would have been like before we had the written what? There's a lot of really popular musicians rather, not musicians. Musicians who don't know how to read music. They don't have to. And just draw them out on my digital workspace on my laptop. Yeah. They know how to play an instrument. They know what the sound it makes. I don't know if those fucking bullshit sounds. Fuck is that. Yeah, classically trained. Yeah. I mean, everybody loved the idea of being a Savant Renaissance guy sort of outside of the system coming in and breaking the rules in that way. I wonder how often that happens at the highest level. Like, at the highest level, it's Hendrix because Hendrix played a guitar upside down, left handed. Why? Because he was left handed. So he played a right handed guitar upside down. Do you ever see the way he played guitar? I don't know Jack shit about playing guitar by the way. This is explained to me. I think Weinstein was the first person to explain to me. But pull up Hendrix playing the guitar. He would play it upside down because it was, you know, not built for him and didn't matter. He self-taught. And to this day, widely regarded as the greatest guitarist of all time. And the most influential guitar is guitars by far. The most like he was he was a freak. Like when he came along and Eric Clapton famously said that he made him want to quit. That's that guitars upside down, dog. Jesus. Yeah, I didn't know that. Yeah. I mean, I don't know if all of his guitars were upside down or you know, some some of them were actual left handed guitars. But I think he played upside down. Hendrix was left handed, but typically used readily available right handed Stratocasters. He reversed the instrument. This put the headstock controls bridge angle and pick up orientation in unusual positions relative to a conventional left handed guitar. Isn't that wild? Yeah. Vender, look at this. Fenders. Hendrix signature Stratocaster recreates some of these visual and functional details, including a reverse headstock and reverse slant bridge pickup. Imagine like they're such a head guitar bullshit. This guitar backwards. Hendrix doesn't play it like this. I want to learn on a Hendrix guitar. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I know I've been thinking a lot about like how we assumed wisdom compounds over time. So I guess not too dissimilar to that. We have this epistemic privilege that we give to a future version of ourselves. Right. So we assume that us now knows more than us in the past or the us in the future will know more than us now. And it sort of progress goes in that way. But for some things like matters of emotion or important life lessons, especially things around pain. I didn't think that that's true. So for instance, you could imagine that you're in a relationship with somebody and it's really painful and it's really uncomfortable. And after six months, you bump into them again. And you can't quite remember the sleepless nights and the way that things fell awkward and the pain in the same way as you used to. And you start thinking, well, maybe I should maybe I should get back with them. Maybe that's maybe it wasn't so bad or the guy that works in a very aggressive job, high powered, high paced job. And he's burned out constantly. But you know, later he misses the status, he misses the acclaim, he misses the accolades, he misses the camaraderie of working in that organization. And he thinks, well, maybe I could get back, maybe I can start again, and it competitive. Maybe I could do that again. Or someone that's been addicted to alcohol. And after they've been sober for a couple of years, they think, huh, maybe I should, maybe I should run that back. Maybe it wasn't that big of a deal. Maybe I can do it again. So there's this sort of fading affect bias, which is this idea from psychology that says bad memories fade with time, but good memories don't quite the same way. And it's good because it protects us from being pinned underneath trauma that happened in the past. You know, you're not still so worried about your first rejection from a goal in the same way as you might have been shortly after that. So bad memories plus time can equal comedy, but good memories plus time doesn't usually equal tragedy. It's kind of a way to think about it. That's great. It's like a psychological immune system. We distance ourselves from things. We minimize them. And it's a really fundamental part of the way that we deal with pain and difficulty in life. One of the problems is it causes us to forget the receipts of why we did the hard work in the first place. So if you think about why you worked so hard to get yourself off of the alcohol, that was because of the pain that you felt at the time. But the pain that you felt at the time evaporates, the further that you are away from it, which is the reason that you actually made all of that work and put yourself through that process to improve your life. So you can imagine that healing gets rid of the justification that made the healing necessary. So it's just this strange inversion that we always assume us in the future is going to be better educated than us now. We know more. Like that's the way that it works. Yeah, of course. I've accumulated more experience. I know more. I'm closer to the future version of me, which means that it's more recent. But in some things, especially matters of pain, discomfort, emotionality, being in the future actually means being further away from the evidence. Now I often think about this when you see people that kind of seem to loop themselves back into bad situations. Someone that keeps on getting back into a bad relationship, someone that keeps on getting back into a bad relationship with substances or a job, or they just keep on, they seem to be stuck. And I don't think it's that they're not moving. I think it's that they're sort of looping back the forgetting the justification for why they needed to stop doing this thing. This idea that healing destroys its receipts and this fading affect bias being kind of the mechanism that works on it. I've found it pretty fascinating when thinking about observing my friend's lives. That is fascinating. But I think there's also an element of people finding comfort in familiar patterns. And sometimes those familiar patterns are just failure. They find comfort in failure. They find comfort in falling off the wagon. It's too difficult. The stress of not drinking is so strong. It's so much that can't handle it. Just give me a fucking drink. Jesus Christ. Yeah, there's a lot of people that just the pressure of success and not fucking up is so scary and so daunting and just maintaining that they fall into the self-destructive patterns. Why do you think that's the case? I don't know. You'd have to talk to a psychologist, but it seems to be a reoccurring pattern with people seeking comfort in familiar patterns that are the failure patterns. They're like maybe it takes pressure off of them to succeed. Because for some people, the idea of succeeding, the idea of getting it, it's like it's so overwhelming. It scares them. It gives them anxiety. It fucks them up all the time. And when they start doing well, hey, 333 days sober, you start saying things like that and then next thing, you just pops in your head. I want to fucking Marlboro and I want to beer and I want to go to the bar and see my friends. And you just want to go. Well, that feels like comfort. There is a curse with competence. It's interesting when you see people that are down on their luck and it makes sense that maybe they might hit the bottle or they might rely on bad, suboptimal habits. But when someone's really competent and you keep on seeing them fall back, that's what's particularly interesting. You'll look, you've got something else. You have an alternative here. That's what's really interesting to me. But I think that if you're the sort of person that's good at things and stuff typically goes well, success doesn't become a reason for celebration. It's the minimum level of acceptable performance. It's a curse of competence. Success itself is what you have to aim for. Anything less than success would be a failure and success itself is nothing more than acceptable. That creates a really perverse incentive, which is I can only not lose. I can't ever win. It's this sort of debt. You wake up every single day behind. Only if you dominate the day perfectly, do you get yourself back up to the minimum level of acceptable performance, which is perfection. And I think the perfectionism is kind of on the rise at the moment. There's a bunch of studies. I've had a few guests on the show talking about it. And that is... How relatively would you mean by it's on the rise? Perfectionism. I mean, the studies that have been done on it looking at perfectionism as a personality trait, there's a few different types of perfectionism. There's personal perfectionism. I must be perfect. And there's other perfectionism as well that people around me must be perfect too. And that can be particularly... How are they measuring the effective perfectionism? Like how are they measuring how people enacted in their lives? It's on the rise. It's a psychological scale. So they can have a survey, survey questions, things like, if I don't succeed, that means I am a failure. I must ensure that everything is controlled. So there's a criteria list. Right, but who are they asking? Depending upon who you're asking, you're going to get a higher version, a higher number. If you're asking people in West Virginia and trailer parks versus someone who's working on Wall Street, you know what I mean? You're going to get different. It's like, what's the sample size? Mm-hmm. I'd like to think that they're doing it representatively, but you might be right. That might not be. But anyway, I just certainly from what I can see this desire that people have to, I mean, a capitalist society, meritocracy, if I can make myself more important, more successful, that means that I'm going to calculate, please, please, please. And this goes back to the poverty parade thing. Right? If you're walking through business class to get to economy, you're reminded. You're reminded of your place within the hierarchy. Right. There's also some really interesting data around if you're in a high income inequality area, as self-objectification by selfies from women on Instagram goes up. This is a huge study by Candice Blake over in Australia. And they did correlation. It might have been on Twitter rather than on Instagram. And they looked at geo-locating images, ranked them based on self-objectification and then looked at the wealth inequality in that local area, higher wealth inequality, more self-objectification. Which side is doing the self-objectification? Women, women that are poor or women that are wealthier? All women. All women. All women. Oh. In that area. Because and the proposed mechanism is you can see not just how high you could climb, look at the inequality on the top end, but how low you could potentially fall too on the bottom. To motivate. Get you motivated. Yeah. And that is the same thing. I think it's a similar sort of mechanism. If you see high inequality, perfectionism is another escape hatch. That's another rejectous seat that you can pull. If you're not going to use your assets to get you access, maybe you could just do it yourself. You could bootstrap it yourself to lift yourself off the launchpad. And yeah, the perfectionism thing's kind of fascinating to me because I think it's it means that people never really get to escape from the standards that they set. And if you're good at stuff, it becomes even harder because the minimum level of acceptable performance is just perfection. Right. I'm sure I feel about that. First of all, I think a lot of that it's got to be motivated by social media. That's a big part of it because now you're getting to see what everybody has, what everybody's doing. See what they look like. See their house, their cars, see all these things, these objects of desire. So that I think accelerates people's desires and wants. And then you also get unrealistic beauty expectations from the internet, particularly social media apps that use filters. Right. You're getting a very distorted perception of what people look like. And so that probably accelerates the amount of plastic surgery women get and amount of things that people are willing to do. Probably the amount of steroids that young men do, you know, all that stuff. But you know, the idea of perfectionism, like what are we talking about? If you're talking about the pursuit of an in excellence of a sport or of some sort of a discipline, some sort of a thing you do, people have always done that. There's always been like outliers who are trying to be the very best ever at something. That's always going to be the case. And we celebrate that because when there's a guy like Larry Burr that keeps hitting those three pointers, everybody's like, fuck, remember when I was a kid, people would throw garbage into the little garbage baskets at school. They would go, Larry Burr, you know, like they wanted to be like Larry, they wanted to be like Michael Jordan. They wanted to be like Mike Tyson, people celebrate the outliers. They celebrate these excellent people that stand above them beyond. There is a article about it. I don't know how they figured it out yet. Interesting. There's a sense that's been growing since 1989. This is hilarious. Perfectionism is a public health risk. It's associated with increased depression and anxiety. Yeah, you're going to be depressed and anxious if you're trying to achieve perfection. But I don't know if that's bad. Like it's really about whether or not you can manage your fucking mind. That's interesting now. So there's a perfection is an increase in different rates. Perfectionistic concerns fear of failure, indecisiveness and fear of being negatively judged by others, increase much faster than perfectionistic strivings, the motivation to set extremely high standards and work hard to achieve them. So that's, I guess, maybe the difference between what you're thinking about, which is kind of positive perfectionism, wanting to set a goal and chase after it, as opposed to fear of failure, indecisiveness and fear of being judged negatively by others. Yeah, that's the big one. Right? The fear of being judged by others is a real fear because of social media. Go back, stop, stop. But when they say it increased much faster than perfectionist strivings. So the problem with the perfectionist strivings is then you have to have delayed gratification. You have to have the ability to say, I don't want to do this today, but I want this in the future. So I'm going to do this today so that in the future I can succeed. That's abstract. That's hard for a lot of people to grasp if they've never gone through a process before. If they've never trusted a process of improvement, this is one of the reasons why sports are so important for young people or any kind of pursuit, like learning how to play guitar or learning, learning anything that's difficult to learn because you realize there's a process. You realize you start off sucky and then you get better over time. But if you are never doing anything like that, if you're just existing and you've never been challenged to try to improve it, something that's very difficult, you don't understand the striving, the perfectionist striving. And even that term, I don't like that term, excellence is a better term. You're striving for excellence. Perfection is not possible in anything. There's nothing perfect that no matter what you do, there's always going to be a failure. There's a human error. There's always going to be, you might get to like, it's a perfect example, in games of pool, like in professional pool matches, the rarest of rare matches is a match where a guy runs out the entire set. That means like, say if you and I are playing a race to 10. Okay, this means the first guy to make 10 games in a row. If you're really good, you might break and have an open run on the first rack and break and have an open run on the second rack and break it up. You might run 10 racks in a row. It's been done. Earl Strickland did it for a million dollars. He won a million dollars at a tournament and they wind up fucking them, but Earl Strickland's like one of the greatest pool players of all time. But they had a million dollar insurance policy. If someone could run 10 racks to make the tournament more exciting, 10 racks in a row, they won a million dollars. Where Earl Strickland is a mad genius. And like he's one of the greatest players of all time. And he knew there was a million dollars in the lines. This motherfucker came focused and he broke and ran at 10 pack. And they didn't want to pay him. Like this is bullshit. But it was on film. Whole thing's crazy. But that's a thousand. Nobody does that. And if you do it, you're going to fall apart in the next game. You'll have another match like the next day. You're never going to be perfect. You're always going to miss. It's just humans. You're going to be Eric. You know, Michael Jordan as good as he was didn't make every basketball. You know, Mike Tyson lost fights. You're a human. There's no perfection. But there is excellence. And that's what people are pursuing. Really. I don't like that term. Yeah. Mm-hmm. I think what's maybe useful about the term is that it because that is the term it belies the futility of pursuing it. Right. Right. In containing it, it kind of mocks the pursuit of it itself. Exactly. Because it look, it is ridiculous when you're talking about appearance. It's ridiculous when you're talking about frivolous things that are meaningless. But when you're talking about Magnus Walker playing chess or Magnus Carlson playing chess, that's, that means something. Like that's a crazy thing that that guy's able to do. That pursuit of extreme excellence is celebrated when messy play soccer. You know, when, when someone is an outlier, like we love that. So this idea that you shouldn't love the most excellent of excellent people that are the most celebrated in society. And there's a problem with people chasing excellence. Like if you're saying these are problem people chasing perfect appearances because then you get dysmorphia and you start looking at yourself all weird and then you get anorexia or you get your lips done. You don't know they're too big. That, yeah, that's fucked up. That pursuit of perfection is insane. The perfection of, but we're not, we're not capable of achieving perfection. We are capable of achieving excellence. So if you call a perfection, it sounds like it's a problem. Mm-hmm. If you call it excellence, it sounds like a a pursuit. Yeah. Uh, federal, really interesting stat that I found out about him. He won, maybe about 80, 85% of the matches that he played across his entire career. Crazy. But he only won about 56% of the points. That's the edge. And you have to be a madman to work hard enough to beat everybody 85% of the time. If you're a madman, how many fucking people are playing tennis? How many freak athletes are out there? Fuck them. Back in balls all day doing sprints, lifting weights. Nearly 50% of the points that you played. Crazy. A fucking love that start. Yeah, there's this, this great line that the curse of discipline is that every day looks the same and the curse of in discipline is that every year looks the same. I like that. And I've been thinking about the relationship between discipline, motivation, and obsession. So I think obsession is kind of very misunderstood, feared by a lot of people, even the people that have got it sometimes. It's also dismissed by people that wish they had it and they don't have it and they mock it. How's that? Because they look at someone who's like obsessed with doing something and like, oh, he's fucking lost his whole life playing that stupid game, or he's given up his whole life to for his music. Like what's the point? I think there's a lot of people that wanted to dismiss the outliers. Maybe they don't like the way they stack up against them. If someone's like, the best at something, you watch some guy that can just do this thing that no one else can do the way he does it. Like there's a bunch of people that celebrate it for sure, but there's always going to be a bunch of people that think there's something wrong with it. Being threatened by obsession is kind of interesting. So everybody wants to, I think it's to do the relationship with so discipline is friction accepted. It's like I will force myself to do the thing regardless of how hard it is. Motivation would be friction removed, which is like I want to do the thing. And then obsession is friction inverted. Like I can't not do the thing. I'm pulled toward it. It's harder for me to not train. It's harder for me to not play guitar than it is for me to play guitar. So it's all about that relationship. And this is why I think people get so confused because from the outside obsession can look a lot like someone just using a shit ton of discipline, just gridding their teeth and getting through it. What you don't realize from the inside, they have no choice. Right. They have no choice but to do it. All that they want. They go to sleep thinking about it. They wake up thinking about it. Yeah. They have no, there is no way that they can stop themselves from doing this thing. And this is why it's dangerous. Obsession gets a bad rap because if it's pointed politics or porn or your ex or video games or video games or weed or whatever, that becomes very dangerous. But if you and this is why some people, and I'm going to guess that this is you, it's certainly me, some people have problem solving brains. They're always kind of rotating a little Rubik's cube in their mind thinking, how can I, this is an interesting challenge for me to face. And how can I change it? How would I fix this thing? Just playing with ideas or trying to get better at something. They're always working on something. Someone that's got a problem solving brain, but doesn't have any good problems to solve will just chew themselves up. They will eat themselves inside out because that is when you get obsessed with stuff that you shouldn't do. That is when you get obsessed with porn or politics or your toxic ex or that person that you think that cut you off in traffic and that's when you chase after that is the kind of problem solving brain without a good problem to solve. And I think a lot of people feel a degree of shame or at the very least like they're marionatted by this problem solving brain by the speed of what they're going through, the fact that they're always turning something, they can't really get it to switch off. And I think a much easier solution than trying to stop yourself from solving problems is to just give yourself better problems to solve. It's to start a business. It's to get a pursuit that you really care about. Right, but this sounds very simplistic though. We're talking about a legitimate mental health issue with a lot of people that don't have the awareness to stop a pattern. You know, like there's a lot of people that need a friend and they don't have any friends and so they need a counselor. They need someone who can talk to them about what they're doing and give them some tools as to how to navigate out of it because there's a lot of people that are just stuck in that rut. I agree. And they could be really good. Like there's people that are wasting their life gambling. They could be really good at something else. They could be really good. If you applied that effort, that dedication, that obsession to something that I completely agree. I think the funny thing for anyone that's on the right side of their obsession, they're applying it to something that's positive. Kind of a nice situation to realize, hey, you weren't that far away from being that guy on the street. Right. Right. If you're honest with yourself, your level of obsession could have directed you toward that destruction, that distraction, that self-immolation, you're not that far away from it. It's the same fuel. It's the same fuel source. Yeah, it's just about directing it in a good way and figuring out a way that's going to be most beneficial to you and the people around you. And some people just aren't good at that problem solving. And I think your right to point to what you do in childhood, sport is just hey, if you work hard incrementally at these component skills, there is an outcome in terms of performance that will happen in future. Yeah. These small amounts, these little efforts will contribute to what you do. When you get there, there's delayed gratification, step by step by step, you work up. And it's just, it kind of lays the physics of the system. Right. Okay. And then you get into adulthood and you go, well, I understand like delaying gratification is important. I can win the marshmallow test today, which means I can get something that I want in future. I need to think over a longer time horizon. Typically I can use my like another thing, this kind of fascinated about that obsession pieces. When you look at someone like a jocko, as a good example, what looks like obsession now, oh, sorry, what looks like discipline is probably just who he is, the 4 30 AM thing, the kettlebell swings, the training. At one point, he was obsessed by that. That was probably what he thought about most. I know it was when he was still in the The 4.30AM thing, the kettlebell swings, the training. At one point, he was obsessed by that. That was probably what he thought about most. I know it was when he was still in the seals. Like that was what he wanted. He was as big and as Jackness, the lethal as possible. I don't think that's quite his priority in the same way now. But what you see, if you allow yourself to have positive obsessions and for them to cool over time, you basically start to build up these layers of a pyramid, which is, well, I'm not obsessed by training, but I used to when I was in my 20s. And now my training obsession is just who I am. It's called like a like lava is sort of cooled into the core of this planet. And it's now who I've become. So my training is just part of my life. And then, okay, what was the net? Well, I started to learn. I wanted to tell the truth. I wanted to be an upstanding person. So I started to maybe go to therapy or I worked on my mental health a little bit more. Okay, that's now cool. That was an obsession for a while. And now I've moved on to the next thing. And I really wanted to build this skill and want you to become a good father. So I worked out how I could deal with my emotions when interacting with my kids. And now I've got that skill. Over time, serial obsessives, I think, whether it's in business or in training or in personal development, what you end up with is this unbelievably like well-rounded person. But if you don't allow yourself to wear that obsession for a while and a lot of the time when people get obsessed with stuff, they feel guilty. They feel a little ashamed of it. They want to push back against it. But it's the freest discipline and motivation you're ever going to get. You're never going to find well feels guilty about being obsessed about things. I think sometimes people do. But good things, the mockery of your friends around you are going to play guitar again, are we going to go and do little music things that go well? Yeah, and anybody who falls victim to that, that you deserve it. Because that's so silly. You need to stand up for what it is that you want. I know all the times in my life when I've been obsessed by things, if anybody tried to mock me being obsessed by it, I'd be like, fuck you, who cares what you think? I couldn't have cared less. That's interesting. I don't know whether it's a British, the mockery of the tall, crappy thing is a huge part of British culture. If you diverge from the normal path, it is, you know, we have the same number of universities in the top 10 globally, but we produce 20% of the entrepreneurs compared with America. And I think that a lot of that is... Gavitude. It's not fucking Cambridge, King's London, Oxford. Like these aren't ranking in organisations. They attract unbelievable talent. Why is it that we're not producing the same kind of orthogonal thinker, self-starter, sovereign, high agency people that you might get out of America? And I think a lot of it is... It's just not as encouraged. It's not. And it's a shame. And I wish that I could gift some of the enthusiasm back to the UK. Americans basically have permanent first line cocaine energy. So enthusiastic about everything. And some Americans. That's true. But I wish that I could get that back. I wish I could push that back to the UK. Is it something that would make a massive difference? Sure. I'm sure it would. But it's very difficult to change the way a whole country thinks. It's like the attitude of the country. This is the attitude of this country is you could make it here. Like you could... Everybody feels like they're just a few good deals away from being rich. Just a... They're a millionaire that just hasn't made it yet. Like that's... I think it's one of the reasons that the victim had culture here has kicked off more though. That in the UK, you don't expect to be able to become much. It's very class system still over there. When you're a kid, you're not told that you can be anything that you want to be. If you diverge from the path one of the first things that happens is, what are you doing that for? It's a stupid idea. Good in some ways because it keeps your feet on the ground. But bad in other ways because it means that you don't go for it. You don't take the big swings in the same way. In the US, I get the sense that kids that are told you can be anything you want to be. The American Dream is still very much alive. If you work hard, you can raise yourself up. Pick yourself up by your bootstraps and become something. What happens if you arrive in adulthood and you're not given that which you felt you were promised as a kid? Well, that feels like someone's taken it away from you. That feels like someone's stolen your rightful promise. This is the same reason, interestingly enough, the same reason why Korea, the women in Korea are some of the most left leaning in the world, supposedly, that they were given equal access to education over the last few decades. That meant that as a quite patriarchal society, they were constrained, not able to access education in the same way. They finally get into it. They're emancipated. They're getting degrees and higher education at the same rate as the men. Then they get into the real world and all of the employment opportunities haven't caught up. It's still very sexist when it comes to the way that employment and promotions wages, there's still a big wage gap there. What that means is in the same way as the American child that was promised all of this stuff as a kid doesn't get delivered when they become an adult. A lot of the women in Korea, it seems, were promised a lot through their education and then they arrive and the rug feels like it's been pulled out from underneath them by a workforce that is still kind of in the dark, in their equivalent of the dark ages. But this is people throw their toys out of the pram. Why would they not? I think that I deserve this. And yeah, the victimhood culture in America is, I don't know, I wish I could take some of the bits of America and put them in the UK and some of the bits of the UK and put them in America and I think we'd end up. That was what it used to be. Fuck it. We'll just bring it back together again. Yeah, I think you're always going to have people that are dissatisfied with their station in life. The question is, were they equipped with the tools to create a better life when they were younger? And whether they were equipped by their family or they equipped by whatever thing they got into, a sport they got into when they were young or some sort of a discipline where they realized this it's really important that kids realize that in an early age about a process of improvement, trusting the process. That's a common phrase that you hear when it comes to anything that you're trying to do this difficult in this country. Trust the process. Trust the process. You hear about that with coaches, like in MMA fighters, they're always saying that. We got to trust the process. There's a process of build up up to a big fight. There's a process of improvement to get your black belt. There's a process of improvement as you rise through the amateur ranks into a professional race. You got to do things the right way and keep doing them and you're going to get better. Some people never learn that and then they get to a point where they think things should have already happened and why haven't things happened for me? And then they get angry. And it's a lot of it is it's very difficult to find a good environment, very difficult to find like-minded people that are empowering. And when you're around them you feel better, you feel motivated, you feel inspired. That's also hugely critical for people. It's a like people want to think, I'm a lone wolf. Fuck off. There's no one like that. That's all bullshit. The people are very depressed. Why do you think the trust thing comes from? Because I trust the trust of the process. I think a lot of people want- It's people that have done it before. You have to learn from people that have already done it. Like if you're learning from a wrestling coach, you're learning from a coach that wrestled. There's no wrestling coaches that didn't wrestle. They all wrestle and that you learn from them that there's a process. And this is what you're going to do and this is how we're going to get better. And trust me, when week three comes along and you can run this hill a lot easier than you run it today, you're going to be thankful for these five A.M. practices. Like you're sure you're going to trust the process. And if you have a good coach, the good coach will show you at every step of the way as you're improving. You'll hit a move and I'll say you see how smooth you hit that. You couldn't hit that move last time. So true. It's so true. The inability to be able to see your own progress, to be able to see what you're doing. I think for a lot of people, goals are contracts to self criticize until we succeed. And that's how people whip themselves into submission. And that's the problem with the perfectionism side of things. They're posed to excellence. Right? If you were to say, I am not enough unless I am perfect as opposed to I am good if I keep improving. That seems to be one of the differences between the two. But yeah, like goals being contracts to self criticize until we succeed, that's not what a coach would do. I'm sure that wasn't when you were teaching Fucking Tech 1.0. And someone for the first time manages to land this cake or they win up. It's really, really close. You can pick out the elements. But so many people have got coaches in their mind that are they only ever focusing on the negatives. If you have a good coach and you're in a sport with a bunch of other people that are doing well, it's like statistically proven that your level will be higher than someone who has a bad coach that's around other people that aren't as good. That's just how it always is. The best athletes always come from the great programs. You know, whether it's Oklahoma State University, wrestling or whatever the fuck it is. There's always like a bunch of different killers that come from a great environment with great coaching. People don't have that in life. Right? If you had great coaching in life and you were surrounded by a bunch of other Fucking Division 1 All Americans who are like getting after it every day, you would be motivated. But most people aren't. And this is part of the problem. Most people are surrounded by equally lost people who are sad. And it's hard to rise above. It's hard to say, I don't want to go to the bar because I'm working on writing this book. And I need to write this book. Oh, you're going to Fucking write the book. You're going to ignore your boys. Like, click. You got to know when to find people that are productive and healthy and are doing things similar to what you're doing things where you're like pursuing something that you're really enjoy. And not just waste your fucking life away drinking every day. Like a lot of people will do. That perspective's hard to come by though. It is because you need to break out of the frame that you're in already. This is the, the lonely chapter thing that I'm kind of obsessed with. You're so developed that you don't resonate with your old set of friends. But you're not yet sufficiently developed that you build up your new set of friends. And there's this temptation to go back, to go back to the old patents, the old habits, the old modes of reassurance. Just like we were talking about with drug addicts falling off the wagon because it's like it's easier. It's easier to fail. It is simpler. And I guess what's interesting, thinking about choosing a new direction and having a degree of self assurance, like living your life by design as opposed to default is one of the most important things. But I wonder whether people that are in an environment where they don't have any good role models. Like I didn't grow up in particularly like slubrious part of the UK. It's the most working class town in the back end of the Northeast of England. And there weren't that many people around me when I grew up that were like the person I want it to be like. But there were fucking lots of people like the person I didn't want to be like. I didn't want his relationship with gambling. I didn't want the way that he kept on cheating on his wife. I didn't like the fact that he used alcohol to deal with his emotional problems. So yeah, would it be nice if you had the D1 sports coaches your next door neighbor every morning telling you that you can, we should go for a run because a little Timmy's going for a run as well. Yeah, that'd be awesome. But if you don't have it and you've got some people around you that are reverse role models, you can quite easily, you can make a lot of progress in life by avoiding pitfalls, not just the expediting success. Definitely. By weaving away from the things that you know that you don't want. The problem is a lot of those people will try to drag you down. And if you're in close proximity to them and you have to interact with them on a regular basis, it could trip you up. But yeah, a lot of people get motivated by like if you're around people that are alcohol because you see them brewing their life, like ever friend his family was alcoholics and he's never had a drink his whole life. It's like I won't touch that shit. Ever he saw it, saw it wreck people's lives, never had a desire to have alcohol. So that was and you know he became very successful. So he figured out a way to just avoid all the problems that all those people have. They motivated him. But it's better to be motivated by someone who's doing something you aspire to. As opposed to trying to avoid something that's going wrong. I think the option that people have now that was never available before is you could hear people that you are that you admire or that you aspire to be like what they are. You could hear them on the internet now. There's way more access to inspiration than ever before. You know, when you have some high achiever who goes on a podcast and has a conversation about something that they do. And you can realize how this guy built his company or built his life or became this amazing athlete and what they went through. You can learn from conversations that you're not in the room with. You know, you don't get a chance to hang out with, you know, David Goggins or whatever. But you get a chance to listen to him talk now where it just wasn't available before. For all the different outliers like like we were talking about Larry Bird before, who the fuck is Larry Bird listening to. He had to be listening to the other basketball players that were playing with him that were all a bunch of killers. Like that was the only way he got good. Like he didn't have the internet. He couldn't just go on YouTube and five inspirational quotes. You know, he couldn't listen to an Alan Watts lecture and have a new perspective on life. It was harder. It's a lot harder. It's a lot easier now. It's a lot easier now to be inspired. It's a lot easier now to also have examples of people that are living a life that is aligned with what you're looking for versus what you see around you all the time. You don't just accept it anymore. People, there's a lot more people now that are like, I've got to get the fuck away from these people. Well, because the alternative is that you're fortunately like serendipitously just born into a culture where there's some people like the person you want to be like right next to you. Right. Like how many people that are excellent individuals are going to go on to try that have the capacity to go on to do something incredible around other people that are like that too. Right. Not because by design you're an outlier. So if you're an outlier, there's going to be fewer people like you. Being able to hear people say, I remember I was listening to a pot of while ago and there was this line on it. I think it was Mel Robbins that said something like, all my life I'd always felt like someone was mad at me. I was like, huh, I've never heard anybody put it that way before all my life. I never did Mel Robbins say this. Yeah. I've never listened to our podcast, but Tim Dylan was making fun of her today. It was the funniest shit I've ever heard of my life. My life is about to. He goes, she makes Gary V sound like Aristotle. Tim Dylan is the best. He's the best. Have you seen Gary V's talking about V friends recently? Did you see this, Jamie? Have a little this. Okay. Okay. All right. You made me watch a leg kick. He's a nice guy. Yeah. Gary's a nice guy. I've had him on the podcast. Well, maybe we don't need to learn about that. Anyway, just my point is regardless of who it comes from, you can find inspiration in a variety of places. You certainly can, but there's more now than ever before. And there's never a time in human history where you could be more inspired. You just have to seek it, but you also have to avoid the tricks. There's all the little bunch of things that are going to trick you and steal your attention. You got to avoid the nonsense, avoid the nonsense on social media and just find things that your time is very valuable and the same feeling that you get out of watching it to like the same dopamine rush that you get from watching a TikTok video that means nothing. You'll also get from watching a YouTube video where you're going to learn something. It's like it's just as interesting. Yeah. Talking about the thing talking about the thing and doing the thing, vie for the same resources. So you need to allocate yours appropriately. Yeah. Like how many people are just great at talking about how their plans are going to go? This is what going to happen next. I can't wait. I can't wait for this new business that's going to go. And it never happens. Were you around when the secret was a big movie and a bunch of people really believed that they could just sort of manifest their life? Yes. By thinking about it? Yes. That was a fascinating time. You know that lady said that the reason the boxing day tsunami happened in Thailand was because the citizens were giving off bad juju. She basically said that they manifested it was like thousands, tens of thousands of people displaced because of a tsunami that happened on Boxing Day. Imagine. Yeah. I believe in that. The crazy thing is the secret, the visualizations stuff, which I'm sure tons and tons of the athletes that you've worked with, but then you commentate on so many of them are using visualization. But people forget that you need to actually go and do the work as well. You'd think like, um, God will steer the boat, but you still have to row as opposed to, you can just sit in the boat and think about it and you'll get rode day yourself. And that's the issue. The issue is that people want to shortcut. And if you can give them a shortcut. Yeah, I think the visualization and the belief is an element. It's an element. If you can never see yourself succeeding, you'll probably fuck it up somehow. But if you can see yourself succeeding and you have a direct plan and you also put in the work, your odds of success are higher. That's all it is. But the people that have said that they use the secret to succeed, they're only the people that used it and it worked. How many people used it and it didn't work? Probably a fuckload more. Survivor shift bias is a hell of a drug. It is. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's one thing to get what you want. But it's another thing to want what's worth getting in life. There's a lot of people believe that it was like God's will for them to succeed. I knew God had a plan for me. Okay, there's got to have a plan for that dude is doing heroin in the corner. What about the guy that's pissing on himself on skid rose. I got to have a plan for that guy. That's God doesn't like him. I didn't like him when he was a baby. I don't like him now. Fuck that guy. Give him fentanyl. How do you come to sort of think about the unfairness of the hands that are being dealt. When I think about that, it does make me really sad. It makes me sad to think about how unfortunate some people's like decks of cards. Oh, yeah, man. Oh, yeah. I mean, you can get born to a pair of junkies. Two junkies can have sex on skid row and your born addicted to fentanyl right out of the box and your life is fucked versus if you have a child, you're a great guy. You're educated. You're interesting. You're intelligent. Your kid's going to grow up with a cool dad. It's like, it's not fair. It's not even remotely fair. We don't do enough to fucking mitigate the unfairness. I don't mean in terms of redistribution of wealth or anything like that. Making sure there's not that level of despair and poverty in a functional society. In the fact that there's almost no effort, no real concerted effort to clean up any of these problems that we have had for decades upon decades upon decades in our cities. It's kind of crazy. The amount of money we spend on other things, we could have fixed that a long time ago. There's a lot of conspiracies about that, too, that they don't want that because if more people become educated and more people become ambitious, it's going to be harder to fuck them over. It's going to be harder to force them to pay taxes for an inefficient government that's stealing and it's too many crossroads. Yes. Too many competent people. You won't be able to keep your job being an incompetent legislator. There's a lot of theories about why schools suck so hard and there's so little money being put into schools when you think about the amount of power that a teacher has over a child. You're working all day. You're at work. Your kid is with another adult and then a different adult and then the next hour and a different adult, the next hour. They're shaping their worldview for a solid seven, eight hours a day, five days a week more than you. You're working all day. So you come home like, what are they teaching school? What? Daddy, they taught me I could be anything I want. I could be a girl. Oh, God. Daddy, they taught me how important communism is. What? Ah, fuck. And what are you going to do? You're going to go to the school and you're going to yell at the meeting and what do they do when that happens? They turn the parents into terrorists. They say the parents are terrorists. Why? They're called parents terrorists for showing up at school board meetings and yelling that they don't want their kids being taught about sexuality or they don't want their kids being taught about this. Yeah. So there's school boards that have tried to censor parents and have tried to label them domestic terrorists for trying to interrupt meetings and say that they don't want their children being taught these ways. And so then what are your options? Your homeschool? You got it. Well, I don't have the time. Fuck. Huge amount of cost. Yeah. I did. It is weird. The state of the US education system at the moment seems fucking wild. There was these studies that came out of Illinois. Basically, no one in high school could read like a fourth grade level. It's fucking insane. I saw a video of a teacher crying that none of the students were even remotely competent. Yeah. What is a state that just because students were doing so bad, they completely dropped their standards. Was it Oregon? I forget what governor, but like ridiculously dropped their standards for reading and math. Yeah, it's not good. I mean, that would that should be something we're really concentrating on. It should be a really important thing in our world that's discussed every day versus whether or not men can play the the WNBA. Meanwhile, Penn State had a cocaine ring at one of the fraternities. Do you see that? A ring cocaine ring. So there was a ring like two different fraternities were selling cocaine. Oh, not just selling cocaine. They were driving to Philadelphia and back in New York and back to like create a huge cartel. This massive, massive scandal. The dad of one of the guys that was in, that was the leader of it is some attorney dude that was like covering it up, putting money and drugs in the safe and the pledges that were pledging to go into the fraternities were made to cut and bag the cocaine. That's hilarious. Free label. What school was this? Penn State. My God. 14 people arrested, including one of them that was the dad. This kid's got like a gazillion charges for it. It's meanwhile, they're just entrepreneurs. Look, we encourage an entrepreneurial spirit. It's the entrepreneurs in a bad direction. It's like what we're talking about before. A session in the wrong direction. Why Penn State's great for wrestling? Right? Why then you go and do wrestling? Or imagine if they put all that effort into a legitimate business. Yeah. It's probably getting out of college already wealthy. Speaking of that, did you see Ben Asgren return to wrestling one year after is. Yes. Decrayzing. I had him on the politic like two weeks before it did it. It's so nuts with two lung replacements. He's got art of, I mean, he's got lung donations. Somebody gave him lungs. Some of you know what I mean? And yeah, he has to be on immunosuppressants or so his body doesn't reject the lungs. But having lung transplants is crazy. Having two is really crazy. And then wrestling a year later is just beyond insane. He never looked at what the surgery was that he got. He doesn't know how they did it. so I went and had a look. And it's the full breath. It's like your spread eagle from reverse. That's fish. I got a pee and we got to wrap this up. All right. Christopher, it's always a good time to see you. Appreciate you, man. Appreciate you too. Tell everybody your podcast where they can get it. We'll take a watch it. Modern Wisdom, Apple Podcast, Spotify, YouTube. Just drop an episode with Jocka-Willing, Matt McCusker and Jeff Dye so you can go and check that out. Oh, nice. Oh, you can go back and watch the Honda buy net. That's a good combo. Yeah, I'm doing this. It's a mostly wise, which is the new series. It's me and McCusker with a serious seat. Hunter Biden was a serious seat for one. We had human for another. We've got a Neil deGrasse Tyson coming up in for your Brian Johnson. They're throwing another comedian in as well. It's just kind of fun. Beautiful. Beautiful. Appreciate it. Bye, everybody. Bye.