[Music] If I sound too smart on this podcast, it's because I'm I'm using performance-enhancing drugs. Right. Right. Right. Mhm. All right. Cheers. Crushed a magic mind. Off we go. Yeah, baby. So, what the were you doing at the Rand Corporation? I'm still there. I'm a You're working there? No, no. I'm a national security master student. Um, so they have a uh So wait, where did you work? We talked about this in the first podcast, but you worked for some sort of other national security agency first. I didn't work for an agency. No, I was an open source intelligence analyst. Open source intelligence analyst. And then you started to see like uh decapitation videos and you quit basically. And now those are so common that it's like now I'm now I'm I'm clearly a wimp. No, I I was uh working in open source intelligence for a little bit and uh just writing geopolitical analysis and forecasting. Uh and then at a certain point I was uh I got laid off along with a lot of the rest of the company and and decided to uh to go overseas again. I'd spent a lot of time overseas because I was Peacecore volunteer. So I was uh I was in northern Albania for about 2 years and decided I wanted to go back and and report from overseas. So I was working as a freelancer uh mostly in the Middle East, Balkans, a little bit in Africa and uh and from there uh decided I wanted to do a book uh you know a sort of unusual travel book uh and I decided that I was going to live in unrecognized countries for for a year and a half. Um yeah. Are you still the ambassador to uh Somali? What's the name of that island that you were the ambassador of? Uh I so I was previously the ambassador from uh uh the world's first cryptocurrencybased nation cryptocurrency libertarianbased micro nation uh which is called Liberland. Liberland. Liberland. Shout out to Liberland. Their 10 year anniversary is coming up. You going to go you going to go back and ride the jet skiis? I I I would. I'm just not in Europe right now. I mean this is the longest I've been been back in the States for a long time. Um but uh but yeah. No, I you know good good on Liberland. I mean you know they have come really close to establishing like a fully recognized and autonomous state and and you know I I was when I was on the so for for folks that don't know um you know go go back and listen to the first pod but I was talking with the uh the president of Liberland um while on the back of a jet ski which was a really um uh strange first way of meeting somebody. That's when you were sworn in, right? On the jet ski. I wasn't sworn in on the jet ski. No, I was just clutching him like a spider monkey so I wouldn't fall off the jet ski cuz he had he had a a life vest and I didn't. Um, but you know, I asked him, "Can you swim? I can, but it was a Danube and and you know, yeah, it's a it's a moving river." So, Oh, you probably get AIDS in that river. I I hopefully not. Uh, I I didn't I didn't find out, which was good. Um, and uh, you know, I asked him, I was trying to figure out like what to ask him because I'd spent, you know, all of this time in unrecognized nations. I'd spent almost a year in unrecognized nations in Iraqi Kurdistan and Kosovo and Transnistria. And, you know, there I was holding holding on to the president of Liberland as we sort of went up the the Danube River on a on a jet ski. And I asked I was trying to figure out some really good question to ask him. But, you know, in that environment while you're holding on to your interview subject, I don't know if have you ever tried to interview this way, but it's Were you like like talking right directly into I was just sort of yelling into his ear cuz the jet ski was loud. Yeah. Um and I was like, "Uh, you started a country. Is it worth it?" It was the best I could get out. And and then he kind of stopped the jet ski and he was like really thoughtful for a second. He was like, "Everybody should start their own country." And then he just busted the sickest like 180 and then on the Danube and I was like I I that's either the most brilliant thing that I've ever heard or or it's complete nonsense. And and I the the project that I'm kind of working on now is is exactly that. I'm trying to investigate how one would start their own country uh nowadays. Um because there are these new nation state building projects that are currently happening. Um, and that's an insane project. Uh, so I was like, I should probably get some uh, you know, academic and scholarly backing for this kind of thing and and actually try and get some some good like scholarly roots in in like actually exploring what state craft really is. And God, you got to be really ambitious to want to start your own country. I I ambitious or stupid, I don't know. Um I there's there's quite a few of these projects that are going on right now. And some of them are like verging more on what I would consider like art projects that are sort of um challenging the the mainstream of of uh like the nation state. Like uh there's this project down in um uh the southern California desert called Slow Jamistan. Um shout out to the Sultan of Slow Jamistan. Um I think you told me about that one last time. Yeah. Yeah. So he's he's just a DJ and uh wanted to start uh a nation. And then there's another one called Malassia which uh I think it's in the Nevada desert and they consider their property taxes as like foreign aid to the United States. Um but then then there are these other like kind of incredible projects like that are like more n uh network state projects. And so network states is what some people believe the future of nation states are. And it's basically like a decentralized nation state. Um and this was kind of predicted has been predicted by a lot of these these futurists um that say you know the nation state at a certain point was this ideological technology that was invented in the 1600s uh at the the treaty of West Failia uh basically so Europeans would just stop killing each other for a couple of years and they were like okay you know what let's get rid of all of these sort of this complex network of of family relationships and religious ties and your allegiance is tied to the land. We're going to draw borders around the land. And by doing that, hopefully the sovereignty of uh a national unit will be allowed to bargain with these other national units. And so as part of like Westfallian sovereignty, as they call it, you've got, you know, this sort of equality of nations. Um there's no nation that is above any other nation. um they're sovereign so you can't mess with them. They're able to make their own laws within their own territories and then as sort of you know one of the big geopolitical guys Francis Fukuyam would say is they have the monopoly of violence so they're able to keep and maintain their standing army policing forces and kind of handle business within their borders. Now, this worked pretty well and it's still working pretty well, but I think we're starting to see the cracks come into it. And one of the reasons for this is because capital no longer really pools within nation states. You're starting to see that there's uh the flight of of capital by way of power or by way of prestige or by way of just money to places where there's just a lower tax rate. You can see even even um you know the the golden visa that's being introduced in the United States. Essentially, we're trying to draw highly capitalized individuals into the United States from other countries because we're saying, "Hey, we've got a better deal for your taxation here. Come over here, maybe start some jobs, maybe just enjoy a a lesser taxed life." And so there's this negotiation that's going on in the world right now where you're starting to look at statehood as a service. And because if you think about uh at least the way that that network state folks think about this is it's almost as if statehood or your citizenship is a a subscription service that you were just born into, right? And so they're looking at it from the perspective of Silicon Valley, which is like, well, what if we just offer you more benefits for your subscription service? So there are places like um Prospera down in Honduras. Um and they they have some sort of charter city status where they're kind of allowed to make their own laws there. And they're offering a lot of uh like life extension surgeries and or I should say life extension treatments and things like that. Um, and there are a couple of these other projects. So, I think the first step is is really just to kind of go to these places and and try to find out what exactly the the end goal is, right? Because at a certain point, the nation state was created and it was it was carved out of the empires and kingdoms of of, you know, yestery year. uh we look at it because we don't really know generationally anybody who like lived under you know an actual king rather than you obviously you know you still have kings in Spain and stuff like that but nobody's like a surf in uh in the modern world um so it's hard for us to imagine something that would come after the nation state and there is a lot of thinking that is going into this right now um so yeah this is all a really long-winded way to say you I wanted to to start thinking about this from a really, you know, wellfounded scholarly perspective. And so I decided I was going to go and and pick up another master's degree at the Rand Corporation. Um, so I've been there for the last 6 months and currently working on a dissertation about uh fifth generation warfare, right? Well, there's according to you know who John Mirshimer is? Yeah, Mirimer. Yeah. He talks about I think what he says is there's a there's three things that determine um the power of a nation state and it's like number one is how big their gun is, number two how big their population is and number three I forget what number three was. I think number three might have been like their their geographical location territorial integrity territorial like us we're surrounded by two oceans. Other people like Israel are surrounded by all these other adversaries. Mhm. Um, yeah, Mirshimer is is uh he's, you know, uh known as as a big-time realist. So, yeah. So, he he really sort of underlines the the the geo and geopolitics where it's like the what natural benefits do the the territori does the territorial integrity of your nation sort of offer you? One of the reasons that that the United States has done so well, there's obvious there's a lot of different reasons that that the US has done so well over the uh you know couple centuries that we've been around. Um one of them is just really hard to invade the United States, right? It's uh we got two big oceans, we got a big mountain range, and we've got a desert right in the center of us. Yeah. Um, so that's that's one of the things that that Mir Shimemer talks about or why it's, you know, incredibly difficult to to take over Afghanistan as many people have tried over the years. Uh, cuz it's just really mountainous and and even with all of our modern technology, it's really hard to fight in mountains as it turns out. What do you think one of the What do you think would be the biggest the biggest vulnerability or the biggest the weakest link of the United States as far as like its ranking on nation states or countries in the world? Like we obviously we have the biggest military. We have the most highowered weaponry on earth. Um we have the best geographical location. I don't know if we have I don't know if we're the number one GDP. Are we is our GDP? Yeah, it's it's currently uh uh I I don't know the exact number, but the uh but yeah, we're we're but there's been there's been like no major world wars since the 40s. So like what I'm sure this is something that companies like the Rand Corporation are looking at. Yeah. I mean, I, you know, there's there's always an assessment of of vulnerabilities and and right now a lot of the scholarly research that's being done is looking at how we transition from uh the global global war on terror to what people are talking about as great power competition. And this is has everything to do with with the sort of research that I'm working on, which is uh uh what's called fifth generation warfare. Sometimes it's called hybrid warfare. Um, but it I I think that your vulnerable the the question about vulnerability has everything to do with with fifth generation warfare. Um, and to kind of understand it, I think you have to go through the the first like, you know, one through four generations. Um, and and the thing to remember when you're sort of looking at these generations is it doesn't necessarily mean that one generation ends and another one picks up. These different generations of warfare can be happening uh simultaneously. But what matters is how technology and geopolitical aims end up affecting uh uh each other in order to uh to change the nature and and the I guess the character of warfare. So can you explain the generation one through five? So, so first generation, um, you know, basically anytime, uh, uh, somebody, uh, decided to to get their buddies together and and go, you know, uh, fill a bunch of other strangers with holes for some geopolitical end. It could be anything from like early Neanderthal tribal warfare all the way up to sometimes the example that people tend to use are like the the Macedonian conquests where strategically you have a really high level of organization but a fairly low level of technology. You know, you've got dudes in lines marching with spears and you know tribes. Yeah. But they but you know the the Macedonian con conquest were were kind of like the latter end of it and you know they had they had shields and they could make a failance and they could you know uh uh stab each other in unison. Um which was you know a technological boon at the time. Uh it wasn't something that we we had seen before. Um but again you know it goes from technology to geopolitical aims. How do you marry those together in order to create this new character of warfare? the second generation that kind of takes us up to almost the Napoleonic wars. Um, and at that point you're looking at things like gunpowder, uh, more advanced tactics. You've got decisive battles, uh, but you also have, uh, entrenchment, right? Um, so you have these these wars of attrition, uh, that are made possible by this new type of technology. Um, World War II is kind of where we start to change again, right? Credit card debt has reached an all-time high, making it way harder to pay off, and it's keeping homes out of Americans hands. One company has risen above them all to be a beacon of light in this pool of rising debt, and that's American Financing. Prices for the last few years have been and continue to be high, and most people unfortunately have to reach for credit cards to cover bills and expenses. But this is not sustainable. American Financing is helping homeowners pay off highinterest debt by using their homes equity. American Financing is a family-owned mortgage lender that's been growing like crazy, and it's licensed in 50 states. Their mortgage consultants are salary based, so there's no incentive to put you in a loan that won't work. Their customers save an average of $800 a month, and they don't charge any upfront or hidden fees. And you can close in as fast as 10 days and may be able to delay up to two mortgage payments during the process, creating an extra bonus in savings upfront. You can join hundreds of thousands of customers with meaningful savings by going to americanancing. Pretty neato if you ask me. Go to americanfinancing.net/jones to get the best deal or call 8889952440. americanfancing.net/jones. nmls182334 www.nmlsconsumerac.org. Thank you American Financing for sponsoring this episode. It's linked below. Now, back to the show. Uh, we've got, uh, more maneuverability warfare and of, of course, the nuclear bomb. Um, so now you're talking about the industrialization of war. So, suddenly you're able to, you know, absolutely like annihilate a battlefield, not only with industrialized uh, weaponry from the sky, but industrialized weaponry that's being driven across the land. So if you think about Hitler's Blitz Creek, that's sort of a good example of that maneuver warfare of the third generation of warfare. But as things go up towards the cold war, we see this big characteristic change in how wars are fought. And obviously this happens because of the nuclear bomb. So at this point, we have the last iteration of great power conflict. But with the nuclear bomb, it becomes far too dangerous to have direct nation state on nation state violence because at any point somebody could drop the worldending weapon or so we thought at the time. Um and so suddenly war has to change again uh because the geopolitical aims aren't completely annihilating the world. It's just to get strategic advantage over the adversary. In this case, it would be, you know, the Soviet Union and the United States. So, we go to proxy wars. We go to proxy wars and asymmetric conflict. So, that can take us from basically the end of the cold war all the way up to the global war on terror. And the global war on terror changes things massively because suddenly we have a a unipolar world. Essentially, Soviet Union has fallen and the United States is able to project power all around the world. But we haven't been able to project power all around the world without making quite a few enemies, right? And also training a lot of those enemies at the same time. So suddenly the global war on terror turns into really precise asymmetric combat with semi-state and non-state actors. So al-Qaeda, the Taliban, um, and I mean, you know, the Islamic State, name your name your insurgent group, your favorite insurgent group. Name them. Pick your flavor. Right. Exactly. But now we have something different happening and that's fifth generation warfare. We still have the same constraints of third generation warfare. We can't go directly into combat with each other with these worldending weapons. And in fact, there's so much economic entanglement in the world that it's very difficult to actually disrupt another nation so significantly because you're disrupting your own market. So that leads us to this new type, this new iteration of warfare, which is the cognitive domain. Essentially, it's a war of media, a war of ideas, and a war of attempting to divide populations against populations. Yeah. Um, and to to use the cognitive domain, essentially like the gray zone warfare in people's gray matter. Yeah. and and to uh to occupy the space between people's ears in order to uh achieve some sort of strategic gain. Um so a lot of what I'm looking at is, you know, how how does the United States work to uh to shield itself from any any attacks in the information space? Um because one of the biggest assets we have as a country is our freedom of speech. uh but that also leaves our information space massively open to any sort of incursion by uh by potentially belligerent actors. In fact, there was this one uh psychological operation I think the uh the uh the agent who did it was a guy named Ivon Aayans. Um this was in the 1960s. M um and you know he uh essentially had created this uh fake treasure trove of Nazi documents. They were all fake Nazi documents and he he dumped them into a lake in in uh the Czech in Czechoslovakia at the time. And then he hired, you know, a real um news team to to unearth them and and say, "Yeah." And and so the goal was basically to uh to sort of acknowledge some sort of complicity uh with the the newly western government um and say, "Hey, you know, look, the these guys were working with the Nazis." Granted, all of these documents were fake. Sometimes this operation, this is called Operation Neptune, sometimes called the fake in the lake. Um what year was this again? Oh, it was in the 60s, I want to say. Uh if you want to read about it, uh definitely recommend uh Active Measures by Thomas Rid. fantastic book. Okay. But he has this one the the Aiance has this this one like absolute banger line in it where he says something like um you know it's great that they have freedom of the press. If they didn't we'd have to invent it for them. And so it talks about this permeability of the information space where it's like where in on the one hand you're able to call out really terrible ideas and you're able to surface really good ideas in free dialogue. Uh but in the other hand it leaves the borders open for anybody to make an injection of information into that space. Yeah. This is almost exactly what that Russian dude Yuri Beesmanov was talking about. That's exactly right. Right. Yeah. Which it seems like that's exactly that is like precisely what where we're at today, which exactly what he was talking about. Well, and the Bessmanov speech is is fantastic too because one of the things that he talks about is the the the generational aim of of these kind of active measures. Uh Russia specifically tends to have a lot more time to to do these things. They don't have administration switches nearly as as regularly as we do. So they can Leadership can make decisions way faster. That's right. And they can also make more long-term decisions. Um, you know, uh, uh, I was reading a report and I, I'm like having trouble getting it out of my mind because now it's the only way that I can sort of think about, um, uh, the, uh, the Ukrainian conflict or really any anything that's happening within the Russian Federation sphere of influence. And they were essentially saying that the psychological operation of of Russia is really the the locust or the center of the conflict that kinetic conflicts are uh just ways of influencing the psychological operation. And so I I know it sounds a little little perplexing, but but I I think the information that they give or the evidence that they give is, you know, um the uh their incursion into Syria at a certain point was uh everybody was saying, well, you know, it's because they want a warm water port. Great. But what also came from that was a massive amount of refugee outflows from Syria that went into Europe. And this is, you know, you can draw a direct line from that into this uh new wave of hyper nationalism that is uh sort of drawing fractures in the European Union because they're saying, well, you know, if we're a European Union, then why are some countries bearing the brunt of taking care of these refugee outflows and why are other ones able to uh to to not have that that same burden, right? And so in one respect, Russia benefits from the rise of autocrats in the European Union and uh and a a fracturous European Union, too. And so we've seen a bit of that already. And so you might wonder, you know, okay, well, what about uh the the war in Ukraine, you have a slow encroachment into the war in Ukraine, 2014, is it? um you really start seeing these gray zone operations where the little green men come into Crimea and and you know we it's a a sort of like a situationship of war zone like you know are are we at war are we not at war and you know it's it's testing the waters to see you know what will the result actually be what uh you know what actions is NATO going to take and we're already seeing an enormous cultural divide especially in the United States and and amongst allies about what do we do about this kinetic conflict? Um, you know, I I haven't lived in the United States for a long time. Uh, but I've been back for 6 months and and maybe it's because I'm, you know, at at uh, you know, a think tank uh, where where these things happen or, you know, we have these conversations a lot. Uh, but I don't I I was I'm quite surprised to see how much division there is over funding or not funding the war in Ukraine. And there's certainly a lot of uh a lot of gasoline being thrown on that fire, not only internally but from abroad. Um so how how what do you mean abroad? How who who specifically abroad would be throwing gas on the fire that's um making more division in the US over that war? Yeah. So one of the uh one of the operations that that we've seen is uh operation doppelganger which was covered pretty pretty well. And I mean honestly, you know, especially after looking at at these things for a while, uh you get to know how clever they are, uh and and how low the cost for for sewing a good deal of discord is. So what Operation Doppelganger did was it basically launched websites that looked like um almost looked exactly like um uh common news websites in in the West, but of course they had more uh anti- Ukraine pro- Kremlin stances in them. And so these were just sort of littered across the internet and people would say point to, you know, these potentially reputable news sources and say, "See, they they, you know, they're they're supporting the Kremlin instead of supporting Ukraine." Um, and we know that was coming from the Russian Federation. Uh obviously you also have uh you know a a weaponization of of the alternative media too where they're saying you know okay well we're going to pay X Y andZ influencer to sort of go on to our talking. Oh yeah. Did you see Tim Pool happened with Tim Pool, right? Yeah. Yeah. I although I I guess he didn't know where the money was coming from but they got like I think it was a few million bucks from Russia. Yeah. And I mean look the Russians are really good at making sure people don't know where the money is coming from. Right. And what was the I don't remember the story there, but I don't think like did they were they told to talk about specific things that I don't know and I can't remember and I I you know I see if you can find the story about Tim P being funded by Russia or I think it was uh tenant tenant media tenant media that's what it was. Okay, here we go. Uh Tim Pool right-wing influencer has been implicated in a Russian influence operation according to the federal indictment. two employees at RT um funneled nearly $10 million into his comp into a Tennessee based company called Tenant Media to create content favorable to Russia. Tim Pool was one of the content creators associated with Tenant Media receiving a payment of $100,000. That's that's what it was. Yeah. He got paid. So, he had to create a new YouTube channel for this, right? And the videos were not getting, you know, some of them were getting like, you know, 5,000 8,000 views. And he was getting paid 100 grand for 8,000 views on a video. I'm not a YouTube creator, so I'm assuming that's a that's a pretty good payday. That's a really good payday. Yeah. Um, he claimed So, Tim claimed that he was a victim of the scheme and said Putin is a scumbag. So, yeah. So, he I mean, it's There you go. Case closed. He said Putin is a scumbag. Nice. They They got eyes closed, baby. Really? I bet I bet I bet the the Russian active measures agents are are really ringing their hands over that that statement. And it says here, "Pool has made statements on social media supporting Ukraine, which some view as an attempt to counter the claims." Interesting. Yeah. And and you know this is this is a version like this is kind of a like it's deeply within the the Russian playbook and and some of the research that I'm doing too is is trying to look at like you know what's the what's the character of a Russian psychological operation versus a Chinese psychological operation versus an Iranian one. Um like how how are they fighting a fifth generation war? Um and and they tend to be very different than one another. So, so Russia has been has doing been doing this stuff for for a long time, obviously. Is it BZOV? Was it Yuri Yuri? Yeah. I mean, everybody go watch that speech. It's it's you can find it, Steve. It's probably uh it's you can probably find like a one minute clip of it. It's like a longer interview, but they have they have it clipped somewhere on YouTube. There's just like chill hop playing in the background. It's just really really viby. Have you have you ever been to Russia? No, I haven't. The the uh uh you know, after this interview, I don't think I'll be welcome. Um, that'll be two countries I'm banned from. Uh, Turkey is the first one. Turkey is the first one. I actually ended up um I got detained flying through Turkey recently. Did you know we ingest a credit cards worth of plastic every week? It's the tiny particles in our food, water, and air. They don't just pass through. They build up in our organs, disrupt hormones, are linked to fertility issues, neurological disorders, and heart disease. In early 2024, human brain samples contain 0.5% plastic by weight with higher levels tied to Alzheimer's and neurodeenerative disease. Microplastics have also been found in semen and placenta samples correlating with lower sperm quality, fetal exposure and declining fertility. BPA and phalates mimic or disrupt hormones like estrogen and testosterone leading to reduced sperm counts, irregular cycles, and developmental issues in children. With microplastics and literally everything from our bottled water to our food to the dust in our houses, avoiding it is impossible. But luckily, you can support your body's ability to fight back. Moringa activates the NRF2 pathway, your body's detox switch, helping flush out microplastic associated toxins like BPA, BPS, and phalates. This pathway boosts detox enzymes, making harmful chemicals water soluble for easy excretion. Not all moringa is created equal. Many supplements use lower quality sources. root, bark, or contaminated powders lacking the full spectrum of benefits. Plus, moringa naturally tastes bitter and unpleasant. And this is what led me to Morning Bean by Verso, a rich chocolatey coffee alternative packed with moringa, cocoa polyphenols, and electrolytes to help detox, fuel energy, performance, focus, and longevity. I don't know how they masked the bitter taste of moringa, but it actually tastes amazing. Plus, Verso only uses pure maringa leaf, the most nutrient-dense part of the plant, and conducts third-party testing on every batch to ensure potency, purity, and safety. You can't avoid microplastics, but you can support your body's detox process. Start your day with Morning Being for researchbacked detox, energy, and health. Click the link below or visit ver.so/danny and use the code Danny for 15% off. That's veer.so/danny and use my code D-n for 15% off. Thank you, Verso, for sponsoring this episode. Um, that's it, Steve. The top one. There he is. Actually, find a short is 13 minutes long. See if you can find Go back and see if you can find a short because it'll be condensed. There you go. The second one. Try that. Boom. Ideological subversion is the slow process which we call either ideological subversion or active measures or psychological warfare. What it basically means is to change the perception of reality of every American to such an extent that despite of the abundance of information, no one is able to come to sensible conclusions in the interests of defending themselves, their families, their community and their country. It's a great brainwashing process which goes very slow. It takes from 15 to 20 years to demoralize a nation. This is the minimum number of years which requires to educate one generation of students exposed to the ideology of the enemy. In other words, Marxism Leninism ideology is being pumped into the soft heads of of of at least three generations of American students without being challenged or counterbalanced by the basic values of Americanism. The demoralization process in the United States is basically completed already. Most of it is done by Americans to Americans thanks to lack of moral standards. ideological subversion. Crazy. The uh the the loaded language there of lack of moral standards like ouch man. Um uh rude. Uh but but yeah, I mean, you know, that that is I think a good primer on on the the purpose of fifth generation warfare and Russian psychological. It seems like you don't really have to do much. It seems like you kind of like let the people fight themselves and light little fires where you need to light them. Yeah, I think that's um I mean it's it's sort of demonstrated in in uh how well uh Russia understands the uh the American character really. Um you know, I think about how there are there are quite a few skeletons in the the American closet and uh they're really good at like playing the xylophone on those ribs, right? Um, one good example is sort of famous example. Oh, I want to say it had a really cool uh operation code name. Uh, it was called like infection or something. Um but anyway, this is uh one of the more famous ones and it was um uh during the AIDS crisis, there was uh they wanted to uh sew this story into the American media that AIDS was uh was being generated as a biological weapon uh to to affect uh uh you know marginalized populations in the United States. So what they did was they sort of smuggled a story into a paper and I want to say it was India and then that hit the international news wires because it was a story in India. It was really hard to to fact check and also it's a fairly sensationalist story. So it sounds really like it sounds plausible. it sounds exciting and both of these things are are big red flags when you want to like identify what is and isn't you know a uh a psychological operation and then suddenly it ends up in the American news cycle I think I mean one of the one of the big news broadcasters uh broadcast on it I want to say Tom Brokhall but that's like literally the only name that I can think of right now um anyway uh people ran with it and and the I it's a a process of idea laundering so you put an idea somewhere within some sphere of influence that has a direct line into the target community and then from there you have a certain amount of um you know well-known uh sources of information that uh seemingly vet that information and suddenly it becomes almost indistinguishable from the truth. Yeah. But it has a distinct effect on the American population. Um, one of my favorite favorite versions of this was so they had the um I think this was um uh Yenni Pgoans. Um uh he was the the the guy who um Pragoian that was the dude uh that was working for Putin. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Putin chef. He blew him up. He blew him out of the sky eventually. He Yeah. He had a catastrophic uh airplane failure. Crazy. What surfaceto air missile? What? Yeah. They shouldn't have been flying that missile there. Um, what bad luck. Um, so he also had uh I think he it was called the Internet Research Organization. Uh, and the Internet Research for organization was was the Russian Troll Farm, right? Um, and I mean it just sounded like you you read reports from the people who were working in in these these uh troll farms and the the conditions sound brutal like you know you've got to write something like 700 posts a day. um you know either supporting or denying or just just fighting with people online under the guise of you know an American from Texas or whatever. Um and uh at a certain point they were like well can we make things happen in the real world from online? And so they did this one operation that I just think is hilarious and brilliant which was uh it was called free hot dogs and they created an event on Facebook in in Central Park in New York City that was just like free hot dogs. We're going to have free hot dogs in in Central Park. Uh there were no free hot dogs, spoiler alert. Uh but uh what they did was they had a Russian active measures agent go and just like see who showed up. a lot of people showed up for free hot dogs. And so what they found out was they could now make people take real life action through online events. Now this changed into uh full-on demonstrations. So there were these two groups that they were trying to to get to fight each other. Um, and I one was called like uh the heart of Texas and then the other one was called like um I want to say like uh uh USA Muslims uh some some sort of Islamic thing uh uh about uh uh Muslims in the United States. And they started essentially like counterprotests against both of these groups. But both groups were operated by Russian troll farms. And of course, one group had almost had a quart of a million people in it. The other group had a quart of million people in it. So suddenly you have real life division and an actual protest and counterpro um protest that was being jinned up from St. Petersburg by a bunch of people posting. And now this process has gotten so much easier that it's insane. with artificial intelligence and LLM, you can have actual agents, uh not not human agents, but but uh LLMs running around the internet and uh just generating hundreds of thousands of posts for you. That's wild. There's a fascinating paper about this and uh it was about a Chinese researcher who sort of predicted this. Uh I can't remember. Uh it's a there is a RAND report on this. Uh I think if you look up um uh uh Chinese disinformation uh then you can you can read the Rand report about it. Um but there was a there's a Rand report. Yeah. I you know most of the most if not not all I mean there's there's certain uh classified rand reports. Yeah. Um and then Rand reports that that are classified and then eventually declassified. Uh but I think you'd be surprised how Yeah. Chinese different. That's Yep. Um, these reports are are fantastic and they're they're incredibly dense. Um, so yeah, they're all publicly available as well. Um, I don't know if it's this one that talks about it, but um, there was a Chinese computer scientist who sort of saw the LLM uh, uh, large language model AI uh, opportunity coming. And initially he was sort of laughed at and they were like, "Well, that that's not actually going to be a thing." But he he came up with the idea of these uh artificial intelligent agents, but he called them souls, right? So you would come up with a digital soul or an army of souls, but really what these were were very realistic um uh social media profiles that had, you know, a full history. So you could sort of vet somebody's full history. uh all of these artificially intelligent generated uh imagery online accounts online accounts and then you would start having those accounts run around the internet and posting various things and LLMs were doing all this uh well so that's what he predicted and I think that this is something that we'll probably start seeing a lot more of um because it's just it's so easy you know a lot of the a lot of the barrier to entry that that previous generations of of psy psychological warfare fighting had was legitimacy, right? Um, going back to that operation operation Neptune, the fake and the lake, you think about how much they had to do in order to quote unquote uncover these Nazi documents, right? You had to have foragers work for months creating realistic fake Nazi documents. They even went so far as to take the steamer trunk and artificially age it so that not only would the steamer trunk be able to hold these fake documents, but it could be identified realistically as something that uh that was at that time period not as a fake. And then you have all these fake documents discovered by fake divers. In fact, uh um Aans was one of the divers as far as I know. Um, and then you have a real media team that shows up there. Yeah. So, that's an enormous barrier to entry. Like, you have to have this army of forgers working for months to make sure that everything stands up to scrutiny. Now, you have an artificial intelligence agent that can work, you know, within a matter of seconds to sound plausible or to sound realistic. uh then you can launder the idea through any number of different websites to make it sound as if this is somebody speaking from uh a measure of authority. Yeah. And so as the bar lowers to uh uh affecting the information space, it becomes easier and easier for both state actors and non-state actors to start messing with the uh the information space of a country. Yeah. If something sounds sensational enough or sounds logical enough, all it takes is one person to report on on that story. No matter where no matter how reputable the original original foundational source is, as long as there's a second source, somebody who reports on that, someone someone else might find that interesting, might make a video about that. Some other bigger uh reporter or content creator could see that and make a video that goes like really viral. And then once you get two or three sources removed, then it's just like a free-for-all. People aren't going to be going back to the original source to see if that was a Russian agent or a Russian or a Chinese SCOP. Well, and and I they're going to run on it because it's a huge story that's going to get them a lot of page views and make them a lot of money. I mean, I've heard you, you know, dealing with this. I guess I'm, you know, I'm a fan of your show as well. Um, so I I listen to a lot of your episodes, but I I hear you sort of struggling with this uh from time to time uh regarding like UFOs and and Egypt stuff, right? You know, you have so many different conflicting reports and then there's so much information in the space uh and the original sources are obfiscated from from you and from anybody, you know, I want to know where the UFOs are, too. This is something that that you know, some buddies of mine uh talk about at Rand. Uh you guys talk about UFOs at RAND. Totally. Yeah. where like you know uh I I took a um uh I I took a course on on space stuff and anytime like a new professor come in we like they know they got they they got to know but then you also realize how much is how stovepiped information is and and you know if anyway so the the thing that I I think is it must be really frustrating for you uh and it's certainly frustrating for me when it's like okay I don't know how to vet any of this information because the information comes from a place of secrecy already. So, anybody that's going to claim some authority, whoever seems the most convincing from that space of authority, I guess they're right. And then, you know, uh when there's conflict in the the space, uh it seems like, uh, everybody's just going to throw the other guy under the bus and be like, "Oh, that's a scop. That's CIA. They're they're, you know, little green men are are CIA." But, but these aliens, like the Plleadenss, they are definitely like legit. Right. Um, think about like think about it like this. Imagine if um a person like Joe like Joe Rogan would be a good example. I don't know. I mean, I'm sure he does quite a bit of background and research on his guests before they come in, but maybe there's one day where he was hung over or in a rush to do something and he came across some article or some someone forwarded him some some Instagram clip of somebody talking about something really interesting to him and he was like, "Oh, [ __ ] yeah. Get this guy on the show." Right? And this guy comes on the show, talks about all kinds of crazy things that no one's ever heard of or things that are blowing his mind that he finds super interesting, does the puts puts out the podcast, gets millions and millions and millions of views. Now all of a sudden there's all these millions of other podcasts that are trying to get this same guy on their show. They don't have to do any Joe Rogan had him on. Yeah. What what what other what other than the fact that you know this person's talking about it's going to get you a ton of views and make you a lot of money. What other background checks do you need to do on this guy? because he was on the number one podcast in the world. Yeah. Because they've leveraged the authority of that, right? Exly. Think how easy that must be for some I mean, if there were Russian or Chinese or any kind of uh foreign agents doing that kind of work. Well, you also I mean, you know, a lot of a lot of what I've learned in in studying national security uh uh you know, at at Rand, which I I should say is a fantastic program and and like the uh the the teachers that we have are like it's it's really cool to be in be in a room with with people who who think about this stuff at all times. Um but you know, one of the things that you sort of consistently discuss is like cost benefit, right? Um, I think often times conflict is really fought on a spreadsheet first, which is how do you maximize the impact to while also lessening the cost and information space attacks just happen to be really cheap, you know, and and getting cheaper all the time. Um, so long as you have access to that messaging surface or you have access to that point of authority. Um and and sometimes like the idea is I don't care as much to change people's thoughts. I just care that they act a different way. So the thought can be any number of things. It's not necessary that you change somebody's beliefs. You just want them to act in a way that is strategically important to whatever your aims are. Have you noticed on the internet? I don't know how many how much time you spend reading comments or how much time you spend scrolling through X. Just uh comments uh just on on the video that I did here last time and just got absolutely shredded. I'm surprised you came back. I did. Yeah. Congratulations for overcoming that. Thank you. I I am a deep state operative and uh you guys are all right in the comments. So, you know, I'm I'm here uh again to be hurt emotionally. Um it seems like on at least in comment sections I've noticed this recently that um blaming Israel for everything seems to be in vogue right now. Yeah. And I notice it more and more in comments though like like comments on Twitter or X and on YouTube. Like for example, I saw a clip the other day of I think it was actually a clip of Joe Rogan's podcast where he was talking to a bunch of like MMA dudes. Uh or no, it was Eddie Bravo. Okay. He was talking he was talking to him about JFK. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. And then that would be the right guess for that. And then every single comment on that video was like not one mention of Israel. I'm I can't [ __ ] believe Joe Rogan must be an Israeli agent. He's an op. Because he didn't say the word Israel when they were talking about JFK. There's there's this crazy thing where everybody there's a lot of people on the internet that want to blame Israel for killing JFK. That seems like a stretch. I I don't know. I I'd love to love to hear their argument for that. Um I I Well, there's two there's two easy arguments against it, right? It's because in 19 in 1963 a did Israel have the means to kill JFK and wrap up the FBI and the CIA to work with them to cover it up and to make it happen. Is that the is that the the general argument for that kind of thing? That that's one of them. Would would the it was would Israeli intelligence or the or Israeli military be able to get the US military, the US, the um CIA and the FBI to help them kill their own president because of what the the argument for it is because people say Israel wanted the nuclear a nuclear bomb and and Kenny wouldn't let him have it. Got it. And right after Kennedy was killed, um I think some uranium was smuggled out of a plant in Pennsylvania. Okay, that's true. That that did happen. But to say that they killed the president over that and got the entire US government and intelligence agencies to help them do it is kind of crazy. That's really [ __ ] crazy to say. And then and then to to even think that they would want to do would consider going that far just to get some nuclear material is also insane. And on the other hand, you also have the entire US military and joint chiefs of staff that wanted to commit a full-on thermonuclear war across the whole entire world. They wanted to nuke China and Russia because that was the one point in history where we had the most nuclear weapons and Russia had very very little at that point. They didn't start ramping up their nuclear arsenal until like 19. It was like a year after Kennedy was killed, right? So, it was a boy that we had the most, they had the least. And we wanted to [ __ ] fully full full-on nuke everyone because we knew that they would if they nuked us back we would only lose, you know, um maybe 100 million people, right? And waiting 5 years, it would be catastrophic. Yeah. So that's the most plausible reason why why Kennedy got killed because the Joint Chiefs of Staff wanted full-on war. He didn't want war. He was pulling everybody out of Vietnam. It was the whole Bay of Pigs thing, all that stuff combined. Um but everyone wants to blame Israel. Yeah, I I think that part of this is is also and also a lot of people want a lot of UFO people think that it was because of UFOs. What? There's a there's there's so many different flavors of JFK. I was going to say I like I just because of the the the release recently I was like I got to get into this cuz I honestly I just haven't haven't researched. I've been too busy with with Unrecognized Nations. Um and then I I started dipping a toe into the waters and I'm like this goes way too deep. this will either like consume all my life or or but immediately I was I was really confused to sort of like what the dominant most um you know most plausible theories were. Um but I think you know um it's interesting you say it like it's either it's either UFOs or or Israel. Israel clearly the the usual suspects. Right. Right. Right. But I I think that this this also sort of speaks to um like in in scholarship and in academia, there's this idea of like um uh somebody looking somebody on a dark street looking for their keys under the only place that there's a a street light on. It's like, well, the the keys have to be here because it's the only place I can see. you know, Israel and UFOs are top of mind for a community that's interested in JFK and the the truth thereof. So, the it seems like stitching together this this uh this grand plan is more plausible because those things are the things that they're already interested in. they already have a sort of working model for how the world works as leveraged by, you know, some somewhere in between UFOs, uh, Israel, and probably what, like the pyramids. Yeah, maybe. I'd imagine. Yeah, there's a recent thing that came out about the pyramids, too. Seems like [ __ ] Did you I I I sent it I sent that thing to a uh um an Egyptology friend of mine uh and and he basically told me to not bother him ever again with anything like Yeah. Yeah. He was like, "Yeah, a lot a lot of people think it's bullshit." I don't I haven't like looked at the whole report, but Well, and I So, this is um uh this is one of those those like there are certain areas in which um uh psychological operations thrive. Uh my uh my girlfriend has a uh uh a joke right now that anytime I say psych psych psychological operations or scops, she has to take a shot. Um and uh uh she's not dead yet. Um uh but she would be if that was true. She's on two weeks into rehab. That's right. Yeah, she's getting better. Um but anyway, like this is kind of the space that that these these things thrive. So um one of the original like people at at Rand um uh was a guy named Kenneth Arrow and he uh created this uh this rational actor model, right? and and the rational actor model or um uh the rational actor theory is basically that that people are going to like maximize their own benefit in any given situation um and nation states will do something similar. So I was doing some research into that and I was like well what are the things where does the theory really fall apart of the rational actor model right and it was really interesting to see the thing the places that the rational actor model falls apart are really the the sort of weak spots in terms of getting people to believe parallel realities. So uh biases just cognitive biases are are one one way of of leveraging information into somebody's head. So, a good cognitive bias, particularly what with what you just talked about is uh the availability bias. Like, you know, somebody has just come from reading an article about UFOs and now they're reading about JFK and they're also reading about Israel at the same time. Suddenly, they have a grand theory about how they're all connected. I can see that. I can see the idea there and and how that makes sense. But at the same time, I feel like a lot of these comments, at least that I'm reading, they see it seems and and also the sudden rise to this kind of rhetoric online, it seems very unnatural to me. Mhm. Almost like it's some sort of bot farm or something. I mean, that technology is totally available. I think that um you know, this is one of the things that I um uh I was uh I've been talking with one of the sort of key researchers on this kind of stuff. Um uh his his name is actually Rand. Uh so Rand Wantsman. Uh everybody should go follow him on LinkedIn because he has this fantastic LinkedIn. Yeah. Like weirdly on LinkedIn. He really he really rocks. Everybody here that has a LinkedIn account. Well, he has he has this incredible uh so he posts a Do you have a LinkedIn account? I do. Yeah. And you know currently uh uh open to networking. So do you post on there? No. No. Okay. Not usually. Um but uh but Ran posts this um uh a lecture series that he did years ago uh called uh defense against the dark dark arts of psychological manipulation. And so it's basically like a slide a day that that talks about how psychological manipulation happens. And one of the things that he talks about is a cognitive DDoS attack. So what does DDoS mean again? Uh denial of service. It's basically like a hacking attack where you have a a bot farmer or just a lot of people sort of like query a website over and over again until the website shuts down. So what this looks like on the cognitive level is uh let's say you're waiting for an important piece of mail um and you go to your mailbox and uh that message that you're waiting for isn't in there, but you have a hundred other pieces of mail that say nonsense on them or they're junk mail, right? um the next day you have a thousand pieces of mail, right? Eventually it's going to be too costly from your time and your just effort to go through all of those messages to find the message that you actually want and eventually it's going to just be uh yeah, it's just too costly to go through all of that information in order to to find what the signal is. There's too much noise, not enough signal basically, right? And so by sort of assaulting, let's say, a hashtag or a news piece with a bunch of information that is sort of nonsensical. In fact, I think Steve Bannon calls this flooding the zone with [ __ ] Essentially, you can make the noise go away or be so reduced that you're never going to be able to hear the signal within it. So when you're talking about potentially bot farms are just dumping messaging into these spaces, there might be it it could very well be it could be a cognitive DDoS attack where there is a bunch of noise going into a a space just because they they're whoever is trying to obiscate the signal is doing so. Um, I mean, I think this is something that that you certainly experience with UFOs as well, where it's like everybody is coming in with their own hot take on UFOs and also they're fighting in the space at the exact same time. So, the the game isn't to generate a truth statement from the conversation. The game is to win the conversation, right? And that doesn't actually surface the truth, right? I mean, I don't know. I I'm still I you you have no incentive to prove anything right or wrong, right? It's it's just to gather more eyeballs. This is this is uh uh I I've I've been writing on on uh my newsletter about um uh sort of trying to coin these new these new phrases, right? Um and so this is something I call the Napoleon's penis problem. I saw your TikTok. Yeah. Right. Okay. So, uh I I'm I'm trademarking it for the world right now. Uh Napoleon's penis problem. Ever have one of those days where you have tons of tasks, you're on the move, and then you finally realize you haven't eaten yet? That's me between the gym, my kids, the podcast, and working with the CIA. Which is why I keep my Hule Black Edition literally everywhere. What used to be powder now comes as a drink. Try it out yourself and get 15% off with the code Danny at hule.com/danny. It's stupidly convenient, and I keep it in my truck. There's no prep, no hassle. Just grab it, crack it open, and boom, you're good to go. It's cheaper and healthier than fast food, and so it's an absolute no-brainer. It comes in four flavors: chocolate, vanilla, iced coffee, and strawberry banana. My go-to is chocolate because it's smooth, not overly sweet, and I seriously feel full after drinking one of them. It's not a burst of carbs or a protein brick. It's just the perfect balance for me. Plus, I know I'm getting everything I need from the nutrients, protein, fiber, vitamins, the whole deal. No weird gaps in my diet and no crashing later in the day. For me, Hule is a lifesaver after the gym, too. 35 grams of protein means my muscles actually get what they need. And on those mornings where I'm running on fumes, vitamin B12 helps keep me from completely running out of steam. Hule just makes life easier. It's good for you. It keeps you going. And it actually tastes decent. And with over 400 million bottles sold, they have to be doing something right. New customers, visit hule.com/danny today. And use my code Danny for 15% off your first order, plus a free gift. That's code DNY for 15% off your first order. Refuel with Hule. It's linked below. Now, back to the show. And it's the idea that so uh uh Napoleon famously had his his penis uh cut off and imbalmed uh and sent to his lover uh cuz I don't know, he's Napoleon. Was this in his will? It was. There are different there are different reports on why exactly. Some people even say that the the um like the priest that was around was mad at him. The weird part is that none of those reasons are important. The weird part is that we know his penis got cut off and inbalmed at one point. Really? That's a fact. That is a fact. Are there other images of this? Do we know is there hard evidence? Can you find something about spent so much time looking for an image of Napoleon's penis that is just so Yeah. Yes. Exactly. So, um, we know that it went up for auction in several places. Um, and I think the last place that we have it coming up for auction uh is like in the 1920s at uh uh some some big New York auction house. One person, the most plausible uh case of somebody owning it was actually a guy who is a urologist and I mean, you know, cuz classic uh convenient. Yeah. Right. uh urologist from New Jersey uh who is just of course he lived in [ __ ] New Jersey, right? Yeah. Shout out to Julian Dory. Um uh he uh you know purchased this thing and he was also a big collector of of all these other you know sort of strange chachkis. But there is also there are other claims to who owns Napoleon's penis, right? But we're in a situation here, right, where you can find the truth. Like you can do a DNA test of the truth, but all of the actors within that system just have negative incentives based upon actually finding out what the truth is. Because what could happen is they do some DNA test and then suddenly they're like, "Wait a second, I have somebody else's dick. Now it's worthless." And now it's worthless. Right? So there are certain circumstances in which it is a a negative incentive to actually surface the truth. And I think that this happens in places like the UFO community, in conspiracy communities, and certainly in political communities. Moonlanding, right? That's a perfect example of it. I think one thing too that I like constantly have to be on guard against is like how fun all these stories are. Like I love them. Like it's like it's American mythology, right? Like the the the conspiracy theories are the American art form. Like there are there are mythmaking because we don't have these sort of like deep cultural myths, but we do have a certain apparatus of sense making around these things that we all sort of share, right? And I think that by making sense of them in these ways that are one really entertaining and super interesting, uh, and two, uh, some of the stuff is partially real, um, it allows us to feel as if we have a a lot more control and agency in a world that is often really chaotic. And instead of being run by people who are, you know, masterminds and and crafting our own reality around us, really, they're kind of incompetent, you know, like it's it's a lot more comforting to me to me anyway that like some evil mastermind is twisting a mustache and and you know, bending the world to their their uh uh their will than it is that somebody, you know, sent an email the wrong place and then suddenly, you know, uh war plans were leaked. Why do you think that is? Why do you think it is that our society is the one that is most prone to this kind of stuff? The mo it seems like we're the most prone to ideological subversion or divide or we're like the it seems like I don't know cuz I haven't been to a lot of countries but it seems like we are the most fractured and we have so many things going wrong like we have not just in our minds but like I think 40% of the US population is obese. I mean it's it's not good. Yeah. I mean, do you think it has anything to do with and and you've been to a lot more countries than I have, but like do you think it has anything to do with religion or religious ideology? I think there's there's, you know, there is a portion of the American character that that has um, you know, a religiosity to it and there's also a portion of the American character that is a a very like individual. I'm going to find out for myself. I'm going to do it for myself. Like I've been in countries that are very um communally based and and and countries that are are very individualistic. And I think the far end of the spectrum is and Americans tend to be much more individualistic and and sometimes that can mean that uh somebody has you know an individualistic view of reality. Um I don't necessarily think that that the US is is more prone to this. I think that I think that the that our information space is just more open and it's also more globally important. You know, like any English PE person can do a really good American accent because they grow up with American media, right? Um uh and it doesn't go the other way. Um there is uh like I I think you know in my in my my research of of like well how do we conduct um information space defense in the United States I start to think about like well what are the things that people kind of like get and enjoy from American media because that acts as a cultural ambassador for us and it's like I have never been through uh you know uh traveling through uh Eastern Europe especially in Albania where I usually live uh and not met somebody that can quote every single episode of Friends really huge huge there and that you know is acting as or like Big Bang Theory like that acts as a cultural ambassador for us um and and that's just because our information space really is spread out through the entire world um it goes through our movies, it goes through our music, it goes through sitcoms Um, and frankly, I think that's like I would much rather somebody get introduced to American culture from sitcoms than, you know, from from uh military actions for for me personally. I' I'd much rather them have familiarity with that. Um, but also it's not to say that like American specific conspiracy theories don't end up in in other parts of the world. Like I was it was right I think it was right before uh the uh end of the the last Trump administration and I was in the back of a cab in Albania and this guy I was I I was traveling to uh Tanzania and so I needed a COVID test at the time and uh I was just talking with the cab driver and at a certain point he's like so do you believe it and I'm like what and he's like co and I was like I mean I'm on way to get a COVID test. So, like I got to take it to travel. And then that just sort of unccorked, you know, like all of the the Big 10 conspiracy theories. And he was he, you know, talking at me for about like 20 minutes about um how, you know, every every conspiracy theory under the sun. Uh it was like Qanon and then uh you know, JFK and probably some UFO stuff in there, but he's talking real fast and Albanian is my second language. Uh and then at a certain point he was like you know what's going to happen and he gave me a date. I can't remember what the exact date was. He's like you know on this date what's going to happen is uh the US is going to come to Albania and they're going to get rid of all of our corrupt politicians and you like and he gave me his phone number and on that day he was like you call me and you're going to see that it happens. And so the the conspiracy theory adapted for that Albanian point of view, right? It became this uh almost like this this prophetic thing that was was a godscent for him in particular because specifically he felt that he was, you know, being ripped off by the country that he was in. And I think this is one of the spaces that that these things thrive too. Um not Annie Jacobson. Um uh the book Surveillance Capitalism um uh Shashana Zubof incredible book uh surveillance capitalism such a fantastic book but she has this concept in it that I I always think about when uh when we we think about like well how how do people get their mind changed? How do they sort of switch tracks? Because I think we've all seen this happen. And I know that I see it, you know, uh, after spending a couple years abroad and then I come back and, you know, somebody has has ideologically changed remarkably and it's like, well, how did this happen? And so she has this idea of the right to a future tense. And the right to a future tense means that people sort of have this psychological need to believe that in their future things are going they're going to be healthier, wealthier, and more secure, right? Even if marginally. And so if they are deprived of that right of a future tense, they're going to start believing in something even though it doesn't bear much relationship to reality, they'll start believing in something that gives them that same right to a future tense. And this was something that I was seeing from that that cab driver in Albania who actually randomly ended up in his cab like 3 months later cuz there's just so many cabs in in Toronto, Albania. Um, and uh, I I didn't want to, you know, like say, you know, that was the nothing happened that you said because like I mean, I'd imagine that he he felt a little like depressed about it because he wanted his life to become remarkably better based upon the fulfillment of those prophecies. And at a certain point, we were talking and he's like, "Yeah, none of those things happened, but you know what? Something's really messed up." And I was like, "Yeah, we can agree on that. It's difficult to sort of see a future where everybody is healthier, wealthier, and more secure right now." Yeah. And so pouring our belief for that that idea of a future tense into fringe communities or to political strong men or whoever, like that feels good because I want it to come from somewhere and I want that information to be reliable. Um but it's just difficult right now, right? Um and I think these are the spaces that that psychological operations thrive. Yeah, you can definitely see that especially in the west or in the United States where there is a lack of cohesive um religious worldview and and people try to map this onto UFOs onto psych even psychedelics. there's like a religious bent to people who are really into psychedelics and um which is interesting because have you seen any reporting or any of the recent stories that have come out about how Silicon Valley or there's this big movement to sort of map Christianity onto everything Silicon Valley is doing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I've heard I've heard a lot about this. I've I've talked about this a bit. Um uh so it's crazy, man. Silicon Valley used to be like anti-Christian, right? And to even to be religious in Silicon Valley was was was crazy. That that was you would never see that. Seemed a bit anathema to to Now you have Peter Teal that you know who is a gay Christian billionaire and other uh big Silicon Valley names and kingmakers in Silicon Valley holding these conferences, these religious conferences. Right. Yeah. So, I I was um I was talking with a buddy of mine who's uh very like super super like AI positivist guy, which is kind of unusual like uh and he's actually kind of like uh AI pilled me for lack of a better word of of saying like actually, you know, AI could like has a possibility of being a net benefit for for humanity. Um uh his name is uh is Tate Tower. I think Tate Lower at uh at uh Twitter is his thing if you ever want to like feel better about AI. Um which is harder and harder these days. But we were talking a bit about like there is this sort of belief uh in the the sort of halls of like the the tech priesthood um that you can almost arise an AI god, right? Um and that it would be a sort of like allconsuming um platform of belief that would be almost like engineered perfectly to fill that god-shaped hole in humanity. Like you know when Nze said, you know, you've you've killed God, right? Um and then I believe Young said something along the lines of like even if you kill God, you're going to invent new God. somewhere within the human character, there is that god-shaped hole, and people fill it with whatever they want, you know, there is um uh or whatever seems relevant to them. I shouldn't I I shouldn't, you know, look down on anybody who's filling that god-shaped hole with UFO stuff. Like, good on you. Like, go for it, man. Well, there is a push to do that. Yeah, there's a huge push to do that. There's people that are like deep in in in the intelligence, like legitimate former CIA people who are coming out saying that this is angels and demons. These are biblical things. Yeah. Yeah. And I know Beck talks about that, right? Beck lover. Oh, probably. Everybody does. Talks about Angel. No, like I'm saying like there's not just Beck, but there's legitimate like legendary CIA officers that are like we know are CIA people who are coming out and saying this that are also UFO people, right? Which I mean, [ __ ] Tucker Carlson talks about it. He like he believes that these are [ __ ] biblical things. Didn't he have a thing of uh like that he was like attacked by an alien and or no no no by by a demon at one point? He he like actually said that he was attacked by I had heard that one. Yeah, I I heard that recently. I I mean, you know, I I'm not informed enough about either the Bible or UFOs to put them together, right? Like I mean I went to Catholic school and I I like UFOs but like to create an allconsuming philosophy where there's a total verimilitude between you know what ver similitude uh um a uh anequality right uh between yeah SAT 1240 um they only let nerds into Rand our our football team sucks. Um, there isn't one. Uh, but chess team though. There we got a ping pong table. Yeah, there's a ping pong table there. Ping pong's not for nerds. Ping pong. It's only for jocks. Um, but uh yeah, like to to say that, you know, you have these two sort of like vastly different bodies of literature, right? I've got I've got uh the Bible over here on one hand and then I have a bunch of like UFO stuff originating from the 1940s in another hand. Yeah. I mean it it feels comforting to put those things into one unified worldview. I think I would just kind of have to understand what the bridging mechanism between those two are. Yeah. Then again, I also think that like maybe I just like I I don't access the mystical like other people do cuz I think well no to me it's just interesting how there's so many efforts that seem to be from coming from very powerful sources trying to inject or infuse Christianity into various things that are in the popular culture right now. Well, and also uh finding a way of of technology coming into that too is really interesting. Like there are and and you know when you talk when you talk about AI at certain levels like they it becomes specifically like mystical and religious sounding like there's in the in the AI community there is this uh the concept of the shog um if you've ever heard of the so the shog is like um I think it's an HP Lovecraft creature. Um, so just imagine, you know, sort of cosmic horror like unimaginable creature. Um, and the shog goth is this sort of um uh anthropomorphized black box. Oh, sweet. Yeah, you got a cool picture of it. What is that? That's the show goth, baby. Whoa. So the the Oh, go to the go to the top left. Yeah, go to that one. That one's cool. Hell yeah. So, it's this sort of like anthropomorphized creature of the black box of AI, right? That we're feeding all of this information into it and then it's growing. It's gaining agency. and the the fact that that it was an HP Lovecraft character, which is this sort of like cosmic horror idea of like it almost doesn't necessarily even see humanity as a you know a functional agent in the world because it's so much more complex than us be almost like you know how we look at ants right and the show goth is like well we keep pumping information into this thing and outwardly like it's really helpful cuz like I didn't want to write that tweet anyway. Uh but inwardly we actually don't know what its aims will be. And there's even some thoughts of like I I know I said that I was I was like AI you know positivist but I'm I'm really trying. Um there's this concept of Roo's basilisk. Have you ever heard of that? No. So the Rokoso's basilisk is this uh this idea that at a certain point the uh the like collective intelligence of of AI is um almost keeping notes on who's for it and who's against it and that those against it will sort of end up being punished by the by the AI. But ultimately this all depends on like can we find alignment between humanity and artificial intelligence and it seems like with this the the sort of Silicon Valley groups that you're talking about what they're maybe attempting to do is is try to leverage the authority of both a biblical text uh specifically the the Christian biblical text and the leveraging the power of artificial intelligence. We already know that, you know, Christianity has been a very successful religion. Um, so layering these two together really gives you an enormous amount of power to sort of bend reality to your will. Whether or not that's actually happening, I have no idea. I've heard about it a little bit. Um, but you know, these are two really powerful concepts. Um, and and it's really easy to proliferate ideas with artificial intelligence. Um, so I, you know, I I also I think that that only in 2025 would you would you ever say like gay Christian billionaire, right? Uh is, you know, attempting to to sort of like manipulate the world in in some respect. Yeah. No, I I always wonder like my perspective on it is with when you have people like Peter Teal and people like uh Alex Karp, the CEO of Palunteer. Yeah. Yeah. who are very different in certain ways where like one of them's super liberal, the other one's really conservative. They're both war hawks. They both have I mean, well, Peter is the owner, but they the com those companies that they run are military-industrial complex companies. They get paid by the US military or the US intelligence agencies or they're funded by the US government to protect national security and to um they're like a defense contractor, right? There are companies that were formed. I always I've said this before, but like if you want to like create the most successful company, you you don't just make a company and then go and find customers. You build a company that's based on a customer that has a huge amount of [ __ ] money. Yeah. Like the [ __ ] uh defense department, right? And then you develop more customers by making sure that that problem maintains. Exactly. Right. So I wonder how much this movement to map Christianity onto this stuff and to get more people in Silicon Valley invested in Christianity, what does that have to do with with national security? I don't know. Oh, because like you have like cuz if you look at other countries and their worldview and their religious worldviews like an extreme example would be Muslim countries that are religious extremists to the extent where they're willing to strap a bomb onto their chest and detonate it to us. We are like we worship the next Netflix series, The Kardashians and Tik Tok. Yeah. So like if you wanted to make us a more powerful country, I think one of our weakest links is our people and our ideologies and what you're talking about like this this fifth generation sort of it's easy to divide us away from one another. There's a great paper, I don't know, maybe you can find it um by uh Mike Mazar. It's talking about um restoring American dynamism. And one of the things that he talks about are are these, you know, these periods of time in American history where um almost like the the the dynamism has gone out of the United States. And a lot of times when this is happening is um is because there is um you know uh there aren't shared uh beliefs. There's an us versus them mentality that has proliferated the culture. You know 1960s when there was you know uh pro-war anti-war movements. Yeah. Communism early 2000s. Sure. And and a part of being in the United States is is and part of being a citizen in the United States is saying your government shouldn't and shouldn't want to enforce your beliefs on you. But there is a difficulty when there is a completely different understanding of what reality is largely on one side and then the other side. Yes. And I think that one of the the problems with this too and the the you know again this these areas where with fifth generation warfare really thrives that we've started to see politics and even technology as a zero- sum game right that if I win my opponent loses like my side of the aisle won and therefore I get to do a touchdown dance as my my opponent loses. You even see this with, you know, people who've won an election and then people on the other side saying like, well, I hope you're happy. Like things are worse. It's like, no, it's like there is one country. Everybody's a citizen of that country. You know, it's not a zero- sum game because if it becomes legitimately a zero- sum game, then we descend deeper into chaos. Um, and that's not in the best interest of the United States, but it is in the best interest of competitors. And so we have a fantastic ability to allow people to share ideas freely, but we also can't say, "Hey, this is what you believe." Because that's just not what how we do things as Americans, right? But if you can some sort of if you can covertly inject something, some sort of cohesive idea into the US population like Christianity in a way that seems natural. Why wouldn't you try to do that? Like for example, there's uh there's a whole another movement in the psychedelic world to try to to try to merge psychedelics and Christianity as well. Whoa. Interesting. Yeah. There's this book by Brian Marescu where he makes the case called Them Immortality. He makes the case at the end of it that uh it would be beneficial to introduce psychedelics into the church now to help people. And and one of the crazy things about that is because, you know, you can really manipulate somebody with psychedelics. People's minds become way more manipulative. Manipul manipulatable and especially if people that are, you know, a lot of them who are going to church are probably not, you know, they they probably are looking for answers to things. And when you have somebody who is has a direct line to God who's running this and also has the power to give you psychedelics, that's going to make you way more submissive and way more malleable to whatever that is. And if you can do that, like also if you can do if you can give all these people psychedelics and and have these individual church fathers giving them a specific message, maybe that's a way you can do it. Well, I think that that especially religion and spirituality really talks, you know, there is no greater um uh right to a future tense than forgiveness in heaven, right? Like even if your life really sucks right now, at least when you die, you go to heaven. Like that is the ultimate belief in a future tense, right? Um and like you know, we have seen that um younger generations have become actually more conservative um at least as far as their their voting is concerned. Mhm. Um I guess the the question that I'd have and you know since I'm not a religious scholar at all um is you know what is the what is the benefit specifically of aligning with one spiritual text over another? Um is it just because that has been a part of the sort of spiritual DNA of the United States? Uh and and also there's a lot of diversity within Christian communities too. you know, I was I was raised Catholic, so it's it's very different than um you know, somebody who went to a mega church, right? Um and obviously wars have been fought for hundreds of thousands of years over who's doing Christianity, right? So could you potentially like, you know, create like some, you know, uh uh totally heterodoxical like version of of faith for the United States? I think it kind of goes back to that um that thing somebody from NASA said about uh faking the moon landing, right? Um so they were saying like, you know, if you would understand how hard it would be and how many people would have to work together in order to fake the moon landing, you'd realize it's easier to just go to the moon, right? Like, do you believe that? I do. Yeah. I think that it's I I think that there and I I've I've had uh uh Why is the moon landing the one that seems to be the most kookiest? Like if you believe in the moon landing was fake, you're you're a [ __ ] crazy person. But you can believe all these other conspiracies and people don't think you're out to launch like that. Oh, see I actually I disagree. I think I think flat earth is the kookiest. Oh, flat earth is the Yeah, right. I think flat earth is by far the kookiest. Or like flat earth is is the stupidest for sure. Tartarianism. Do you know Tartarianism? Uh I think I've heard of it. Yeah. It's like it's basically the sort of idea that there was uh there was a like a large chunk of history that was covered up by the powers that be uh that were actually like that like 200 years of history that was covered up by you know some shadowy cabal of the powers that be. Um, and that was because like, you know, there was this group of people called like the Tartarians and they had like zero point energy and they had giants and they had, you know, all sorts of like advanced technologies. Frankly, like as far as conspiracy theories is concerned, it's one of my favorites because it's just so cool. Like Yeah. Yeah. They they talk about how like um you know certain towers were like 0 point energy machines then Yeah. some like YouTube channel just like has a slow black and white footage of something old and like a really big door and they're like and see giants and they're like damn that is a really big door story checks out to me. Yeah, right. Moonlanding is definitely up there though with one of the things that you're you're stupid if you think the moonlanding was fake. I mean, I think that like I I try to have as like as much empathy as possible for for like fringe communities because it's like So, who you said that a lot of people would have to keep the secret for the moon faked? Yeah. How do you think do you think it's more than the Kennedy assassination as far as people that would have to know about it? Damn. Um, I think there Yeah, I think there would probably just be more people involved because there's there's more people involved with a uh with launching something into space. I mean, you've got Right. But they could have still launched somebody they could have still launched the astronauts into space, right? And just never gone to the actual moon. Maybe only the astronauts and a and a handful of people that were involved in like filming it or knowing about that stuff. I mean, my official opinion is UFOs did both. Yeah, that's that's that's why the the Tartarian UFOs did, but like all the people in the in the command center, you know, that were guiding the launch, they they knew they were launching them out to space and they still launched the astronauts into space, right? But the the fact that they went to the actual moon, you could easily like I think you could fake that without a lot without a ton of people knowing about it. Mhm. Wasn't that Wasn't there a movie that was made about that, too? There's a bunch of movies already about it. Yeah. Like a like a fiction movie made about that. Oh, no. I don't know. A fiction movie. I I there's like some is that Fly Me to the Moon. Isn't that like a romcom about about them faking the moon landing? Maybe. I heard about it. Yeah. I didn't see it, but I heard it was great. But like during that that period of time, the Cold War, there was so much [ __ ] going on. Yeah. Well, G of Tonkan, Kennedy's assassination and and during the Cold War NK Ultra, right? You know, the was it was it about that? Yeah. Yeah, that's it. Oh, that's hilarious. What does it say? Fly me to the moon. A two a 2024 American historical romantic comedy drama filmed by blah blah blah blah written by blah blah blah blah. Okay, let me see what the idea of the story is. Okay. A NASA launch director set against the backdrop of an Apollo 11 mission. The story follows Jones and Davis as she is tasked with creating a false moon landing in case the actual mission fails. Wow. Oh, that's that's another good point. Hollywood's telling us if they couldn't get Well, you know, that's the thing, though. Did they Did they Did they actually try? Is it plausible that they could have tried to do it and had a backup plan in case it fails and they can't do it? Because one of the biggest arguments for the fake for the for the fraud is that they couldn't get through that radiation belt. Yeah. But the Van Allen radiation the Van Allen Yeah. But that's that's a sort of fundamental misunderstanding of how the Van Allen radiation belt works. Oh, really? Yeah. It's because you uh Yes, that radiation does exist there, but it's still in a vacuum of space. So you can pass through it and it's not like you will be immediately irradiated. It's it's because of of how thermodynamics works in space. So it you can pass through it, but there is a heat signature there, right? Yeah. But have we ever sent have we ever done did we ever do tests sending like animals through the radiation belt and bring them back and and test them and see how they did? Because I know the Russians did. They said Yeah, they they sent dog and it died a couple days later. I can't remember the the name of the dog. Um, but they also sent Yuri Gaggeran up there, which is such a wild story. You know that Yuri Gagarin, the first man in space, he actually uh they sent him up past the radiation belt. That I don't know, but he was the first person to orbit space, which was must have been a wild thing for him. Like literally the first dude. Also, he grew up in like a mud shack without lights and he was the first person to like rotate around the earth and come back. Like how incredible. That's actually one of the reasons that I think like when I when I think about um you know how technology will advance within our lifetime, I think about Yuri Gaggaren, right? Because Yuri Gagarin, he literally grew up in a mud house with no lights. And then, you know, flash forward a couple of years and he's blasting off and is the first person in space. Like our version of, you know, growing up in that like mud hut somewhere in in Russia. Could be that like we grew up remembering, you know, a time without the internet or without cell phones or something. But that doesn't it's really hard for us to understand how exponentially technology will grow in our lifetime. Well, look how exponentially all technologies grow. Right. Right. Like look how look how crazy how how fast like AI has just evolved since it first came out. But the moon the Apollo mission technology is literally the only technology in human history in modern human history that hasn't doubled since the time we c heard it. It literally disappeared. M we haven't got like we we went to the moon in in ' 69 and through from 69 through 73 and we haven't been able to do it since. It's the only technology that hasn't ex exponentially gotten better or like doubled in its capacity or it ability to well so there are plans to go back to the moon. I don't know if they're if they're being scrapped right now with they keep getting pushed back. Yeah. If you look at uh Artemis is it of the Artemis Accords I think they just push it to like uh March of 2026. So the question right now is like does uh does Artemis go through which is a a transnational agreement to to go back to the moon or uh you know because because Elon Musk has become so deeply entrenched in the current administration uh are we just going fullon straight to Mars and obviously there are there are problems with that because well didn't he say we had to go to the moon first? A lot of people have said that we have to go to the moon first. And the reason being is because, you know, you need to have a sort of like base of operations somewhere off of Earth. Um, and Elon also said the reason they haven't gone to the moon is because they would need to refuel nine times to go go to the moon or to go to the moon. Ah, interesting. Establish. Yeah. Sustainable presence. So, there's three art missions. Uh, the first one's going to Oh, already launched and Hey, yeah, but it was unmanned. Oh, second one is scheduled for 2026. You third one 2020 April of 2026. Yeah. And I mean, you know, the by by sort of uh inter and there's also a lot of um uh private space companies now. They call them new space. They're basically the startup space of of of space companies. Um and I I've interviewed a couple of these people. It's really fascinating. Some people are are building full-on space habitats now. Uh I think that there's a company called Vast that's doing that. Um some are uh creating ways of of like storing material in space so that if you need it anywhere in the world it can just kind of be dropped down um to you know have on the earth and and space as like an emergent field is super fascinating. Yeah. Um have you ever heard the sound of Earth from space? No. Stephen, what does that sound like? Pull up the sound of Earth from space on YouTube. It's [ __ ] wild, dude. It almost sounds like you're It almost sounds like you're in the rainforest. The sound The monkeys. Well, it's from like It's from like plasma fields. Whoa. Yeah, cuz there's no You can click that. Yeah. This is the sound of the Earth's magnetic field. Oh, whoa. Oh, this isn't the one I saw. Go back. This is not This is not the one I saw. This must be fake news. This has got to be fake news. Maybe that one. Try that one. 12 hours. 12 hours. No, no, no. That's The rest of this podcast is just going to be us. Up, up, up. Right there. Click that one for 11 million views or 1 million views. Oh, you just passed you went right past it. There you go. Oh, now I'm getting the uh now I'm getting the uh uh rainforest feeling. These sounds are generated by energetic particles in Earth's plasmosphere, which are being tugged to and fro by the rotation of Earth's magnetic field. That's so wild. You see, there is a plasmosphere around Earth containing clumps of ions and electrons. As Earth and its magneettosphere rotate, the magnetic fields push through these particles, accelerating them in a wave called a plasma wave. Honestly, I'd love to sit next to a bar. That's good, Steve. Start start explaining plasma fields to you. Yeah. That's so weird. The other videos though sounded so different, right? Yeah. Yeah. Well, and and then I think we also demonstrated, you know, our own uh sort of appeal to authority here. It's like, well, this this one's got 3 million views. This is the one I want I want to be, right? like the the the English guy speaking at this point sounds like clearly the most reasonable. Uh but it's like all English guys. Yeah, for real. I um uh also going back to the moon landing thing, how come the first guy who ever stepped foot on the moon, which is which is without a doubt the most profound, groundbreaking thing that humanity has ever accomplished on Earth. Yeah. He's only done, I think, two interviews and the president had to ask him to do both of them. Is that right? Two. And one of them was super cryptic. Really? Yeah. He did one for like the 20th anniversary in front of like a college class and he was saying like we have to break through the lies of our history or something like that. Jeez. So if if you are if you are the person who achieved the most amazing astonishing feat of humankind, why have you only done two interviews? Maybe not. the president. He says he only he only does interviews the president specifically asked him to do. Yeah. It could be that he just doesn't like talking in public too, right? But wouldn't if you did if you accomplish something like that for the the purpose of solidifying America on the world stage as far as like technological innovation, you would think they would want you to do more get you would almost have to be forced to be in the public eye a little bit more than that, right? Yeah. A bit more. Yeah. I don't know. I, you know, I uh I spend most of my research on on on the Earth, but now I want to look into the moon more. Yeah. Yeah, that's interesting. And and also like you know how um pull up pull up Neil Armstrong's interview in front of the in front of the class in front of the college for the um moonlanding anniversary, I think. Wait till you hear this [ __ ] dude. Yeah, it's crazy. Today we have with us uh a group of students among America's best. To you we say we have only completed a beginning. We leave you much that is undone. There are great ideas undiscovered. Breakthroughs available to those who can remove one of truth's protective layers. What the [ __ ] does that even mean? You know, I I don't know. I haven't spent a ton of time uh uh with space people. Protective layers. I Well, I I've spent I spent a little bit of time I took I took a a space course which was pretty cool. But I I think that that one of the things that I noticed in terms of like talking with with folks that are working on space or working, you know, potentially in space in the future is this, you know, um desire that we maintained the pace that we had during the space race because funding fell off massively. Now the funding for NASA is is minuscule compared to how much it was. I I don't know if you can find it, but can you can you find the percentage of the US budget that that NASA was funded at the the time of the space race versus now? It was a lot higher. It was an enormous amount. And we but now a lot of that funding is going into SpaceX and other private companies. Yeah, it goes into SpaceX and then of course there's you know uh we've uh well not we I certainly haven't been involved in in uh privatizing space. Uh but there are private space companies that have demonstrated that you can create profit out of out of space. Um you know you've got you've got tourism. Yeah. Tourism is coming up. Um uh you know small satellites for for bespoke purposes. And this is actually one of the issues that that we're starting to see more and more which seems like yeah look at that. So 1960s to now um 60 billion uh in that's worth dollars. Uh in 2020 it was worth 60 billion a year. Um where does it say what it is now? Yeah. So around 4.4% in the 1960s and then.5 now. Yeah. Right. And so you imagine what but also a lot of that money has gone to private companies. Right. Yeah. And and private space is now is is now more open for business. Google this Steve. What was the memory on the NASA Apollo computers? The the um the I think it was their guidance computers computer memory. Yeah. Here we go. It's just like an original Game Boy. 4 kilobyt of RAM. Wow. Four kilob to get to the moon. Core rope memory. Incredible. And it's also just convenient that all that technology disappeared because you know what their excuse was why why they don't have any of that Apollo technology anymore because they accidentally over wrote over the hard drive. They were playing Doom. Yeah, they were they had to download the new Doom. They actually they actually did. Worth it. Fair. Fair. Totally worth it. That was a great game. It really changed changed the landscape for everybody. You know, this is this is also something I've been thinking about a lot more too, which is like uh what what is the the right amount of transparency with with when you have like an enormous thing like the national security apparatus like like intelligence agencies like NASA, you have this massive thing that everybody has buy in because all of our our tax dollars are going to it. I mean the world has buyin into it because the world is oftenimes affected by American foreign policy and American nationaluh security. We have a certain amount of transparency um especially in terms of the intelligence community because after the church commission they were like well we need you to reveal certain things you need to declassify things after a certain point. Um, so now we have a certain amount of transparency, but it seems like that amount of transparency doesn't do enough to actually make us trust these organizations more. In fact, it sort of throws more distrust into them. Like we we both know about like MK Ultra because those things were declassified. But declassification didn't end up making us trust these organizations much more. We were like, wait, so what are you doing now? Right? And so there's this this period of obs obfiscation right now like as far as what the intelligence community is doing, what space did previously, what the United States government is doing, but they're not transparent right now and the previous transparency that has been revealed uh has just done enough to sort of sew discord into the American imagination. But I think that's one of the difficulties with national security in general. National security is like trust. You really only think about it when it's broken. When something goes wrong, you think about it. Like we don't know about all of the operations that went really well because we shouldn't know about those things. Uh we do start to understand when things have gone not so well or things have been leveled at the American people as as was the case with with MK Ultra or some of the uh or um you know some of the other um uh Department of Defense things. Um, uh, I'm trying to think, uh, who are the Oh, the Tuskegee experiments. Oh, yeah. Is that right? Tuskkegee. The Tuskegee Airmen. Yeah. Yeah. Um, yeah. So, like we know when those things have gone wrong, but and that's why I actually think that that there we need to look at how we do transparency because the purpose of transparency is to uh establish greater trust. But what it has done seemingly in the United States is often times destroyed trust or eroded trust. And that's because we know things that have happened in the past that are are, you know, incredibly corrupt and and potentially leveled at the American people. So I I think this this eventually sort of goes back into the information space too where it's like if it becomes a really good target for anybody who wants to mess with the American information space to be like well look at that thing that you did in the past that the United States has been honest about presumably. Um well what do you think you're doing in the future? like anything that you can do to sort of like erode the trust of the American people between each other and between the American government certainly works to the benefit of global competitors which certainly points out the incentives for national security and law enforcement to be embedded in these social media companies like we found out there in the Twitter files which is really interesting and I I think that this is also right now there's there's a sort of there's a conversation going on in some national security circles which which I tend to like a lot which is uh at least I think it's a conversation that should be had which is how do we how do we create an environment where national security and national defense are uh separate but equally aligned. Right? So national security is really about ensuring the the life and livelihood uh and present of your population is secure into the future. So that could be anything from like energy policy and education to agriculture policy. That's a bigger circle than national defense, which is instead of making the lives of the American people much better, it's potentially making the lives of adversaries much worse for a punctuated period of time. Um, and those things have sort of become conflated that national security and national defense are the exact same thing. Same with war and defense, right? Yeah. Exactly. I mean, you know, the they added the D to ARPA to make it sound like we're defending ourselves, right? Yeah. And you know, there's also IRPA. No, I've never heard of Yeah, they're the uh What the hell is IRA? Intelligence Advanced Research uh Project Agency. Yeah, ARPA. They're all Yeah. Holy crap. Really interesting papers. How have I never heard about this, dude? I just heard about them. Um, but yeah, they they have uh you can go onto their website. They have tons of white papers. You know, I think you'd be surprised at how much of this stuff is is just totally open source. You can just go rooting around um the the classic Rand papers. In fact, there's some really cool ones on there. There's um uh there's one that was written by Isaac Azimov and it was literally talking about like trying to find a new a new planet for humanity. This is back in the 1960s when he was writing it. They have a famous paper about that was imagined a world circling spaceship. And as I was reading it, I was like, "Oh my god, did they ever actually build this word world circling spaceship?" And then I realized they were talking about satellites. So the like this initial paper just imagined what satellites would be in the future60s. Yeah, you can find it. Find uh the Sorry, I was being very demanding just now. Uh the white rabbit is talking. How you like that white rabbit? Uh I I'm speaking faster. But you don't feel like super jittery though, right? It's not It doesn't feel like caffeine, right? My eyelids are sweaty. White rabbit sweat in places he never thought you would. Uh what what what am I looking at? Oh. Uh so look at um uh Rand Classic Papers uh world circling spaceship. Have you seen the um the animations of what all the satellites look like orbiting the earth right now? Oh, it's wild, right? Yeah, it's insane. There it is. Yeah. Preliminary design of exper experimental world circling spaceship 1946. It wasn't even the 60s. Go to images. You can actually look up the real on Brave. You can check out the actual paper there. I think dude, the images and the animations of all the [ __ ] satellites that are orbiting the Earth right now, it it looks like flies buzzing around a dumpster. There's it's there's so many of them. Also, if you look at how many of them are owned and operated by uh SpaceX, it's it's pretty astounding. Uh, I think they my my numbers might be off here, but I I think they Steve find the uh the a video on YouTube of all of the satellites orbiting the Earth. They've got about 7,000 now. And I think the the goal is to reach to 13,000. Um, and so I think those are in Nothing to see here. Yeah, those are in uh low Earth orbit. Um, or click that. Holy [ __ ] How crazy is that, dude? I mean, honestly, you think about that from the perspective of aliens. Like, if aliens are watching, they're like, "Wait a second." Holy [ __ ] They got a lot of stuff. Look at that. Look how many are farther out. Yeah. Well, so this this uh see this red one? Um this long red elliptical orbit. Yeah. What is that one? I can't remember what that orbit is called, but there So, the the three main orbits are uh LEO, MO, and GEO. So, uh, low Earth orbit, uh, mid Earth orbit, and then geostationary orbit. Wa. And then there's That's [ __ ] terrifying. There's this one really long elliptical orbit that is is quite different from all of those. And usually that's used for um uh for spy satellites. Uh Royally, why spy satellites? Why do they have such a long orbit? Uh I I think it's because look at that [ __ ] Wow. Yeah. Well, they also have to be be uh very specifically hardened against radiation because they uh uh they're further and further out. And I I I think it's it's probably just for for defensive reasons. That's just it's going to be a lot lot harder to disrupt that. But also, fighting in space is is really not what you might think. Like there's no like the Star Wars fighting in space thing really isn't uh we're not there yet, you know? It looks like a [ __ ] junkyard. Space junkard. an enormous problem. So like um and and how many collisions how many satellite collisions are there, Steve? Is there is is there a stat on like um how many collisions per year there are with satellites in Earth in Earth orbit? There there aren't tons. Uh but it's a problem that's like consistently being worried about, right? Because if you have let's see say it's not consistently what go to [ __ ] Chrome. Yeah. Well, and I think we use Brave usually because there's no ads and it's not as as curated as Google. I think one of the reasons that it's not it's not usually uh reported is because then obviously there's there's you have to um uh attribute uh the damage of a a really exquisite system to uh maybe somebody launching something that that in a way that they shouldn't have. So this says one satellite is destroyed by collision with other satellites or space junk annually. Yep. And space junk is like we can track I think that's crazy. How many satellites are there total orbiting the earth? I don't know. But but this is something that we're worried about. This uh Kesler syndrome is really interesting. What is that? Kesler syndrome is this uh this idea that if you have one collision in space and uh suddenly you create this mass of space junk, then everything else that is within that orbit uh could potentially be impacted by that space junk. And then you make more space junk and then you make more space junk, right? And you can't track the space junk, right? Not only can you not Well, you can track down to the size of about a nickel. Oh, wow. But below that, even even something below the size of a nickel can still destroy your satellite, right? Right. Cuz it's flying so [ __ ] fast. Right. Potentially, if Kesler syndrome really happens and it gets worse and worse, not only does that stop us from launching new things into space out past low Earth orbit, but it even has an effect on whether or not we can observe space as much. there's this this um concern about uh having so much stuff flying in space that will no longer have dark skies and you need dark skies in order to uh use research telescopes to look out past Earth and so constraining the amount of uh of what would the skies look like if they were covered in satellites. God, I just hope there isn't like a Pepsi ad. Like I think there was actually a thing about that there that somebody was talking about uh okay so this says as of 2024 28,300 satellites are orbiting earth almost 59,000 um cataloged in total since the launch of Sputnik 1 and 57. And you have to realize too that that is only going to go up as the cost to launch goes down. you know, now there are all of these uh private launch companies that are are doing really interesting things like um I think there's a company called Spin Launch um and I think they launch out of the Mojave Desert, but you're talking about like a a much lower cost from a private industry to put your put whatever you want into space. Um, and as things privatize, they become uh more self-interested and and tend to talk a little bit less with, you know, um uh nation state- based uh space apparatuses. This is something I I Right. Right. that could be dangerous. I was writing uh um uh this last year I I was uh ghostwriting a book for somebody um uh and uh I I can't talk about who it was for, but it was a a thing about artificial intelligence and ed education. So sort of looking at the history of of what education was, where education came from, and potentially how future technology can kind of help education. And one of the things that sort of became abundantly apparent in that research was that there is a period of standardization with technology, be it ideological technology like education or technology like, you know, um, uh, the printing press, right? There's a period of standardization that allows you to scale, but then there's a period of specialization which sort of brings you to the next level. So once you standardize education, you make sure that everybody has the same education. But if you specialize it, you allow certain uh outliers to really enhance their skills. And the same thing happens with businesses as well, businesses and technology. Once you standardize the uh ability to let's say gain access to low earth orbit, anybody can now specialize and use that for their own purposes. And this is how things how technology scales. And so now we're seeing this point in in space where we're able to do more things because there are public private partnerships, but those public private partnerships also have to have a profit-based incentive for them to go up there, right? And and you know you talked about um uh like Palunteer earlier too. Palunteer h is is you know it's a profitm venture and so part of their profit-making venture is they need to have uh a certain amount of customers and the United States is a really good customer of that. Um actually if you I don't know have you seen the uh the new Palunteer commercial? No. Oh it's really interesting. Um maybe is it on YouTube? I think so. Maybe you can look it up. Oh, we got to see this. There's because I think what is what the the palunteer is this? Does it start out with the idea of taking lives and saving lives is super interesting. Is that what that's an Alex Karp quote? Oh gosh. Oh, that I'm sure that make Oh yeah. Future of warfare. That's it. So check this out. [Music] Okay. So, this specifically this swarming technology Whoa. Yeah, that's [ __ ] sinister. This So, this this go I want to read the comments. What's the top comment of that video? UFOs. Please have them turned off. Of course they have them turned off. Cowards. Absolute cowards. Um, so doing Israel's dirty work. This um uh this uh sort of philosophy, right, of of like you have this enormous swarm. There's actually a paper that you can probably find uh called the the replicator program. Um so if you look at at replicator on on the Rand papers replicator program replicator and and it you know this is this is a bit of of what we're seeing here and what replicator is is um the idea of a traitable systems. So attitable systems are systems which um uh essentially they lower the cost by having um systems which are not the the difference between a tradable and another system would be an exquisite system. So an exquisite system would be something along the lines of you know a aircraft carrier this enormous multi-billion dollar thing. ARitable system would be a system that is like a drone, right? Um something that like you don't want to lose it cuz you could reuse it, but if you lose it, it's not going to bankrupt you, right? And so all of these little drones that you just saw, you know, pop out of this this potentially look like little DJI Mavics like, right? And so the idea with replicator is that you have this enormous cost imposition by using attitudable systems against exquisite systems that if you can kill let's say an aircraft carrier with a couple of drones that are worth thousands of dollars, you're essentially shooting thousands of dollars at billions of dollars. And so in the war of uh the spreadsheet, it's clear who wins and you can potentially bankrupt the the opponent by doing that. Um, and so this is something that this is a a paper that Rand put together. It's right there. Yeah. The the rep the replicator program is is this similar to what uh Anderil is doing? Yeah, Anderil is certainly working working under this um under this banner. Um and for people who don't know, what is Anderil? Anderil is a uh I I don't would you even call them a startup at this point? They're a they're a defense company. Um they're operating under a very different model than than the traditional defense companies if I can say traditional defense companies. Um is it s is is the is it similar to that company Y combinator whatever it's called. No Y Combinator is a is a an incubator. So they just give they give funding for um uh for startup ideas. Got it. Um but uh what Anderald does is uh they've taken a very different tack on uh creating defense uh defense products right so instead of waiting on what's called an RFP or like a request for proposal um uh from the United States government United States government says hey we need a really cool drone that does X Y and Z and then let's say traditional uh defense company like Boeing or Northrup Grumman will will bid on that saying, "Hey, here's what we think we can do with that." Um, they're basically saying, "Hey, we're going to make what we think you need in the future, and you can pay us for it." So essentially trying to uh leverage their uh privatized speed and funding to uh create defense products that are uh more uh that are easily able to be purchased by the United States government. And the idea is to speed up that process of procurement. Okay? Because as you know the United States and this is this is one of the things that I think is talked about quite a bit and I've written written some stuff about this for for my newsletter is that this the procurement process is so slow that it is often times really difficult for the United States to deal with things on the ground. A good example of this would be during the glo g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g global war on terror um we had uh sort of this this really recent past of desert storm. So, Desert Storm was sometimes known as the the uh the very first space war. And the reason was we used geo uh geopol we used uh uh what do you what's Google maps you know GPS GPS that's right okay yeah so we used which is made by DARPA right yeah yeah so we used GPS in order to uh to locate various forces that were on the ground and we used that for for targeting and we used it for command and control to great effect um Annie Jacobson writes about this in her book too so it was the very first space war as we went into the global war on terror. The thought was we would be able to leverage this outsized technological advantage. I think in Annie Jacobson's book um uh the Pentagon's Brain, they talk about uh having a battlefield that can see and hear at the exact same time. So, we had these enormous technological capabilities and we still got bogged down. This was a big part of her first platoon book as well, I think. I didn't read that one, but I love her work. Um uh shout out to Annie Jacobson. I I hear you're in Los Angeles. Let's hang out. Um uh but uh you know, it was undone by uh IEDs. It was undone by, you know, a couple pounds of fertilizer and uh an off-the-shelf cell phone. And so study after study was done on how do we how do we guerilla warfare, right? And this is fourth generation warfare, right? This is in insurgent warfare. And so how do we get around these IEDs? And what you had at a certain point was you had the soldiers on the ground actually retrofitting their own vehicles with what they called hillbilly armor. And it was armoring that was going to protect them from the IEDs. And so let's fast fast forward maybe four or five years into the global war on terror. We know that IEDs are constantly taking the lives of of American servicemen. They're outfitting their own vehicles with technology to potentially help them survive these these attacks and then five years later the Department of Defense is able to give them the MRAP which is armored specifically against IEDs. So the procurement process is quite slow and so companies like Androll, companies like Palunteer are taking a bet that if they're able to sort of leverage this uh uh one uh private funding and two the sort of Silicon Valley uh let's look around corners and build for where the puck is going to be rather than where the puck is now. then we can potentially either win the wars of the future or stop them before they even start, right? If you have a lot of tentacles and a lot of arms out there basically testing [ __ ] that you would never even or people like even like coming up with theories like this drone thing, right? Having thousands of drones that are worth, you know, less than $100,000 swarm these ships that are worth billions of dollars and potentially take them out. Well, and this is something that that's kind of a crazy theory. Yeah, this is something we're seeing in Ukraine, too. I mean, you know, one of the Did you see how much money we're spending on our new fleet of nuclear submarines? I have no idea. Probably a lot, though. Can you find that, Steve? There's a We talked We we we probably looked at this a few months ago, but there's a um a new class, they're calling them the Colombia class submarines, I believe. We We had the We had the Ohio's. Yeah. And now they're working on the Colombia submarines, and I think they cost like $2 billion each. Nuclear subs don't come cheap from what I understand. The new Col Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Total projected budget for the Colombia class submarine is worth 109 bill. Oh, that was it. I thought it was more for So 109 billion for 12 subs. Wow. That's pretty remarkable. Estimated uh the cost for the lead boat USS District of Columbia is estimated to be around 15.2 billion. See this this is exactly what I'm talking about about exquisite systems. obviously incredibly expensive and and you can see you can see this concept of a tradability uh as it happened in Ukraine pretty massively, right? Ukraine the Ukrainian defenses were one of the first armies to defeat a navy without having a navy, right? The Russian forces weren't able to to completely cut off Odessa because they had so many unarmed vehicles or unmanned vehicles that were able to take out boats. Oh, wow. Wow. And so was this stuff the US gave them? Uh actually no. So there's the um it's something that the the US is uh I think currently looking at and learning from. Um but the uh the forces on the ground from what I understand in Ukraine were really looking at uh what they could do natively like what were their indigenous capabilities. And one of those indigenous capabilities was uh not only having a decent amount of drones around, but was uh through the uh the firsterson view uh racing community. So there's like a drone racing community. Have you ever seen videos of that? [ __ ] nuts. It's insane. So they had these firstperson view racers that were clearly fantastic at flying drones. And then all they needed to do was 3D print little brackets to make sure that they could hold explosive devices. And those became the, you know, the leading weapon and a new technological innovation that happened from the ground rather than from, you know, some bureaucratic environment speaking down to the ground. And so that's that's how they were filling the innovation gap. So it's certainly something that the the United States has started looking into, but it's also something that that I think everybody is paying attention to. There's also wacky, wild, sickening videos online about the regarding people like there there's videos of drones like dropping bombs on random soldiers like hiding behind bunkers and stuff. I saw one yesterday a couple days ago of one it was a a firstp person view of the drone like the front of the drone and it rammed in front of a tank and nothing happened but you can see the guys there. It wasn't a tank. It was more like a Hummer or something like that. And there there was a cuz there was a windshield and you can see the Russian guys behind the windshield. And as soon as the drone started speeding up heading towards the the Humvey, they like got down like this, but then it backed up and nothing happened. And then tried to ram it again and nothing happened. There's also you you also see uh even handtohand combat. Uh I don't know if you've seen that video. I I I don't recommend anybody watch it cuz it's pretty gnarly. But um there's a video of a Russian and Ukrainian soldier having a knife fight and and you can actually hear them speaking to one another because they have one has like um a GoPro on and so this this footage was was released. But if you want to talk about fifth generation warfare, that's what it is, right? It's all of them combined. It's it's all of the information space combined. As soon as I saw that, I was like, there is a reason I've seen this video so many times in different areas. And that's because one it works the the Russian guy won it works so massively for the Russian point of view. It it it stimulates the Russian population. It gets more buyin for the war effort. And there are these other um I I've read something I don't know if it's actively happening on the ground. I think it might have been a sort of notional thing that people were talking about. But one of the things um that uh as far as like active fifth generation warfare subversion that they're talking about is looking at how you can use the communication apparatuses that soldiers have on them. Right. This is one of the very first wars where you can text back home. So the thought experiment record everything on a [ __ ] GoPro. Exactly. So the thought experiment kind of goes like this. Let's say uh you're texting with your mom. You're a soldier. Doesn't matter which war. Uh I'm sure we'll have plenty to to uh choose from in the future. Um but you're texting Gummy. No. What is it? Magic Mind Gummy. Oh, sweet. Hey, Magic Mind. Shout out to Magic Mind. Shout out Shout out to Magic Mind. You should sponsor link below. Also sponsor uh sponsor my uh newsletter. This is not a scop uh cuz the world is getting weird and you don't need to. I love the gummies, man. They're they're tasty. Oh, that's good. Mhm. Nice. Yeah. between White Rabbit and and um Magic Mind and and reaching Nirvana. Um this is incredible. So imagine you're texting back home, you know, um you're on the front lines or maybe you've just done a rotation, you've gone gone back to um a base, you're texting regularly with your mother, your mother or your girlfriend, whatever. Um, at a certain point she says, "You know, I actually don't believe in this war anymore. I want you to come home." Um, and uh, you know what? I saw a thing. This is how you surrender. Like, and if you do this, then you'll be able to surrender. You decide, you know what? My mom's right. My girlfriend's right. I'm going to go surrender. goes and surrenders only to find out that they were talking with an LLM that had scraped the uh previous conversations with the mother or with the girlfriend and it was just imitating that person. Wow. Totally possible with today's technology. Completely possible to surrender, right? And so this is um even China has a uh has a doctrine around this. They call it the three warfares doctrine. And it's a it's a um a doctrine that is built around winning without fighting. And so the three warfares are psychological warfare, uh economic warfare, and then lawfare. Lawfare being using the laws of a country against itself for potential subversion or doing things that are completely legal, but they have a subversive quality to them. Right? So let's say an uh an example of of the psychological operations from from China. There was a um uh there was a rare earth metal processing uh plant in Texas and a Facebook group was started uh to say, "Hey, we don't want this in our backyard." Uh and there were fake news stories that were put out saying, you know, uh the radiation from this plant is causing, you know, uh children to be born with birth defects. Yeah. real people got into this real group. Um, you know, understanding there is this deep not in my backyard or nimism that that happens with a lot of American communities. Um, all of the stories were fake, but people really did start to say, "Hey, we don't want this rare earth mineral processing plant in our backyard anymore. We think that it's a public health crisis." And so there was no public health crisis, but the reaction was real. And the purpose of that was to make sure that rare earth mineral processing remained in China. Wow. It's really interesting. Um and so cost effective. Totally. Yeah. That's that's the that's the real efficiency of it. Um and then you know uh an example of uh you know economics, right? um or the you know of the the three warfares. So, China has this um this initiative called the Belt and Road Initiative. Have you talked with people on the show about this? It's fascinating. Um and for for those who don't know, Belt and Road was all about um uniting I think it's like twothirds of the world into a single um you know economic trade network, right? I think they have I forget how many they but they built so many roads and ports in Africa it's mindbending. Yeah. actually and a lot of those ports that they built can be can be converted into uh military bases, dual use. Yeah. Actually, while I was in uh uh while I was in Somalia as as the ambassador to Liberland, um uh I uh so I was doing a a a food delivery, like an aid delivery out to uh some nomads that uh had uh been affected by a cyclone that happened in the area. Cyclone Sagar. So, Cyclone Sagar had blown through. We're delivering a couple tons of food out there. Um, and uh, all of the kids who sort of came up to me um, through my translator, they were like uh, they were asking if I was Chinese and they they knew certain Chinese words for different gemstones. And I asked why that. Asking if you were Chinese. Yeah. Yeah. I guess they just hadn't seen somebody who's I mean, I'm not They haven't seen a ch They have never seen a person from China. I They knew Chinese gemstone words. And uh I was told that this was because there were Chinese mining companies out there. And so you know this is this is a part of the expansion. In fact I even met the uh well I met a guy who identified himself as the Chinese ambassador to Somaliand. Uh I mean what did he look like? Well he he was clearly Chinese. Um uh but I you know I mentioned that I was the ambassador to Liberland and I felt like you know we really had solidarity as as uh uh being you know goofy ambassadors in the same place. Um but immediately you know he wanted to make deals about about Liberland. And I'm like I I don't think you understand what Liberland is. And he's like we're going to make you the president one day. And I'm like I man you just heard about it and I just heard about it. So I don't think this deal is going to go forward. Um but you do you know you do see deals uh you know a part of the belt and road initiative all over the world. In fact recently in Serbia one of their their projects collapsed uh killing quite a few people and it's led to uh the biggest demonstration since the fall of Yugoslavia in Serbia. Um you can see right now I think um if you if you pull up the uh the demonstrations is something like 500,000 people are demonstrating um because of this collapse but also because it shows the uh sort of internal corruption of uh political actors interacting with with you know China or or other transnational bodies in a manner that people say is corrupt. Holy [ __ ] It's pretty remarkable. Serbia accused of using illegal sonic weapons against peaceful protest. Yeah, the the video of this is pretty insane. [Applause] Whoa. Oh, that's the first time I've actually heard the sound of it. That's crazy. I've been going to protest for 30 years and I've never seen anything like this. The sound was like a whiz. Okay. Yeah. Wow. And you know part so part of this so this is where so this is Belgrade. And so have you seen the videos of like some of the crowd control weapons being tested on people? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's uh it's really distressing and and I think that you know there there is some talk about look at all those what is this all about? Uh so there was a collapse of I I want to say it was a uh a bridge in uh a city called Novvisad. Will you take a look at um the uh the bridge collapse or So the the idea with this crowd control stuff uh these crowd control weapons is they're not fatal, right? They can't kill you. Yeah, they're not fatal, right? But who knows what kind of [ __ ] lingering down the line radiation effects it's going to have. I think there might actually be something a little bit more pernitious about this kind of thing. And this is something that that we've we've talked about a bit um internally. So what is this about the bridge? Oh, that's Brazil. Uh I Yeah, I would just say Serbia collapse. Um or it said Serbia in the title, right? Maybe it was like a a mix. Yeah, maybe. Um, anyways, so one of the things that I think is is important about these sort of crowd control weapons too and also artificial intelligence also um cognitive security and cognitive capture, right? Is and artificial intelligence all of these things. What it essentially has the possibility of doing is creating a political environment where revolution is impossible even peaceful revolution. And if you can disperse protesters nonviolently, if you can create um where it's impossible to have revolution to have to have protests, right, that there you know there are a lot of these pernicious technologies. So it's just to control the populace. Yeah. To control the people. Yeah. Population control. And you also see this with um population mind control. M I I I think that you know one of the things that um uh that has become a concern to quite a few people especially with the the Chinese belt and road initiative is that there is this uh uh other concept that comes along with it which is the uh digital silk road and so the digital silk road is we're going to give you all of these IT technologies that come along with belt and road initiative technologies or belt and road assets and So specifically in Serbia uh there were quite a few there was the development of what was called like a safe cities initiative and essentially this was a mass surveillance net that was provided by the Chinese government and so this is and I believe that's actually illegal in in Serbian law and so what the bargain that China is seemingly making is look we want this economic infrastructure to be developed because then we are sort of the uh uh uh the new champions of globalization where the US was previously. We're able to unifi unify people into a single market whereas the US was previously doing this by acting as the the police for the global oceans. Yeah. Um but they also want to make sure that they're entrenching powers that will continue to work with them and continue to agree with them. And so by saying, "Hey, you want, you know, uh surveillance technology? Do you want uh uh digital capabilities that you and your, you know, political party can specifically use? Well, then get on our team and we'll make sure to continue to entrench your power while also entrenching our own power. And this is, you know, this is legal, right? So, this is that lawfare thing. This is that economic thing. So, these are the three warfares. even um so um Australia at a certain point they said no we're not going to we're not going to take any more of these technologies we're not going to to work together uh with the Chinese because we believe that it is against our national interests it's against our national security of course they ended up getting massive sanctions because of that as China has come up into uh being you know a a global economic market not only are they exporters but they're They're also an enormous market for sales, right? So, Australian companies want to go in there and use them as a market. But of course, this can be used as a cudgel when they are really powerful market. You know the in 2001 uh China got accession into the WTO or the World Trade Organization and the bargain that the United States placed on this was that as they entered the free market as they open entered the globalized world that essentially they would become more liberalized politically that that autocrats would have less and less ability to uh maintain control in China. But that didn't actually happen. In fact, they they m they just got economically much stronger while also maintaining autocratic control. And so that's why they're able to expand this network throughout the world, continuing with the doctrine of the three warfares, but also never really going into direct kinetic conflict because direct connect kinetic conflict or direct you know um uh aggressive conflict uh would not only risk their trade relationships but it would also risk their internal security and their internal tranquility. So we have, you know, in the United States, Chinese companies and and individuals uh purchasing land in and around or not in but around American military bases. Um as soon as we saw that, we put greater restrictions on that kind of thing. They were also installing Huawei cell tower equipment like within within a couple miles of military base or not military bases but nuclear launch sites. That as well. Yeah. and and even um uh policing um there there are or at least were I think they've they've been uh hopefully rooted out now, but there were uh American or uh Chinese policing uh stations that were within American cities where if somebody began to speak against uh the uh the uh administration in China, they would be talked to. You can look that up. How? Oh yeah, check it out. Chinese policing stations in the US. Yeah, they were shut down. What the [ __ ] Yeah, I think if you look it up. All right. So, if people publicly said something on like social media against China, they would be able to overseas police uh go to uh uh Brookings. I would uh the other one seems to be a Catholic edu. Yeah. Right. China's overseas police stations, an eminent security threat. Just keep scrolling. Zoom in for the first paragraph. Between 2016 and 2022, four local Chinese public security bureaus reported establishing 102 overseas police service stations in 53 countries across North and South America, Europe, Africa, and Asia. Citing reports on these stations uh released by human rights NGO safeguard defenders authorities in the United States, Canada and the UK and the Netherlands and 10 other countries all launched investigations into these outposts concerning concerns about the overseas policing stations were okay. But what specifically were they doing? Um so this uh from what I understood they were uh policing diaspora. So even even if somebody was an American citizen but they were of Chinese descent, they were trying to police the the diaspora to make sure that they weren't How do you police people though? And how do you like not get like the whistle blown on you and get Well, I think the whistle was eventually blown on them. Um like that's crazy. It even lasted like a few years, right? Yeah. And you know, this is this is certainly something that that I think is a a a continuing uh source of interest for for the US where it's like, you know, we didn't realize that this would be a threat that would be happening. Now, this is this is non-kinetic. It's not like they're Steve, can you find an example of what they were actually doing in that article? Sorry, go ahead. Yeah, I mean, they were not um uh sorry. Anyway, I I think I read this report one time. Um, you know, it's not like they're they're blowing up weapons in the United States, but they are eliciting power. They're they're using Gray's own power in the United States without turning it into a kinetic conflict. And so that is also a version of fifth generation warfare, but that also what they were doing doesn't is not legal by United States law. It's it's illegal. So they weren't using our laws against us. They were straight straight of violating the laws. violating it certainly, but uh and also I would imagine they didn't register as foreign actors, which is something that you you have to do in the United States. So if you're if you're operating on behalf of of a foreign government, you have to register as a a foreign agent somehow, right? Um so so yeah, like all of these things are Israel. I I I don't study them. I just study UFOs. They sound great. Um, but we don't want to get this podcast demonetized. I was going to I I I think uh what was I talked with Julian about something that that got him got him demonetized for one of our episodes. Um something about Israel. I have no idea. Was it wasn't something about Israel, but but hey, we've gone gone through China and Russia. So, you know, hopefully you can make uh $100,000 an episode on this one. Just talk with Tenant Media. I'm sure they'd love to have you. Um yeah, I wish they would pay me. I mean, right. I take a hundred $1,000 per episode, but you don't need that with Magic Mind. You can come up with other profitm ventures. Magic Mind link below. Yeah. Um I I'm actually really interested the um in in sort of like running all of these uh fifth generation warfare concepts together. Did you find anything, Stephen, by the way? Like what specifically they were doing? Yeah, it's it's very convoluted other than so I I have I have a little bit info. Can you highlight it on there? What to expect and how to respond? No, it wasn't here. Okay. Well, let me know when you find it. Oh, okay. Information is also limited. No way. Clear uh clear whose hands these station is if staff are paid. Oh, that was this is very This is not more information is needed. Yeah, I really over these stations is warranted. Yeah, I really should have boned up more on those things, but I'm sure you can find it somewhere, Steve, if you remember, not on this article, but maybe on another one. I was speaking with one of the the the China analyst who was who was talking about this, and he was like, "Oh, yeah, that's definitely a real thing. It's it's it's happening." Um, but I I mean, you know, this is this is one of those things where it's like, you know, we have we have a very permeable country. It's part of it's part of like the benefits of the United States is like exactly you know I I've lived in Albania on and off for makes us vulnerable like 70 years at no point would anybody ever mistake me for Albanian you know within the country but but in as diverse a country as ours you can just be American um and we have a process for doing that uh we have this open information space and actually one of the reasons that okay here we go I started Chinese policing stations in Europe are reportedly involving in monitoring Chinese disperate. Okay, this is basically what we said. Yeah. Yeah. Um according to human rights groups like safeguard defender persuasion to return. So I've heard about this a bit like that that uh potentially anybody somebody who's acting in a dissident fashion could be persuaded uh uh to return to China. Um which obviously Oh, so they're policing Chinese people in the US or or Europe, not just regular people? No. Oh, no. Chinese people, only former Chinese people. I see. I see. Uh, but also Chinese daspora who are American citizens. Ah, okay. I see. I thought you just meant they were doing this to anybody. No, they're not just like giving tickets to American people. Right. That'd be that'd be be really weird. You get pulled over by a Chinese police car. I'm like, I don't I don't speak Mandarin, sir. And then Yeah. Man, I got a ticket on the way here from from, you know, somebody working for the CCP. That sucks. Oh my god. Could you imagine? Yeah, but we got away with it for 10 years. Yeah, it's specifically aimed at at policing diaspora and and minim minimizing external uh external actors from uh sort of expressing descent from the CCP. M um and you know as as China becomes more powerful uh they're they're also able to uh you know to to have more influence in in other countries because the United States you know the bargain of of what was called the the Bretton Woods Accords um which were the uh sort of financial accords that ended World War II. it uh took the economies of uh of Europe and also Japan and it dollarized them. So it established the currencies of uh dominant currencies of Europe and also the currency of Japan uh and pegged it to the dollar to make sure that they could sort of economically return uh and build back after the devastation of World War II. Well, World War I and World War II. Um there was an exchange for this too and that was that the United States would then become the sort of police of the global ocean right but they wouldn't be putting their thumb on the scale for any one particular nation because a lot of the European conflicts were really over uh who got access to resources and who could control the market. If the United States was able to project power on both seas at the exact same time, the Atlantic and the Pacific, and establish that as a global marketplace, then globalization could go anywhere without anybody stepping on each other's toes. So, we've had that for many, many years, and it has uh brought a good deal of wealth to the United States, but it's also allowed everybody else to globalize. Um, and for a brief period of time from the 1940s up until the 1960s, we saw that sort of like American golden age where somebody within a generation went from being, you know, close to the poverty line to being decently wealthy. Everybody had this, you know, belief in their future tents because they could see that they were becoming healthier, wealthier, and more secure as they went along. potentially like our grandparents like I know that my you know my grandfather went from being like you know he was a refrigerator salesman and my father became a judge like so this was an enormous generational jump up um but progress started to slow and progress started to slow due to the fact that America moved through this process of uh being a value added manufacturingbased middle class to being a skills and knowledge based middle class and suddenly we were able to export the labor that is required with manufacturing. We could come up with the ideas but the labor would seek the point in the world that had the lowest price point. Right? So whenever you open an iPhone you see designed in California. You certainly don't see made in California. And globalization allowed that to happen. So then you had a sort of hollowing out of the middle class because now you really just need skills and knowledge based workers and you need people who are uh you know uh very low-skilled workers or service workers. And so we don't have that robust middle class anymore and it's like there's there's a uh an exporting of those things to countries that the price point is simply cheaper, right? And so this same thing is now possible as we as I'm looking at the sort of future of state craft too where it's like at some point we will have people that are so wealthy that their country doesn't matter anymore and they're just going to find the tax jurisdiction that will make the most sense for their finances. So taking that idea of citizenship or sovereignty as a service, they will be like, well, what do I actually get for my American citizenship or my, I don't know, kits and ne citizenship? And they'll say, well, I want to go to a bunch of different countries. I want uh maybe decent healthcare and I want certain amount of protection. Well, all of those things can kind of be provided by private companies at this point. private companies are becoming so powerful that you'll see, you know, uh Facebook has housing. They even have school systems to, you know, I should say Meta, they have school systems to u you know, help the the families that that they're that are working at Meta. Um they even have defense and security specifically for their employees. If you look at um you know oil companies in that are working in in uh dangerous areas like the Nijair River Delta, they've got private military companies that are working alongside them. It's not a far leap to say that in the future it would be very possible that companies will become almost like technofudalist states. Yeah. Right. It's also not a far leap to say that in the future the sort of sovereign class that are so wealthy can expatriate themselves to places where the tax jurisdiction is just so much better and the services they get are so much better that they are no longer Americans anymore. They're no longer British anymore. They're simply emancipated people that are enjoying better services than the rest of us. And this is something that I'm super curious about. Um, and it's something Rand is concerned about. Not something Rand's concerned about. In fact, I I think I think I may be one of the only ones who's who's banging on about it at Rand. Um, well, because because going back to what you're saying, maybe like certain individuals would be able to do this, but they couldn't make their companies transnational like this. No. No. Because like, you know, I'm sure you followed some of that USID [ __ ] that's been happening. Yeah. Actually, I'd love to talk about that. I'm a little I'm kind of read in on on USAD. Oh, really? Yeah. Um, uh, I actually may come at it from a very different perspective. Um, uh, so, uh, yeah, cuz I've I've heard a lot about about USAD. Um, and I've actually worked with USAD on projects before. Um, yeah, that that guy, uh, Mike Benz talks about it all the time and it's fascinating the way he talks about it. Super super interesting. Yeah. And so he used to work for the State Department. I think he was an analyst for the State Department. And one of the things I remember specifically he him saying was how he was leveraging leveraging um companies like Facebook, for example, um to maintain their monopolies overseas and being like, "We're only going to let you have your monopoly overseas if you agree to censor X, Y, and Z." Like all kinds of [ __ ] like this. Yeah. So, so here's um here's at least my take on it. And um you know I I worked in with USAD in a very different capacity than him. Um and so I was a peacecore volunteer uh which is technically under the state department. Um so you know I was I was teaching English at an Albanian high school uh for two and a half years. Um and as a part of that I got the opportunity to go out to village schools really really remote schools um and uh you know give English lessons out there sometimes. So, you know, there's there's a lot of need out there. Uh, and I'd try and go do English classes as as in as far a field as I could. At a certain point, we had the ability to uh collaborate with a couple of the other NOS's and say and USAD and then some of these other other funds like um uh the German Development Fund which is called GISZ and UNICEF. And the idea was, well, we're going to make a mobile library. And uh, basically, we have a big van, got a bunch of books in the van. We drive to one of the 42 villages of Trapoa every single day. Try try to hit two villages a day. And then like once a month, you know, uh, you get a English lesson and a and a book. And, you know, we help villagers, right? This was my interaction with USAD. It was getting a couple dollars to put some books in a van and drive around to give books to kids, right? So when I Meanwhile, you're only making 100 grand a day. What's that? Yeah, I'm making 100 grand a day. Um I think I you know what is the problem with with China? Um I think they're doing great. It's going to be really fun in the future. Um doing a great job. Thank you. Um uh so that like my interaction with it was like we're giving books to kids. Yeah. And and we got some funding to to make sure that that happened. And if you think that every single dollar that was going into USA ID was these like malicious operations that are are forcing governments to uh to bend the will of the United States. It certainly wasn't my impression of working with USAD. Um, however, and I also know a lot of people who've ended up working with USAD and and you know, they're they're all looking for work right now. Um, so LinkedIn is popping. Oh, wait. Actually, hold on. I got to tell you about this other other great uh Chinese psychological operation. Let me Can we put a pin in USAD? Yes. This is a really [ __ ] brilliant one. I just learned about it. Okay. Okay. So, um obviously a lot of the federal workforce has been has been uh looking for work recently. Mhm. Um uh China and I think you can pull up a story about this from the AP. China has been uh starting consulting firms and looking to hire people who now don't have any federal work specifically. Yeah, it's kind of brilliant. Where did you hear about this? AP. Really? Yeah. Look it up. Wow. It's Yeah. I mean, so they're hiring people to work remotely. Oh my gosh. Look at that. Reuters, too. Exclusive. Secretive Chinese network tries to lure fired federal workers. Research shows. Um, scroll down. Let's read the summary. Zoom in. D. Researcher identifies a network of fake consulting and headunting firms. Chinese embassy says Beijing res uh respects data privacy and security firms list addresses that are empty lots and shell companies. Wow. So the the bet that that Beijing appears to be taking is that somebody who has been a federal worker for many years, spent a ton of time uh you know living, working and breathing uh federal government is now not only out of the job but also looking for uh uh salary and some some uh uh professional stability that usually comes with federal workforce. And maybe, just maybe, they might have a bit of a chip on their shoulder based upon being fired. So, what that could result in is picking up some really good information about what the US federal government is up to. And again, you know, it's not illegal to hire people who without jobs. Um, these appear to be, you know, fake consulting firms and fake headunting companies, right? Um, but it's not a kinetic attack, right? Um, anyway, I just I just remember that thing. But that's crazy. Isn't that amazing? So, if they if they're hiring them, what would they be doing? Do they give them a job and a paycheck? Like, are they just is it just to make headlines and to create some sort of [ __ ] internal disscent? Well, I think if it's made headlines that their their operation isn't going so well. Um, I I think that if I mean, you know, if I was them, I would want to hire them and have them make projects that could potentially leverage their knowledge of the federal government so that I now have a good deal of knowledge about the federal government. Um, so like I said, you know, there's a lot of people who have been fired from USAD. Um but anyway, so the the USA ID thing, I think people should understand a little bit about the uh the modern history of USAD and how it changed uh basically post Reagan. Originally, USAD was created, I think it was 1961, by Kennedy. Um and the purpose of this was to not only uh you know distribute diplomatic aid uh but to act as a branch of soft power on behalf of the United States State Department, right? Um I think that it is no secret that states use soft power in terms of here's a stick, a carrot instead of a stick. Every every nation does that. In fact, I've even done that on behalf of Liberland. Like I I distributed aid uh uh to uh Somali nomads uh that were affected by Cyclone Zagar uh because we were trying to you know uh get closer with the the government of Somaliand, right? So it's no secret that that happens. What happened in uh during the Reagan administration was uh USAD changed from uh we are going to sort of implement different programs within countries and we're going to develop and launch them inhouse. It changed to becoming a more privatized venture where USAD essentially becomes the pool of funds that private institutions and NOS's can requisition provided that they are in line with whatever the initiatives of USAID are. So you have companies like uh Kimonics is one of them. I think they're still around. What is Kimonics? Uh they're international development company. um c h m e o n i x I think. Um but and then you have smaller NOS's and the the bargain is basically like you know if you have I don't know I I'll use Albania but like if you have an Albanian NGO that is roughly working on what USID thinks is not only good for the country but also good for US relations with the country. Um then you can get some funding from USAD. Um, in fact, I' I've worked on projects in in Albania recently. Um, like there's a a video game development um uh festival that happens there every year, and they get a little bit of money from the US embassy to uh you know, stimulate the video game development economy in in um uh in Albania. Shout out to Game Jam Albania. It's a lot of fun. Um, but that's because private companies, private individuals can requisition funds from that uh from that organization so long as that they're in line with the granting. But what this also does is it opens it up to uh companies and even agencies that have less than uh magnanimous ideas about what they're going to do with that funding. So I think what's the gentleman who um uh Mike that's him. Yeah. So he was talking about um was it intelligence agencies sort of leveraging these funds to make the state department. Yeah. To make sure that they censor stuff on on the platform. Sure. And so these are these are private companies who are using these funds in ways that uh are are not outwardly magnanimous. They actually look more like insidious control of a country. Well, it's not necessarily Yeah, it's exactly it's the State Department doing it. But this is also something that I think I think is less top-down rotten core control than I've seen in the media. I think that there's frankly I think that there's a lot of good actors that that have been funded by USAD. I mean, I've worked with with USAD funded projects before. Didn't Duipa get money from them for Albania? Did she? I have no idea. Find the story. Type in dual Lipa USA Albania. But apparently she got a bunch of money to inject some sort of Albanian uh dial some something to talk about Albania in a certain way. I mean she is Albanian Albanian. So that would that would Well, she is Albania, right? Did you type in USA Duipa? British Albanian singer songwriter been involved in discussions about Albania and her relationships and it relationship to Kosovo in 2020. She faced backlash over tweeting a map representing greater Albania which sparked controversy due to national implications. Yeah. Um but what does it say? Where does it come to the USA ID stuff? Do I have to make it like Super Bowl? I don't know. I don't know. They're censoring. I don't think that's going to change anything. Steve Sparks. Yeah. The uh Anyways, Mike Ben said something about how uh USAD Oh, you know what it was? Okay. She was one of these councils. What was it? Oh, was it like a cultural ambassador? It was like it was like Council of Foreign Foreign Relations, I think it was, or one of those things like the CFR. Okay. She was like awarded like the top [ __ ] uh art artist or something and she went ahead and like talked to this council, but apparently she was like involved. I don't know. You can't find anything, Steve? No. I mean, I'm a huge huge Duual Lia fan, but I haven't heard heard this bit. Um, I think I think one of the things too is, you know, uh, one of the reasons that I think people are are also, um, rightfully looking to type in Mike Ben's dual Lipa USAD. You'll find something. Um, and then UFO. Uh, uh, and then Bigfoot. Yeah, Bigfoot. We haven't even talked about the Albanian Bigfoot connection. Um I I think that one of the reasons that that people are are also rightfully looking at USAD with with a great deal of criticism is what is the extent of soft power, right? Um if you look at um if you look at uh uh indicators of where violent armed conflict are going to happen. Yeah. Um one of the biggest indicators of that is uh low state-based institution. So some of the you know like uh there's a lot of organizations uh OCE uh you know the uh EU the UN that are working on institution building in a country right and this could be anything from like making sure that there are regional town halls to making sure that uh minorities are represented in in local governance to making sure that like there are uh like there's equal representation of like different faith in a country now is helping a country building institutions that look not unlike democratic American institutions is that overstepping our bounds? I don't think so because I think that democracy is a better bet than autocracy is. That's my point of view on it. Well, when you're spending billions of dollars on it and your country spiraling into debt and you then and then people don't see the people don't get to vote where their tax money goes, let alone it's going to all these NOS's who are funding all this crazy crazy, you know, subversive um ambiguous [ __ ] like then that gets to be a problem. So I think that that and I I agree like and and this is ultimately like one of those problems with taxation. Like I wish every year I got a receipt for my taxes like I bought, you know, like 11600th of a Stinger missile. Awesome. I I wish I like filled like 27 potholes. I at least get a plaque. Yeah, right. Uh, you get a portion of the Stinger missile. Okay, here it is. Dual Lipa and Taylor Swift. Former US official Mike Benz claimed US A used celebrities to destabilize governments. Wow, that's a big claim. Um, Ben claimed the USAD had trained musical artists including Duual Lia, [ __ ] Riot, and possibly Taylor Swift to act as assets and spreading political narratives for uh state craft purposes. He suggests that these efforts are part of a broader initiative to influence public opinion and uh destabilize governments. Ben said the celebrities who can be trained to spread desired messaging are actively recruited and used as network nodes. He cited NATO linked incentives, NATO link initiatives and US aidbacked music diplomacy uh programs as key drivers behind the efforts. Yeah. So obviously there is there is music diplomacy. There are there's sports diplomacy. All of these things are like especially in the international development world things that that people talk about. Even food diplomacy. One example of food diplomacy is is the fact that the Thai government subsidizes Thai restaurants in the United States. Like that's why there's a lot of Thai Thai restaurants around. That's that's a legit thing, right? Um but Thai restaurants don't have to stabilize our government. They don't. as far yet we've got to I can see how that could be a slippery slope though. Yeah. And and so like do I do I worry about uh about you know um uh overusing the subversive capacity of the United States in other countries? Absolutely. Do I worry about uh you know the the US identifying too broad of a target base and saying hey we need to make everybody exactly like us. Absolutely. I totally agree with those things. But at the same time I really I like that there is an apparatus in the United States of giving aid. I like that there is a an arm of our government that says, you know what, the what the way that we want to interact with the world is by helping them at times in which they are struggling as a country. Yeah. But it's not aid, right? What does it actually stand for? Uh uh international development. American international development. Is that right? Right. Yeah, that sounds right. Yeah, international development. Yeah, international. I mean, look, I I was driving around Albanian villages giving books to kids. Like, it it if you can find some like mustache twisting, pernicious means in that, good luck. Um, but at the same time, like I'm pissed off that there are these other more subversive like uh politically motivated actors that are using USAD dollars to potentially work against countries because that means that everything is painted with the broad brush of well that's [ __ ] Yeah. like and and also in uh to to your question about um uh about like do our tax should our tax dollars go here. So there is a real big benefit in helping to stabilize and advance the economy of a country because then when it descends into violent conflict is less likely. Right? There are countries in the world with less state development with with weaker institutions with greater um disparity between the very wealthy and the very poor. Those are the places that wars start. Those are the places that we may end up having to go into. And so if you want to pay for an education system or to you know I mean use the peace corp to to go in and give English classes now it means that maybe in 20 years it'll be more robust when a geopolitical fluctuation happens and there is a potential that they'll go into conflict. Right? And so paying now to help for help develop institutions may actually be a better investment especially in a globalized world and especially in a globalized world where often times the United States has has to use violent force in order to stabilize or to nation build. By the way, I I for those listening at home, I did I did quote Buddy ears on both of those words. Spoken like a true USAD employee. That's right. I was a Peacecore volunteer. We're not employees. So, what is I'm just trying to get hired by a Chinese consulting factory. That's next, bro. I know. You You got Rand on your resume now. That's right. I am open to work, guys. So, you know, I can look the other way. So, so you you're you're you're not actually working for Rand. You're doing an educational thing there. Yeah. So, they're one of the only think tankakes that that offers uh degrees as well. So I'm I'm a part of their actually their first class of uh national security students. So Wow. So they have PhDs also. Um would they would they consider offering you a job after this? Would you take it? I don't know. Um it's really interesting work. Uh and the the stuff that you get to think about, the people that you get to work with are really cool. Um and you're you're certainly, you know, you're on the cutting edge of of all of this stuff and being able to do really long range research on all these things. I don't necessarily know if my if my role is to to be in think tanks. I think what I'm hoping to do is I I want to raise these conversations in the public more. I want to write books about about this kind of stuff, about nation building, about um you know the the eccentricities of geopolitics. Um and that's why I started uh uh my newsletter, this is not a scop um subscribe. Um, and that's because I think that there is there's a lack of of easy public access to like what the the thinking in these organizations is. You know, I spent like 10 years abroad seeing uh a lot of places that have been dismantled by American foreign policy. And that's a really heartbreaking thing to see. And it's one of the reasons that I wanted to go back and find out how these policies are made in the first place to learn from kind of the epicenter of the American political mind. Um, and now I feel like I can sort of speak from the authority of not only being on the ground in certain places, but also understanding how decisions are made. Um, and also having a great network of researchers who are are curious about these things at the same place. But I think that I think that there's a lack of public conversations about this kind of stuff from both perspectives. from the perspective of what it feels like on the ground and also how the thinking is happening internally. Yeah, this whole fifth gener generation warfare and like population mind control stuff is so is so strange and it's so it seems so like futuristic sci-fi, you know, but like it seems like it would be really easy to do in today's day and age with all like just the media itself, like how crazy the news cycle is. I don't think it's that hard to do. Yeah. I mean, that's that's the Did you see this new stuff with the with the CIA director on this group chat with all these people trying to like I've been following it talking about their war plans in Ukraine or Yemen or something. Yeah. Yeah. There's a whole hearing over it with Tulsi Gabbard and the CIA director and they're saying, "Oh, no, there was nothing declassified. It was totally normal for us to to hash out these war plans on a WhatsApp group chat or whatever the [ __ ] it was." Well, and then you you see the the sort of normalization of a of like a massive intelligence leak. That's that's not a great thing. We we were we we are going to absolutely forget about this in two weeks. There's going to be something completely different. Yeah. And and I think, you know, I I guess in in my in in my heart of hearts, I was like, that would be a great thing to do on purpose if it gave you some sort of strategic advantage. Um to to have this active leak that that gave us some strategic advantage somewhere. Um it doesn't appear that that's the case. Uh you would you would hope that these people are capable of playing 3D chess in that way, but I wonder sometimes if they are if they're just Man, I I totally agree. I mean, I think that that one of the one of the things that I've noticed in terms of of now kind of like knowing from the inside a little bit of how policy is made is it is so incredibly slow and politically costly to make a policy. Um, if you look at the time that uh the the they were talking about starting the Manhattan project all the way until we had a nuclear bomb, it was years before they even started doing it. Even though everybody at the exact same time totally agreed, the American political apparatus moves incredibly slowly. And so you're looking for this point at which what's called a policy windows window opens up. So a policy window is the moment that the idea that you've been thinking about forever uh aligns with the political interests of an elected leader and aligns with the needs of the population at the same time. But how do you find that? And how do you make somebody how do you like have an elected leader who is just at the right point at the right time to implement a good idea or to implement a terrible idea? That's what the policy window is all about. And so like one of the things that I'm that I've bang been banging on a uh one of the things I've been banging on about in my my own writing is um every year there is a um a national security uh strategy that's released. Not every year I think every administration. Um then there's also a national defense strategy. Two different strategies. One is DoD, one is White House, right? And as I sort of started my journey into to looking at uh information space defense, I was like, well, I should probably just like look at the national security strategy and a national defense strategy because clearly there's got to be an information space defense strategy and security strategy and there isn't any. We have an Arctic portion of that strategy. Arctic. Yeah, Arctic defense is big right now. um huge uh but we don't have any information space defense strategy. What is Arctic defense strategy? Um so uh briefly with um uh with climate change happening. Yeah, there's the potential that um there will be more uh there will be an opening of the Arctic ice that will allow uh uh essentially a new domain of warfare in the Arctic. Uh it it opens up a trade route uh between Asia and Europe that I think is like 40% quicker. Wow. Yeah. Actually, this is really interesting. There's a there's a um a War on the Rocks article um uh I think it's called the icebreaker gap, but the icebreaker gap is pretty fascinating. It's like um so Russia has the uh biggest amount of ice breakers in the world. So these are these are ships that can I mean break crush iceberg. Yeah. They they crush ice so that you can create navigability between like Arctic spaces. I think that they have something like 350 or so and we have 3.5 like one that's only an icebreaker or can be retrofitted to an icebreaker. And so they're like, "Okay, well, we have this Arctic defense strategy, this Arctic security strategy that we're trying to develop and we're trying to figure out how this is going to affect American security, but we need ice breakers." And it's like, okay, so the question is, how do we get ice breakers? Well, as it turns out, having an icebreaker factory is really expensive. And the only person that we'd be or the only country that we'd be purchasing ice breakers from is Russia. But we can't buy ice breakers from them. So it's like the next best option is to buy ice breakers from Finland. But it's like how much money are we going to have to invest into just ice breakers to ensure that we are prepared for any sort of Arctic national security crisis is we have tons of submarines that can go into up into the Arctic though. Yeah, I think we do. Are you talking about spec specifically about trade or like actual conflict? Conflict probably both. Um I I know that there's concern of this over this icebreaker gap and it's something that the the five eyes so the uh the five like English speaking intelligence sharing networks are looking at doing cost sharing to ensure that they can all sort of like use the icebreaker. But like it doesn't like the dollars don't make sense unless you have a pretty deep order book for your ice breakers. Right. But yeah, I mean this this kind of Arctic strategy is is being thought about actively. Um the next best example that I can have or that I have for um uh for information space defense is um uh cyber defense. Right? So after 9/11 uh uh they started talking about how we need cyber defense capabilities, right? Um this was before we saw any major cyber attacks because the the concern at that time was uh what they were calling like a digital Pearl Harbor and that would be you know this devastating attack on the United States that that uh came through our IT systems. Now this was before we had seen any major cyber attacks and now we've seen quite a few cyber attacks. We have constant examples of information space attacks but no strategy to address them. We had briefly um uh a couple of organizations that were stood up in order to um sort of establish deterrence in the information space. Uh but both so there was the global engagement center uh and that was uh sort of destroyed uh it was it was defunded. Um, and then there was one more that I think only lasted like 6 months. But it's because of the same reasons that you might imagine, right? Like the reason that that it these were criticized was you can't have an American Ministry of Truth, right? Because a portion of being an American is having freedom of expression and having, you know, uh, your your right to to think, say, and believe anything that you want to say. So the needle that my research is trying to thread and frankly I'm not doing very well. Um if anybody has an idea any ideas reach out on LinkedIn. Um especially if you're from like a Chinese uh consulting company. Um uh is how do you preserve freedom of speech while also defending the information space? There's a there's a really good paper called um uh well there's two really good papers that I could recommend. Um one is a book. It's called Truth Decay. Um, truth decay is this concept of how we're experiencing right now in a unique way the uh the eroding of a shared sense of facts in our country. And for a democratic environment to function, you need a shared set of facts because governance is really all about finding the problems and the challenges, identifying a solution to the sorry uh challenges and opportunity, identifying a solution to the challenge or opportunity, funding that solution, and then experiencing the benefits from that. Yeah. So sometimes people think about governance in in like this threepronged way, right? It's who decides, who pays, and who benefits. And so if we don't have at least a carrying capacity of agreeing on what the problem is in the first place, what solutions might be, and who could actually benefit from those things, then the the democratic system falls apart. Yeah. And it's critical that we are able to have robust debates about those things. But it's also critical that we have agreement on what facts are, right? Um, so Truth Decay is a really good uh that's so interesting. It's so relevant. Super interesting book. Um, they uh they did really long range deep research on on this and also looked at other times in American history that that we've experienced these kinds of things. So um typically you experience like periods of truth decay during massive moments of uh uh inequality within the country. Um also uh it's experienced when there are new modalities of sharing ideas. Um you know this is this is nothing new. We've just created new new ways to share ideas. If you think about it like the the printing press comes out, right? And then Europe is just like, well, I guess we have to kill each other for the next 500 years. Like, wait a second. You believe a slightly different thing about the Bible? Um, right. I mean, the the second the second most bought book after the Bible. Uh, after the printing press came out, do you know what it was? What? The Malice Malifocarum, the witch hunting manual. And then suddenly we got a bunch of witch hunts. Yeah. What year was this? Oh, look it up. No way. There's also a great AFI song called Malice Malfarmms. It's pretty pretty intense, bro. I knew you listen to AFI. I'm going to go to Emo Night in St. Pete. That's [ __ ] hilarious. Yeah. The Malas Malifocarum book, The Hammer of Witches. Wow. When was it published? 1486. 1486. Is it really the second most bought book? I believe so. Fact check me. I'm I'm ready for it. Wow, man. So, you know, this is this is another moment of of suddenly we have the bar to share ideas is lowered significantly. And because of that, second most bought book, Harry Potter, after the Bible, the second most bought book is often considered the Quran. I I think specifically after the uh Well, it's a religious text. Yeah. after the uh uh invention of the printing press, I believe the second most printed and bought book was the Malis Malik arm. Um yeah. All right. Anyway, anyways, um so yeah, like these are this is like this moment in history that we're living through. Uh things like it have happened again. I mean, it's like that great quote of like, you know, history doesn't always repeat itself, but it always rhymes. Um, I agree. And that's like one of the reasons that I I love studying geopolitics and history and seeing how these things go together because if nothing else, like it it gives me a a way of feeling like we haven't completely departed from the map, that we're not, you know, in the middle of of some forest with nowhere to go. By studying history and geopolitics and understanding the incentives behind things, it makes you realize that like there's really nothing new under the sun. and that by studying how it's been dealt with in history, you can also see maybe around the corner to see how it could be dealt with now. Um, I'm just so for the record, I'm in no way advocating for any sort of like restriction of free speech. Um but I'm also I don't necessarily believe that um because most most academics when they talk about like how we need to deal with truth decay is uh digital literacy education we need to educate people on digital literacy to like really fact check themselves and I just like you're you're saying of like how well you are adapted to using social media and not being like tr because I know a lot of older people that just are comp get scammed every single day. The Facebook moms are the biggest security threat in the United States. You want a prize, right? Just give us your credit card information and we're going to send you this incredibly expensive gift. We just need you to pay the $7 shipping. That's right. I mean, Meanwhile, you get hosed for $1,000 out of your checking account. A renaissance of Nigerian print scams. Um, but I mean, that's that's what digital literacy education is. It's basically like, "Hey, make sure you fact check that and don't believe those crazy things." I frankly think I mean I'm from the DARE generation. Yeah, me too. Without revealing too much it didn't work. Um you know I so I don't I don't take that as an actual serious uh intervention to help truth decay. I just don't um I don't know what a serious intervention, you know, uh really looks like. It's something that I'm I'm currently like struggling with and trying to um trying to identify um and doing a lot of research on. Um, but I know there's no I mean like I've had CIA officers on this show before who one of them in particular Andy Booamante who said we need a common enemy to unite the country. Yeah. Mhm. We need some sort of common exter external devil to fight against to in order to get us back together. And that's we don't have that. We also don't have a we don't have a cohesive national religion like a lot of countries do. I'm not saying it's going to be a good thing if we do have that because I think religion is probably the cause of mo most more death and war than anything in the history of the world, but like what what else is there? Cuz we are we're not going down the right path right now. I I think that's one of those things like I don't know to me that that feels like yeah it was a solution in the or it was a solution in the past. It is great when you know there is national unity and and frankly like one of the one of the the best examples of national unity that you can point to is the last you know major attack. I push back against this theory that we need to have some antagonistic relationship in order to unify nationally. I because what's the option there? To jin up uh wars and enemies in order to unify us. I I don't think that that's the answer. Um I think that that is what if what if we could fake pretend like we have enemies and pretend like there's these big bad guys out there. Like in the public we're portraying China and Russia as these big evil bad guys, but like behind closed doors, our diplomats are going over there being like, "Yeah, hey man, we're just put this in the news. we're we're still going to do all these deals behind behind their backs. Well, I think that, you know, this is something I think about a lot, too, is um uh you've read uh 1984, right? Yes. Yeah. So, so one of the things in 1984, actually, the um Audible just did like a great audio play version of 1984. Yeah. If you really want to like get freaked out, um cuz who doesn't? Um go listen to that. It's great. Um, but one of the main plot points in 1984 is uh the main character can never remember who they're at war with. It's either like Oceanania or like uh Eurasia, right? And so, yeah, I mean, would that work? Sure. Is it ideal? My I don't think so. I don't think it's I don't think it's ideal to lie to a population in order to like make sure that they're uh believing the same things. And I frankly I think that we're better than that. I think the government does think that though. I think the highest echelons of the government do do believe that. I think they treat us as a parent child relationship. Yeah. And I know that Andy talks about that too. Yeah, you know, there's a there's a a great line in uh in a poem by uh the the writer K Tempest uh who says something along the lines of uh they treat us like idiots, but that's their problem, but when we behave like idiots, it becomes our problem, right? So, yeah, like do people in power often times infantilize the people that they so that they represent? Certainly. Mhm. But the the institutions that we have put in place are there in order to at least give us the capability of pushing back. And I think at least my belief is that and I I think Andy would disagree with me, but my belief is that that we can and should uh trust the American population more than uh than it seems like happens with our elected leaders. And I I think this is ultimately kind of the American population. Yeah. I think that we should we should trust individuals. I think that I mean I trust individuals more than organizations personally for sure. you know, um, and I think that this kind of goes back to, um, I mean, this is there's like in any geopolitical book that you ever read, uh, chapter 2 100% will always, uh, talk about like Hobbes versus Rouso, right? So, Thomas Hobbes, uh, you know, um, man in a state of nature is, uh, lonely, nasty, brutish, and short is his life. Something like that. You know, he's real, real rough. Um but he essentially believes that that we're naturally in a state of nature um you know evil conniving and um and those appetites need to be constrained for the proper functioning of society. Um and that's constrained in in his book Leviathan by the Leviathan. So we're giving up those freedoms in order to constrain our natural inclination towards violence and chaos. And then there's Rouso who says that in a state of nature, man is naturally equal. Um he's he's uh willing to cooperate um and more tranquil. I think bootoamonte's opinion here is more on the hobbsian side of things where we need to con use we need to use societal controls to constrain the individual because if left unchecked they're going to make decisions that are not only bad for themselves but bad for society at large. This is your sort of like parent child thing. Um, I tend to trust individuals more and I think that that people really are reasonable actors when they're given proper information. Um, I think that we've devel we've developed an information space right now where we're all sort of invested in these zero sum politics where it's not enough that my side wins but the other side has to lose at the same time. I don't think that's a fair broker of an information space. I don't know how to get that information space where people are are treated like adults and and transparency is is the you know the letter of the day. I don't know how to get there. But I do trust individuals and I think that that it doesn't benefit us when we have a country that is predicated upon uh the the primacy of the individual to make the their own lives and their own communities better uh to say that well the government needs to keep a lot of stuff from us because we can't be trusted with it. But that goes back to that that transparency gap too where it's like the government is often times transparent enough to make us not trust it rather than Exactly. giving us transparency so that we do trust it. We don't know what's up or down anymore. Yeah. But you know what though? I also like Okay. So anytime I go to a country and this has happened like I don't know. By the way, hey, we got like we got to wrap it up in like 5 minutes. So let's let's uh I got to pick up my kids soon. We're like three and a half hours in. Oh [ __ ] All right. Yeah. Cool. Um, uh, I'm going to get a bunch of offers from the Chinese consulate after this. This is awesome. Finish your story. Um, I I I I think that like, um, I never trust a country when I get into the back of a cab and the cab driver is like, "We love our political leader." It's like, "No, you don't." Right. Right. I bet you that happens a lot in North Korea. I I've never been in a North Korean cab before. Um, I've heard stories. Have you? Oh, super cool. Um, no, I got in No. Yeah, I knew this dude. This dude Wally Green. He was a famous he or not yeah he was a like a big- time big shot ping pong player and he went to some big tournament in I remember seeing a bit of that and he got in a cab to go to a go to the tournament or whatever and she was like oh our supreme leader invented the telephone he is the best invented ping pong everything yeah best ping pong player actually I think she did say he invented ping pong that doesn't surprise me um yeah I mean it's like and and I think that's kind of the part of the the political game we shouldn't trust our political leaders right we we should we should be constantly scrutinizing the things that they say and Like there is no way that anybody agrees 100% not only with a political leader but with every with anybody else. Like I my best friends I like have differences of opinion with them. We have a unique capability of of pushing back against political leadership in peaceful ways. um that needs to be maintained, but it also needs to be maintained with uh a pretty clear information space that is hopefully free of manipulation by foreign actors because you asked me at the beginning of this, you know, what is the what is the greatest vulnerability that we have in the United States? and and obviously my my research is is focused on fifth generation warfare in the information space, but I think that the the biggest vulnerability that we have is the gray matter. You know, it's the space between our ears. It's the ability for us to look at somebody else who is an American citizen and say that they're the enemy over somebody from a thousand miles away across the world who actually does mean us harm. And that's just because of the stories that we tell ourselves. Um, I think that's the greatest vulnerability. And I don't have an answer for it. I'm going to keep doing public thinking about uh about how we how we create cognitive security in the United States and elsewhere. Um, and uh if you want to hear about that um check out my uh uh check out my newsletter, this is not a scop uh which I promise is 100% scop free. What is it on Substack? It's on Beehive. Beehive. Okay. Behive. Yeah. Yeah. I'll put I'll link it all below. Link below. Send me the link. So, I'll put it in there. And uh check out my book. You are not here. Travels through countries that don't exist. Hell yeah. We got it back there somewhere on that shelf. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, wait. What? Didn't Wasn't there a different wall back here previously? Yeah, he scooted that one back in. I guess we're not ready for the new wall yet. Incredible. We were gonna we're gonna debut the new wall with you, but he decided not to at the last minute. That was pretty cool wall. Yeah, I noticed the set been changing. Anyway, um always a pleasure, Danny. Thank you, Eric. Yeah, it's been [ __ ] fascinating. Let's uh let's uh I want to debate backlover about cryptocurrency sometime. I'm sure you're going to see back, aren't you on your trip? No, no, he's in New York. I uh Oh, you're not going out there? No, I'll go to go to Albania maybe before uh before I go I might go to New York. I don't know. I'm in Los Angeles. Um yeah. All right, bro. Thanks again. This was fascinating [ __ ] All right. Everything's linked below. Good night. Magic mine.