Joe Roman Feynch. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan Podcasts, by night, all day. I'm a nice meet you, Joe. I wish you didn't have to exist. You're one of those guys that when you talk, like, God, I wish what he's saying isn't true, but I know it is. But I'm happy you do. I don't remember where I first saw you speak, but right away I was thinking, OK, this makes a lot of sense. When you're explaining the ministry of truth or whatever it is, is that what it's called? Ministry of Truth. Well, you tried to do that for a while. That was, I think, just as a background, please tell people what you do and what positions you held. I do all things internet censorship. That's really my mission in life, my North Star. I started off as a corporate lawyer and then worked for the Trump White House. I have a speech writer. I sort of advised on technology issues. And then I ran the cyber division for the State Department, basically the big tech portfolio that interfaces between big government international diplomacy issues on technology and then the private sector US national champions in the tech space like Google and Facebook. So I was the guy that Google lobbyists would call when they wanted favors from big government. But my life took a huge sort of eutorn, you might say, when I, the 2016 election came around and I became obsessed with the early development of the censorship industry, this giant behemoth of government private sector, civil society organizations and media all collabing to censor the internet. It was kind of a weird path from there. When did it all start rolling? When did the government realize that they had to get actively involved in censorship? And what steps did they initially take to get involved in this? It started in 2014 with the Ukraine fiasco, the coup and then the counter coup. The coup was great for internet free speech. I mean, you really do need to start the story of internet censorship with the story of internet freedom because censorship is promotion of censorship as sort of the flip side of promotion of free speech. And we've had this free speech government diplomatic role for 80 years now when World War II ended, we embarked, you know, we had the international rules based order that was created in 1948. We had the UN, we had NATO, we had the IMF, the World Bank, we had this big global system now. There was a prohibition in 1948 under the UN Declaration of Human Rights that you can't acquire territory by military force anymore and have it be respected by international law. So everything had to move to soft power influence. And so the US government took a very active role beginning in 1948 to promote free speech around the world. And this was done through all these, you know, initially CIA proprietaries like Voice of America and Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty. And then the whole Whizner's World of Surstate Department CIA apparatus, all the early partnerships with the media and the war machine around propaganda for World War II continued through the Cold War. And then that hit the gas with promotion of free speech on the internet when the internet was privatized. It was initially a military project. So it was a government operation from Jump Street. And then in 1991, the World Wide Web came out, civilian use. And right away, the State Department, the military, our intelligence sphere was promoting free speech so that we could have a, basically, government pressure on foreign countries to open up their internet to allow, basically, groups of the US government was supporting to be able to combat state control over media in those other countries. So we already had this sort of deep interplay between government tech companies, universities, NGOs, that dates back 80 years. You look at the evolution of NGOs like Freedom House or the Atlantic Council or Wilson Center promoting these free speech. So what happened was in 2014, we had had about 25 years of successful free speech diplomacy. And then we tried to overthrow the government of Ukraine. We successfully did. And I'm not even arguing whether that's a good or a bad thing. But the fact is, the US did effectively January 6th, the Yennecovitch government out of power in 2014. I mean, we literally had our Assistant Secretary of State for Europe and Eurasian Affairs, Victoria, Newland handing out cookies and water bottles to violent street protesters as they surrounded the parliament building and ran the Democrat, they let the government out of office. But then what happened is the eastern side of the state completely broke away. So we don't respect this new US installed government, Crimea voted in a referendum, joined the Russian Federation. And that kicked off that sort of set in motion, the events that would end the concept of free speech diplomacy is like a US government unfettered good. Because what they argued is we pumped $5 billion worth of US government money into media institutions in Ukraine. That's the figure that cited by Victoria Newland in December 2013 right before the coup. $5 billion setting up independent media companies, basically sponsoring mockingbird style or media assets in the region. And they still didn't penetrate eastern Ukraine. The eastern Ukraine was primarily ethnic Russian, didn't penetrate Crimea. So they said we need something to stop them from being able to combat our media influence. And they initially called this the Jarossimov doctrine, named after Valerie Jarossimov, who's this Russian general. They took a quote from him saying, the new nature of war is no longer about, no longer about military to military conflict. All we need to do is take over the media in these NATO countries. And that's primarily social media, get one of our pawns elected as the president. And that president will control the military. So it's much cheaper and more efficient to win a military war by simply winning civilian elections. So that was called the Jarossimov doctrine. That's what's set up the early censorship infrastructure in 2014. Three years later, the guy who coined that Mark Alliotti would write a sort of me, a cult was saying, oops, I'm sorry. Jarossimov was actually citing what the US does. But by that point, they'd already renamed it hybrid warfare. NATO formally declared that it's tanks to tweets, doctrine saying that the new role of NATO is no longer just about tanks. It's about controlling tweets. And then Brexit happened in June 2016. In July 2016, the very next month in Warsaw, NATO added hybrid warfare to its formal charter, basically authorizing the military, the diplomatic sphere and the intelligence world to take control over social media. And then five months later, Trump won the election being called the Russian asset. So all that infrastructure was redirected home to the US. Jesus. It was looking pretty bleak, I would say, in terms of the direction internet censorship was headed. It was, it seemed like the censorship machine was winning up until around the time that Elon purchased X. That seems to me to be our fork in the road. That's the alternative timeline. Mark Andreessen talked about that yesterday. We've had a couple of alternative timelines where things have shifted. I think that was one of the big ones. That's exactly it. I mean, he's sort of the timeline where we miss the bullet is where there's a deos X muskina. Sort of like a deos Xmakina where it's this random plot thing that happens. Someone descends onto the stage and solves all the plots, loopholes and magically saves the, the plucky heroes that were otherwise in danger. There were events in the run up, well, it all sort of happened simultaneously really because the month that Elon announced his acquisition was the same month that the disinformation governance board was announced at DHS, which was the first thing that really roused Republicans and frankly anyone with institutional power and DC to finally stare into the sun and recognize or at least begin to glimpse the size of what they were up against. The disinformation governance board set off a flurry of congressional activity from Chuck Grassley and other luminaries in Congress. There were a lot of, there's whistleblower documents that came out and for years, the entire Republican party and most of the Democrat party had denied the existence of government censorship. And frankly, the mystery of truth was not the disinformation governance board, the disinformation mystery of truth that all existed three years earlier at DHS, they just made, they just called it a name that masked what it did. It was called the cybersecurity and infrastructure security agency, which is a name that puts you half to sleep by the time you're finished saying it. Ministry of truth scared to share that to people just because of the Orwellian context of the term. You know, it just seemed like what do you, what? Well, the funny thing is they were right. The disinformation governance board was not the mystery of truth, it was a dull, boring, mundane bureaucratic layer to manage the ministry of truth that was already created three years earlier. But the fact is nobody called them out on it because of the thick language of sensor speak that hides this whole thing from general public awareness. I mean, in my own path, I've tried to self-reflect about how I ended up here spending my life on this. And I used to think it was primarily about chess and my sort of early encounters with AI and then seeing the censorship AI that really sparked my pursuit into this. But the more I thought about it, the more it's based, I think it's just kind of coming from a corporate law background where your job is to plant dirty tricks in the fine print of 150 page legal documents and to catch dirty tricks in that linguistic framing that's done by opposing lawyers. And that's really how they pulled this off. Nobody thought in 2019 that the cyber security agency in DHS would be the ministry of truth. They didn't appreciate the layers of sensor speak that were constructed on top of that to say that, well, DHS governs critical infrastructure and elections or critical infrastructure. Public health is critical infrastructure. Misinformation online is a cyber component. So it's a cyber attack on critical infrastructure. And so normally policymakers or people in the public think, oh, cybersecurity, that's hacking. That's phishing. That's for CIA, NSA people to stop Russians from hacking us. And they think critical infrastructure, they think things like dams or subsea cables or lower satellites. They don't think it means you sitting on the toilet at 9.30 p.m. on a Thursday saying, I don't know that I love mail-in ballots. And then suddenly you're being flagged by DHS as a cyber threat actor for attacking the US critical infrastructure of confidence in our elections. But that's how they scaled these definitions into this giant mission creep. And now it's metastasized into the entire US federal government, depending on the state department, USAID, the National Down for Democracy, DHS, FBI, DOJ, HHS, and the task in front of this administration is just unbelievably enormous into constructing that. Is it possible? They're going to run to a lot of headwinds because once this power was discovered and funded to the tune of billions as it has been, we have this foreign policy establishment that manages the American Empire. That saw internet censorship as kind of an El Dorado key to permanently winning the soft power influence game around the world. And what I mean by that is, OK, you know how a lot of people talk about the early CIA activity in the media with things like Operation Mockingbird and whatnot and the ability to sort of propagandaize things in the media. Well, you never had this capacity in the 1950s while that was going on. If you and I were at dinner, thanksgiving or something, and there's 12 people at the table. And I start talking to you about, I don't know, the COVID vaccines may have adverse side effects. There's never an ability to simply reach under the table as an intelligence agency or as the Department of Homeland Security or as the Pentagon or the State Department and just turn off the volume when we talk to each other peer to peer. But since the lion's share of all communication is digital, especially the politically impactful ones, that capacity now allows our blob, our foreign policy establishment to effectively control every election, or at least tilt every election around the world. And they've sprawled this into 140 countries. And Trump is going to run into every single regional desk at the State Department. Every single equity at the Pentagon arguing that if you do not allow us to continue this censorship work, it will undermine national security because it will allow Russian-favored narratives to win the day in the Ivory Coast, in Chad, in Nigeria, and Brazil, and Venezuela, and Central and Eastern Europe. You're going to have the State Department argue that if we don't have this counter-misinformation capacity, then extremists will win elections around the world. We're populous will win the election around the world. And that will undermine the power of our democratic institutions, essentially our programming, our assets in the region. And they've built this enormous capacity. It's we use it because it works because it wins. And the fact is, is Trump probably only won this election because for the same reason, he probably only won the 2016 election, which was, in both cases, there was largely a free internet. It was when Trump got censored into oblivion in 2020 by the US government under his nose, working with webs of outside NGOs and Pentagon front groups to mass censor virtually every narrative that he was putting out, that he lost. So it does work to win elections. And there's a regional desk at the State Department covering every country on Earth, Victoria, Newland. You know, I had to desk the cover about 20 countries. So every country, the State Department has preferred winner of that election. We work with all political parties. And that's a hugely powerful tool to lose. It's just twisted and evil. And it needs to. And we need to win, I don't want to say fair fights. But dipping into this sort of dark sorcery power has not only does it crush the First Amendment entirely, but the diplomatic blowback is just absolutely normal. And enormous. I can go through examples of that if you're interested. Sure. Well, so we have this thing called the Global Engagement Center at the State Department. So it was set up initially to fight ISIS because in 2014, 2015, when the Obama administration was trying to put military boots on the ground in Syria, there was this sort of giant threat that was publicly and talked about all over about ISIS recruiting on Facebook and Twitter. Homegrown ISIS threats, for example, the Garland, Texas, fiasco where there was a shooting by ISIS terrorists and the web of online intrigues around that. Three years later, it would come out that he had been effectively groomed by the FBI. The FBI had paid someone over $100,000 to become his best friend and text him to tear up Texas before that. But never mind, the horse was out of the barn. So this idea that ISIS was recruiting on Facebook and Twitter gave a license to the State Department to create this thing called the Global Engagement Center, which was really the first official censorship capacity in the US government. It predated the DHS stuff that would come along in the Trump era. And this gave the State Department the direct backchannel, the direct coordinating capacity with all the social media companies to tell them about ISIS accounts, ISIS narratives that were trending. The Pentagon poured hundreds of millions of dollars into developing a national language processing, which is a way to use AI to scan the entire internet for keywords. And you would have these academic research, researchers effectively constructing code books of language. What do ISIS advocates or supporters talk like? What words do they use? What prefixes and suffixes? This whole lexicon is then conjoined with the ingested sum of all of their tweets and transcribed YouTube videos and Facebook posts. And then suddenly the State Department is a real-time heat map of everyone who is likely to be or hits a certain confidence level of being suspected to support ISIS. That was 2014 to 2016, set up by this guy Rick Stengel who described himself as Obama's propaganda and chief. He's now on the advisory board of news guard, one of the largest censorship mercenary firms in the world. But he described himself as a free speech maximalist because before he started this, he was the under secretary of state for public diplomacy. He started this censorship center. He was the former managing editor of Time Magazine. And so he's talked about how he used to be a free speech maximalist back when he was in the media and media companies benefited from that. But when Trump won the election in 2016, he became convinced that actually the first amendment was a mistake. He was actually openly advocated in the Washington Post in an op-ed that we effectively end the first amendment that we copycat Europe's laws. And they wrote a whole book on it. This is the guy who started, effectively the country's first censorship center. But then they did a really cute trick. They went from counter-terrorism to counter-populism. Now we've always had this ability since the 1940s to interfere in the domestic affairs of foreign governments or foreign countries to topple communist countries. This was the whole Cold War counter-communism work of the CIA and the State Department. But that was primarily targeting left wing communists or left wing socialists or left wing populist and run countries. When Trump won the election in 2016, this was one of the reasons I think Republicans were so slow to move on all this. They had never experienced the brunt of the intelligence state against the mainline GOP, or at least the in power Trump faction of the GOP in the way that Democrats did in the 1960s and 70s when the CIA was actively interfering in Democrat Party politics to try to tilt them away from the anti-Vietnam movement and more into the sort of limousine liberal international, interventionalist neoliberal camp. And so in 2016, the Global Engagement Center pivoted from being counter-terrorism to counter-populism, arguing that right wing populist governments that wasn't just right wing. They were also against left wing populist, but they simply never rose to power in the way that Trump did in the US, Bolsonaro did in Brazil. Mateo Salbini didn't Italy, Marine Le Pen, almost did in France. Nigel Farage was on his way to in the UK and the Brexit referendum. The AFD party in Germany, the Vox party in Spain. In 2016, they were afraid that social media rising all of these right wing populist parties to power would effectively collapse the entire rules based international order unless there was international censorship because Brexit would give rise to Brexit if Marine Le Pen won and she was massively overpowered on social media versus Macron. If, as I mentioned, Italy, there was going to be, not just Brexit, there's going to be, Brexit, it'll exit, Brexit, go Brexit. So the entire EU would come undone, which would mean all of NATO would come undone, which would mean there's no enforcement arm for the IMF or the World Bank or international creditors. This would mean it would be like the ending scene of Fight Club where the credit card company buildings all collapse just because you're allowed to shitpost on the internet. And they talked about that quite openly in 2017 as they were creating this whole censorship infrastructure. So the 2016 elections was, that was a counterpoint, that was like a turning point. That was a moment where they realized like this is actually dangerous. Like allowing people to freely communicate online and say whatever they want, completely undermines the propaganda that they have been distributing, completely undermines their ability to control who's the president, what policies get pursued, things on those lines. Yeah, it was the final straw because the 2014 Crimea situation is, I mean the Pentagon was actively working with and funding these censorship operations through the entirety of Central and Eastern Europe starting in 2014. And then Brexit was a major event in that, basically it was said to come to Western Europe at that point. But when Trump won, that was, I guess both the final straw and then the massive anvil that collapsed any residual resistance that existed within the national security state that we didn't need to do this. And Russia gate really was the useful tool to drive that all through. The fact that Trump came into office under the barrel of a gun of a special prosecutor, openly alleging that he may be a Russian asset, effectively a Manchurian candidate of Russia who only rose to power because of social media operations being run by Russia, allowed that national security predicate to carry forward this infrastructure and be massively funded by the Pentagon, the State Department, the IC, the NGO sphere in order to set this infrastructure. But then in July 2019, Russia gate died on the vine immediately as soon as Bob Mueller completely goofed his three-hour testimony. And a lot of people were thinking before he took the stand that Trump was going to be in jail as a Russian asset because it was kept under such close hold for two and a half years, what was Bob Mueller doing? Yeah, there was the SNL sort of fanfare around that. But then when it was revealed he had nothing, there was a moment in time between July 2019 and September 2019, when all of this could have been shut down. And we could have just called all that censorship work, counterintelligence, a national security state thing. But they did something really, really nasty at that point, which we now live in the permanent aftermath of, which is they switched from a sort of counterintelligence, national security threat from Russian interference predicate, which is useful because that gives you a blank check to use the Pentagon and the State Department of the IC on this, to a domestic democracy predicate. Now, this is really, really nasty because it basically transitions censorship from being a strictly military thing that we're doing to stop Russia to being a total permeating apparatus over all civilian domestic affairs, regardless of whether there's a foreign threat. And when that was allowed to go unchallenged for effectively three years up until Elon announced the acquisition of X, and that same month the disinformation governance board spilled over, and then Republicans won the House in November 2022, which then allowed congressional hearings on all of this and the elevation of the Twitter files and the public awareness from that. But for three years, you had this handoff from Russia gate, I call this the foreign to domestic switcharoo. And if you're interested, Jamie, if you look up, I'm not not asking it too, but if you're curious, I have a whole super cut of what these people were saying from 2016 to 2018, while the Russia Gate investigation was going on to 2019, 2020, after Russia gate, they do this foreign to domestic switcharoo, those are the key terms if you're interested in it. There's a compilation to the United States. Yeah, I did a compilation of all these DHS officials, state department officials, Pentagon officials, completely changing their justification for why we need internet censorship before Russia gate and after Russia gate. And they switched from saying Russian disinformation is the threat, so that's why the Pentagon's involved. That's why the state and CIA and FBI's involved just saying, well, actually, domestic disinformation is a threat to democracy. So regardless of whether it's the Russians or not, we need to censor Americans to preserve democracy. And this happened in tandem with it. What would examples were they using to justify this? Well, they pulled off a cute trick where they doctrinally redefined democracy to mean a consensus of institutions rather than individuals. They had, when Trump won in 2016 and Brexit passed in 2016, they took this anti-authoritarian toolkit, which has for 80 years been the CIA's predicate for overthrowing governments. And really, since the 1910s, when Woodrow Wilson announced that America's role is to make the world safer democracy, we've long had a habit of intervening in foreign countries in order to liberate people from authoritarian control and bring them the gift of democracy. And that has always meant primarily that the government would represent the mass of institutional, the mass of individuals in the form of voting. When Trump won in 2016, at the same time that all these right-wing populist parties who were just like Trump also won between 2016 and 2018, primarily using free speech on social media and their popularity there, they argued that right-wing populism was the same authoritarian threat that left-wing socialism, left-wing communism was. And so they said, well, populism is the people's ground-up revolt against institutions against government, science, media, against the NGOs, the experts, the academics. So what they did is they argued that democracy has to be defended from demagoguery. Democracy needs guardrails. We need bumper cars on democracy that go beyond what people vote for because people voted for Hitler. People voted for Trump. And they were doing this at US government conferences, by the way, in 2017. I can show you some funny ones if you're interested. But they were arguing that we need these institutional guardrails against people voting for the wrong person. And those institutional guardrails are so-called democratic institutions, which is another cute rhetorical trick because that's the CIA State Department Watchword for Asset. When USAID, for example, goes in in funds, university centers, media outlets, parliamentarian groups, activist groups, legal scholars, you name it in a region. They are building up their assets to exert soft power influence on that society, on that government, in order to influence the passage of laws, the span of operations that they're doing that touched the US embassy in the region. And so what they argued is actually democracy is not about the will of individuals. It's about the consensus of institutions. So if there's institutional consensus building between the military, the diplomatic sphere, the intelligence community, the NGOs, the media outlets, the universities, that's really democracy. Those are the institutional guardrails, the people who know best. That's a difficult process, by the way. That's a process that takes months, years. That's why there are these major consensus building institutions like the Atlanta Council. That's a difficult process, by the way. That's a process that takes months, years. That's why there are these major consensus building institutions like the Atlanta Council and the Council on Farm Relations and Wilson Center and the Carnegie Endowment. We have a whole suite of consensus building institutions to bring together the banks, the corporations, the government officials, the outside interest. So they all get on the same page about a certain policy or initiative or regional drive or industrial change. If at the end of that process, a bunch of people vote for a politician because he does funny TikTok videos, or he's got a popular dance, and throws a monkey wrench in those years of consensus building, that they began to view as an attack on democracy. And so they said democracy is really about institutions. And you can actually look up, for example, read Hoffman in 2019, they were doing all of these conferences where they said elections are a threat to democracy, elections corrupt democracy because we can't think of democracy's elections anymore. For example, Ukraine has banned elections. We still say we are providing $300 billion in military to support to promote democracy in Ukraine, even though they don't have elections. What's because of the, it's controlled by US institutions. You can look up something called the Red Lines memo, by the way, on my ex-canon, if you're curious. So you say that Ukraine no longer has democracy. Essentially what happened is Zelensky was supposed to leave office and he did not. Is that what happened? Well, they've indefinitely canceled elections. So he is because of the war. Because of the wars, they're argument. Now, we had elections during the Civil War here in the US. This is not uncommon for countries to be at war and still have elections. The issue is is Zelensky is unpopular and not winning in those election polls. And we no longer define democracy as being about elections because elections allow populists to circumvent the consensus of institutions. And if you want to see a great example of this, you can look at the, something called the Red Lines memo, which is, which is, I think I have it near the top of my ex-account or you can look for just the phrase Red Lines memo and you will see, Zelensky's first month in office, he was given a threat letter, effectively by the US State Department, where they had something like 70 US-funded NGOs who wrote a letter to Zelensky telling him, ordering him not to cross the blow listed red lines, or else there will be political instability in your country. Now, political instability in the country caused by the US State Department is the reason Zelensky ultimately became president. The 2014 coup in Ukraine was US and UK orchestrated political instability to have a January 6th style mob destabilized the government and literally run it out of the country. And they gave him red lines on every single aspect of what he could do as president, security red lines, cultural red lines, energy policy red lines. What were these red lines, the cultural red lines? So for example, that he could not allow the use of Russian language to be aired on any of the major Ukrainian media channels. This was part of a drive by the US State Department in tandem with the censorship work that started at that same time in order to prevent the sort of affinity, the sort of Russian affinity network that happens because of Russian propaganda spreading from Russian language news sources and to try to pry the country off of these Russian ethnic faction and have essentially the Ukrainian guy. That's in response for what happened in Crimea? Yes, yes. And Crimea and the Donbass, the whole Eastern, Eastern side breakaway. But this is effectively the long arm of Langley, the long arm of the State Department in CIA, telling Ukrainians that they can't, what kind of language they can use in their own country. Ukraine was effectively forced to transfer over. It's education ministry to an EU commissioning body so that Russian adjacent mythologies couldn't be taught in the country. They were told what industries they needed to privatize and to block any attempt to maintain sovereign control of those energy assets. This is ultimately what gave rise to the Burisma scandal by the way in the Hunter Biden State Department affairs that ran through all that, which is a whole other fascinating topic I should add. But the fact is- I love your back to that. Yeah. But this is every aspect of Ukrainian society, effectively top down control by democratic institutions funded by the US government. When it's stock standard, that the only reason we do that, he who pays the Piper calls the tune, they're being funded to exert this soft power issue. Every, this soft power force on the Ukrainian government and Zelensky knows that force because the only reason he occupies the power that he does is because that force ushered him in through the sequence of events from Yatsanyuk in 2014 through up to him. And so the issue is, those are the institutions. By the way, that whole thing was run through some of the Ukraine crisis media center, which is effectively a suite of media institutions in the area that are that are CIA conduits, like the Kiev Independent, which is funded by the National Endowment for Democracy. The National Endowment for Democracy is one of the most pernicious forces in the entirety of the censorship industry. And you were talking with Mark Andreessen about NGOs and their role in their net censorship. And he was, I think, fleshing out sort of the concept of a gongo, a government organized non-governmental organization. And so the National Endowment for Democracy is sort of posited as an NGO, but it's got a very curious history. Again, this is what sponsors so much of Ukrainian media. The National Endowment for Democracy was created in 1983 because of a dilemma that the new Ronald Reagan administration faced. The CIA at that point in the early 80s, its name was dirt. There were the massive scandals in the 1960s, to the 1970s, everything from Operation Mockingbird to MK Ultra to Operation Chaos, to effectively bribing student groups on college campuses, all sorts of the heart attack gun being held up in a public hearing at the church committee in 1975 about ways the CIA was assassinating world leaders and assassinating journalists and political figures, using methods that included a gun that would make it look like they organically died of a heart attack. All of these things gave rise to Jimmy Carter being elected in 1976. He was not expected to win in 1976, but he won on the back of Democrat mass outrage over the malfeasance of the national security state, the CIA. And so the following year, Carter does something called the Halloween Massacre. He fires 30% of the CIA's operations division in a single night, and then he totally cripples the CIA's budget. Reagan gets to power after the Iran hostage situation, wants the CIA's powers back, but the Democrats were still hugely hostile to it. The public still had not fully forgiven the CIA. So they came up with a cute trick, and you can actually look at a September 1991, David Ignatius article called Spylus Coos. This is in the Washington Post. The article begins with a, by saying that we don't even really need to have, we don't really need to even need to nominate Robert Gates, the Senate, the new CIA director for, we don't even need to do a Senate confirmation hearing for a CIA director anymore, because the CIA is effectively made obsolete by its new tactic that we use through NGOs spearheaded by the National Endowment for Democracy. And you'll find in that article a quote by the National Endowment for Democracy's founder, where Carl Gerschman, where he explicitly says that it would be a terrible thing for groups supported by the US government to be seen as subsidized by the CIA. We did that in the 1960s, and it worked out terribly for us when it turned out they were backed by the CIA. That's why the National Endowment for Democracy was created so that we could, the CIA could effectively subsidize the groups without having CIA fingerprints on it. If you look at his legislative history, we passed effectively a bill through Congress that Ronald Reagan approved. The origins of it come from the CIA director William Casey in 1983, working directly with the US Attorney General, as well as an entire US aid blueprint, though the previous year. The CIA requested this to be set up. It's funded entirely by the US government. It's officially accountable to the House Foreign Relations Committee and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. So it's funded by the government. It's literally accountable to a US congressional committee. It was the CIA director, Burt Thitt, the founder acknowledged that they were created to do what the CIA wants to do but gets in trouble for doing. And we call this an NGO. I don't think so. And so the issue is the National Endowment for Democracy and the entire intelligence community was, they were the ones who led this conversion from counter-communism to counter-populism. They're the ones who when Trump rose to power and when Brexit and the whole NATO EU country domino started electing right-wing populists who were hostile to the foreign policy establishment's consensus. And a lot of this has to do with energy geopolitics and military interventionism. And we can get to those if you want to go there. But the NED has its octopus arms around the entirety of the censorship industry. If you want to see something really crazy, there's a video that we can watch. It's a two minute video from one of Ned's global censorship programs where they explicitly work with foreign governments to get foreign governments to pass censorship laws to attack US companies. So this is the US government funding a CIA cut out to back channel with regulators and influencers and foreign countries to get those foreign countries to crush US national champions in the tech space. This is the exact opposite of what the State Department was set up in 1789 to do. Where is this video? How can we say it? If you, if you, if you, you got it, you put it up. Disinformation has invaded online conversations on social media platforms, posing challenges to healthy information environments and threats to democracy. It bolsters authoritarians, weakens, democratic voices and participation, exploits and exacerbates existing social cleavages and silences opposition. Countering disinformation and promoting information integrity are necessary priorities for ensuring democracy can thrive. The SEPS Countering Disinformation Guide is a resource including nine thematic sections and a comprehensive database of interventions, highlighting various approaches for advancing information integrity and strengthening societal resilience to disinformation and other harmful online campaigns. The International Foundation for Electoral Systems, International Republican Institute and National Democratic Institute developed this guide with support from USAID through the consortium for elections and political process strengthening. Here are nine key takeaways from the guide. Addressing disinformation requires a whole of society approach. We need to create a sense of urgency to drive collective action for addressing disinformation. Institutions and platforms have the resources to address disinformation, but lack credibility, whereas civil society has the credibility but is chronically under resourced. Countering disinformation requires a mixed methods approach, including fact checking, monitoring and other interventions. Focusing on major events like election outcomes alone will not achieve a healthy information environment. Developing norms and standards, legal and regulatory frameworks and better social media content moderation is necessary for a healthy information ecosystem. It is important to establish frameworks to discourage political parties from engaging in this information. Not sure where to start? Click here to explore the interventions database of organizations, projects and donors working to counter disinformation around the world. Whoa. There are 140 countries. It's entirely funded by the US government. I can break this down in detail. So this SAPS program is basically in large part the reason that the Brazil censorship state was erected. I mean, this came a little bit later in the game, but it's a spawn out of this Ned censorship network. Explicitly created by the CIA director, self-confessed effectively CIA cut out. What SAPS does is they manage in a umbrella portfolio of all of the censorship institutions that they've capacity built in a region. So capacity building is a phrase in statecraft that effectively means building up an asset so that it has the capability to be instrumentalized by the US State Department. So for example, whenever we're trying to do something in a foreign country, the first thing we do is we look at the state of the chess board. What assets are on our side there? What political groups? What demographic groups? What religious groups? What political parties? What universities? What media institutions? What capacities do they currently have? What capacities do they need, but don't have? And that is where the flood of state department and USAID and Ned funding comes into capacity build them so that they can be instruments of US Statecraft. Now it doesn't mean they always use those capacities. Sometimes we create those capacities even if we don't intend to use them right away just in case we might need them later. And that's a whole other fascinating field. But what SAPS does is it's a joint program by the US State Department, USAID and the National Down for Democracy. Now USAID is a very note, it's sort of a switch player. There's no aid in USAID, by the way. That your brain is being tricked when you see the phrase USAID. It's not an aid organization. The aid in USAID stands for agency for international development. It is developing internationally around the world, all of the institutions that the state department needs to use. So when they are capacity building activist groups in a foreign country, that's because the State Department wants those activists there. Now USAID for the first time in its history was created in the early 1960s by JFK 1961. It was created because you had all of this intelligence, statecraft, and military support and logistical aid that was tripping over itself. Basically, the military would be running aid to certain groups in the region. The State Department would be running aid to certain groups in the region. The intelligence community, and there was no sort of central coordinator of those capacity building operations. USAID, by the way, is a $50 billion budget. The entirety of the intelligence community is only $72 billion. So it is more than the CIA and more than the State Department. And aid is basically, USAID is effectively a switch player to assist the Pentagon on the national security front to assist the State Department on the national interest front or to assist the intelligence community on a sort of clandestine operations front. So you can look up funny moments, by the way, in USAID being a CIA front. If, for example, you want to pull up the Wikipedia of Zunz and Eo when USAID created basically a CIA Twitter in Cuba to try to convince the people of basically to try to get a free speech internet, a free speech Twitter knock off in Cuba at a time when Twitter in 2014 was restricted. And USAID wandered money that was earmarked for Pakistan in order to create an identical version of Twitter, but just for Cuba, and to recruit them using messaging at first involved music, sports, and hurricane updates. And then in their own documents, once they had accumulated about 100,000 users, they would start to feed them in the algorithm, messaging to make them want to overthrow their government and form smart mobs to bring a Cuban spring to Cuba in the same way that the CIA, the State Department, USAID pulled off the Arab Spring into Indonesia and Egypt in 2011, 2012. By the way, I'm not even opining on whether this is good or bad, but you can't bring that home, and you can't target US companies like they've done here. But so USAID provides most of the money. The State Department provides the policy vision for this SEPS censorship program. And Ned does the technical implementation work. Now, you saw in that video, there were two organizations that were listed. It didn't say they were the international Republican Institute and the National Democratic Institute, IRI and NDI. These are the two political branches of the National Alfred Democracy. When this CIA cut out was set up in 1983, they set up their four core fours. The first two are the political cores. The IRI, the Republican, the GOP wing of the CIA, effectively, the NDI, the Democrat Party wing of the CIA. And then two others, one called the Center for International Private Enterprise, which is the Chamber of Commerce. It's basically the CIA, it liaising with multinational companies with our big US national champions. And then the fourth one is called the Solidarity Center, which is the CIA's work with unions, which has been a part and parcel of our CIA work since the 1940s. And so you have, but these two political branches of the National and Alfred Democracy are designed to basically gel to both sides of the political aisle to make sure they have support for CIA activity in a region. And so this, for example, there was a split on Russia between the GOP and the DNC up until Ukraine in 2014. You may recall in 2012, there was that debate between Mitt Romney and Barack Obama over Russia policy, where Mitt Romney was flanking Obama from his sort of hawkish Russia right. He was saying, Obama, you're soft on Russia, you're letting Vladimir Putin get everything he wants in Eastern Europe. And Obama's response was the 1980s called, they want their foreign policy back. Because at the time, it was primarily the GOP economic stakeholders whose energy investments were being sabotaged by Russian activity in Georgia and Azerbaijan. It hadn't yet hit the NDI network, the DNC side of the economics until Ukraine in 2014. That was when there became a bipartisan consensus on the need to effectively go to war and launch this big energy sanctions operation against Russia. And so that's who's running that SEPS program. It's both sides of the political aisle, but both of them hate Trump, both of them hate populist, whether it's the US, with Trump, Bolsonaro in Brazil, and again, the whole suite of EU countries that we just talked about. And they descended on Brazil just two weeks after Bolsonaro was elected in 2018. The Atlanta Council and NED held all these meetings about how Bolsonaro only won because of basically social media. Social media and end-to-end encrypted chats like WhatsApp and Telegram. And that we need to basically stop Bolsonaro's presidency and its tracks and stop them from getting reelected by creating a censorship infrastructure in Brazil that is powerful and institutionally as wide and deep as are the different network. So NDI, which I should note, Hunter Biden was on the Chairman's Advisory Board of NDI, the DNC CIA wing. So if anyone is a little curious as to why the CIA intervened on the Justice Department investigation, folks remember the IRS wanted to question Kevin Morris, Hunter Biden's lawyer who paid his taxes for five years. And then the CIA intervened and told them, do not look into who is funding Hunter Biden. I find it curious that the CIA's DNC branch, Hunter Biden was on the Chairman's Advisory Board. But so NDI sets up this sprawl of coalitions called D4D, Design for Democracy. And Design for Democracy in tandem with this SEPS program goes on to work with the censorship court, De Morea, the censorship Voldemort on their TSE court. Basically the election management and censorship body of their Supreme Court. This is the guy who has gone to war with Elon Musk. They help that censorship court set up a disinformation task force and their own institutional assets get put on the advisory committee of the Brazilian censorship court to direct the censorship policies of the same institution that banned ex from Brazil, that seized Starlink's assets. They worked with the universities, the FGV DAP and other very significant Brazilian universities. They set up disinformation centers in there and got academic thought leadership published in Brazil about the need to pass mis-anti-misinformation laws. Their own NDI fellows and operatives were publicly testifying to the Brazilian parliament on the need to pass these laws. They were publicly speaking to the prosecutors association groups in Brazil, telling them they need to prosecute misinformation on this. They were funding millions of dollars to Brazilian media institutions to promote internet censorship and to promote the banning effectively of any pro-Bolsonaro content on social media or on end-end encrypted chats. The USA then kicked in millions of dollars of funding to inter news, which is another US government funded media projection arm to promote media literacy programs, information integrity programs, countering mis-indist information programs in Brazil. So at every level, Brazilian media companies, they partnered with the low-bow, for example, the largest media outlet in Brazil. The media institutions, the universities and thought leaders, the politicians, the judges, it was full spectrum. It was the same thing that we do when we try to regime change a country. By the way, this is in USA's charter. This is one of the reasons they're able to get away with this. In USA's charter, it allows USA to capacity-build assets to do so-called judiciary reform, which means influencing the laws and the structure of the judges and to be able to have our foreign aid money, get laws passed or get structural changes made to the court system there. And this is what SEPS did. This state department, CIA front censorship organization, they developed a strategy they called EMBs election management bodies, which is basically focusing in on the court system of different countries that are in charge with adjudicating elections in order to get them to grow a censorship capacity to censor the ability for people to question their elections. And they had all these stakeholders, some of them are really funny. Some of them they said, well some of our EMB partners didn't want to actually, didn't think they could pull this off. They couldn't convince the other political stakeholders in their country to grow the censorship capacity. And they advised them about how they could cleverly use rhetoric to disguise the programs. Don't call it a counter-disinformation program if you think that'll ruffle too many feathers. Instead, simply call it strategic communications. And because every government agency has some sort of public affairs branch, some sort of communications capacity, simply say that this is for monitoring and engaging in strategic communications. And then you can mass flag the accounts of the US State Department's political opponents, they want to stop from winning the election. Jesus. This is why, you know when you're saying it's going to be insanely difficult in Trump's going to face so many headwinds trying to unravel all this stuff. Like there's so many organizations and there's so many people involved and there's so many countries that are in lockstep. Because we waited too long. We waited too long and now look, it's not full blown. This has not yet reached full maturity where we are at complete 1984 on all of this, but it is no longer in its infant stage. There was, if Elon had a, if Congress was aware of that CISA, that cybersecurity branch at DHS was the real mystery of truth in 2019 and 2022. If people were aware of the State Department's Global Engagement Center and US AIDS Democracy, Human Rights and Governance and all of this, you know, in 2018, 2019, when it was really getting its feet down, it may have been easy to have been pulled out at the roots then because they were skittish at the time about going through with this at first. You heard in that, in that video that we just watched, a reference to this phrase called, Whole of Society. This is another funny, funny video. If you want to just pull up though, if you're interested Jamie and if you think Joe, this is appropriate, I could have made this a six hour super cut, but if you just, I made a two hour super cut of, if you just look at Whole of Society super cut on my X account, you'll see this. And this phrase is, they're get out jail free card. So when these CIA cutouts and State Department emissaries and, you know, the whole apparatus of the blob had this apparition moment in 2016 where the rules based international order would collapse and we have to stop populism, we have to stop Trump from, you know, ending our C's Eurasia foreign policy. When that happened, they had a lot of self-reflection where they said China doesn't have this problem. Russia doesn't have this problem. Authoritarian countries don't have to deal with the threat of insurgent populist groups, you know, radically altering that country's foreign policy, that country's national security state, but they do it all top down. And we have our entire diplomatic apparatus is arrayed as a sort of dichotomy between democracy and autocracy because that's what lets us go over, go and take over or overthrow a regime change foreign countries is their autocracies and we're bringing democracy to them. So we can't be seen to look like the autocracies we're trying to overthrow. We want the autocratic outcome. We're bringing democracy to them. So we can't be seen to look like the autocracies we're trying to overthrow. We want the we want the autocratic outcome. With a but we don't we can't be seen to use the autocratic process. So they came up with a really cute trick to prevent the top down. Perception. And they called this the whole of society. Counter misinformation framework that whole society counter misinformation alliance. And the reason I thought it'd be funny to play this clip before delvin into a little bit more is because it actually starts with a clip from SISA the cyber security turn cyber censorship DHS. Internal meeting where the where the SISA censorship official leading leading the meeting apologizes for using the phrase whole society because. But by that point everyone is so sick of hearing it. It's like a mantra like an incantation that they that there that has to be recited almost like a religious ritual. Because this is how you get this government private sector civil society. Media alliance this thing was completely orchestrated top down to avoid the appearance of top down in 2017. They borrowed this concept from their military counter insurgency work and they simply grafted it on to censorship. But I don't know. Do you want to just like watch this in it. If you just look for the phrase whole of society at like Ben cyber. I did. I did. You could also find a lot of his talking about well if you go to in my highlights tab in scroll down. I think you'll you'll see it there it's a super cut. I use the phrase super cut if that's helpful to highlight it. But whole society is this concept that the government will fund allies to astroturf the appearance of a spontaneous. Demicratic surround sound around the need to do the censorship work so the so they're for quadrants and their whole society framework. Government meaning all the different government they have a whole of government side of that which is everything from the state department the DHS HHS for covid censorship work. You know FBI DOJ National Science Foundation all that the private sector are the private sector companies that social media tech platforms where the censorship actually takes place. The civil society quadrant means university censorship centers count. Disinformation studies is what they call it misnomer of the century but. But so they've there's now about a hundred US universities every major US university has a censorship center. Well it's it'll be called disinformation studies sometimes will be tucked under their sociology department of their communications even though applied physics when they do. AI censorship so you have the universe in the civil society layer you have the universities the NGOs the activist groups the the independent nonprofit foundations and the fourth quadrant is media which is the government working with media to promote. censorship of US citizens and so by by effectively wielding all these assets so that there's government funding and government coordination but technically. Most of the pressure being put on the tech companies is coming from yeah here you can watch just like a funny super guy we don't need to watch all the thing but you'll get the picture very quickly. And we hear this term all the time. A problem like disinformation fighting disinformation really requires a whole society response and I know whole society is a little bit cliche and an attorney gets thrown around a lot. And addressing disinformation requires a whole of society approach. So information is not going to be fixed by governments acting along. I think we've seen that a whole society effort is really key to the solution. There are some countries more so in Europe or up in other parts of North America that are more progressive in recognizing that this is a whole society challenge. Whole of society approach and what would be your wish list if you if you've been if you could implement anything or to be able to trust when somebody tells them it's fake is there anything that governments can do on that front. Absolutely. This is a whole of society problem so there's things that governments can do you know individual national governments and multi lateral institutions. This information challenges that democracy require that we work together as a community to share our experiences into whole governments social media platforms and political leaders accountable for making sure that people are empowered with information that is real and accurate. And so it's important to have the information that can only be achieved through a whole of society effort. Countering disinformation we often talk about a whole of society response. Of course we need this information. A whole of society approach. I want to get into the quote whole of society response that whole of society networked with bonds private sector public sector civil society. Means that we're circulating and that to me is the whole of society approach. I think this solution has to be whole of society which is the word that we throw around a lot especially in venues like these right. We need cooperation from the tech platforms good safe cooperation and enforcement of terms of service but we also need people in the government who are willing to say yes this is a problem and it's not just about foreign actors. Okay so so a few things on that if you remember the seps video the the CIA front net program to get censorship laws 140 countries. If you remember there was this one of those nine things they read off is that the US government needs to capacity build these counter misinformation institutions in civil society because the government has the money and the resources but not the credibility. Civil society organizations the universities the NGOs they've got the credibility but not the money. So that that's part of what they're saying here with the role of this civil society is they can't be the government can't be seen as telling everyone to do all this censorship because that's authoritarian. That would look not credible that would look authoritarian for the government to do so we've got the muscle and the money but not the credibility are cut out organizations. have the credibility but not the money in the muscle so we're going to give them the money in the muscle. And so I can show you if you want to see what this looks like in action I can show you some some great videos that sort of show this. So if you if you just look up wise decks it's in my highlights it's also if you just do at Mike Ben cyber wise decks. I'll show you a couple of things of how this how this works so if when when Jamie's able to pull that up. So why is why stacks W I S E D X. And so Trump did something really ambitious when he when he was president at the National Science Foundation the National Science Foundation is is the main funder of higher education in the United States it's a 10 billion dollar pool of money. That goes to fund university centers and it is sort of the civilian arm of DARPA it's technically you know a sort of civilian. You know foundation for science but if you look at its history it basically has a it's it's when military technology becomes dual use for commercial and civilian purposes so for example the internet self started off as DARPA in the 60s. Then it was transferred to the National Science Foundation for civilian effectively management that then it made its way to the world wide web. That's why the National Science Foundation has a like a 15% quota on national security related projects and that's and all the technical implementers of the censorship programs at the National Science Foundation come from DARPA including this that. I'm going to show here but but so Trump created this thing in what it in his first term at the National Science Foundation called the convergence accelerator program. The idea was is that we were going to converge scientists from different fields to solve these home run swing challenges like you know cold fusion and and you know all the. A quantum mechanics challenges that required physicists to talk to data scientists and network modelers and bringing them all together so that all they got converge on a come come problem. So we set up about five of these tracks in like 2019. So the line gets into office is first year in office is National Science Foundation creates a new track it's called track F and the whole thing is is it's for it's is for countering misinformation to converge scientists on developing censorship technology to censor the internet at scale. So they have spent tens of millions of dollars this this this one that we're about to watch was eligible for 5.7 million dollars from the National Science Foundation it received 750,000 dollars from the National Science Foundation to create this this is the promo video that they put up on YouTube in connection with their with their grant so in so I'll just let it play in then all. Posts that go viral on social media can reach millions of people unfortunately some posts are misleading social media platforms have policies about harmful misinformation. For example Twitter has a policy against posts that say authorized covid vaccines will make you sick when something is mildly harmful platforms attach warnings like this one that points readers to better information. Really bad things they remove. Before they can enforce platforms have to identify the bad stuff and they miss some of it actually they miss a lot especially when the posts aren't in English. You understand why let's consider how platforms usually identify bad posts. There are too many posts for a platform to review everything so first a platform flags a small fraction for review. Next human reviewers act as judges determining which flat posts violate policy guidelines. If the policies are too abstract both steps flagging and judging can be difficult. Why sticks helps by translating abstract policy guidelines into specific claims that are more actionable. For example the misleading claim that the covid 19 vaccines suppress a person's immune response. Each claim includes keywords associated with the claim in multiple languages. For example a Twitter search for negative efficacy yields tweets that promote the misleading claim. A search on if it gets a negative yield Spanish tweets promoting that same claim. The trust and safety team at a platform can use those keywords to automatically flag matching posts for human review. Why sticks harnesses the wisdom of crowds as well as AI techniques to select keywords for each claim and provide other information in the claim profile. For human reviewers a wise sticks browser plug in identifies misinformation claims that might match the post. The reviewer then decides which matches our correct. A much easier task than deciding if posts violate abstract policies. Reviewer efficiency. So covid 19 was essentially like a proof of concept of all this right like this is a this is something they could utilize and see how everything works. Because you have this sort of consensus among most people because of the media narrative that this is dangerous. We're all going to die the thing that's fucking us up is these people who are vaccine deniers and these people who are believing things that are ridiculous like natural immunity. And so we you have like a public support of this thing to go full scale where they can try it out with covid 19 where there was no real specific narrative. That we thought of holy as problematic as a society before covid 19 covid 19 became one that at least a large swath of society believed the narrative that's being given to you by corporate news. And this was the thing that they could combat on social media and have support for this type of censorship. They had already begun doing it for hate speech before covid 19 didn't hit the scale though, but they were already using hate speech as a proxy for populism both in the US and across. NATO to support to and they were conflating everything with hate speech basically if you opposed open borders in the US or in Italy or in Germany or in the UK. In fact that's that's why the US justice department funded hate lab. You want to see another crazy video from all this. I'm not saying we had to pull it up this was pulling up. Yeah. Yeah. Look at look up the hate lab. There they're video on the their AI scan and band dashboard for all of this is just a large scale. Implementation of censorship. Yeah. Just using all these different things to get people accustomed to it and to try to start using this full scale. Yes. Actually before we go to the hate lab, I do want to dwell on this covid thing for a second because that's that's exactly right. On what we just watch with wise decks just coming back to this whole society concept. So this is the National Science Foundation. The administrators for this are both DARPA guys. It is it is funding the University of Michigan to create an AI censorship claims database so that the censorship policies that that the Biden administration strong armed on to these social media companies as we know from Mark Zuckerberg and others to adopt in the first place so that there's no escape. There's every claim that a covid vaccine skeptic says will be mapped out in a sort of you know lexicon code book of terms and claims that will then be automatically flagged and the National Science Foundation does not want to be seen as having the government tell the private side companies to do it. So it is capacity building a civil society nonprofit. The University of Michigan disinformation lab to create this AI censorship technology to then sell to the social media platforms to make sure there's no escape to. In terms of being the ability to criticize government policy on covid without getting censored. But just to drive home that point on covid censorship. This is something that I think is really terrifying that the people should. Should be aware of there's a company called graphic which which figures very heavily in all of the censorship industry. If you if you pull up graphic as April 2020 report on on on covid and covid conspiracy theories. It's also on my timeline if you look up the the word graphic. It's g r a p h i k a graphic is a is a long time military contractor that did social media monitoring surveillance and analytics work for the US military and intelligence in order to see what narrow. They were formally a part of the pentagon's Minerva initiative. The Minerva initiative is the psychological operations research center of the pentagon. When the pentagon is trying to do information shaping operations and they solicit propositions and ideas and thought leadership from outside organizations to help the military chief psychological operations outcomes that are favorable. To the intended military policy. So graphic has gotten over seven million dollars in pentagon grants. It was formally a part of the pentagon's psychological operations research center. And graphic was one of the very first entities to begin this this censorship around the world of covid 19. Given the strange unresolved role of the pentagon in potentially giving rise to covid 19 or the strangeness of the DARPA grants around there in the military networks around the biosecurity state. Graphic began their work in before covid 19 even got its name. They started in their own source documents. They say they started December 16th. The pneumonia like symptoms did not begin into work were December 12 2019. So just four days after now they've said later that actually we started in January 2020 but we backdated our data. Our AI you know ingestion of all the tweets and Facebook posts in January 2020. So even if you accept that that is still just one month after covid broke out. And if you pull this if you pull up their April 2020 report you will see that they've they've literally scanned. Yeah this is the one. And I have a highlighted version of it by the way on my on my ex account as well if if if if you scroll up so so if you if you start page one I'll sort of walk you through this. So again this is a pentagon funded psychological operations research arm of the pentagon. And you'll see like the you know it's called the covid 19 infodemic. It gives you they publish this April 2020 after covid gots name but they started this before it did. And if you scroll if you scroll down to I think page five here you'll see you'll see so this is by the way. an AI generated network map of all people expressing skepticism about the origins of covid in different different conspiracy theories so if you scroll down to page five says a key analytical have these maps okay so you'll see that they. So similar large mega clusters of us right wing accounts. that were diminishing the the mainstreaming of the coronavirus conversation if you scroll down to the next one. You see they've dedicated coronavirus misinformation map seated on disinformation specific hashtags real that conservative groups have a larger total presence. Of covid heterodox opinions this is right at the outbreak one month. You know into it a pentagon funded cyops firm is is doing political mapping not in the US in the UK in Italy. So they found that disproportionately it's it's conservatives who need to be censored more if you just scroll down through this I'll show you some highlights. What was this in regard this was this information in regard to the origin at this point yes so you can run a control left which is wild that they were already countering when the origin was not really. And you're still being debated right and you'll see they even so again this is the pentagon. Creating network mass we're paying for this effectively to protect the political the online reputation of Bill Gates and George Soros you'll see they have a whole section on can if you just want to control F for gates or Soros you'll see this as well. But you'll see that they map these different conspiracy how much would Bill Gates or George Soros need to pay a cloak and dagger public relationship to scour the entire internet and create targetable sensible. Demographic communities that social media should censor in order to protect the reputation. This is us paying the pentagon to pay a cyops firm to protect the reputation of Bill Gates and George Soros from conspiracy theories online. And they did the same thing with covid origins they did the same thing with vaccines the same group graphic it was a part of something called the virality project which you know had which mapped out 66 different claims. If you question covid vaccine efficacy if you question masks and their efficacy if you if you question policies around around lockdowns all of that was systematically mapped all four of the entities involved in the virality project by the way we US government funded in terms of at the organizational level. University of Washington who are two of those four received a joint three million dollar grant from the national science foundation which again is this basically civilian side of DARPA. The you know graphic as received seven million and pentagon funds and then the you know the nastiest one of them all is this group the Atlantic Council which has. Which gets annual funding over over a million dollars a year from the pentagon over a million dollars a year from the state department. It also gets annual funding from the CIA cut out national down for democracy gets annual from the USA at least every web of US cloak and dagger intelligence and and diplomatic funding. Funds the Atlantic Council every year the Atlantic Council is seven CIA directors on its on its board of directors. A lot of people don't know seven former number one heads of the CIA are still alive. Let alone all locally clustered on the exact organization which is the premier heavyweight in internet censorship around the world. And the Atlantic Council. I'm sure some wild clips of that by the way including them training journalists on what to censor. and you need to see that yeah okay so if you pull up. If you can find this also if you look for on rumble NATO training journalists. You'll you'll see that. Is rumble the only place you can put that up right now. No I have it on my ex it can actually have a 45 minute video. I have a 45 minute video that goes through it in all the supporting receipts that's got I think almost three million views right now but there's a two minute there's like a two to four minute video. If you look at Atlantic Council. censorship journalists or the videos I can tell you that the source video is called I call bullshit. This was in is is in Joe June 2019. Right on the heels of the Bob Mueller investigation. The Atlantic Council again with seven CIA directors on its board and annual funding from the state department Pentagon does this this 360 meeting where they bring in journalists and fact checkers from all over the world to come to this. You know it I mean it looks like something straight out of Dr. Strange love and Jamie let me know if you have trouble pulling it up because I can. He sent me down to middle adding what you got to hold up what you were talking about on other podcasts that's not what I'm looking for after it's definitely it's definitely searchable easily on on rumble I actually. Want to love this up but. And I can I can tell you the exact if you just look it's got I call bullshit is what it was by Ben Nemo the Atlantic Council. I just say what I'm seeing because every time I type in what you're saying it just brings up you talk. Okay. Okay. How about how about it when a council. A land council journalist or training. General so. Yeah. I know. Yeah I think you know. Still from still pregnant bring up what you talked about. There you go that that's the top one okay so. So here you go. The censorship training session yes so can I tell you a little backster on this real. Trump tweets Brexit slogans. Yeah give me some. Okay all right so if you pause if you pause right there on the on the thumbnail if you just see it real quick. Okay so I found this video in 2019 you know my like my whole life has been 24 seven morning new night. Tracking watching I know these people closer to my own friends and family this is. You know I found this video I think it around the five or six hour mark of of a day two of. I found this I think it five or six hour mark of a nine hour video in in June 2019. But where this this is basically the month before the Bob Mueller investigation and they they wanted to pre sensor and and throttle trumps ability to be able to. Fight off charges that he was a Russian asset because at the time the Pentagon and the intelligence community want him out if you remember the Ukraine impeachment in 2019 came from. The C.M. Morella the you know the CIA agent came from the Binman brothers who are military basically Trump had a big beef. With the existing brass of the Pentagon and the intelligence community over Russia policy over Eurasia policy. Which is a whole thing that we can maybe talk about if you're if you're interested but so the Atlantic Council was was one of the very very very first movers in the censorship industry space. I mentioned how this really started in 2014 with 25 years of free speech diplomacy sort of ended with the 2014 Ukraine fiasco. Because of this draw some of doctrine hybrid warfare thing and I mentioned that that's when NATO began setting down infrastructure. Just just censor the Internet and that's what snowballed into what we now have. And so the Atlantic Council effectively bills itself as NATO's think tank that's what it's known as in Washington. There's you know places like the council farm relations are sort of more known for chamber of commerce and big business sort of working on on government policy. The Atlantic Council is one of these that's for NATO and it's basically NATO's clandestine civilian sort of civil military arm. There's a NATO military agenda that needs massaging at the political level they need laws passed they need sanctions put put in place they need capacity building to on the civilian side to help a military thing. That's what the Atlantic Council primarily does and I'm not even appining on whether much of what they do. I'm not even saying good or bad organization but they set up something called the digital forensics research lab right at you know basically right on the heels of the Crimea and eastern Ukraine counter coup. And it was one of the earliest NATO US military liaison Internet censorship shops that targeted populist governments Trump. You know the the whole UK Italy Germany Spain network that I talked about Bolsonaro right out the gate. And so this video was again right before Russia gate ended and they were so they thought they could put Trump in prison with this. And this was a training session that they did for journalists and fact checkers in June 2019. You see this session is called is an interactive session it's called I call bullshit. And by the way Ben Nemo he's at the Atlantic Council in this one but he goes on shortly after this to be effectively the technical lead for graphic of the same Pentagon. So by the way he had started his careers in the NATO press shop basically doing media work for NATO then he goes over and again we fund all of this but let's just watch and we'll show you this. If you have any who worked in this space well I think acknowledge that in any information operation it's not just lies you take a grain of truth and they will build a pearl of this information around it. When we're in this space there isn't a simple binary true or false there are all kinds of shades of meaning in between. Now there are various different ways of modeling how you can identify the ways in which people are trying to twist the story. Wait for this gets good. Because it's short and because frankly I developed it is the four D's. Dismiss, distort, distract and dismay. These are the four responses that we see time and again. Not false none of these are false. How can we get censored anyway? All of you should have some of these cards on the table. If you don't look on another table and steal one that's not being used because these are going to help get our attention. We are going to go through a set of slides showing quotes from different organizations and individuals who are using certain rhetorical devices to make their argument. And so if you go through all of them at least one of these four will apply. Again dismiss, distort, distract, dismay. Everyone say it with me this name. Distort, distract, dismay, excellent. You're welcome to scream I call bullshit too if you're comfortable but it's not as long as I'm on it by US tax bill. With that let's play. Which are... How can you censor the sitting president? Are you arguing that what he said is disinformation? How can you tell the tech platforms that that tweet is disinformation? Get creative. Obviously it can be any number of the D's. You can say it's distorting what they're saying or distracting them from whatever the issue is saying. The issue isn't real. They're just after me because they're which is an easy evil. The engine... They're still talking about what they're saying or distracting them from whatever the issue is saying. The issue isn't real, they're just after me because they're which isn't its evil. I'm the injured party here. So it could be a whole lot of them. Trump's got a nice range when it comes to disinformation. Does anyone have a number one pick that they would like to mention related to this one? They said the Smith's doable. Yes, this Smith's. The Smith's. How many of you think dismissed? Raise your card, please. I think we're under something here. Absolutely. So you're right that underneath that attempt, there are, you know, he's twisting the story. He's accusing somebody else at the same thing. But the main thing is what he's saying is like, don't listen to them because it's a witch hunt. So that was our first one. All right. Number two. Getting topical here. Pro Brexit. When you have an idea. This is a Brexit ad saying we should be spending the money on our own national health system instead of funding the EU. The store. Any other take us any suggestions? How many of you think this one is distort involved? Jesus Christ. Okay. Any other? This seems a happy to comply. This seems a happy to comply. We're going to have big hand over here. Let's, oh, were you just you just kept your hand up. Her hand goes back down. Are there any others are we just going to stick with that one? Yes, right here. Distract. Ah, okay. So for those who couldn't hear, it's also distract because it's trying to focus attention on the NHS rather than the vote itself. Yeah. So, okay. One more example. So this goes on. But what you'll see is this is the exact political adversary group that the intelligence, diplomatic and military structure is trying to stop Donald Trump. Brags it in the UK. And you know, if you ever wondered why is it that everyone got all on board and suddenly start doing this all together, they were literally having years of these consensus building. You want to get your career made if you're at the pointer institute or the international fact checking union or if you're on the disinformation beat for the Washington Post or NPR or Lamund in France or the Frankfurt Algominer in Germany, you get your bonafides by going to these and you get effectively accredited by the blob. They are literally training people to find creative ways to mass flag. You can't even run a Brexit ad saying, hey, we should be spending $350 million on ourselves rather than the EU. That's disinformation. Not false. They're saying, right, right. It's not false. There's any number of ways that we can use to put pressure on the tech platforms to call this disinformation, you're hosting disinformation simply because it's not the agenda item that we want here. And again, this seven CIA directors currently on the board of that organization, those placards reading, I call bullshit, were paid for by us. It's just wild to watch everybody happily comply enthusiastically. Try to find ways that this makes any sense with no one having a counter narrative. No one standing up and go, wait, wait a minute. Who's to decide what it, what if it turns out it is and it was a witch hunt? Now we know all that rush-a-gate stuff was 100% bullshit. So he was correct. Right. But remember the mother, mother disaster wouldn't happen till just the following month. So the time they thought, you know, oh, great, if we can get him censored around calling this a witch hunt, then once the findings come in, he's going to be cornered. He won't be able to defend himself. It'll be like a internet gag order. Headline readers and low information voters overwhelmingly believed it. Right. Note that, I mean, this is nothing Elon was a huge game changer on. A lot of these people did not begin to sort of naval gaze and self-reflect on this until there was political and social blowback. The fact is, there were a lot of these people who in 2017, 2018 were looking around at these, I mean, I've watched thousands of hours of these, you know, consensus building meetings. They literally, you know, there would be some debate in 2017 about whether or not we should do this tactic or whether or not this goes too far. And I watched as these people basically let those early inhibitions go as the thing took wings and as the money poured in because that's why I always emphasize the censorship industry. If you get rid of the money, you get rid of the glamour, you get rid of the career track, you get rid of the power, you get rid of the networks. And so to me, it's, in fact, is if these people could not have their careers made by doing this, they wouldn't be pursuing those careers. But when Elon arrived on the scene and Congress began to take action and media began to report on it and the Twitter files spilled open and the Murthy Missouri lawsuit spearheaded by the Missouri and Louisiana State Attorney Generals, you know, put this in the court system in America, first legal, Stephen Miller and Gene Hamilton's group began to, I mean, it wasn't really until there started to be a whole society freedom network on the other side of this that the moral ambivalence that were expressed in the beginning began to reassert themselves. And I think there is some self-reflection on that. You know, it's funny, in 2022, Harvard wrote this piece, I covered it at my foundation. It was called disinformation studies is too big to fail. And they made the argument, this is right before the bottom fell out on this stuff. September, October, 2022, Harvard misinformation review, disinformation studies is too big to fail. They made the argument we've arrived. It took a while. In the beginning of it, they say the catalyst for this entire field was the 2016 election. Basically, we created this entire spanning octopus of censorship work because Trump won the election in 2016. Now it's 2022, we've gone on challenge for six years. And now if they want to get rid of us, they can't. They were making the argument that they were basically like Citibank after the, during the 2008, 2009 financial crisis, that they were a, simply a bank that's too big to fail. Because now they are so deeply ingrained in the media disinformation beat. They're so deeply ingrained in the private sector interstitials working with all the trust and safety people at every platform. They're so deeply funded by 12 different US government departments and 50 different US government programs. There's no way to get rid of us even if you want to. That's what they were stunting on in right before Elon finished the acquisition of X and Republicans won the House in 2022. And all this went in reverse. And now you'll see just this, just this week in the news that there's quotes about them wanting to flee the country and that the whole field is potentially in disarray if Trump does indeed go forward and defund this. Because now you're going to have 100 university centers gone. There goes your state department funding. There goes your NSF funding. And I have a great example of that by the way. That's pretty eye opening on our topic of institutions. That's a, that's a quick receipt if you're interested. So yeah, free to guide James. Yeah. Yeah. So Jamie, if you go to the Arizona State University global security initiative, I'm going to show you some of this in action a little bit. Arizona State University Global is very vague. I just wanted to go to their website. Yeah, Google, okay, Google Arizona State University Center on Narrative Disinformation and Strategic Influence. Disinformation and Strategic What? Influence. Yeah, we're just Arizona State University Center narrative. Yes. Okay. Let's go to their website. Yeah, just go to the website. If you pull it up. So this, so this is, and if you click on global security initiative, I'm just going to show you an example real quick. Just click on the top thing. This is global security initiative and then hit, you will hit the back button in a second. But if you scroll down, so this Arizona State University, this is basically John McCain University. Now this is significant because John McCain was the founding president of the Iowa. The eye. The girl with the mask is wearing it wrong. Her nose is exposed. Oh my gosh. I mean, it just kind of shows you have fucking stupid all the stuff is. Exactly. You know, they had to have her wearing a mask still even in 2024. She's going to go to the website. She's wearing a mask and she's wearing it wrong. Her nose is exposed. Not only that, it's a surgical mask is the dumbest one. The one that provides zero. Literally zero protection. Right. Okay. Especially with your nose open. That's fantastic. So, so a few things is background. Arizona State University, it's current president, Michael Crow, is now and was since the day it was born in 1999, the chairman of the CUTEL. And in CUTEL is the CIA's venture capital arm. This is literally the CIA's proprietary investments in early stage technology companies. And the head of Arizona State University, it's president is the chairman of the in CUTEL. And it has been for 25 years. Arizona State University has these very deep partnerships with John McCain, who is the senator from Arizona. John McCain, who ran for president against Barack Obama in 2008, was the before he ran for president in 2008. For 25 years, he was the founder and the president of the IRI, the CIA wing of the Republican Party. And the IRI is that is the GOP side of the of the National Dammit for Democracy. That's effectively self declared CIA cut out. And in fact, Arizona State University has a John McCain center on disinformation that works in tandem with this one. But I just wanted to show that you'll see this is technically Arizona State University. But you'll see that it is an intelligence program. So if you if you scroll up for a second, you see you'll see at the bottom, right? This is a program at Arizona State University that is an intelligence program. Its job is to assist the intelligence community with this with this work. And you if you scroll down and you can scroll down from here, you'll see the different branches. And then click on the one narrative disinformation strategic influence. Now this this program gets one has a 1.6 million dollar grant from the Pentagon to do censorship work. It has $300,000 in grants from the State Department. It's got another almost $500,000 worth of additional government grants from adjacent adjacent US government diplomatic statecraft intelligence. So this is this is a multi million dollar censorship center currently still up and running at Arizona State University. Funded by us now if you click on why is disinformation dangerous? I want to show you something real quick because this language is everywhere. This is stock standard language. Why do we have this set up? Disinformation shows confusion and distrust diminishing people's faith and confidence in the institutions that are critical to a functioning healthy democracy such as government, news media and science can oppose right there. The dirty tricks that this is laden with is what allows them to get away with this. So note that they are saying that they have set up this apparatus and we can get it. I can show you the different projects that are involved with on the censorship side. But the issue they're saying is not that something's wrong, but that people's the simple act of diminishing public faith and confidence in the news media, government and science is an attack on democracy. This is the identical language that dozens of university centers and both of the major censorship programs at the National Science Foundation as well as at state USA, Pentagon. They all have this stock language now, which is that the purpose of the program is to protect their assets. The legacy news media is one of those assets. If you on social media undermine public faith in the New York Times as a credible institution, you are attacking democracy in the white blood cells of the blob. These disinformation centers being run out of our NGOs and universities and for profit, private sector, censorship, mercenary firms will scan and ban you off the internet. And I can show you what some of those look like as well, these dynamic disinformation dashboards. But even if you just go to the projects page for that, I think you scroll down, you'll see it. Yeah. So these are semantic information defender. So this is right out of 1984. So if you scroll down, let's just the terms, semantic information defender. This project, again, this is 1.6 million just from the Pentagon alone. This project will develop a system that detects characterizing and attributes misinformation and disinformation, whether image video audio or text, ASU provides content and narrative analysis, text detection and characterization methods, and a large data set of known disinformation and affiliate objects. So this is a database of all images, videos, audio, text that effectively, the ghost of John McCain, the founder of the CIA side of the GOP after Reagan reoriented to the IC around the NGO complex, they've been caught basically conflating anything that's pro Trump with being pro Russia and going after rank and file right wing populist and conservatives because that's who the never Trump side of the GOP, the Mitt Romney, John McCain side of the GOP is trying to take out Mitt Romney by the way, who ran for pressing and so bomb up the the the the cycle after John McCain, remember John McCain was the founding president, the IRA, the CIA wing of the GOP. Mitt Romney is was and still is a board member of the IRA. I should note Marco Rubio, our incoming secretary of state is also a board member of the IRA. He is going to need to confront this in a way. I hope everyone is prepared for, but it's all the way down to just to framing technique. Did you just look at this for a second? Detecting and tracking adversarial framing. Just listen to how this is phrased. A pilot project with Lockheed Martin. So the fence contract, oh, we're going to go deep. You want to see some crazy. Yeah, but let's keep going with this. We put, please go deep, but created an information operations detection technique based on the principle of adversarial framing when parties hostile to US interests frame events in the media to justify support for future actions. That is such a weird way to phrase things because it's so okay. Here we go. Research helps planners and decision makers identify trends in real time that indicate changes in the information operations strategy, potentially indicating imminent actions, a follow on project funded by the Department of Defense expands techniques developed in the pilot project to additional countries incorporates blog data into the framing analysis along side known propaganda outlets. Listen to this. Next one studies the transmutation of these frames to non Russian non propaganda services. This is how they course is rather right and seeks it out the ability to automatically detect adversarial from that. This is the AI. adversarial framing such as strange way to put it because US interests are could be just simply narratives that turn out to not be true. So they have the ability to censor true information based on US interests. This is how they get you to that transmutation frames to non Russian not propaganda sources. Yeah. That's how they get to say that we are spouting Russian disinformation if we say something but so does some random outlet they don't like in Russia. This is how we notice the 51 spies who lied about Hunter Biden. They will still insist. Yeah, okay. The laptop's real, but it's still Russian because they argue that Russian propaganda outlets were amplifying it. So it's in Russia's interest to stigmatize the United States or to undermine the credibility of Joe Biden as president or to help Trump because Trump's foreign policy is helpful to them. So this is how they can flate us as US civilians with a first amendment guarantee with the get out of constitution free card of our counter intelligence capacities. But the CIA is not allowed to operate at home, right? It's supposed to be a foreign facing operation. But they get a get out of jail free card on that which is if it's counter intelligence, if they think a US citizen is being recruited by or in a network formal or informal with a hostile foreign nation's station intelligence services. Now they get spouting Americans. This is how the NSA reads Tucker Carlson's signal chats and whatnot. And so they they launders that foreign to domestic switch a route, which by the way is another great, great clip. But anyway, I was going to I saw your eyes go a little wide with the Lockheed Martin thing. Yeah. Can if you go to YouTube and you type in MITRE, MITRE is one of the largest military contractors. They are they're absolutely enormous. They they and they're sort of like a technological version of the of the Rand corporation, if you will. Now this so they are funded by the US military and fighting COVID-19. Mr. Yes, let's go do it from the beginning. As the nation continues the fight against COVID-19 wrong mask, wearing it wrong, spread of dangerous misinformation. The federal media is full of conflicting misleading and false information. The level and quality of fact checking varies from one platform to the next. That means that half truths or flat out fiction may appear as facts. People who are predisposed to believe the postings will perceive them as truth. When deception and misinformation have the potential to negatively influence personal and national health outcomes, we must call it out and corrected. Mr. Squint for COVID-19 provides a fast reliable way to report and counter COVID misinformation at the disease. It's treatment and vaccinations. If you're a medical or public health expert or other squint user, you can report on true or inaccurate COVID-19 related postings with a single click whether using a desktop or mobile device. Miter Squint collects the URL with the screenshot and the coded information for aggregation and analysis. People get a secure message to verify that you sent the screenshot. The verification message includes a report that you can share or send to the social media channel asking that the misinformation be removed. What happens then? Miter Squint analyzes and identifies patterns in social media that are misleading the public. Your report enables faster take downs and helps maintain the public's trust and confidence in the efforts to battle COVID-19. Miter Squint for COVID-19 provides an unprecedented opportunity to report dangerous misinformation, designed to create additional fear or anger and people already stressed by the pandemic. Contact us to learn more about Miter Squint and become a participant. Squint and Miter.org. Yes Miter is like a $2.2 billion annual budget and tens of millions of that come from the Pentagon. Very major Pentagon contractor. They did the same thing. By the way, that was the second Squint AI censorship technology they developed. Again, just like the Pentagon was paying graphic a censoring COVID-19, censoring conspiracy theories. They're paying AI censorship technology to simultaneously manage the censorship of COVID skeptic narratives. They started this actually in the Trump to the 2020 election. If you look at squint misinformation elections. Democracy, our elections, we must call it out. I think that starts at the 40 second. If you go back to the beginning. I see. Including the viral messages spread through social media. Social media platforms are only as accurate and truthful as the people who post to them. The leveling quality of fact checking berries from one platform to the next. That means that half truths or flat out fiction may appear as facts. People who are predisposed to believe the postings will perceive them as the truth. When deception and misinformation impact the infrastructure, operations and processes integral to our democracy, our elections, we must call it out and correct it. Miter squint provides a fast, easy and comprehensive way for election officials to combat the spread of misinformation on social media channels. When elections officials and designated Miter squint users see untrue or inaccurate postings about the elections process, you can report it with a single click whether using a desktop or mobile device. Miter squint collects a screenshot and the coded information for aggregation and analysis. You'll get a secure message to verify that you've sent the screenshot. The verification message includes a report that you can share with election peers or send to the social media channel asking if the misinformation be removed. What happens then? Miter squint analyzes and identifies patterns in social media that are misleading voters. Your report enables faster takedowns and helps restore integrity to the elections process. Miter squint is helping election officials like you defend the elections process from disinformation campaigns designed to undermine election legitimacy. Contact us to learn more about Miter squint and become a participant. They were partnered in the whole 2020 censorship operation. There's another thing I just thought of that is just an unbelievable clip with the Atlanta Council. The Atlanta Council was formally partnered with the Department of Homeland Security to censor the 2020 election to censor Trump supporters. 100% of their repeat misinformation spreaders were Trump supporters. There's unbelievable videos on all of this. Some of this has been played on the congressional Jumbo Tron. It was election interference. And unbelievable level, but they bragged afterwards about how this thing could be scaled and how they were able to get this done and how they could use this technique to get social media companies to ban things well beyond basically to scale it to every other policy issue so that it's not just around elections where they're quote huge regulatory stakes for the companies. They go over this strategy. Literally, on a celebration video of how they pulled this off. Again, with the Atlanta Council, graphic Stanford, you to the same institutions, in this video, they go over this two part technique for how they were able to do this and how they can do this in the future. And one is using their front effectively as a civil society organization, leveraging the threat of government pressure from their government partners at a top down level and leveraging the induction of crisis PR, Black PR, if the companies did not do the censorship from the bottom up. So the government would threaten top down and the media would threaten bottom up. What are the threats? The threats? Yeah, when you say the government would threaten them. Well, so there's several. In that case, there was in 2020, there was regulatory overhang coming from Amy Klobuchar and Elizabeth Warren about breaking the big tech companies up, which they actually move forward with this big, you know, the Google is now under the gun of this with the US Justice Department. But more significantly, it's the threats probably that one of the most incredible examples of this. If you want to see the receipts on it, it's wild, but I can also just tell you about it. If you look up on my profile, the phrase 10 flaming examples, it'll pull up the Facebook files, what Jim Jordan's committee, you know, the subpoenaed version of the Twitter files, but from Facebook. And you'll see that in early 2021, the Biden administration was pressuring explicitly Facebook to censor COVID origins, heterodox speech. And Facebook was skittish about doing it, saying there's a highly unusual request coming directly from the White House. We don't really want to do this. This is what Nick Kleg, the head of public policy, was emailing with Mark Zuckerberg about. So if you scroll over, yeah, so you see this is right. So this is there were five claims. So this is two Mark Zuckerberg from Nick Kleg. Nick Kleg was the former head of the UK Labor Party. He wrote a book called How to Stop Bregs It After Bregs It Already Past. Shae out interconnected all this stuff is. And the subject is COVID misinformation, Wuhan Lab League theory. On the question of our decision to remove claims related to the origin of COVID, again, this is June, 2021. There were five claims that met the standard man, basically anyone who accused COVID of potentially being man-made or bioengineered or created by an individual government or country, or that it was modified through gain of function research, we reduced distribution, meaning they throttled the algorithmically zapped out of all viral, they applied by reality circuit breakers to to content, making any of those five buckets of claims. In February, 2021, so this is right in tandem with the vaccine rollout in response to continued public pressure and tense conversations with the new administration. We started, so they only started removing it because of quote tense conversations with the new administration. So if you go to the next, if you go to the next image, if you just, yeah, oh wait, I'm sorry, go go over. Yeah, bigger fish to fry. There should be a, yeah, here you go. In June, 2021, E-mail, plague e-mailed others in the company that given the bigger fish, we have to fry with the Biden administration. We should think creatively about how we can be responsive to the Biden administration's concerned. Then it says, but what are these bigger, what is it? I can go over those and say, just one more thing on this is, you see, in April, the company was seeking to risk closely with the Biden administration on multiple policy fronts. So this now gets to the larger issue of the interplay between the profits of multinational corporations and the protection provided by the US government when it actively advocates on their behalf. So for example, right now, one of the major, major issues, and I'll tell you this because I, when I ran the cyber desk for the US State Department, I got to call one day from nine Google lobbyists. We're all former lobbyists from big oil companies or from sovereign countries who had moved to Google to lobby the US State Department, the US, it was the orchestra symphony conductor for all of the assets of the American empire. And these nine lobbyists told me over the course of about a 90 minute call that the number one threat to Google's business model, the most existential threat over the next five years was the EU Digital Markets Act and Digital Services Act. And they let out a variety of reasons I won't get into to granular detail, but that basically, you know, because the State Department traditionally defines US interests as being the welfare of US citizens and the aggregate welfare of US national champions, US citizens and US corporations. This is why again, it's so insane and flamatory and there's got to be a way it's friggin illegal that the National Down for Democracy and the US State Department and USAID are currently running programs to tank US national champions like X because they're hosting, you know, they allow the hosting of a pro populist political content. But so, you know, basically the pitch is where US national champion were Google. This is another thing that the Trump White House was saying at the time. The other, they were defining magas Microsoft Apple Google and Amazon because their stock price being high was a big, you know, I think, boom. I don't know what the political calculus was, but I'm trying to tell them, hey, they're censoring the internet guys and well, point is, you know, so they're the G and maga. And they are functionally requesting that the US State Department adjust its diplomatic posture with EU counterparts in order to have the appropriate asks and demands of the European Union that protect the profits and business. have the appropriate asks and demands of the European Union that protect the Prophets and business Divisions of Google on and I won't without again getting to granular these involve everything from data privacy rights The Europe is something called the GDG D PR. They're all sorts of fines. It's kind of ironic how this all played out when Trump won in 2016 Europe was many of these European governments were afraid of a Trump autocracy and And so they set about a Sort of policy pivot that they called strategic digital autonomy meaning that Europe needs to exert more sovereign autonomy over the tech space and the digital sector rather than purely relying on American projection arms are our US tech giants and so These new EU digital markets action digital services act are like for example a Tim Cook, you know at Apple just got hit with a 15 billion dollar fine from this It's the only people who can stop that who can negotiate and who can pick winners and losers in that market are the US State Department Those are the people who negotiate those are the people who do the carrots and sticks Hey, you counterpart. Hey counterpart in France. Hey counterpart in E What was the stick to Apple in relation to like what was it in response to? I Just remember the 15 billion. I forget if it was on a data if it was on data grounds or if it was on Pretty you can if you can look up the Because he Tim Cook called Donald Trump on that specifically I think this is another one of these things where Apple felt betrayed that the Biden administration didn't stick up for them as much But I just though I'm not getting the specific thing wrong if you look up Yeah, 15 billion dollar fine Additional two billion dollar and it trust fine You has been investigating big tech firms to curb their power and ensure a level playing field Apple recently lost a court battle Was ordered to pay 14.08 billion in back taxes to Ireland Trump told Cook that he would not let the EU take advantage of US companies if he is elected This government highlights the this development rather highlights the ongoing regulatory challenges faced by tech giants like Apple which may impact their stock performance Investors should monitor these regulatory developments and their potential impact on Apple's finances and stock financials and stock price Right and this is happening to all the tech companies and the only reason this hasn't happened yet You know in the in the now 30 years of internet diplomacy is because the state department has always gone to bat for them We've all sorts of carrots and sticks that we can threaten on that right the humanitarian aid the security assistance They want from Apple that would allow them to allow Apple to be fined that much So the state department can in theory could open up a diplomatic channel to the EU the US ambassador to the EU could march into their office You know horses head out of you know out of godfather style and say You are not going to f with Apple on this this decision was wrongly made if you move forward with enforcement of this $15 billion fine The US government will renegotiate our trade posture our tariff posture our humanitarian assistance our security assistance are Roland name and there's any number of things that that you can log role in this are our joint activities with you in South America in Africa and Central Asia on this particular industry It's the state department who's got the assets of the empire to manage and and to offer up to foreign countries to protect the And to frankly oftentimes to secure those markets for those tech companies in the first place be the incentive to not do that Favourite favors to Europe and European and I mean you you're always dipping into political capital when you do that right like whenever you are threatening something with someone you're doing business with you are Giving up a little bit political capital and making that threat in the sense that they might you're sort of sanctioning yourself in a certain Respect this is what for example the sanctions on on on Russia that we've led after 2014 you're They had an agreement with Russia. They're They're sort of shooting themselves in the leg to try to you know Get the bear that's that's biting it So you're sort of doing this with the EU is a very delicate dance with with the US right? It's 550 million people. It's a giant market It's you know, it is the there's there's basically three polls between China the US and the EU There's a ton of overlapping trade arrangements It's it's basically the economic arm of NATO It's so if you were to if you were to threaten to if you were to threaten the EU Too hard so China just overtook the US as the EU's largest trading partner if If we were to go to the mat for apple in this case on the EU The EU may turn around say fine Well if you do that we're going to partner with Saudi Arabia We're gonna partner with China or we're gonna we're gonna partner hey We may need turn to turn the natural gas imports from from Russia back on There's all sorts of it's a constant interplay. That's what makes that position Both so fascinating but also so complex is because you're having to manage all the different stakeholder relations From the banks from the corporations from the from the political groups from the you know from from the outside From the outside ones and Facebook. I mean it's it's data It's ads. This is another thing that the media companies have been on a crusade against Facebook and Google because They yeah many these media companies feel like their revenues are being stolen by the you know the ad money going to Google and Facebook there've been laws that have been put in place in Canada and I believe Australia where they're basically trying to I Forget the one can't actually pass but the bait they're basically trying to you know Have the media companies get a cut of the big tech profits because they are monopolists in the ad space and you know Google ads makes up a huge portion of Google's revenue Facebook obviously the only reason it became profitable in the first place You know when Facebook IPOed It was initially there was a concern that it might not even be a profitable company let alone one of the top You know eight biggest companies in the world because they had not yet monetize those eyeballs through ads in the way that they've Scaled incredibly to do but what happens when What happens when our own US government completely betrays them and works with Europe to screw them unless they do censorship? And if you want to see incredible receipt on this you can look up the February 2021 USA disinformation primer You can go actually to my foundations website foundation for freedom online calm and just type in the word USAID and you'll see that disinformation primer USAID in tandem with the National now for democracy that's the eye cut out and includes with state who USAID serves Has an instruction manual for how to exert its its soft power influence Around the world to regulate ad networks to to hurt US tech companies if they allow pro populist Speech on the platforms by getting the getting advertiser boycotts and advertiser blacklist to punch the social media companies and so You know it's it's a plot against our own people and it's Being waged as part of a political proxy war to stop Populists like Trump from being being able to get elected in the first place and if he gets elected to be able to throttle his Administration and his allies around the world so that he can't implement his agenda Jesus how does this not how do you sleep? You know like knowing all this like what it was It was really really hard the first three or four years because there was like I was in this before When the whole thing was totally depressing and there were no wins at all, you know, I was like And it was my health deteriorated. I you know, I didn't look good. I didn't feel good I I Mean I tell everyone you have to go through your five stages of grief on this You know, you're you're gonna have your you know, you're your denial and then your anger and then your you know You're your Barg your depression and then you're bargaining and then your acceptance and you you'll go through many iterations of those five stages of grief but You get to a certain point. I think where you you accept that this is our inheritance and this is In a way as as evil as so many components of it are the larger picture is is kind of a fascinating archaeological dive into The the ancient dinosaur bones of the of the world that we live in the American Empire would not exist without this apparatus It took a twisted turn in 2016 But the fact is we are an international empire because of the banana wars in the 1800s that gave the US You know, Vasilage control over much of South America. We're an international empire because of the the the Spanish American war 1898 We take the Philippines. We had you know, we we have We had the miracle of the 20th century because this free speech diplomacy, which in large part was a state department CIA cynical front just to be able to capacity build our own assets behind the iron curtain that ended up giving us cheap gas and You know 401k's and middle-class lifestyles and of affordable homes and pensions and and all the favors that the state department does to pry open markets is is the reason that Walmart can export You know to to the furthest reaches of the world is the reason that you know I played this really funny one You know a few days ago that the famous pizza hut add with with starring Gorbachev after the After the national dam of a democracy pride the Soviet Union open and it's basically saying we have we have instability These are Russians arguing with each other. You know, we've instability at home This is horrible. We're basically a satellite state of the United States And then the other person at the pizza hut says ah, but we have pizza hut and Gorbachev stars and spouses is a pizza hut advertisement and Can be fine that online? Yeah, yeah, you can actually true at these city walnuts We come to be a bar duck Look at that. Yeah, you move. Let's know it was more If it's anyone else, we'll just you just came here. Stop being honest The very I'm on a swab water Only house here is big deal when the kitchen's came in this The blue the very I am Plus he's he's hot Oh god, they all agree on pizza And Gorbachev hail the Gorbachev Oh my god, so pizza That commercial say that seems like a satellite lives catch. Yeah, so pizza hut did not win The market for 200 million customers in Russia because it out competed the other pizza companies it won because The CIA pride Russia open. I mean you you can see all the touchdown dances We did about the Boris Yeltsin puppet presence Boris Yeltsin was faxing the National Dam for democracy in 1993 for permission effectively to bomb his own parliament building We there's a whole Hollywood movie called spinning Boris Which is the based on the true story of how the state department and Hollywood teamed up to prop up a Alien Boris Yeltsin in 1996 when he was pulling at 7% in the polls To so that we could continue privatizing state-owned Russian assets and selling them off to George Soros' investment fund you can read casino Moscow for more on that but basically This is I hate his pizza at pizza hut as a kid. It's at some point. It becomes it becomes fascinating at some point it becomes The tragedy shifts to a comedy and and when you start looking at the size of some of these forces It's the most exciting time ever to be alive If there was it didn't look like there was any light of the tunnel when I started this in 2016 It was L after L after L after L First nobody would listen then the people who listen say you're crazy Then the people who say crazy say well, you know, you're right be your hopeless Then the people who say your hopeless You know say okay, well, maybe you're not hopeless But I can't help you and then it's just constant and then and then the dam starts breaking a little bit here a little bit there and now This is the most exciting time Ever and we have existential threats that I think maybe in the end more terrifying than anything We've seen yet, but I'm just honored to be along for the ride with everybody else who's pulling the levers that they are and You know if you can make it through if you can make it through the the hard times on thinking about it There is something beautiful. It's like getting to know Let's just say you know Genghis Khan, you know, you're just ended from or something people are gonna say Genghis Khan murder Rate whatever you know crimes there are but but that's if you're descended from that it's still your family and I'm not trying to smash these Institutions. I'm not trying to get rid of the Pentagon or get rid of the CIA or I want them to be reformed And they have to go through the gauntlet of public sunlight Jaybout at charia dr. Jaybout chari was just named the NIH. That is one of the most inspiring stories I think it's an incredible turn around yeah Tell the whole story because some people aren't even aware what happened with him with the great-parent in declaration Well, he was he was kicked off of Twitter. He was you know Basically up a premier scientist at Stanford. He was labeled a fringe. I you know epidemiologist by by Faucian company And he was just tapped to be our new NIH director the National Institute of this is the premier medical research institution in all of medicine and They put in one of the most critical voices of the entire covid era To run it. I mean it's like it's like putting Bobby Kennedy in as the head of HHS And to me that's sort of what needs to happen now in the censorship space which is that When you look back at the church committee with the CIA They held up that heart attack on in public and Frank church and you know James Angleton It we saw now. I know a lot of that was a whitewash and walks in the space or I Or pregnant triggered by me even acknowledging that that was a decent thing but the fact is is It did have to go through it It did have to go through a gauntlet where where the the way to restore faith in the institution Is to make it do a naked lap make it do its walk of shame And then they can put its clothes back on and return You know into the good graces. I'm not trying to take these institutions out I'm not anti American Empire But the Empire has to serve the homeland and the fact is is We it does have to go through this period of penitence And I hope that the incoming administration understands The magnitude and severity of the need to do that because if they don't they're gonna be caught flat-footed by something very nasty I think coming down the pipe. Have you any have you talked to anyone there? Not in enough detail to be able to Feel that we are where we need to be but maybe that will change Um, barisma. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, that's wild. Yeah. You know how I mentioned The Atlanta Council so many times in this Seven CIA directors on this board. Yeah, you'll find it depending on state department CIA cutouts like the NED Literally sponsoring at Atlanta Council conferences the I call bullshit censorship training meetings the work partner with the DHS to censor Trump partnered, you know to censor covid One week before Donald Trump was inaugurated in January 2017 Parisma signed a formal cooperation agreement with the Atlanta Council For the Atlanta Council to leverage its Representation effectively as as NATO's brain the think tank for NATO To kick energy deals to barisma. You can look this up if you can pull us on screen I'll show you these receipts are wild if you just type in you know barisma You know on my well my ex-account or barisma Atlanta Council any of these will get you there so There's a much larger story here that sort of gets us back to to Eurasia and just for perspective This issue around Russia gets to something that has been Decades of tension in the making Yeah, so this is barisma in the Atlanta Council. This is one day actually one day before Donald Trump's inauguration January 19 2017 So this group is seven CIA directors on its board an annual funding from the Pentagon the state department by they these are these are old numbers from 2020 It's over a million now for all these but but What are they doing signing a Formal agreement with barisse, but I kick them deal flow well So here is where it gets to the the geopolitics of the energy space and what a lot of this Russia stuff is about so If you look up for example a If you just go to Google and you type in Russia 75 trillion You'll see what Trump got knifed for You in in term 1.0 and that is still the knifes edge dangling over Trump term 2.0 so if you pull up like an image graph of it, it'll make it a little bit I think more Yeah Yeah, you're just like maybe the fourth the fifth one if you see or the fourth or fourth one or yeah for the fifth. Yeah Anyway, those right so so Russia has the most Exploitable natural resources of any country on earth by far by far by far I mean, it's almost double and and that was why you may have heard this term from Francis Fukuyama the end of history in the 1990s This was like the you know the the the moment that America was the unipolar power There is this long-range plan to pursue at least the political annexation of Eurasia this is the this goes back to his big new Brzezinski the The Grand Chess Board the idea that he who controls Eurasia controls the world because this is where two thirds of the world's Resources are and so there's this this is big you know stretch basically from central Europe all the way out into Into far reaches of Russia where so many of these Minerals in oil and gas and race exploitable resources are are concentrated if you remember Lindsey Graham Finally threw up the white flag about four months ago when he said listen even if you don't care about Ukraine They've got 12.4 trillion dollars worth of minerals and resources so you know do it for that He just said the other day admitted this war is about money It is it is so but This is This is so fascinating to me. I almost have to take a self indulgent moment if you allow me I had initially started working on this with a book in a movie that was just about the AI censorship side It was weapons of mass deletion and it was in at the time I was in 2016 early 2017 I was I was focused on the domestic side like I think everybody is when they see this you know a lot of this was woke stuff So you see you know some pink haired You know feminist purses and with an outrageous Yeah, I read his Twitter account who's a trust and safety person the Twitter and he's say ah, okay This is a culture war right and then as I started tracing this and Just completely obsessing every day and the on the research side of this You'd see these censorship planning conferences with high ranking military and intelligence officials and On the panel with them would be your Asian focused energy investors and energy companies and you'd say well What are they doing at a censorship conference? what Why is why is chevron here? Why is royal dot shell here? Why is nathware represents from nath to gas at this conference about disinformation on the internet and To me that was one of the early breakthroughs and being able to trace the larger networks and In history of it was the the close can join nature of censorship and geopolitics and in particular around the energy world because You know going back to this Milton Friedman sort of argument around free markets versus does the government secure the markets? Milton Friedman Was once sort of given a sort of milla style list of entities to a fwara you know to sort of not you know knock out and When it got to the Department of Energy he said I Keep that one but fold it under The Department of Defense because our energy work is basically a subset of our military work because the military is effectively who secures energy markets The military and the State Department the military using kinetic force or the threats of doing so The State Department on economic sanctions and economic inducements to secure the energy resources. So this is where it gets really interesting so I we were just talking about Boris Yeltsin in the 90s Putin rises to power in 1999 the Russian economy is totally destroyed He is You know he's got only two assets of the of the of the Russian remnant that he can leverage to try to turn Russia Back into a world power One of them is their sort of military export economy Russia provides Small arms munitions to rebel groups around the world to oppose the US Pentagon Such as in Africa. There's a big battle going on right now between the US and France on the one hand and Russia on the other hand on in the in the Sahel this is why a lot of these French run governments have Have had there have been toppled in the past year Chad and Nigeria Cody war This is one of the reasons that it's very curious that France arrested Pablo Duroff the telegram founder When the CIA's own media channels like radio for Europe radio Liberty and Voice of America were effectively Calling for telegram to be rained in because it may be a Russian spy in every Ukrainians pocket and we need to stop the ability for Russians that free speech on telegram and You know a lot of this is because of the he's a Russian France is curious because France is involved in a proxy where against Russia And and that's only made possible because Russian Russia exports those arms Russia's also the only reason we were not able to successfully Topel Bashar al-Assad and Syria folks remember the S 300 S 400 anti aircraft You know air defense Systems basically if we can get rid of Russia's military machine There's no there's there's very very little resistance to the Pentagon around the world from from Venezuela to Africa to Central Asia to you know to Syria and Russia's economic other big economic export the main one is that they have the largest energy resources in the world and Exporting that can make them very help very wealthy if they are able to Export that freely it's sort of a similar issue with Iran and Iranian sanctions so almost a hundred percent of Russian gas used to be Used to of European gas used to come from Russia These pipelines have been around for many many many many decades and it was and it was the motor engine of Russia's economy oil and gas you know, Ross Nft and gas prompt and When Putin did something to reassert Russia's political influence over Central Eastern Europe after NATO already thought these were NATO acquired territories places like Georgia and Moldova Ukraine Rup Putin began shutting off the gas in 2005 2006 are threatening to do so to leave a sort of dark cold winter to these European countries that were thought to be under US NATO control and These countries began to acquiesce to Russian influence on gas and Their politics started shifting to be more pro-Russian Their civil society organizations got deeper Russian penetration their media organizations began to you know Spout more pro Russian affinity lines and so our state Department of Intelligence services flew into a panic like oh my god. We're going to We're going to lose The Cold War late in the game if we do not embark on a quest to destroy Russia's energy diplomacy What they were calling energy diplomacy their energy soft power influence over? Central Eastern Europe Germany with the Nordstrom one pipeline Ukraine with it with the direct the direct gas pipelines that then go all the way out You know into into Western Europe Because that and we could not compete with Russia strictly On because gas is a commodity. It's not like a you know an iPhone or it's not like a it's like a phone where it comes in a you know Different flavors based on on quality. It's just strictly about the price you sell it at and the only way that I'm that You can get gas into Europe effectively other than natural cheap natural gas pipelines are expensive liquefied natural gas You know where you you know you basically harvest it in the Permian basin in Houston You freeze it you ship it you know 6,000 miles across the Atlantic Ocean through the Baltic Strait you unfreeze it you then You know ship it to you creates like orders of magnitude more expensive than than the Russian alternative so so European countries wanted cheap Russian gas the US and the UK and NATO wanted the EU member states to sanction Russian gas both because it would cripple Russia's economy and also so there's a national security on here now we get to take over Africa now We get to take over Central Asia because there's no Russian resistance from the military because they're bankrupt Now we can beat back Russian influence into Central Eastern Europe because they're bankrupt It's the same way we won the Cold War the Soviet Union collapse because it was bankrupt So they embarked on a diplomatic quest to get all these countries to pass sanctions on Russia But they couldn't do the full sanctions in 2006 so they embarked on what they called energy diversification Then the 2014 fiasco pops off in Ukraine in this becomes existential because now half of Ukraine is is effectively militarily backed up by Russia So they have to get Europe to pass these sanctions on Russia But the issue is is a lot of these EU member states did not want to have to buy super expensive Western LNG it would be ideal if you could simply harvest the Indogenous gas supplies in Ukraine you Ukraine happened sit on Europe's third largest unexploited natural gas resources or the you know the shale that can be converted and so they So Parisma was a tool to be able to supplement the Western LNG within Indogenous and at home Ukrainian Alternative gas supply so that the sanctions could go through in Europe and so that Ukraine would not be reliant on Russia to have Cheap natural gas, but this required NAFTA gas the state owned Ukrainian gas company which George Soros has been locked in a power struggle with Putin to over privatization with for decades and And Parisma was the largest of the private for profit firms that had the rights the gas rights for exploitation of Eastern Ukraine and the you know the surrounding Crimea offshore offshore gas supplies and so Parisma was was seen as an instrument of statecraft by the US State Department to economically bankrupt Russia and to militarily shut down Russia's war machine as part of the larger play for NAFTA gas and to build up Ukraine's innate gas supplies which were which were under exploited In part because of a military tension over who actually controls that territory That's why the Don Bass is so important. That's why after the counter coup The US was sponsoring the this is what the military aid in peach the military assistance impeachment of Trump was about in 2019 We weren't at war with Russia then right? This is 2019 this three years before the outbreak uh-uh We were sponsoring the military reconquest of that region because that's where War with Russia then right this is 2019 this three years before the outbreak uh-uh We were sponsoring the military reconquest of that region because that's where the energy resources are The population's mostly in the west the resources are mostly in the east. It's the same same thing with with China and And and Xinjiang in terms of that dichotomy And so this is you know when Hunter Biden said what when he was asked what he was doing on barista and whether he felt shame about he said He was doing a patriotic duty for his country Barista was an iterative statecraft for the state department what they were doing is they were they were building that up That's why they had work that's why they had funding from from USAID again the CIA Funding conduit was was working the Atlantic Council with seven CIA directors on sport Hunter binds on the chairman's advisory board of the NDI Hunter binds law firm even has this just broke four months ago. Hunter's binds law firm actually had a Road a pitch to the US State Department for how for how barisma could serve as a You know is basically a vassal for US State Department interest in the region you had the you had barista's back channeling with Was it the US ambassador in Rome for on similar grounds in terms of the the Italy Greece supplies but What you have here is a private sector for profit company many such cases by the way because not only was hunter Biden on the board of barisma as chairman's advisory board of The CIA's DNC cutout But who else was on the board of the board of directors right next to right next to Hunter Biden Co for black Co for black who spent 30 years in the CIA One CIA distinguished metals awards You can read the daily b-starticle where co for black is described as Mitt Romney's Sure put to the intelligence community to get the sea eyes blessing to back him against Barack Obama What is this CIA Luminary doing on the board of barisma? What is Hunter Biden who the CIA personally calls the justice department off investigating his funding sources and is on the Chairman's advisory board of the CIA cutout It's because just like we have done since the 1940s It is a private it is a dual use entity. It's a for it's a for profit standalone private sector firm But it's also an instrument of statecraft because every dollar that barisma generates is one less dollar that gas Prom generates and so it's the it's the best job in the world if you can get it It is it's it's you get to keep all the profits And you're getting the backing of the battering ram of the blob And remember we personally intervened it was Joe Biden at the council and farm relations who bragged about About forcing using the diplomatic carrots and sticks of the US Empire That if you cream wanted their billion dollars in assistance they had to fire the prosecutor who is investigating barisma Nobody nobody in in our in our Congress I think is is prepared if if there was a total declassification of all CIA and State Department cables and documents and meeting minutes and emails and communications if you had For all intelligence work related to barisma the treasure map that would break open I think would be and would frankly be a diplomatic scandal Because this gets to the larger play around the IMF And it's played to privatize NAFTA gas because there's something very nasty here Which is that we have been trying to get just like we put Russia through shock therapy When when we won the Cold War and then it was the Harvard endowment and The Soros you know crew and the US State Department who privatized trillions of dollars of state-owned wealth by The Soviet Union so that they could become a capitalist society, but then The assets are held by Wall Street and London This has been the play with Ukraine. They know the potential of the entire European energy market running through Ukraine If they can just get it up and running so the so this grand Ukraine energy play has been to Privatized NAFTA gas the the feeder that barisma feeds into so that you have western stakeholders who make the money by capturing that that market Have the have the blob of the state department the CIA and the DOD Imposed enough pressure to carve Russia out of the market Now you've got private sector stakeholders who are basically you know early stage equity holders in a totally protected Because it's protected by the bat the bayonet of The Pentagon the state department and the IC to make sure that that the profits run through there so that Russia doesn't get it So it's a great job you can get it and All this stuff that was on the laptop What was the whole thing about 10% of the big guy and what so was What what evidence is there? Yeah, well, you know the 10% of the big guy and in another text You know, I think he had said to you know one of his family members that you know half the paycheck goes to What you have here is is is almost is almost a tale as old as time since 1948 in terms of this relationship between private sector profit And foreign policy. I mean I call it foreign policy for personal profit Which is this idea that if you have a senior-level job in Blobcraft in Defense diplomacy or intelligence You don't make your money as a w2 employee of the US government. So for example Mark Millie. Yeah, the CIA director only makes about a little over $200,000 a year You make I mean more as a third-year corporate associate than the then the central intelligence agency director that's You get your money from Serving the stakeholders afterwards like Mark Millie was you know Joint head of the Joint Chief of Staff. What's he doing now? You know, he's at he's at JP Morgan You know doing the macro economic forecasting So you know so that they basically have the insider trading Vision of the guy who's tapped into everyone at the Pentagon So they know what markets are about to open up because where the Pentagon's about to exert its influence? They know whether to invest in natural gas In you know in companies in Germany or Ukraine because they have the head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as To make phone calls to the people in the Pentagon about what's going to happen to that country in six months Look up look you want to see a great example this look at the Donylon brothers Look up look up Look up Tom Donalon's BlackRock Investment Institute profile Tom Donalon is the brother of Mike Donalon Mike Donalon is the The closest advisor to Joe Biden and has been for 40 years Mike Donalon is you know, I think began working with Biden in 1982 He's literally the what they call the inner kitchen cabinet of Of the West Wing of the White House now that's a great that's a great job to have if you are Mike Donalon's Brother Tom Donalon who's currently the chairman of the BlackRock Investment Institute So while his brother is the closest advisor to the president of the United States BlackRock which has $10 trillion of assets under management and portfolio companies in every industry in every region on earth uh Tom Donalon, a theory only needs to make a phone call to his brother Mike Donalon to know exactly what to invest in in term because he knows what Billions hundreds of billions of dollars of expenditure of state department and Pentagon and intelligence work is going to do to the industry in all region Yeah, this is basically like Pelosi tracker but for like military intelligence If all legal Tom Donalon again, most time Donald on Tom Donalon didn't start out as a banker He was the national security advisor in charge of military intelligence and and statecraft for the US empire He was he was at the state department. He was he was in IC. He was at DOD He went straight from the blob To the black rocks banker many such cases. I mentioned Mark Millie another one is Jared Cohen if you know who Was the policy planning staff whiz kid at the state department who introduced the CIA's You know the CIA effectively to using social media for regime change work He was the you know he was the guy who was known as Condi's party starter And to for how how Condalisa Rice as Secretary of State could get could get this could could stop running regime change operations out of US embassies and consulates and In CI station houses they could simply use social media to organize these and that's what resulted in the Arab spring and the Facebook and Twitter revolutions that toppled Tunisian Egypt and then Jared Cohen then goes on to start Google jigsaw Which is the you know which which set in motion the entire world of the AI censorship? We now live under when he just left Google jigsaw. What's he doing now? Well, he's yeah now he's at the Goldman Sachs and he's doing their geopolitical You know forecasting for for Goldman friggin sex so blob to banker pipeline every time You know and this is how these people go from You know making two three hundred thousand dollars a year To being able to live like the people who they used to have to answer to when they were in government So they are using the assets of the American empire They're adjusting US foreign policy in a way that maximizes their own personal game They're not necessarily doing the calculus about what should we be spending all this money on you If that's what the stakeholders want and this is what Biden was doing and this is what the 10% of the big guy thing comes back to I mean, you just look at the overwhelming Just unbelievable scope of it. I mean for so first of all Joe Biden was known as Mr. Foreign Policy in By the council on foreign relations for 40 years. That is he was the blobs inside guy and the blob is the foreign policy Establishment which now has substantial control over our domestic politics. It's supposed to face outward damage the American empire But when homeland politics interfere with the empires plans they sick it against us and so for 40 years He was on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee for 15 of those years He was either the chairman or the ranking member so the top dog for oversight of the US of the US State Department So So he's got these international connections people are constantly pitching him for 40 years. There's a great video I think you can look it up if you ever seen Joe Biden bragging about You know being a being a prostitute for for the for the biggest donor and that when he when he turns when he turns 40 He was told it went at one meeting that for the real big money He should come back to them when he turns 40. Have you ever seen this? It's a great clip if you I think if you just look up the word prostitute on a Biden prostitute On my ex account you can you can find this but Basically Biden incorporated was was running a foreign policy for personal profit operation. I mean here's a crazy example Joe Biden. I'm sorry 100 Biden. I believe was oh, yeah, this is great Well, I'm not sure you should assume I'm not corrupt, but it's I'm thank you for that the system does produce corruption and I think implicit in the system is corruption when in fact Whether or not you can run for public office and across the great deal of money They're going to the United States Senate. He's a small state like Delaware You have to go to those people who have money and they always want something We were told that we politicians as the young could say rip off the American public I think the American public in a way rip off We politicians by forcing us to run the way they do to raise 300 $300,000 is no mean fee and unless you happen to be some sort of anomaly like myself being a 29-year-old candidate and can attract some attention beyond your own state It's very difficult to raise that money from a large group of people. I'm a 29-year-old oddball The only reason I was able to raise the money is I was able to have a national constituency To run for office because I was 29. I'm like the token black to the token woman. I was a token young person I went to the big guys for the money. I was ready to prostitute myself and the man in which I talk about it But what happened was they said come back when you're 40, so And he's 80 Amazing. I'm good. He talked about it. Yeah, right. It's so smooth. Right. Mike you gave us a lot to think about man I'm gonna have to listen to this one three or four times just to try to begin to absorb it But if it wasn't for you, we wouldn't know this. I mean it takes someone who is done exhausting Deep dives into this shit and to be able to express it the way you do I think is incredibly important. I think most people including me were not not aware of the scope of it Until you came out with all this Well, you're the man the arena and You know, it's been a personal inspiration for me for a long time and What you've had to take on just to be able to do this show is Something for the history books. So thanks for having me on my pleasure. Thank you