Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night. All day. Yup, he won? Thanks for the heads up, so I'm not sure if I'm letting go. Hey, dude. Good to see you, man. Good to see you, too. What's cracking? You got a diamond in your tooth as I was going on. There's a nice, nice. That's fun. My friend, Cam, just got a gold tooth. And I was giving him a hard time, and then I was like, damn, I think I want one. Oh, yeah, you got to get one. How do they get a gold tooth? I have a car. I had a root canal. I've got a cap out of one of them. I think I want to swap it out for a gold tooth. Do it. Do it, fuck you. Yeah, yeah. It's that key. I got one back here somewhere. It's just not a little like, I don't know, that little pirate thing starts to happen. You get a little outcasty. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So what's cracking, brother? How you doing? I'm good, man. If stoked to be here, see you? Stoke does have you here. Yeah, man. Shit, I wish I was staying longer now. But we'll make the best of how long you stay and how long you need to have for. I'm leaving after, right after this? After you, yeah. We headed back home. Oh, my son is getting married. Oh, congratulations. Thanks, thanks, which is such a trip, dude. You know, like he's 29, and he's getting married. And I'm just, I've been kind of tripping out on that. Like, dude, where the fuck did that time ago? Right. And like, I'm so fucking happy for him that he's been seeing the squirrel for seven years. I'm so proud that he did exactly the opposite of his dad. You know what I mean? Right. He knows and they're in, they've been basically they've been married. You know, they're just making it official now. And I'm just so happy for him. I'm like, I'm, I tell him all the time. I'm like, so happy for you, dude. Like, you know, you use some patience and some love and like, mix it all around and put some time in there. And you know, shit's like your survival rate is going to be way better, way better. And that makes me really happy. And your happiness rate. I think if you're a kid and your dad is Tommy Lee and you leave a fucking crazy chaotic life. He's probably like, slow down. Give me a fucking yard and a big offense. And whoa, totally, totally. That's why like, you know, you know, in the drift of everything. Yeah. Really surprised and I'm really happy. He just like pumped the brakes. That's awesome. Like make sure that what he's doing is the real shit. Yeah. I mean, especially in LA with a rock star dad, it's like there's so many bad influences. There's so many ways you could go where you could just ruin your fucking life. It's so easy to ruin your life if you're in the wrong circles. Dude. Yeah. So easy. Right. Cause everybody else is doing it too. You're like, hey, I guess we're doing meth. I guess I can just I mean, I know people that are good people that have fallen down that rabbit hole. And they're not bad people. They're not even stupid, man. They just made a bad decision for whatever reason. And then next thing, you know, they're all strung out. And like LA is the hub of that. Yeah. There's so much of that going on in LA. Yeah. And if you have any sort of that sort of shit magnet attached to you. Yeah. You know, the shady friends and the weird circles you just cut out to and all of a sudden you're just fucking. Oh, I mean, I don't live in the rock and roll world. But I think that's probably the most attractive to like crazy people. Like that world. That is the world where if you're a fucking cooch, like you gravitate towards that world, you know, it's probably so hard to find like sane, balanced people that are, you know, that have to shit together. It's like it's almost impossible. So like you're just comparing yourself to the other chaotic people you're around. Yeah. You're the fucking drummer and motley crew. I mean, you're supposed to be normal. What the fuck are you talking about? What kind of life is that? That's such a bizarre life. It's the craziest life of all time. You're fucking slamming the drums on stage in front of literally a sea of human beings singing along to your music. Yes. Nobody can understand that. I know, man. Yeah. And yeah, they've seen it all. They've seen it all. Like I put them to work out on tour, you know, just so, you know, we could hang out and spend time. You're like, you know, get them a radio, all of a sudden, they're part one of my sons is part of the lighting crew, helping those guys. My other son is like, all he's worked, all he wants to know about is like, dad, I want to be in charge of all the after show passes. I'll go out while you're playing and I'm going to hit all the chicks. And like my son is out there just, just stack of passes. Come on back, afterwards. Come on back. You know, and again, watching him like have just just running it. Right? It just like brings the tour to my eye. Oh, that's cool. That's very cool. When you look back, like how much of a dream does it feel? I mean, it's got to feel very bizarre that you, you know, every young guy who plays music wants to be in a gigantic band. They all want to be rock stars. And when it actually happens for you and then you look back on it, like how fucking surreal does it all feel? It's dude. I pinch myself still daily, literally. And then I'm just fucking, I don't know, man. I'm just lucky to be here. I'm lucky. I get to do this. I always say to people like there's a couple of things that are involved with that whole thing. There's some luck, some talent, timing of things that, and those things kind of all line up. And it happens for you. And it just happens at fucking supersonic speeds where like a lot of it's a fucking blur. Right. Like a ton of it's a blur where you have to have somebody else like remind you, like, oh shit, that's right. I totally forgot we did that. You know, like about crazy times. Yeah. Yeah, it's a trip, dude. I spend a lot of time like hanging on. Right. What a fuck. Here we go. Did you get a chance like when you're coming up to talk to any other rock stars? Does anybody give you advice on how to handle things? Like how weird it's going to be? No. I'm trying to think of any sort of mentor kind of dude on like how to survive the shit. Like no, pull Keith Richards aside and say, hey man, how about if you tips? How'd you do this? He's still here. Bro, I saw them at Kota at the circuit of the Americas a couple years back. Yeah. They were fucking incredible man. Incredible. Insane. They're like, what is, how old is Keith? Dude. Are they like 80? He's got to be. Mick is like 80. Bro, Mick is moving around at dancing and singing insane. Dude, and let me tell you a fun quick little story here. Molly Crew gets to open up for the Rolling Stones. This was on Halloween. I forget what fucking year. But some stadium I think it was Toronto. We got to open for them. And we're so fucking pumped. We're like, dude, are you kidding me? We get the fucking do this. Anyway, we play our show back in the dressing room. After we're done, the Stones tour manager comes into the dressing room and goes, Tommy. I was like, yeah, he goes, he goes, Mick, bro, he can't even like to see that. And I was like, Brad, I fucking head over there. And dude, this is 20 minutes before they're to go on. I go under there, they're world and they got, they bring a bartender around with them. So there's a guy set up just slinging fucking drinks. Mick isn't hammered, but fucking Keith and Ronnie, dude, they were fucking walking on their lips. I'm talking shitty like, hey, fucking right. Just falling over with their guitars. 20 minutes for the go on stage. I'm like, how are these guys gonna fucking, there's no way they're playing. I'm sorry, there's no way, no fucking way. And all of a sudden, we took a couple of photos and it was like, let's go to the stage and I'm like, oh, I gotta see this. I'm walking with them, right? They get up there, fucking lights go out. Boom, they fucking, I think they started with start me up. Bonnet, and it was like a switch for it. All of a sudden, those guys were fucking money. Like 100% fucking rocking out. I was like, how did they just go? They've been doing it for so long that they just, their masters of the controls. They're like, yeah, okay. I guess we can get this amount of fucked up and then we can go. Like it's okay. I think some guys just was a crazy level. Like I was talking, you can barely talk. And then they went up there and fucking breath it. They just saw that. Some guys just want to be fucked up to just feel the experience. Just to just ride it like a wild pole. You know? Just wherever you live. That's what some guys like to do it. I mean, and I don't have to tell you, rock and roll music is the heart of that. That's where it really goes down or a lot of guys like to get fucked up before they play. You know? You want to see something fucking inspirational. I'm going to show you something. You're crazy. Always. This is, have you seen Jamie, have you seen Rick Springfield lately? I did just see him. And I was like, whoa, I'm going to send you a video and it's going to blow you away. This is literally bananas. This is Rick Springfield. He's seven, seventy six years old. Okay. 76. 76. 76. He's singing Jesse's girl like he just wrote it. Any fun. Yeah. Play, start it. Put the headphones on. Put the headphones on and back this up for the beginning. Whoa. Whoa. He's just sending to you on Instagram. He's real. I just can't get the click on the other link then. The one that I said in your own Instagram. Because you can't, first of all, he looks fucking incredible like he's working out every day or something. I mean, I don't understand. He looks like a 30 year old guy. And he's singing the song like he just wrote it. 76. That's crazy. That's crazy. That's amazing, man. Amazing. That's fucking inspirational. Inspiration. Bro. 76 years old. And the passion and enthusiasm is what kills me. This is not a guy who's like just going out there and going through the motions. He's singing that song like he just wrote it. Yeah, totally. Fuck. Yeah, Rick's Springfield. Yeah, good job, bro. Fuck. Yeah. That's amazing. Yeah. I said that to everybody. I'm like, fuck yeah. That is, I saw that. I saw that clip. And I was like, whoa. A lot of people in there are 76 are basically waiting to die. This dude's on stage with no shirt on fucking crushing life. It's good. I love it. That's going to be me. Still 10 years old. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Rock and shit. Well, I remember in the 80s, there were no old rock stars. Like no one was out there touring. That was an old rock star. You're right. And then the stones released the new album. I think it was like 88 or 89. And everybody was like, wow, they're going to tour again. It was almost like, are they done with this? Like they're older now. Yeah. Then it started being a thing where a bunch of older guys would like go out on tour that hadn't been on tour in a while. And now it's not. And people like, why are we retiring? Like, why would I stop doing the most amazing thing that a human being ever gets to do? Yeah, that you love to do that. No, let me stop doing that. It was like a thing with hip art. Hip art is too. They would get to an older age and people just didn't appreciate them anymore. It's like it was like a young guys game. And now a lot of those older guys are going on tour too. And people were like, oh, these guys are fucking dope. Like I saw a run DMC when on, or excuse me, public enemy, went on with, I think it was Bruce Springsteen. I think Bruce Springsteen had them go up in one of his concerts. I'm like, fuck yeah, look at these dudes. They're killing it. They're still getting after it. That's the best, man. You got to love that. And I think that research, I don't know if you call it a or just that style of like, there are certain things that were really great that have stood the test of time. And I really think that the way shit is now, man, there is too fucking much. Like there's too much music. Like Spotify releases like 300 fucking thousand songs a day. Really? Who the fuck is listening to all this music, dude? I'm in the business. And if I can't keep up, how can a fan of music keep up? So I just, I think that the excess of, it's just static. And it's really blown a hole through for, you know, original stuff, you know, really good stuff. Because a lot of the stuff is all kind of sounding the same now. But I just, I think that it's been a cool progression that sort of fuel that. I don't know if I'm making sense. No, you're making sense. You know what I'm trying to say? Yeah. But there's so much static now that the sort of the something has to be undeniable to break through. The authentic stuff still fucking holes water. Yeah. Big time. You know, well, there's always like one song that all the sudden resonates and just goes super viral because people listen to it a holy shit. Yeah. There's always going to be something that's exceptional. But I do agree. It's impossible. There's a lot of great music that I don't know anything about. And then someone turns me on to it. And I'm like, how the fuck did I not know this guy? Yeah. Yeah. And had your friend not turned you on to that. You would be never fucking know. Well, there's no real radio anymore. No. Right. So how do you find out when I was a kid or I was in high school, like a new Motley crew kit song came out. It was on the fucking radio. Yeah. And then you knew, all right, the new albums out. Let's go get the new album. Yeah. And that was with every major band. It was like, then you got MTV. MTV came along. Oh, the music videos out. The albums out. But now it's like anyone can just put stuff up, you know, which is great. Yeah. Which is cool. It's cool. Look, it's all overall positive because you have more artists and more people that are doing what they want to do. Yeah. More people that are making music, which is awesome. But like, it's the same thing with movies. You can imagine you had to watch every movie ever made. You have to be a million years old. You never finished. Exactly. It's not a thousand the day. Yeah. It's the same. It's the same musically. What's happening musically. It's happening with everything entertainment. Yeah. Yeah. But films, television shows. There's an abundance of like, it's just too much. How do people, I mean, if people got these, you know, you know, TV packages where they've got subscriptions for thousand different places and you still can't find anything to watch. You're like, what the fuck is happening here, everybody? We got to like, peel it back a little bit. Make it a little easier here. Well, there's so many options. Too many options. It's almost like dating apps, right? Like, if someone, if some chick is chewing or food with their mouth up, you know, like swipe. Like, who's next? Yeah. Like, people get, they don't get a chance to know anybody. And I think that's all the same thing with movies and TV shows. Yeah. Because if you're watching Netflix, if you get bored for three seconds to like, fuck this movie, what else is on? Bit, bit, you know? Okay, try this one. And you watch that for 10 minutes. Not fuck this. You would like to see their numbers of like, how long people actually watch a show or a movie on Netflix before they shut it off. I bet it's way different than in the past. I bet in the old days, most people watch the movie to the end. Sure. I bet now it's like 20%. Oh, dude. If that all bit. Yeah. I'm going to say a little bit more. If that. Yeah. Everybody, it's short attention span life right now. It's very, very bad for you. Yeah. Sometimes you got to just take something in. And that affects the people who create the stuff because you realize I'm dealing with a bunch of fucking six year olds here. And if my shit isn't banging within the first, whether it's a movie or a song or whatever it is, whatever your art is, if it's not fucking ripping your face off and grabbing your attention within three or four seconds, you're next. Right. Exactly. When that's just the world we're in so that and that affects people who make the stuff because they really got to put the best shit up front, you click or else you're going to lose everybody. 100%. And that's that sucks. Yeah, but they don't have to give into that. Nobody's got time for suspense or yeah. Fuck that. This summer, the cup is taking over the US and only draft case has you covered every step of the way. Follow every group stage upset every knockout round thriller, every stoppage time moment that flips the whole tournament. Sweat all the big matches you love in real time with a seamless experience built for the world's biggest stage. No matter where you're watching, you're always connected and in the game with one app. New draft Kings customers sign up with code, Rogan spend five bucks to get 200 in rewards within 21 days. That's code, Rogan in partnership with draft Kings. The crown is yours. Bed with DK Sports book, gambling problem called one 800 gambler one 800 my reset New York called eight seven seven eight open wire text open why Connecticut called eight eight seven eight seven eight seven seven seven seven seven four visits ccpg dot org on behalf of Budho casino in Kansas that text pass through may apply in Illinois. Twenty one an over void an Ontario event contract trading with draft Kings predictions involves risk of loss. Sportsbook bonus bets expire in seven days. $50 in predictions dollars issued weekly for three weeks expire in one year. Team one on with Robbo reward availability varies predictions offer void in New York and June 28 terms at DKNG dot co slash audio. Well, think about some of the songs from the past that would never pass mustard today that are just amazing classics like whole lot of love. So a whole lot of love. You have a minute and a half fuck sounds with symbols before it comes back to this insane guitar solo. Yeah, right. Yeah, right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's like the most bizarre song ever. Yeah. Kind of drum solo. Yeah. And no one. And in classically free bird when Leonard Skinner released free bird, they're like, no, no, no, this song takes way too long to get going. It's so long. It's like a seven minute song. You got it. This is never going to fly. We want to know the greatest anthems in the history of the world. And perhaps the greatest guitar solo in the history of the fucking human race. Right. Right. You know, pre bird when that dude gets going. Yeah. You see it live and everybody's fucking, you know, fucking places going off. You're a banana. So the greatest guitar solos in the history of the fucking human race. And their record company was like, it's too long. Yeah. People don't have any attention span for this guys. God, even back then people were fucking hating. Well, it's always the people that are the money people. Yeah. Because all they give a fuck about is money. And you're in the creative side of it. And the money people are just pimping out the creative side of it. And they're just trying to get you to suck as many dicks as they can. Because they want to buy Rolls rice. So they're like, come on. Suck that dick. Let's go. Go. And they don't give a fuck about you or your reputation because then they got fucking nickel back over here. And this guy over there. There's always a new band. They could push and pimp. Yeah. And so they just want to make the maximum amount of money possible. So they have always have shitty advice. Because they have advice. Their advice is based on making money. Yeah. Yeah. And for that reason, when we were on electoral records, they were never allowed in the studio. No one from the label. That's awesome. We allowed them once and he came in and started making like, making changes or... So justing edit and stuff. We're like, out, out. Yeah. You'll get it when it's done here. Oh, God. So gross. Yeah, dude. Here's some guy making those kind of calls who has no, not a musician, has no idea about what key the fucking songs in. All he knows is it's too long. Yeah. And we got to get to it quicker. Well, it's these people that have ego for no real reason. They're just kind of... They're just involved with other great creative people. And that's what they sell. That's their business. It's a sell stuff that's awesome. And somehow or another, they think it makes them awesome. Yeah. It's very weird. Like, you know, Zach Bryan, he's got a great song called... I think it's damn cold vampires or cold damn vampires. It's a great fucking song about fucking tongue twister. It's a great fucking song. It's about the music industry. And it's about these vampires that are just sucking blood out of these artists. And it was a great song, the great line of the song, trying to make an empire of the things that you create. They're making an empire from other people's work. That's what they're doing. But they somehow or another think that they're responsible and that they have an insight. And they're... I'm good at my job, Tommy Lee. Let me tell you something, kid. I know music. And that drum solo 14 seconds too long. I'm going to tell you why. I'm going to show you these statistics. So we've got a guy... We've got the best guy, the best statistics guy. He knows when people are... When they get to this fucking part of the drum solo, they tune out, Tommy. We've got to stop him from tuning out. Totally. Because I want to get a conis egg. I want to get one of them fucking $2 million cars. These cons. They exist in every walk of life where one person is like, you know, a creative type that's not business oriented. And you need a business person. So the business people come in because someone's got to sell it. You're not going to fucking sell it. What are you going to do? You're going to make your own record company, your higher-on executives, and do your own promotion? Get the fuck out of here. You can't. So they come along and they get involved and they fuck it all up. And how many guys have listened to them? And ruin their careers because they listen to them. Oh, man. You know the Billy Squire story? Billy Squire. Billy Squire. Billy Squire. Billy Squire was the shit when I was in high school. Oh, that song, Lonely is the Night. Oh, my God. A low Billy Squire. Dude, the stroke. He was fantastic. So he did one music video where it was like very effeminate. It was like really weird. Oh, was it when it was he was in his pajamas or something? It was really weird. And everybody was like, nope. Yeah. What is he doing? Yeah. It was really weird. And to this day, I don't know if that was his idea or somebody else's idea. They just took a while chance. I don't know. No one knows. I prayed to God. It was his idea. He's created a creative decision. Didn't work out, whatever. Yeah, fun. But if someone tanked his career because they wanted him to act feminine in a song, it was like very, the reaction was crazy because this guy was like a sex symbol. Yeah. He was like, you know, shirt down to his, you know, open up down to his pants. Yeah. And he was a bad motherfucker on stage. Yeah. He was a ass off. He's a star. One music video tanked him. I think it was my kind of lover. I think that was the song where Steve you can find what the video was. This is it. This is it. This is a documentary. Someone made on the Facebook. Facebook, I found that. About it. It's about this whole thing. So like this, this is it. Yeah. So it's, it was very weird. What, what song is it? Can you hear it? I will. So, so was somebody else's ideas that, that guy with the face, that guy with the face is so exciting. I was like, kind of tell you. Oh, really? Yeah. He's crawling around his knees and his hands and his knees. Yeah. It was weird. It was very weird. What's wrong with this? Like, you know, like if he was like, like look at this, look at him skipping around and say it was a very odd that guy. That seems like the type of guy that would give you the better advice. Something me tonight, the name of the song. I want to fuck. I'll look at this. Now familiar with that title. Yeah. I don't know. But I know. Yeah. I was in. And everybody's like, nope. Yeah. That's a wrap. And that guy I should have had like fucking 50 giant albums. That guy was amazing. Yeah. Such an incredible singer, man. So around. Rock me tonight. 1984. Oh. Yeah. We'll cut that part up. But you can see him dancing around. Look at this. Yeah. Don't do that, buddy. Yeah. What is this? He's like, yeah. I don't do that. Yeah. We need you on the ground. It's a warm and round. Hopefully. Hopefully it was his idea. Yeah. And he was just like, God, if this was somebody else's idea. Like, I want you to be looser. I want you to be looser. I want you to be more free. Yeah. I want you to be like, I want to feel it. I want to feel your vulnerable side. I want you on your hands and knees. I want you to crawl. I want you to do. I want you to like this. Like you barely can crawl. Yeah. Like you're having a hard time crawling. That's what girls like. Girls like a guy who struggles to crawl. Yeah. Oh my God. Did you do it? Oh my God. What did you do to him? What did you do to him? I know. I hope it was his idea. Despite its major success, the song is sometimes associated with the end of his career as a singles musician due to the music video, which is described as one of the worst ever. In a 2011 book, I want my MTV, the uncensored story of the music video revolution. Show Squire dancing around a bed with pastel colored satin sheets and wearing a pink tank top. Squire's concert ticket sales. Squire's concert ticket sales immediately declined and he later fired his managers. He has accused Ortega of deceiving him and altering his original concept, which Ortega denies while Squire remains steadfast. The video was solely responsible for the initial decline of his popularity. Other commentators are lesser. Well, I'm pretty certain. I remember it. I remember it. I remember kids in high school going with the fuck bro. Yeah. The fuck is Billy Squire doing bro? That's just gay bro. Billy Squire was the man. I mean, yeah, he could have been another John Mellon camp. He could have gone forever. For sure. Like what the fuck dude 84 one song one music video? I didn't say that is really crazy if you think about it. Yeah, nuts nuts. Well, that's the craziest thing about we think about like the success of Motley Crew and bands like from your era. I think that you guys endured for so long. Like still to this day. Bro, if I'm working out the gym and kickstart my heart comes on. I swear to God, I get stronger. I think it's down. Oh, fuck. Like you get pumped man. That's that's that's on the drug. Yeah, that one man. I can't tell you how fun how rewarding that is to like sit back and like, I don't know the super bowls on and the fucking kick off. Oh, boy. Yeah, we got to cut it out, but I want to hear it. Throw kickstart my heart on. We'll cut it. We have to cut it out for you to other little get docked with. Oh, fuck. The fucking money people come involved. Meanwhile, we're just promoting news that God damn it with Tommy Lee. You mother fucker. Yeah, right. We'll get docked with fucking money people coming back. Meanwhile, we're just promoting news at God Dammit. We're Tommy Lee, you motherfucker. Yeah, right? But this fucking here. This fucking song, I was this live, don't be your live one. Give me the actual one. That was one of the most American songs that's ever been made. Ever. Ever. That song is fuel. Yeah. That song is fucking fuel. If you were running in a race, you were thinking about quitting and that song comes on your headphones. I'm like, let's fucking go. Red fucking go. You know, like songs like that, they really do give you energy. They really are like a drug. Yeah, they're definitely, they're injected. Yeah, like changes your state, you know? I love that one. Isn't that fucking wild the power that music has? Like the right kind of song, you know, everybody's different. But there's nothing better than like a fucking, like I get fucking fucking goosebumps, bro. If something comes along, it just, and it gets inside you. Yeah. It's fucking infectious and all of a sudden you're like, dude, it's taking over my whole body. I'm fucking tingling. Yeah. Here's standing up. And you're like, what is that? Yeah. What the fuck is that? Like I want to fucking bottle that up and try to recreate whatever that is. Yeah, it's just an encapsulation of emotion with sound frequencies that just changes your physical state. It does something to you that's like, it's one of the most amazing creations that human beings have ever done. One of the, one of the most amazing accomplishments that human beings have ever done is it just make incredible music. Because it's one of the things that it affects us in a way that like, they're like nothing else. And you can hear them over and over and over and over again. Like a great joke is awesome. The first time, but after you hear it the second time, it loses a little of its power the third time, it gets a little boring. Of a great song. I could listen to that. Sometimes I'm working out. I just put something on repeat. I'm like, oh, I just want to hear this song. One song over and over and over again. Where the fuck are out? Where the fuck are out? I don't care. It's so good. I don't give a fuck. I just want to feel the slugs. Fuck it. Go. And every time it comes back on, fuck. Yeah. And we're back. You know, it's like it changes the frequency of your actual soul. Yes. Your body gets moved by it. You feel different. You I want to ask you a question because you're into all this fucking crazy shit. Um, I saw somewhere recently and this just goes along with that feeling that you for feeling you get when the right notes or frequencies hit you. Um, I saw that through sound certain frequencies like some dude in China, some doctor in China or is it Japan has is this close to healing fucking cancer through through sound through frequency. Real have you seen any of this? I haven't seen it, but I wouldn't be surprised. I wouldn't die there because, you know, it just fascinates me because there is those frequencies out there that you know about them 432, 432 hertz. You heard about that stuff explained to people. So well, it's just there. There's some weird, uh, what do you call it conspiracy theories about. Originally, our music like Bach Beethoven back in those days was tuned to 432 hertz. And this is the conspiracy bullshit part about it. At some point, and people say Hitler changed the tuning, the pitch of music. And now everything was raised to 440 instead of, you know, 432 instead of 432. Now it's a 440. It's up and it's in the frequency is more aggressive. And it was said that it was done to give the soldiers more fucking, you know, angst and you'd correct this music. Well, they were also given a math. Excuse me. They were also given the math between meth and kickstart my heart. Fucking so much. Not so bad. I'm not going to real problem. Dude, no, no, kickstart my heart in German. Yeah. Oh my Lord. That would be the real problem. Yeah. I'm just curious because I know that you're into that kind of stuff. Any sound therapy or healing through frequencies if you've heard any of that. Well, I know people do sound baths where, you know, they'll do these meditation experiments where they lie in their back and they have someone that it's making sounds. Yeah. There's something to it. But just to think about what we're saying with kickstart my heart, like when you hear a great song, it changes the way you feel. Yes. It changes your feeling. It gives you more energy. It really does. Obviously, sound has a profound effect on the human body. And it's not just like you inter, there's a lot of aspects to a great song, right? It's the sound. It's also the messaging that's in the lyrics. It's like there's a lot going on. The voice of the singer, you know, the visuals of everybody fucking rocking on stage. You sure. That also contributes to it. But the actual sound itself is affecting your body in a very profound way. And I wouldn't be surprised that there's ways that sound could provide like therapeutic benefits to like people that are injured, that are healing, sickness. I'm sure. If you were lying in a hospital bed and you felt like shit because you just had surgery, but you're listening to some dope music, wouldn't that be better than just listening to people moan in the next room? What? What? Getting out of here. Yeah, you're inputting something. Yeah. Something nice. Should be a part of your recovery. Yeah. I'm sure. Getting positive vibes and getting like pos things that give you good feeling and good energy. I do that all the time and I'll sit at home. If you know, when you're in the mood to not really listen to music, but hear music, where it's just playing in the background. And I'll just put those these YouTube videos of these beautiful Japanese gardens and Kyoto or whatever. And there's like high deaf shots of these just beautiful, you know, bonds, eye trees, boy ponds, big, Milwaukee, bonds, I like, and it's just so chill. And with that music and I just put it on and it's kind of on a lot actually. And I find myself that's where I go to like just like, I don't know. Yeah, it puts you in different state. It puts me in a different space, you know. Yeah, I dig it, man. You got really into Bonzai. Yeah, dude. How did that start? All the times that we've gone to Japan, every time I went there, I always went to the Japanese gardens of the temples. And I would just walk around and just be like, my jaw on the floor, like I've never seen anything this fucking peaceful and beautiful. And just like, I don't know, it just came over this feeling every time I went, I came over me. So I started studying it. This is like eight years ago. I was like, I need this in my life somehow. I don't know what this is, but let me go down, you know, down the tube here and figure out what that is and how I can get this, some of this into my life. And I found some fucking videos on doing bonds I work on trees. And I started and I haven't stopped and it's been hands down. the coolest fucking thing I've ever gotten into, man. Like, I'll be out there for hours every day. Like I'll start my day just being with nature and being with the trees that I'm working on. And I got like a workshop, dude. It's like a, there's like, in progress, works on the bench. There's other ones on bending. There's ones that I'm, you know, treating for pests, you know, there's a whole world and wiring everything, training it to where you want to go. Pooning. It's just, it, it lets me escape everything for a couple of hours. I just, I just, I don't know, man. I just, I check out how many years you've been doing this now. I've been probably eight years now. I've been doing it eight years. And so is a bonds I tree a regular tree that would grow big if you didn't fuck with it? Yes. Yes. And I'm excited to this incredible, beautiful, artistic shape. And you're small. Yes. It's what you're, basically you keep kind of dwarfing it. And everybody gets this confused. And they just think, bonzai is like, that's the tree. Bonzai means tree and pot. That's what that means. Oh, okay. It doesn't mean the actual bonzai tree. It means tree and pot. And long as the study of bonzai, how long has the practice been around? Do it. Fuck. I have no idea. And you, and you find that other parts of the world now that you get into it. I mean, there's in Taiwan and China. There are some fucking insane bonds. And I think it actually originated in China. And the Japanese took it in, all written in ways and did it there sort of their version. And I think it originated in China if I'm not mistaken. Something like that. Yeah. Six century China and then they brought me in. Ah, see, look at that lamp. Fuck, dude. Wow. Fucking wickily over here. So don't you have a tree that's 300 years old? Yes, I do. Over 300. I have two of them that are over 300 years old. So someone was working on them over 300 years ago. But either that or was collected maybe a hundred years ago. And then over that time, it's just constantly been cut back and cut back. Like what you'll do. But it's a part of a tree that's 300 years ago. Yeah, it's still it's the same tree. Right. But it's just it's never been it's it's always getting its roots cut. Is that it? Is that your tree? The 300 year old tree? No, no, no, that's just a that's just a small juniper that I have. The 300 year old one is a is a redwood and fucking trunk on it's like this. And it's smashed into a pot about this big. That seems rude. It's about that. That's what that way. It's a redwood. It seems rude. And if you go to like Northern California and you go to the Redwood forest. Yeah, they're fucking spectacular. Yeah, those things are wild. The same. That Redwood forest is so incredible. There's the one that you drive through. Yeah. Yes, they cut a hole in it in like the 1920s or whatever. It's really fucked. I can't believe they did that. But the tree still alive and you drive through the tree. It's so crazy. Yeah, that that that that that one I showed not too long ago in an exhibition. Oh, so you go to bonds. I shows. Yeah, I just started entering some of my trees that I've been working on. I've done too so far. I just now, just like just this year entered a couple of trees. That's also rest that this these other seven years or eight years of practicing is just learning. You know, what a cool hobby. Yeah, it's fucking rad, dude. It really is. It's also like the complete opposite of being a rock star. Totally. Like what great balancing tool, you know, I know, man. It's interesting because a lot of, you know, my, my peers, musical buddies, like they're all of them are super interested. They're like, dude, what's up with the bonds? I like, I could they they're curious. They want to know because maybe they've seen me, you know, maybe change a little bit over the years or they've seen how much joy it fucking brings me in there. Yeah. I think I want some of that. I'm not sure where there's something about like a Zen garden that you associate with like bonds. And peacefulness and clarity. Yes. Peace of mind. Yes. Clean mind. Like if your mind is pure, you're like, you're really in the moment rather than just being a fucking mass ordering Ubreeds. You know what I mean? Yeah, dude. Like there's something that's very spiritually attractive to people about those practices. Yes. And that's it too. It really has a lot to do with sort of the, the, the culture of all of it. Like when you start going down that hole about design and all that stuff, you start to, you start to realize that everything that at least the Japanese do is with such fucking purpose. Like you'll notice, you know, and I didn't notice this stuff until later. I was like, oh, I get it now. Just serious rules about how they build a Zen garden. You'll never find a straight path ever. I don't care how far you look. You'll never find a straight path going through a, a Zen garden. They specifically and strategically curve the path to slow you down. When you get, when soon as you walk into a garden, the number one objective is to get you to slow the fuck down. there's no straight path and everything. You don't, nothing becomes revealed to you until you come around that corner. So you're always, even if they're, if you're going across a lake or a pod, there's never a straight, very rarely, a straight bridge. It's either arched or the bridge zigzags across. There's never a straight line. what that's, what that's meant to do is get you to stop at each corner and look out and just take it in and it fucking be present. And then that's to me. It's like that's the deeper meaning of all this for me. It's really got me to slow the fuck down because everything is just kind of, right. All the time. So that it's just, I don't know how to explain it sometimes. It's hard to explain that state, but that's what I, that's what I get from it. And every day it's the best way to start your day, man. It can only get fucking amazing after that because you kind of set yourself up for having a fucking super rad day. Like I do know what I mean? Like yeah, yeah. Yeah. I'm good. Let's go. I mean, there's something about those Zen gardens. It's so attractive to people. Yes. It's obvious there's something going on with that design with that flow of nature and the way it's artistically pieced together. You're exciting to people. And you see it, man. I don't know if you noticed. You had to notice. You see it in a lot of them like newer architecture. A lot of fucking designs and homes are being built with that sort of very minimal Japanese flavor that is just meant to have your home be a peaceful place and not like a fucking museum or like this or that. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's more, it's more peaceful. Yes. Like in the actual design itself versus like some house of big, giant ass fucking windows overlooking the big city and fucking rocks everywhere and like, oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I've had that. Yeah. It's a house on the top of the hill with the views. And I mean, the view is just kind of a view. It doesn't really do anything. It's very different than having a beautiful winding sanctuary to cruise through, you know, I think nature is very therapeutic. And if you can put nature in an artistic form like a zangardin, it's very therapeutic. Oh, that's a way better view. The view of nature is a way, always a way, but look, you, whenever I go to New York City and I'm staying in a hotel in the middle and you'll see all the buildings like, wow, this is crazy in the center of it. This is fucking dope. But I don't want to live there. Right. I like to visit. I don't think it's good for me at least. I don't think it's good for my headspace to live there. Yeah. I like to see trees. I like to see nature. I like to see green. I like to see things that are alive. That makes me feel better. Yeah. It's funny dude. I tell people, I think I was a fucking tree like in a past life because I'm, I'm, I'm, like maybe you were a tree too. I'm like you like, I don't know if you're like this gnarly about it, but every time I go into a city, the first thing I look at is the trees. Like, whether it's a big city, wherever, I'll find the tree because that's the first thing I'm looking for. I don't look at the buildings. I don't look up and we're down. I'm always like looking for the tree. Yeah. It's just, I don't know. Human beings are very connected to plants where they're very connected to nature period. It's one of the most brilliant things that the designers of New York City did is make central park. Have that giant park. It's an enormous park in the center of the city. I was staying at a hotel last year and it was like on the edge of the park and like from the window you look at, you see the whole park like straightaway. This is fucking incredible that they did that because it's so big. And it's, it's just trees. And paths and little lakes and everything and go on around. Like, hey, get the fuck out of these buildings for a while. And it's like for a person living in New York City, having that right there in the center is gigantic. I don't know what percentage of people take advantage of it, but they should all. It would make them all better. You all feel better. It's a little center retreat, man. Wow. An amazing one. It's fucking huge. Like how many acres is central park? Let's find that out. I'm a guess 1000 acres. If I had a guess, maybe 2000 acres, how big is it? Yeah, 843 acres. So it's this amazing huge park in the center of the biggest city in the world. And you see all these giant crazy fucking buildings and then none of them from the center. It's beautiful. Fuck them props to that. Those people or whoever that didn't sell that space. How many fucking vampires or do they take over that and put a big shitty ass building in the middle of it? We don't need 800 acres. 500 acres. That's plenty. Yeah. Plenty plenty plenty. We'll just make those 500 acres even better and no one's going to complain. Yeah. But a bunch of money. Yeah. It's often whoever. Whatever we're going to do. Whoever like to help that down. No, no, man. They've lost a few parks. That's one of our shows that we do with the Irish, Fierce, Shane Gillis and Mark Norman is protect our parks. Oh, but we're not really protecting parks. We're just getting drunk and talking shit. It's called protect our parks because Ari on one of the early episodes was ranting and raving about they're going to fucking take down this park and turn it into apartment bills and they wound up doing it. They killed the park. Oh, man. And cars. This one suck out all the trees. Just make money. These dirty bitches. Oh, man. Pretty soon they were going to have no place to go, man. Yeah. Well, I think Central Park is safe. And that's the greatest park in the world. Yeah. Really is the greatest parking in any city in the world. I was so crazy. You mentioned that because on the way here, I was flicking through Instagram and I saw. Sorry. That this happened. Some dude got killed. One of the horses took, you know, the horse and buggy thing. Just fucking launched. And you see the dude, the horse flips the cart. Oh, man. The dude gets flung out and then he dies. He died on the way to the hospital. Why did the horse freak out? Do we know what happened? I don't, it didn't show it. It just showed like somebody else has had footage of it. Like just the horse freaking out. Oh, shit. And then peeling out and you'd see the thing flip over and you're like, oh, man, dude. You know, I love horses and I'm not a fan of horses walking around the city. I think it's fucked. Yeah. I get the people think it's romantic to ride on the back of a buggy with a horse. Yeah. Yeah. It's not right. The horse is supposed to be in the fucking fields and the mountains. The horse is supposed to be running around and clicking around on the asphalt. Oh, dude. Fuck all that. They're not like it's just a gross touristy thing. I mean, it's cool to see them every now and then. You know, I know cops like to use them when they're breaking up riots and shit. It's kind of crazy. But the reality is a horse is not supposed to be. They're just like a cow's not supposed to be there. If you had cows walking down the street, you'd be like, why does fuck us as cow? This was likely an accident because the driver, yeah, the driver, I guess they call him wasn't a dude. And they were spot like left to see what? Yeah. He left is never supposed to see. There's seats as to take maybe a photo of the passengers in the carriage and when the family was coming back in, horse got spooked. Oh, no. Yeah. It happened very fast. But yeah, the driver's not in it. The driver's not in it. Dude, it just peels out. Oh, fuck. And you see it just go and just made up, make kind of a hard right in the bug. He just, oh, fuck. Flip's over and I don't fuck with horses, man. Yeah, dude. I don't ride them. I have a written horse before. I don't like it. Dude, I've did same here. I've done it. I got my ass thrown off on. Yeah. And I was like, I'm good. I'm cool. It's just not. It's just, I mean, look, if you're a cowboy and you're riding horses and everything, that's kind of a different thing. Sure. You know, if you're doing it every day, that's different thing. But for me, it's like, I don't need to ride them. I get it for entertainment purposes. Yeah. It's like I went to Thailand and we rode elephants. We had to ride elephants. And the elephants don't mind because you establish a relationship with them first. You feed them sugar cane and you pet them and you hang out with them. They decide whether or not you're cool. And if you give them like peaceful, gentle, friendly energy, they're like, sure, come on up. Go live to a leg up and you step on top of them and you climb on their back. And they gently take you through the jungle. But I'm like, I didn't need to do that. I could have just hung out with them. That'd have been plenty cool. I'm happy just feeding them. I don't need to ride them. Yeah, yeah. Like King Chimp. Oh, King Chimp on it. Big ass fucking elephant. Look at me. Yeah, it's very weird. Yeah, it's weird. But, you know, people like it and they're beautiful animals. Oh my God, they're beautiful. I don't need to ride animals. I get it. People like to do it. I don't have a problem with people doing it, but it's not me. I don't have to do it. I'm with you. Yeah. But horses and people have like a crazy relationship. You know, people that have horses, like they're bonded to that animal, like no other animal. Oh, yeah. I know a few that are just like horse whisperer kind of shooting where you're like, whoa, this is some next level love. Yeah, they do. There's a therapy with that too. They do. They do fine therapy for a lot of people. I did that one time. Did you? At a rehab they took us to have like a couple of days with horses and it was cool, man. I get it. Yeah. Well, again, it's like just like the trees and the forest. It's like something peaceful about horses. Yeah. You know, mostly, mostly the time, especially if they're broken, they're pretty chill. They just want to hang out. Yeah. You go up and pet them and they like it. And it's like, wow. Wow. Like, wow. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I get to go up and check their big ass teeth freak me out. Oh, no. You don't like it. Your finger isn't there, dude. I have people that have been bitten by them too. The poppers. I have people that have been bitten by them too. If someone's dicks, you get a horse annoyed and they bite you, like, bro. Oh, dude. Yeah. That's God a fucking, can you imagine? All that job power? Dude. This size that are fucking head. Yeah. Just clamping down on your hand. Fuck you. Yeah. I want to carrot bitch. Yeah. You can be the fucking carrot. That's so rad you can smoke in this. Oh man. Yeah, smoke cigars. Of course. Oh, fire up with you. All right. Mm. Hell, you've been smoking. God. Forever. You ever tried to quit? I have and I quit for hours, a few years ago. I quit for like, fuck. I almost made it a year. And then I was like, kind of going to feel like after a few months, you're out of the woods. Yeah. I don't know. It just didn't, it didn't last. It just didn't fucking last, man. What brought you back? You know what? Probably because I was drinking at the time. Like, they kind of go hand in hand. If you're on a cocktail or a beer or whatever, you're having a smoke chances. Chances are. Right. And I don't know, man. I was just sitting there and you're having a drink and you're like, where's the cigarette? It's just, I don't know. They're like rock and roll. They just go together for some reason. So I failed. Well, why did you quit originally? What it was the, um, it was the top behind it. I think I was just trying to quit fucking everything. You know, he was like, I said, fuck everything. I'm just going to take a break and fucking hit the reset button on everything. I was going through that phase because I hadn't never tried that. Try everything else but nothing. Um, uh, and yeah. I don't know, man. It's the last vice of a lot of people in recovery. Yeah. And then you got, and then, you know, you got guys like Keith Richards, who's just ripping cigarettes still. And I'm like, he's fine. And I'm like, I've gotten, I've gotten my fucking, my lungs and done the whole like, per new vote, but like, body scan, the sea, all your shit. And they're like, you're good. I'm like, are you sure? Let me see the, like, you know, the paperwork. This is just a different lease or a different guy. Like, because that's fucking impossible. They're like, you're good. I was like, all right. So there's really no reason to quit. Well, there's a, it's actually a very small percentage of people. Well, first of all, it's a very small percentage of people that get lung cancer, or the general population. Uh, and then when you add in cigarette smokers, it's a small percentage of cigarette smokers that get lung cancer. Uh, but more cigarette smokers get lung cancer than regular people. And so that's why when you look at the percentage of people that get lung cancer, that smoke cigarettes, that's why it looks so high. So if you like, let's, let's find the numbers. Put it into perplexity, please. Let's, uh, what percentage of cigarette smokers get lung cancer? And I think it's less than 5%. I think it's a very small number. And then you got to think people that are smoking cigarettes, how many of them are smoking two, three packs a day? Oh, yeah, that's crazy. And how many of them are smoking just a few cigarettes a day? I bet a lot. I bet a lot of people that are a little hesitant. They only smoke like a half a pack or a little bit less. Yeah. Like so what does it say, Jamie? It's still calculating. It's tightening itself. Oh, sorry. And isn't there something about like nicotine like when COVID happened? They were like, if you're a smoker, you're good. And I never got fucking COVID. Yes. And it was like, yeah, nicotine. Well, there's something about smoking cigarettes. It's supposed to be really good to prevent COVID. It's really confusing to be so crazy. Yeah. 10 to 20% of people who smoke at some point in their lives will develop lung cancer. With many studies landing about 15%, I thought it was a lot less than that. Large study estimates that 15 out of 100 current smokers will get lung cancer over the, but that's estimated from a study. Another analysis found roughly one in seven current smokers develop blood cancer. People who never smoke have a one to two percent chance or lifetime risk of lung cancer. Yeah. People who never smoke. Overall, only a minority of smokers get lung cancer. But smoking still causes about 80 to 9% of the lung cancer deaths. Oh, this is something we talked about yesterday, Jamie, that we forgot to look up. There's some sort of a study that's connecting people that live in Europe that have high polyphenol diets. They have like, they use a lot olive oil. Oh, yeah. And olive oil seems to protect. And it's a very controversial statement because people think, oh, my God, you're promoting cigarettes. I don't think they're promoting. olive oil. Oh yeah. Olive oil seems to protect. It's a very controversial statement because people think, oh my god, you're promoting cigarettes. I don't think they're promoting cigarettes. I just think they're just looking at data that these people that have high olive oil content in their diets seem to not have any problems with cigarettes or not have nearly as many problems. Oh wow. Yeah. Which makes sense because olive oil is so good for you. You got to think it's got to balance out a lot of the free radicals and bullshit that you're getting from life. Yeah. Makes sense that it would apply to smoking as well. You're totally. Yeah. That's that's so smoke. If you got it. Fucking it. It gets a extra virgin olive oil. Let's fucking go. Dippling. Dippling like sure. Have you ever tried shurm? A long time ago. Did you? Yeah. I'm fucking high school days, man. People in it or Europe who eat high polyphenol diets, but still, but smoke still face the full very high health risk of smoking diet cannot cancel out cigarette damage. It could only modestly improve overall risk markers. But there was an article that I had read that they were connecting it. They were talking about Europeans. Yeah. Here it is. Especially meditating rich plant diets. Consumes substantial polyphenols from fruits, vegetables and whole grains tea olive oil and wine. Holly polyphenol intake is linked to more to better cardiovascular risk profiles and lower long term heart disease risk and overall overall mortality in observational studies. Because that's the thing about cigarettes. It's not just cancer. It's also heart disease. And so polyphenols have antioxidants and anti-inflammatory effects. But current evidence does not show they can neutralize the cardiovascular cancer or lung damage risk from smoking what it means for smokers. Haters. You have to have some vices. Most of the people I know that in alcoholics and condoms, they fucking drink coffee every day and they smoke cigarettes. Big percentage of them. Ripping cigarettes. Yeah. Because it gets you a little high. Yeah. But it's like a very manageable high. Yeah. Like the cigarette high is like, oh, I'm all right. Yeah, it's just like a little light hooded. Yeah. But also like good for cognitive function. You know, like you know, Pink Floyd when they wrote the wall, they're at highest fucking cigarettes. Those guys smoke cigarettes all day long. What? Yeah. Yeah. Those dude smoked ton of cigarettes. Yeah. Yeah. That coffee dude. Yeah. Thank you, bro. Yeah. Tony Higgs. He told me that and he's a giant cigarette fan. Um, Stephen King said that too. When he stopped smoking cigarettes, it affected his writing. Oh, whoa. Yeah. He said his kidnaps just didn't fire as fast anymore. Wow. It's like that was one of the things that I really noticed when I quit smoking. That's wild. Yeah. Huh. Doesn't that make sense though? Yeah. It does. I remember quitting for a short time. I remember everything tasting better. I'm sure. Yeah. Like everything you just tasted better. Yeah. You know, of course, pounding the cigarette immediately following every single meal or drink. It's got to numb the inside of your mouth and somewhere dull your senses. Something you're caking it with smoke. Yeah. It's awesome. Yeah. Clog up the old taste receptors. Yeah, I do it. But a lot of creative people's whereby cigarettes, man. I think there's there's some benefit to it. Yeah. Hopefully. Now I think there is. I think there's some cognitive benefit. There's just way too many like super creative people and a lot of intelligent people, a lot of professors used tobacco. David goes on and says he never smoked cigarettes. David Gilmore, but didn't Roger Waters. This is this thing goes on to say that some of the band did smoke cigarettes, but it's more about their marijuana and has she smoking. Oh, so Tony Henscliffe spread misinformation. And here I am repeating it. I might have been told though. Yeah, I'm sure it was told it. Well, Roger, yeah, we all did hang out with Roger that one night. That was pretty dope. We'll see Roger Waters live. We came on the podcast. We hung out and then we went to see his concert. It wasn't saying. Oh, it wasn't a saying. I bet it was fucking rough. He is another legend. It was still like full power on stage. Incredible. That's the best. The show was amazing. And it's like he has these enormous screens behind him. So the show is like it's the music, but it's also these incredible visuals that you're watching while the music is playing. Yeah. You know, and his is so politically loaded. So it's, you know, you see all this crazy shit. Like while he's singing these songs, like when they're playing the wall. Yeah, I remember seeing one of those tours. I think maybe it was. I don't know what, but the wall is slowly building over the whole. Yeah. It's fucking crazy. And when we went to see him, Ari was high as fuck on acid. And he's crying in the middle of the show. He's crying. It was fucking phenomenal. Oh my God. Dude. I don't know if I could handle that. Yeah, I don't know either Jesus. Just get the fuck out of here with the acid. We're just going to go see the concert about do that. Yeah, dude. Fuck. I've around all those people. And I'd probably, I don't know if that'd be a good one. Probably not a good one, but Ari's an experienced passenger. You know what I mean? He can ride some waves. Good boy. He can ride some waves without throw it up. Do you ever look back and just say, God, it's a wonder I'm still alive? Dude, I told you earlier, I pinch myself on a daily basis. I really do. This like, I shouldn't technically be here. Right. Maybe you shouldn't. I don't know who knows. We all got our thing, but I'm, man, I'm really lucky to be here. And I think it's because I want to be here. Like, um, and you know what I mean? Like, I want to be here. Like, I want to fucking see I'm kind of pissed because I feel like we're not even close to where we should be. I mean, the year 2000, I'm, where's my fucking spaceship? Right. You know, like, where is that? That they were supposed to be full Jetsons. Bro, they're extremely late or it's never going to happen. I think there's a real problem with people flying or they lied. The people, the problem with people flying around is you got to catch them. Whereas if they're on the street, just close off the street and then you catch them. Right. Yeah. If people are flying around like too much banging, they just go off. Like, no, no, no, no, you can't have that for everybody. You have people corral in nice, like very clean lines. We can block these lines off very obvious paths. Use lights to start. I over them in helicopters. Put a spotlight down on them. See, fall around. That's what people like. They don't like this idea of the Jetson. Like, that's not a fuck. I want that dude. I want my own little, well, they do have flying cars now. I saw something. There's a couple. There's like one company called Jet One. It's like this little, looks like a little, it's like a one man drone. Mm-hmm. I'm like, yeah, me and my manager were always like, should we go fucking get a couple of these? You don't want to die that way. Yeah. Let those things get worked out for a few years. Yeah, it's probably an easy little bit more time for it to be soup, but yeah, man, because I mean, think about like how glitchy early cell phones were. You know what I mean? You know what I mean? That shit get ironed out. Yeah. Let the eggheads work on that for a little bit. Yeah. I'll shit up nice. Yeah, that'd be fixed all the bugs. Yeah. It's like, I don't know what happens when those things crash. Like, get a warning when they're about to die. Like, do you, do they run out of batteries? Is it run out of gas? Is it allowed to run out of gas? Can you just be an asshole and just fly until you run out of gas? and die? Yeah. Or solar charging tank over. I think I could make it home. Like how many guys have done that in their cars? I think I could make it home. When I was in high school, my friend picked me up in his buddies 1970, Chivell's fucking amazing chivells. Oh, nice. So dope. And I remember he ran out of gas and we coasted perfectly right to the gas station. No way. Yeah. It was like, we shut the car. We got out like that was amazing. Because you know, or 16 it ran out of gas at the pump. I was like, this is perfect. No pushing. No, nothing. Just, but if you're in one of them little drones and that shit goes goes on E. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's fucking parts. Yeah. Yeah. Not good. Do you see that documentary that they did about that kid that stole a plane? He stole a plane. He was like working at an airport and he stole a plane and hijacked it and then flew it and crashed it and died. Yes. But he's like having conversations with them. Yeah. He's talking and going like, I don't know what I'm doing, man. But you know, this one's further. I don't know. Yeah. And they were just like, I could run it, dude. While they were trying to get a child. But they were trying to get them the land. But the reality was he like, he's no way he was going to figure out how to land that thing. He's a dead man. The moment he got off the ground, he's a dead man. Yeah. And he just stole a plane. And there's a whole documentary about it. It's apparently very interesting. Wow. Wow. I don't have not seen the documentary, but I've seen clips of them trying to talk him, talk him down. And he just seemed like he wasn't that wasn't an option. He just seemed like this is really wrap it up. He was taking this. This was this that that one flight. Yeah. The ready to wrap it up. Yeah. Hope your insurance covers this. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But yeah. I think flying cars will probably be a thing one day. For 70 minutes, the world watching disbelief as a stolen horizon airplane soared over Puget Sound for crashing on a remote island. Now a new Hulu documentary reveals the man behind the controls. Oh, I got a quiet struggle that led him there. Oh, I got to watch this. What's it called? What's the guy getting? It's what? Sky King. It's called. Sky King. Poor dude. Oh, damn. Well, at least the guy gave him a round title. Yeah. Well, the unfortunate thing is that might encourage other people to do it as well. Yeah. People are very stupid. The people are stupid. I just released a song called Stupid World a couple of weeks ago. And that's exactly what that's about. It's literally we have gotten to a place where everything to me, like we are at just epic stupid proportions where you're just like, none of day goes by where I'm like, that's fucking ridiculous. That's stupid. Like how stupid can we get? Anyway, I wrote this track called Stupid World. Well, just live in LA, which is one of the stupidest fucking places on earth. Dude, I know. It's fucking insane. I'm like, and I'm doing the same thing too. Like, why do I live here? I mean, I love I love it there. But in the same way, there's always in the back of my head is why? Look, it's the most one of the most beautiful places on earth. The weather's perfect. Yes, most of the people are very friendly. Most of the people are cool. It's like, it's only a percentage of the people that are that suck. It's a large percentage, but it's only a percentage. The most the majority of the people are cool. The problem is it's like slowly becoming a new Detroit. It's like slowly the film business is like dried up. Yeah, completely dried up. Television, completely dried up late night TV. It's dried up, man. And that that was fueling a giant part of like what made LA special. I know. And it's just dried up, man. Nobody has to be there anymore. And they make it intolerable. They make you seem like you have to be there. So they just punish you with taxes and they punish you with regulations. They punish you with the, they make it everything very difficult to conduct business, very difficult to be safe, very difficult to just feel fucking normal. Yeah. And they get surprised when people leave. Like, what do you want? Yeah. What do you think you're doing to that place? You guys can see the statistics, stop fucking gaslighting the world. Right? You guys can fuck this place sideways and you want to keep doing it. And the weirdest thing is, you know, like, you know, you hear and you see, oh, man, fuck a bunch of people are leaving LA and part of me is like, fuck yes, get the fuck out of here. There's too many people here. So go. But then I realize nothing's really changed. And I don't really notice that people have left to traffic still the same. A bunch of shits exactly the same. And you tell me this many people left. I don't see it. Well, and I wonder if that's not not maybe a, I don't know, a hyped statistic. Yeah, it's not a scientific analysis. No, like the numbers are real, people have left LA, but it doesn't matter. You could lose five billion people in LA still too big. The traffic's bananas. It's fucking it's retarded. Yeah. It's bananas. Yeah. If you want to go to Orange County at four o'clock or shoot yourself, like it's a real, that's a real decision. Tried to Orange County at four o'clock in the afternoon. You're like, what the fuck am I doing with my life? This is crazy. Yeah. And don't even think about hitting the 405 at all. Like no, no, you're going to have to go some sideways. Yeah. You're going to have to go some, you're going to have to use ways. Yeah. And yeah. And even then your fuck, even then it's an hour and a half. If you live in like Irvine and you commute to LA, good, God bless you. Dude, God bless you. Yeah. How do you do it? I don't know. People do it every day. They just want to live in a place like Irvine real safe, real nice. Yeah. I got to work in LA. Fuck it. I'll just drive in every day. Just all fucking mad and just I would get up at five in the morning and just go to the gym. That's what I would do. I'd get up five in the morning, drive to LA. I get a membership in LA at the gym. That way I'm driving with no traffic, at least one way, at least getting there. I have no traffic. Yeah. And then you deal with the home commute. Doing it to both two and from. Yeah. Fuck you. Fuck you. I'm not doing that. It's too gnarly. I'd rather get up at five in the morning. I would, I would, I can't imagine even doing it once a day, but there's a lot of people that do three hours a day minimum in their car. And they, they really live 20 minutes away. If they didn't have traffic, they would be there in 25 minutes. Man, that's, that's pretty crazy when you realize all we have here on this planet is time. And you, you realize that kind of time, you're wasting wasting and you're never going to get back. And you're like, if I do this consecutively, every single day, I wonder what, add that time up over, you know, whatever, however many years and I bet you people would freak the fuck out. Yeah, he lost years of my life in the fucking car. Yeah. But the good thing is one thing you can do in the car is listen to books on tape. Yeah. And books on tape are amazing. And you know, podcasts too for some people, but for me, it's a lot of his books on tape because like you'll get lost in a book and it doesn't even really bother you that much. And the one of the crazy, if you have a Tesla, my Tesla does auto driving. So if I want to, if I'm leaving here and there's some crazy traffic for some reason, I just go, I just turn it on and it goes. I don't have to hit the blinkers. I don't have to change lanes. I don't have to stop at red lights. It does everything. D stressed. And all I have to do is just keep my fingers on the wheel. Just like this. Oh, it makes it look like you're old. No, you're supposed to like stay contact with the wheel. Just keep your eyes on the road. But you don't have to think at all. You know, you can't do that. You know, it's supposed to do that. It probably would still work. I don't even know what happens if you just, I think it shuts down after a second probably starts to recognize is that you're doing that and shuts down. But the reality is like that as a stress decoupler, there's nothing like a man, the best. You just put your fingers on the wheel and just chill. And now all you're doing is sitting for an hour and a half instead of like constantly hitting the brake, constantly hitting the gas, constantly hitting the brakes. Now you're just chilling and you can get you just like, listen to your book on Bonza high. Yeah, no, that is, that is nice, man. I don't know about you, but like if I start like, you know, you start reading a book, just you know, your eyes focusing and reading, they get tired. So you get more in listening to it an auditory version of it rather than for me, at least sort of sort of eye stressing on reading doing all that. Yeah, that's some tired and then fucking lose interest. Yeah, that's, that's, there's definitely something to that. Reading always makes me want to go to sleep again, especially at reading at night helps you fall asleep. But there's, there's also something about reading in your head because you create the voices and you create everything like you use your imagination when you're just reading that doesn't exist with books on tape. Yes, but with, with audio books, I don't have the time. So for me, it's a time thing. Yeah, like if I have a guest coming on, the guest is like an astrophysicist that has some very bizarre theory about something. Like I need to absorb the information and I have a limited amount of time. So we listen to audio books in the gym. I listen to audio books in the sauna and I listen to it in the car on the way to work. And so that all together is a couple hours in a day. Well, so I can do that and get a lot of information in where I wouldn't, I wouldn't, I don't have the couple hours to sit down and just read. I just, I don't, I wish I did. I don't. Yeah. So I can still get all that data and that information, but I have to be very diligent, diligent about actually listening. Yeah. That's the thing, because especially at the gym, you can get a little distracted and you're like, what the fuck did he just say and you have to back it up and oh, yeah. That happens. I generally, I just shut it off. I might just work out to two intents. I can't really pay attention. Yeah. You're going to yeah. What do they say do what you're doing when you're doing it? Yeah. And yeah, people, people, people think they're multitasking. Right. That doesn't fucking exist. You really, yeah, whatever. You're sort of multitasking, but you're robbing from Peter to pay a poll. Thank you very much. Yeah. You're taking away some of your attention on what you're doing to pay attention to this other thing. And it's definitely making you less good at either one of those things. And if one of them is very simple and it's like it doesn't matter, okay, you could be distracted. Right. Right. If it's two important things, you're robbing each important thing. You're robbing attention from these things. Yeah. There it is. Yeah. Here it is. Well, I've always find that like my best workouts are in silence. It's like, you don't, it's so hard to work out. Like you really need to only be thinking about what you're doing. Yeah. And if you add in a bunch of stuff, except music, music is always fuel for workout. That's different. Sure. It's like music you can listen and then stop listening and you can do it. Be in the middle of the set. It doesn't distract you with lyrics. It just keeps, just gives you some energy in the air. Yeah. Music is the ultimate companion for yeah. No doubt. No doubt. So much though that David Goggins doesn't use it because he says it's cheating. What? He goes to cheating. You know, because he's just a complete total psycho. Is that that like, is that that like ultra marathon guy? Yeah. Okay. I thought it was the lib forever guy, though. Oh, no, no, that's Brian Johnson. That's the guy who like has his son blood injected into yeah, that's dude. I'm sorry. I'm confusing the David Goggins is a totally different guy. He's the Navy SEAL who run. I think how many ultra marathons that you run in a month? Something insane. He runs 100 mile races and he's insane fitness freak. And when he works out is he's, these workouts where like famously he'll take like professional fighters and they work out with them and they can't keep up and they're just throwing up and can't believe how much this guy works. And he's doing it easy where he's just talking to them the entire time that they can't keep up. He finished eight 100 mile marathons in eight consecutive weekends. So he ran 800 miles in eight weekends. He's a nut. And he does like he'll he'll be like at home and just decide, uh, I'm going to do a 60 mile ruck right now. And just like throws on a backpack, gets outside and starts rocking. And they'll just do 60 miles. And so he'll go out there for hours and hours just decides. This is what I'm going to do. And I'm not stopping till I'm done. And he does it all the time. Whoa. He's in insane shape. And he's 50. Wow. He's in insane. He also has no knees. His knees are completely destroyed. Off him. The bone on bone. He said a ton of operations doesn't care. Keeps going on on bone on bone on bone. Like what is just a maniac. So complete and total man but he doesn't use music because he says is cheating. Wow. That's amazing. But that's just the shows you I like to cheat. I like to use that music. I like to cheat. I need to cheat to get that energy extra. I mean, I can do it myself maybe. But why would I want to pound it. I mean, give me that fucking give me that fucking music. Yeah. If it's cheating, I'm going to cheat at that. Yeah, that's that's that's not cheating. I don't think give it as that's called inspiration. Yes. It's an awesome supplement. That's what I call. There you go. But for him, it's all about mental strength. And so he considers it cheating. Use that mental strength. Like to your mental strength should be right from your brain. He goes, you can't always count on that music. The music's not always going to be there. Like, okay. I guess so. He kind of has a I get it. Yeah. Do what you're doing. For what he does, he kind of has a point. Yeah, I could see that. He's focusing. Yeah. No, no, no distractions. Yeah, he says he's gaining knowledge. He says I'm gaining knowledge. I'm acquiring knowledge. You must be doing. I believe him. I believe him because he's going to the dark realms of his mind. You know, what would you do? Intense suffering running 100 mile races, eight weekends in a row. He's doing some serious other work. Right. While he's that's the real, like deep introspective work. You want to find out who you really are run eight, one hundred mile races in eight weeks. Imagine those conversations you're having with yourself. What the fuck am I doing? No, dude, you got this. You got this. No, dude, you're an idiot. No, bro. Fuck yes. I think he probably used to have those conversations. Now it's just now it's his battling demons. It's all just demons is crushing down negative thoughts, crushing down weakness. You know, I don't know. Fuck. So, a lot of different kinds of people in this world, Tommy. Yeah, there are, dude. It's pretty crazy out there. You've met every variety of them. Just about. Oh, my God. That's funny. Wow. I know. There's some crazy people in this world. Yeah, there is. But we need all of them. We need our Tommy Lee's. We need our David Lee Ross. We need our, you know, we need our David Goggins. We need all those people. That's what makes the world beautiful is that there are so many different people. You can meet someone like, fuck, I never met a guy like him. That's nuts. Yeah, that is what it is wonderful. Isn't it wonderful? I mean, he must have met every fucking human being that's ever lived practically. Do you think I feel like it? Just about. I mean, you've been famous since what he like what year did Motley crew really break out? 80 80. That's nuts. Yeah. Boy, that world was a different place. Oh, bro. The world was a different place. No internet. No cell phones. No is president in 1980. Uh, was that even Reagan yet? Almost. When did Reagan become president? Fuck. Reagan was president when I was in high school. Who'd have fought? That was in the 80s. Would year Jamie? It started in 80 one. 81. So 1980 Reagan wasn't even president yet. Fuck who was president? How did we Jimmy Carter, right? Yeah. That sounds right. Was it Jimmy Carter before Reagan? Yeah. Yeah. So it's Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan. Whoa, dude. Wow. And that nuts. Mm-hmm. 1980. What was that scene like? Bro, that was still to this day. Motley did. We did this movie called the dirt and it's based on our autobiography from, you know, certain years from this year to this year. And it kind of like it shows how it fucking was. And one of one of the coolest things, ever is when, you know, I'll see, you know, emails from fans or questions from fans. And they're like, dude, was it? And these are from like, you know, 18 year old kids. They're like, was it really like that? When you guys were rocking shit like that, I was like 100%. They're like, fuck. And they're bummed. They're like, we will never, ever get to experience that. Fuck. It was just full on till the wheels fall off. No, you could get away with fucking murder. Literally, there's no phones and no, this was at a time where anything, anything goes pretty much. How much would you be in 1980? In 1980, I was 18. Jesus Christ. So you're blowing up at 18 years old. How the fuck did you manage? Look at that picture. That's crazy. That looks like a picture from like 1940. Right? It's like, it's not in world. I know. Even the font from Motley Crew. Yeah. Looks ancient. Totally. Wow. God, dude. What is that? Is that even seem real when you look at that picture? Look at our fucking little cheesy cloth backdrop. Those are the wrinkles in the fabric. That's what the whiskey. Yeah. whiskey. Too fast for love. Fucking great song. And that fucking drum riser that that right there with the lights in it. Yeah. My dad fucking and my dad, myself and my drum tech, we built that riser, dude. Like it had fucking switches. My dad was a mechanic. And so my dad built, he, you know, he was like a jig, you're a drum riser. All right. Let's go. I mean, dude, he would, my dad would built us a pyro. Fucking, he like drilled out these, but there are cut, cut these big, big, blocks of wood ran electrical prongs up through the wood. And then you take a little small wire and you connect the tube, put a pipe over it, fill it with gum powder. And we'd be on my backyard, dude. And the neighbors would be like, all sitting. It's like fire. There's these fucking mushroom clouds in my backyard. And the neighbors are like, what the fuck is going on in my dad? Like, he just, like he loved these like making bombs, lighting rigs, drum risers. And then he would drive he would drive me to the gigs. And in his van with all my shit, like I had the best dad fucking ever. That's awesome. Yeah. And here's a mechanic. Okay. Look at this fucking setup, bro. This is nuts. Oh, dude. Right. The hamster wheel. Yeah. That it's crazy. That's nuts. But you were doing drums like halfway upside down. Dude, the thing is gyroscope, it went around, you know, right to left back to front. What is it like trying to play the drums from that position? No, that's got to be very weird. Dude, it is insane. Like I had to like, I had to change so many dynamics. Like, think about it. Instead of gravity, instead of gravity pulling your hand down, right? Right. Now you've got a push. Oh, yeah. Upside down. So it becomes three times harder physically. And also you had to make adjustments. So I don't know how much you know about drums, but on your pedals, their foot pedals for your bass drums, right? Well, and those are chain driven pedals, footboards. So when you go upside down, they fall. So I had to put springs, I had to put springs underneath the pedals to keep them taught. So they would stay up. You know what I'm saying? Oh, yeah. So I had, and with symbols, they, they, I had to put springs underneath the pedals to keep them taught so they would stay up. You know what I'm saying? Oh yeah! So I had, with symbols, they, they, they're meant to hang a certain way. They're not meant to hang up side down so I had to make all these crazy adjustments technically to pull it off. But we figured out what the hi-hat to because the hi-hat would, you know, the two symbols it would just, if you're upside down, they just, they just go open, they all. Right. So I had to do another spring as well to keep that close so I could manually drive it. It's all this crazy shit. Why did you decide to do that? Like what was it just something rad? You know what? That all started and it's kind of been my thing throughout history and every year I do something fucking different and crazier of course everybody's like, what are you gonna do next year? What are the next year? That's sort of like, that's where it all started and it really started when I went to go see it was fucking patch wravers. Do you remember patch wravers, man? Boom, boom, boom, I'll go the lights. Oh yeah, yeah. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Anyway, they were cool and I went to go see them and Tommy Aldrich was the drummer and this before Motley, I'm just like, whoa dude, I'm like fucking kids standing on the chair of my fucking god. Right. And he's drum solo time and he's about to ask and he's just, he's fucking ripping dude. All you see is sticks flying and hair fucking going. He's shredding and I'm looking around and I'm watching people go get a beer, people going to pee, going to get a t-shirt, going out to lobby to fucking smoke a joint, whatever, everybody's kind of leaving and I'm like, what the fuck is everybody going? That guy is murdering the fucking drums right now and y'all are like, he failed to capture their attention and from that moment on I went, I need to figure out A, how to give the audience a better view of what you're actually doing there because people can't see. You can see. Oh, there's the, that's the roller coaster. That's the, that's the, that's the crucified dude. That's so dope. That's the latest one. That thing went from in the front all the way to the back of the fucking arena or stadium. That's crazy dude. And look at it and then it, it starts, it starts twirling as it's going down. Oh my god, you're upside down. That's so sick. Look at that, dude. That is so sick. The audience must go, duh, nannas. Yeah. At one point, the roller coaster comes down and it's literally almost, they could almost touch you. Wow. Look at that shit, dude. That, I think that is, I get a crazy head rush when you're upside down, hanging on the drums, dude. It is so gnarly. I'm, I'm wrecked. It's nine minutes total. Must do that for your core too, right? Oh, dude, I'm on the oxygen bottle. When I finish, I go all the way out and then I do it all backwards. Whoa. Go back and do it backwards. And by the time I get done, I'm sitting there with the oxygen going, well, make those a guitar solo. I just need a couple seconds because I am fucking done. I can imagine, man. It's incredible cardio. It's like shadow boxing for minutes at a hard core, super fast. Yeah. I've always admired the physical fitness. Just constantly and you know what that's like, man. After a fucking minute of that, you're like, I know the physical fitness involved in playing drums must be really crazy. Like if you didn't play drums for like a few years and then picked it up again and started again, it'd probably take forever to get that endurance back. Forever, dude. Because it's so like when you're going off, dude, you're so fast. You're going so fast. Everything's fucking moving. You're pounding your feet and everything like fuck. Yeah. I know. It's one of the most athletic things in all of music. It really is, man. And I had this. I was like, okay, how come I've weighed the same weight since fucking high school till today? Right. And I'm like, that's fucking weird. And I eat kind of whatever the fuck on to eat. Like I don't just know I don't like diet or have some strict, you know, regimented food program. I was like, I'm going to fucking I got a C. I got one of those. This was years ago. It was like a pedometer. You clip onto your shoe. Like joggers would use it to see how, there was like the old version. You just clipped it on your on your shoe and it tells you how many miles you did. Like a little tachometer, not a tachometer. Yeah. I know. I know. I'm a pedometer. Yeah. So I'm like, I get one. I clip it on. I'm like, I'm wondering what? How many fucking miles I'm doing after a two hour show? I don't know. Fuck. Who knows? I know I'm sweaty as fuck. And I'm I'm after the show. All's I here is ringing in my ear. And I'm fucking. I'm wrecked. I'm done. And I fucking took it off after the show and I looked down and it said 13.3 miles. And I was like, so that's why I don't fucking that's why I'm just skinny fuck. And like I just, I just, I'd sweat it out. The Travis Barker same deal. Same deal. Yeah. I mean, he works out a lot as well, but it's like same deal. Yeah. Yeah. It's like incredible amounts of cardio. Do you amount of, I wonder how many calories you burn at a two hour show. It's going to be off the charts. Yeah. I thought I haven't measured just because it's not just jogging. It's not like you're running 13 miles. Obviously you're sitting still, but the pounding of the arms. Yes. Yep. And the breathing. You're going to fucking control. Yeah. It's like, god. Yeah. Everything's going, man. You're fired on a whole solid. For sure. The most athletic thing in all of music for sure. Nothing even close. Right? Yeah. No. I mean, playing guitars, you're moving your hands and everything, but it's not not nearly. Drums is like a, it's more like a sport. Really is. It really is. It really is. Like you don't see a really out of shape drummer. No. You know, it's almost like you can't be to keep up. No. I know. And everybody's, you're kind of like, you're the fucking heartbeat, man. You're really everybody's coming. You know, people say you're only your bands only as good as your drummer. And that's really fucking, it's really true. And I'm not just saying that because I'm a fucking drummer. But drummer has a lot of responsibility, man. Everybody, all the people that you see out there that are fucking moving. I'm responsible for a lot of that. I'm not saying it for all of it. You sort of set the pace, you know, and you're making people physically move. Yeah. Like that takes, that takes a lot of work, you know, as the amount of energy you're putting out, you're getting back and you're seeing it, and you're like, fuck, I'm driving here. Yeah. And that's a cool place to be. But it is a responsibility. And it is physical and it's training. But it's fucking rad. I live for it. And did you take lessons to learn how to drum or did you learn on your own? I didn't really take lessons. I learned on my own until, I mean, like kind of early in, in high school, I played in the marching band. But that wasn't really like drums. That was like more like drum core stuff, like rudiments and like, you know, drum core shit. It not really the whole kit. To later, I got the school, my high school to let me, you're sorry, my grade school, to let me borrow the drum, the jazz drum set at the school. And I bring it home. And then I started listening to my favorite shit. And I would just play along. And I saw I never really took any physical lessons. I just, just in me, man, I was just like, I'm really good at hearing something and going, oh, okay, I got it. Did you have to learn how to hold the sticks? Do you hold the sticks in a convention away that like, like your taught or did you just figure it out on your own? Just, I just figured out on my own just probably just moved on from the, the forks and the spoons. Interesting how many great musicians learned on their own. Yeah. Like Hendrix. Hendrix taught himself to play guitar. That's why he played it upside down, left handed. He just made it work. Yeah. Yeah. Just figured out how to do it on his own. It's really interesting how like with, you know, when you just get an instrument and listen to other people use it and learn how they're doing it and just kind of fuck around with it and figure it out. And then doing it your own way, yeah. Of course. And then whoa, then you got your own which is wonderful, man. But if you think about early rock and roll versus the way drums are played like like you play or like Travis plays like some elite drummer plays. It's like drums are so much. It's like it's so much more powerful now than ever before. I know, man. And then that thing happens. I don't know if you've ever been around like a like a drum circle. The more drummers there are like all the sudden it just becomes this this thing. It grows into this tribal like dude, everybody's just being moved by rhythm and fuck. It's so powerful. It's like, you know, I don't know that that kind of it's it's a more aggressive power than the kind of power where you can make somebody fucking cry playing the piano, playing the right chorus. I watch them cry. Yeah, right. But yeah, that's fun, man. There's nothing better than been rhythm and I live for that shit. No, I can doubt. I was getting trouble all the time at in school because I'd always be like always always. Can you stop tapping on the tables? Yep. Sorry. We sit back in the back of class and be like making like water drip noises. They're looking around for a class clown. Well, there's something about drums that it's like a part of like tribal culture, like from the beginning a few men time, like people pounding on drum. For more for yeah, they pound it on ships to keep pace with the rowing. You know, there was a guy that was the drummer on a ship. Yeah, you know, to keep make sure everybody keeps pace. It's kind of wild. And that cool. You know, that they knew even back then there's something about the sound of drums that's important. The heart beat. Do you ever fuck around with bongos? Oh, sure. Yeah, that was a lot of hand instruments. Bongos, Kongos. I just, at the last couple of years, been playing a hand drum. People call them a hang drum, a hand drum. You know them. If you've seen them, they're like, they look like a fucking flying saucer. Oh, yeah. Yeah, I have. Yeah. And they're really melodic and really beautiful, zenny sounding instrument. That's cool because it's percussive and melodic. So you can come up with these really bitchin depending on how the instruments tuned and stuff. But that's been a lot of fun. That that's cool. Like sort of a different kind of rhythm. But it's a soothing one. It's a total opposite of the aggressive shit. Right. Right. Well, I mean, it must be fun since you've been playing drums for so long. Just experiment with different things. I love that man. I'm always searching for a new sound. A new percussive sound that moves you, makes you fucking, I don't know. It gets inside you. I'm always on the hunt, dude. I'm such a weaker, like, you know, find something that sonically sounds like a drum. It could be a drum. It's not. And I'll make it alternative to something that sounds like a drum. And all of a sudden, you know, that, you know, I don't know, hitting on these Elkhorn's or something sounds like a woodblock. But pitched way, way down. It sounds more sounds like a note going, oh, I don't know. Like I'm just I love, I love percussion and rhythm. So I'm always fucking around trying to find, find something that moves us, you know, that's my job. Yeah. Cool. I'm here. Oh, you man. It's a cool fucking job. I like it. It doesn't suck. No, it doesn't suck. No, when you're working on a new song, when you're creating a new song, what is your process? Do you, do you have a beat in your head? Do you sit down and just start fucking around until something comes to you? Like, how do you do it? You know what? It's always different. I wish I could say I had like a thing. I really don't, man. Like, you know, it'll be something that happened to me or something I'm experiencing. Spark a word or a chant, all of a sudden, you know, then that I'll pick up a fucking guitar and be like, oh, this is killer or sometimes they come with a beat. I'm like, oh, this is a fucking killer beat. This would be great. And then I'll start with a beat and then then add guitars. It's never really, there's not really like a format. I just kind of go with whatever sort of inspiring me at the time feel like I need to write about. Yeah, there's not really like a way. I know a lot of people have a sort of methodical way, but like, while I start with the lyric first, always the lyric first. Nothing else is important. Okay, dude. Why don't we get, why don't we get people to move first before you try to seduce them with these fucking crazy words? Actually, no one's going to even get to these fucking words. If you can't get them to stay listening or to move, they're like, oh, this is nice. There's not the like, it's not the key moment when you're like, oh, this is cool. Before you've even heard of a lyric or a melody, that's kind of my, my, my priority is like, is it moving me? Yeah, okay, let's go. It seems like having a bunch of different methods to get there is probably better anyway. Yes, because it's all sorts of different paths to get to the prize. Right. And having a bunch of different methods of creativity is probably better. It's going to give you up more different results. Right. Yeah. Instead of being that, okay, well, it's going to start to sound the same. If you keep using the same method, yeah, when you write, do you write down on paper or do you just, yeah, yeah, paper. No, you ever write on computer or do you ever like just write in your own own head? You ever just like, I use a computer a lot to a lot for, excuse me, for demos. That's a really quick way to, you know, where I can, I can present a song to the band where, you know, fuck, I play guitar, sing, drums, bass. So I'll, I'll bring in demos that totally created by you. Yeah, just sound, really sound finished, you know, it's like, okay. And then, you know, and we'll go from there. So yeah, I always try to like, you know, not, not finish everything entirely because, you know, when you're a band with three other guys who also create kind of leave it open for that. But, um, but yeah, I'd use a computer a lot to sort of compose the ideas and get them recorded, sort of produce them. It's really beautiful that, you know, Motley Crew hit in 1980. Here we are, 46 years later. And you still love it. I know. That's so awesome. That's what everybody wants in this life. Something that they're passionate about that remains a passion. It stays. And if anything grows as a passion, still exciting, still enticing, still captivates you. Yeah. 1980, the world was a different place. I mean, think about where we were in the universe in 1980 and how the entire solar system is spiraling through the galaxy, which is spiraling through space. Like, we've moved. How many fucking million miles? Since 1980? I know. That's what that's hard to think about. You know, have you ever seen what the, you know, we always want to think about this sun being in the center of our solar system and the planet spinning around it. But have you ever seen what the whole solar system looks like? Like moving through space? The whole thing's moving through space. It's not stationary. It's not like we're sat there and we're just spinning around. Yeah. Everybody else is just a fucking whole thing is hurling through space. So in 1980, we were in a totally different spot in the universe. That's crazy. That is great. The world was different. People were different. Information was different. Our version of reality was different. Everything was different. Fuck. And you wrote it out from answering machines to pages, to fucking sidekicks, to iPhones, to the internet, everything. Like, remember the Motorola brick phone? Oh, yeah. Yeah, dude. You're a pimp if you have one of those. Look at it. This is what it looks like. This is see most people think our solar system looks like, but this is what it actually is doing. Oh, it's how our solar system actually moves. So look, the sun's hurling through space and all the planets are spinning around it as it hurls through space. Isn't that crazy? Where's earth there? Earth is with the third planet from the sun. Oh, the blue one right there. So just think about that. How many rips have we done since 1980? We're in a different place in the fucking universe than we were in 1980. How far? Let's ask this. How far has the solar system moved through the universe since 1980? Let's ask perplexity that. Oh my God. This is one of the best uses of AI. Stupid information. Like, yes, it is. It is. I'm going to guess 100 million miles. Just a wild guess. I have no idea. I might be off by 100 million. Well, let me see what it looks like. Roughly two to three. I think a light year is a trillion miles. Two to three light years through space. Okay. How many miles is a light year? Put that in. I didn't say a mile. But how many miles is a light year? I think it's a trillion. Fuck, we're going in. Oh, a light year is 5.88 trillion miles. Dude. Okay. Think about that. Think about how many trillions of miles earth has traveled through the universe since Motley Crew bust out onto the scene. Dude, think of that. And a trillion is 1000 billion. Yes. 1000 billion. How many thousand billion miles has the earth moved through? So it was like two to three. It was two to three light years. Okay. And each light year is how many trillion? 5.88. 5.88. How about that? So you're dealing with roughly 15 plus trillion miles. Dude, we're old. All that's fucked. Yeah. 19.88 was in junior high school. I don't know about old, but fuck we've traveled. We have fucking traveled. Yeah. We have fucking traveled. Yeah. But that's that's a freaky thing to think about how far they're whole and we're in a different place in the universe. Well, I thank you for that bit of information. That's nice to to I don't know. Just to think about dude, you know how many miles I've fucking traveled, bro? Yeah. 15 plus trillion. Really just since Motley Crew bust out onto the scene. What was it like being that famous at 18? That would be nuts. It's fucking bizarre. Dude, like, I don't know. And even know how to explain it. Just imagine having the fucking, I don't know, it keys to fucking pretty much anything you wanted to do. Try was the first crazy thing you bought when you first started making cheddar. First thing I bought was at was my fucking dream car. It was a fucking 82 Corvette. T top. Nice. Top popped out. What color? It was a champagne color. Ooh, nice. It was kind of silvery gold. Yeah. Fucking rad, dude. Like, oh, my whole. I don't know when you're an 82. The Corvette was one of the only American cars worth buying because in 82, they were still dope looking. I pull up a 1982 Corvette. Yeah, they're still like mustangs look like hot dog shit in 82. They look fucking terrible. They look terrible. Camarrels look like shit. Everything looks like shit. They were all like plastic garbage. That's still dope. Yeah, like that's still dope today. That's the color I had. Look at that. That's the one. Look at that. Make that bigger. Okay. That's that car. That is a fucking dope car today. It's one of the only American cars from 1982 that looks dope today. Like, pull up a 1982 Mustang. 1982 Mustangs. I'm going to make you want to vomit. I know a lot of people that are like fans of the Fox body. Look at that. What is that? Come a second page. Whoa, that looks like a gremlin. It looks like straight horseshit. That's whatever the fucking Russians did to us to make this make cars. Well, really, the Nixon administration by fucking blocking drugs. Look at how ugly that is. That is fucking disgusting. That is so dude. Look how fucking disgusting that is. Now, I want to do this. Pull up a 1969 Boston 429 Mustang. Put up the pinnacle of muscle cars. Look at that motherfucker. Right. Look at that fucking. Look at the difference between 1969 and that fucking dog shit. He's a shitty two. Extended. I'm a fucker. Look at that thing. That's a real car. But they blocked the drugs. They kept those car makers from having drugs and they'll make garbage except Corvette. Corvette still stuck with that style because Corvettes were fiberglass. So they weren't as limited in terms of like the shapes. You know, they had those cool swirvy lines to them and they kept those until oddly enough the 90s. They started getting shitty in the 90s. Look at your dog. Yeah, there it is. Look at your dog. Wow, that's crazy. That's not stupid. I wonder who's got that car. I don't know. Somebody has Tommy Lee's 1982 Corvette. Somebody they have to. You know that thing's still running. Yeah, probably. Hopefully. Yeah. Well, they a lot of those they take them and make rest of mods out of them now. They put like a modern engine and modern brakes and everything. So they handle better and modern suspension. I immediately fucking me and my buddy just took that car and fucking put a fucking blower than injection on it. Just fucking insane dude in the glove box. This is before like now we have you know a bunch of super rad tuned exhaust. You know, straight pipe shit loud as this is before that. And we made a couple of cutouts in the glove box. I get the cops here to come. You just open the glove box and take these two. They're like choke levers. And you pull them out and the flaps would disconnect them and just go straight from the headers out and bypass the mufflers. So just be like, Oh, God, God. And if the cops are coming, you just push these two choke levers in and back to the mufflers. I'll quiet. Yeah, they have switches for that now. Oh, yeah. And cars like custom made cars. They have exhaust switches that do that. But they don't do it to that extent where it just goes straight pipes. Yeah. Yeah. That must have sounded that must have sounded fucking amazing. So it's so rad. Yeah. I mean, there's nothing like rock and roll and muscle cars. Like those are two things that are like completely connected forever. Yeah, another fucking rad car that I never got, but I always wanted to was like the fucking Shelby Cobra. Oh, yeah. The big fucking pipe spoon went just out as fuck. Like four inch exhaust. Like, yeah, dude, that's just the roadie and just tiny little pasty little fast glass car. Go cart with a four 27 in it. Crazy power. No weight at all. It weighs nothing. Yep. It just burnouts the whole time. Too much. I have a buddy of mine who has one of those. It's not like, but it freaks me out. It's like there's no protection here. If you get an accident, like, it's like nothing to this car. Yeah. You know, like you have no roof. You don't even roll bar. It's like just got this little tiny windshield. You're behind the wheel of an engine, just a giant engine with four wheels. Yeah, you're done. Yeah, one bad move. Pretty dope. Yeah, super rad. Yeah, like one of those. Like look at that fucking dude. I'm sorry, but that's the fucking sickest shit radical looking. Oh, look at the flare wheel. The thing is, too, they make a lot of recreations now. Yes. The old ones are worth like millions of dollars. I do. I know. Yeah, but you can get a recreation and experience the exact same thing. Sure. There's a ton of recreations now. And they're fucking great. And they look the same. And it's like, yeah, it's not worth as much money, but who fucking cares. It's just drive it. It's awesome. Yeah. If you just look at that thing, gee, look at that. That thing is slim. Carbon fiber. Oh, my goodness. Look at that. Fuck it. It's all carbon fiber. Oh, fuck. Let's wait 14 pounds. Let's go get a couple, dude. Dude, who's making that click on that link? Who's making that fucking thing? Yeah, probably is. Well, I know. Yeah, classic recreations. That same company that does those dope 67 GT 500s. They're making that classic recreations. A thousand horsepower. Oh, dude, it due to waste 2,300 pounds. That's nuts. A thousand. But the body, the carbon fiber body is only 88 pounds. Unbelievable. It's 2000 pounds of suspension, frame, and wheels, and engine. And that's it. Oh, that that's sick. That sounds sick. That's just straight trouble right there. That's going to get in trouble. Yeah, we're not. Or just enjoy your stuff. Just fun. Yeah, but it's America. Fuck yeah. Fuck. I love those cars. What else did you buy that? That was in horsepower. I know. Proposters. Yeah, what else did you buy that's nuts? When they first came out, me and my bass player bought like almost fucking at the same time off. Ferrari had come out with the test of Rosa. Oh, the Miami bass car. Totally, dude. Yeah. I had a car broker. Find me a black on black one. Oh, man. It's just like, fuck. Okay. This is insane. The listeners will probably appreciate this. You buy a fucking car for 200 at the time, $250,000 for the test of Rosa. Get it shipped from it came in from Florida to LA. I'm pulling the plastic off the seats as brand fucking new. Back it down the fucking car carrier. And I'm in, the dudes kind of show me, you know, what's up? And I fucking, I look into the right of the steering wheel. There's like a, like a, looks like a cover. So I grab it and you open it up at that where the stereo would be. I open it up and I go, where's the stereo? I grab it and you open it up at that where the stereo would be. I open it up and I go, where's the stereo? The guy goes, Oh, Enzo believed that the music that you should be listening to is the sound of the engine. And I'm like, well, that's fucking raddin' everything Enzo, but bro, I just spent a quarter of a million dollars and I want to fucking crank shit loud and I was fucking here and breaking the speed limit. Like, come on. Who does that? And so I had to go, I got a stereo at the time. There was no subwoofer. There was a bazooka tube was available. You could drop. There's no room to. So you could, you could get a bazooka tube behind the seats and some fucking, you know, to the first subwoofer and some other speakers in the doors and decent door speakers. Yeah, they're only decent back then. Yeah. And I don't alpine receiver, but I got it to to bump, but I just found it fucking just shocking that like that, that much money for a car and you still don't get a stereo. It's pretty ridiculous. Yeah, but they did sound incredible. And I totally get it. Like there should be this on the most things make. This is just like it's heavenly. It's totally different than the American sound of the muscle car sound. The muscle car sounds my all time favorite, but there's something melodic about those Ferrari and just it's like I felt just like it. Oh, there's a sound that it has. It's like it's so spectacular. It's just engineering and it's wine and pasta and a fucking windy road. And totally, you know, a bunch of no. Oh, yeah. Fuck yeah, man. Oh, those things are something special. And again, what is that? It's a piece of passion. It's artwork. It's artwork that's, you know, made into an engineering form. Yeah. That we get to play with. Yeah. Basically a race car. Yeah. Like a friend of mine, we were talking about like Ferrari, you think Ferrari's worth it. I go listen, man. Rich people aren't stupid. They're not stupid. If Ferrari's weren't worth it, they wouldn't keep buying them. Have you ever driven one? Yeah. No, trust me. They're fucking worth it. Yeah. Again, it's a ridiculous amount of money. It's not worth it really for a normal person. But if you have like an insane amount of money and you could experience that, the thing Ferrari fucked up on big time is to took away the manual transmission. They fucked that up. Yeah, that's fucked that up. Portia's the only one who kept it. They're the only ones smart enough to realize like there's a part of the experience that you got a fucking one. The gated shifter where you're clacking them in there in a Ferrari. Yeah. Bring it back. Cut the shit. Yeah. Guys, you're silly. Dude, did you see the fucking electric car they just released? Which one? The Ferrari? Oh, it's dog shit. Dude, they fucked that up. Guard court. That looks like a joke. It looks like it looks like something that someone made for just to get engagement online. Like it's fake, but it's real. I know. I couldn't. I was like, it looks as this can't be 1980 to Mustangs. Yes. It looks like a bar. It's a Ferrari electric car. Oh, yeah. Look for a ride. Look at it, dude. It looks so boring. What? And so nothing. Look at it. And even inside, you're like, this looks like cheap dog shit. Yeah. I don't understand it. I don't get it either. I thought it was like a joke. I know. And you know, like, you know, look at this. It's got suicide doors. It's kind of dope. That's kind of cool. But you know what? It's really dope on a 65 continental. Not on this fucking thing. Ugly, you ugly fucking monstrosity. That's funny. You mentioned that car. That's another one of my favorites. Oh, 65. I was talking about yours. Oh, yeah. Fuck. I know a guy who's got one for sale. That's a rest of mom. I'm fucking really thinking about it. It's a 65 black convertible with the suicide doors. And it's just doomed. It's mint. And it's got a new engine in it, like a modern engine. And it's got fucking a perfect suspension. And it looks so radical. It's something about that car, especially in a convertible, the 65. The convertible is my, that's my jam. Good luck parking anywhere. Yeah. Might as well be parking a yacht. It's like, you can vote. It's so big. It's so big. It's so big. But it's so sick. It's just I can't understand how Ferrari can make. Now, I want you to pull up a Ferrari 458 atalia. So I think the 458 is their masterpiece. I think it's the best looking Ferrari that they ever made. Yep. There's a lot of them that look great. There's a lot of them that are amazing. But for me, there's something about when they came up with the 458, it's just they nailed it. You look at that. Oh my God. Look at that fucking thing. That is a work of art. Yeah. It's so beautiful. And it's, it's a lot of people think it's the greatest Ferrari ever when you draw and also doesn't have a manual transmission, which sucks a fat dick. But other than that, go back that last picture that you had of that one. Look at that one. Make that big. Yeah. Look at that color. Oh, it's a shitty picture. But God, it's fucking beautiful. Amazing. Those are beautiful. Now, think of the company that made that also made that good, that black one right there. Will your cursor just was? Click on that one. Oh, basically. Look how sick that is. Yep. And how do you go from that to that electric piece of shit you guys just released? I don't know. Fuck you for doing that. Oh, dare you. I bought a, uh, an F8, the tributo, which is very, very similar to that. And that fucking car is badass. No, they make incredible cars. They make incredible. And somehow or another, less douchey than a Lamborghini. I don't know how they did it. Yeah. You know what I mean? It's like something about a Ferrari that you have when it's sophisticated. You know? Yeah. Whereas if you have a Lamborghini, like look at this douchebag, it's fucking like, you mean, Lamborghini's are awesome. Yeah. They're awesome. But why is that? Why are they like attached to, I guess because it's kind of like, I don't know. I don't know. Maybe rappers or something started started started. I don't know because they're not least in them too. And it doesn't make any sense. It's like there's something about them that's more ostentatious. It's more obnoxious. The doors. Maybe just like just too showy. I know I have a buddy in my who loves Ferrari. He's a rich guy and he loves Ferrari. I can't try the Lamborghini. I'm like, why not? He's like, it's just, I don't want, I feel like a douchebag. I'm like, okay. I know what you're saying. There's a, there's a real thing there, but I don't know why. Because Lamborghinis are fucking amazing. Yeah, they fucking too have an amazing sound. Oh, different from Ferrari. Exactly. It's a higher wine here. But say, what they bark. I mean, yeah. Like what is the latest Lamborghini? They have some crazy new one that they just released last year. It's insane. It's as wide as a fucking trailer. It's huge. Extra. I don't know the name of it. I've never had a Lamborghini. Yeah, me either. I drove one once on a track. It was a little loose. Which one's that? Temerino. Temerino. Temerario. Temerario. Oh, it's amazing. Oh, dude. Yeah. Oh, that's pretty. Ew. That one. Here we go. Her con. That's another stick. Oh, the hera coin. Yeah. That's a little smaller and lighter. I think. Yeah, dude. It's also amazing. You give an 18 year old kid that kind of power in a car. And you're still alive. I know. I know. The fuck. Yeah. Those those kind of cars will definitely check you. Keep you in check too, because it's not until, you know, over 100 miles an hour is getting closer to 200 miles an hour to where you're in that car. And you're like, it hits you. You go, if I make one fucking tiny little error here, it's over. It's over. Yeah. The motor's in the fucking back. Yep. And if this thing runs into off the road or whatever, it's just going to accordion right into me. And you're you're you're done. It's kind of amazing. You just buy one. You know, I thought about that now. Like they have the new Corvette ZR one. It has a thousand horsepower. Yeah. From the factory. So you can just go into a Corvette dealership. If you got the cash, slap down some money. And you have a thousand horsepower car that goes zero to 16 two seconds. And you just go out there and like, bye. Just good luck. Be safe. Yeah. Like what are you doing? How are you allowed to have that? Like that you have to have a pilot's license to drive one of those things. Totally or just, you know, race track only, whatever. Right. But imagine you're an 18 year old rock star. You know, here you go. I did. Got one. And back then the core vets like yours, especially when you put a blower on it, those fucking things had no traction control. They had zero anti lock brakes. There's no nannies. There was nothing to protect you. No, it was just madness. You were bad. This. Did you ever take it to a track or anything? No, never did. Have you ever driven around a track? You've done that? Yes. That's fun. Yeah. That is fun. Yeah. That is fun. I went to I spent some time at the skip barber school. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah. Of course, the lever in me has to fucking learn about everything of apex and study. Like there's a lot of physical and, you know, technical things about driving. Oh, yeah. If you don't understand about going into a turn at fucking in a hundred miles an hour, you're going to fucking die. You know, so I was like, I was definitely going to spin out. Yeah. Learning learning how to do it was really interesting to me. It was really interesting to realize like the lines that you take. Yeah. You don't just go in the middle of the track all the way. Know your hug in the outside edge, then the inside edge and cutting the lines to make a quicker time and knowing when to break and knowing when you would accelerate. And it's so interesting. It's a lot. Man. Very technical. Yeah. A lot more technical than anybody would ever think. You think you're just kind of steering the car like, no, no, no, there's a lot of decisions to be made. There's a lot going on. Especially on a really windy turn. This, that's what code it looks like. That's the track. Yeah. The circuit of the Americas. And that one is like, there's so much turns and things. Yeah. There's a long straight away. You could really fucking cut off for it. Right. Yeah. And it's not even about the acceleration. A lot of times it's about the breaking. Yeah. I mean, faking and turning. Dude. It is like, that's one of the things that I say, like is really worth it about having money is like experiencing a great car. Because it's like an amusement park ride. Yes. You do not even go on fast. Just driving normal speeds around. It's like if you're shifting your own gears and you hear that engine and look like, ah, yeah. It's not an amusement park ride. You know, it's not just, you're not just driving a car. You're, you're experiencing something that, you know, the other people aren't driving that stupid Ferrari piece of shit, electric car. You're not experiencing that. No. Yeah. No. No. You're just grooving on the emblem. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They got you. Yeah. That could have been a Hyundai easily. Dude. I couldn't believe it. I was like, they did not do this. Well, I hope they rebound. Yeah. They, like, smack somebody who made that and go, hey, bro. They will. I think one of the designers was one of the guys who was involved in designing the iPhone and it fucking looks like it. No. That's what's got. That's why it's got all the funny I was. Yes. No. That, and that guy's awesome. How did he do that? That started to make sense. I was like, OK. I would ask him before I even talked to him about him. Like, what kind of cars do you have? Do you have a car? What do you drive? And if he's like, I drive an escort, like, fuck you. OK, get the fuck out. Yeah. Yeah. I have a Prius. Go eat shit. Eat all the shit that's ever been shit. Fuck you. Out of the design room. You can't. You can't design a fucking Ferrari just because you made an iPhone. You're going to make it look sleek and plain. Yeah. No, it's got to look like art. You motherfucker. It's been a quarter million dollars for this thing. And now a lot more, I think the electric cars all want to say three, three hundred and thirty. I bet they're going to sell two. Right. Two retards. Two fucking super rich retards are going to buy that fucking thing. Nobody's going to spend $400,000 on this electric thing. Meanwhile, the other cars that make our fucking. Yeah. I know. What the fuck you guys know? What is the latest one? What is the, what is their, their main one now? The sleek, we can want to look at the advanced version of the four, five, eight. Like the one they have now, like what is it called? SF. Oh, is it called? SF90? SF90? Yeah. That's what it is. SF90. That thing's insane. That's gorgeous. Yeah. That's a gorgeous car. My favorite. How do they go from an SF90? They're selling that at the same time as they're selling the sunka junk. SF90 is one of the most best looking cars ever. Yeah. It's incredible. And do you pull up a picture of one of those, Jamie? I'm on their website. And if you do it, if you've seen the bodies, I love the Laffarari, the body style and the Laffarari. Yeah, that's it. That's the one. Oh, dude. That's got some Laffarari in the ass end. Oh, so this is like all the cars they've ever made, Jamie. I'm on their website. I'm just, oh, no, understand. This is all the cars that they make and all the cars that like, that's gorgeous, man. That is gorgeous. Hit the, hit the Laffarari. Yeah. Dude, look at that thing. Woo. What is the F80? Click on the F80. Oh, my God. Gorgeous. Gorgeous. When it says all models, they don't have the, what is it? I was looking for. I was trying to find what I went to the website to find a newest car. I know, but I think like some of them, it's not the newest car. Like it might have been like last year or a year ago. Oh, they would be sharing it somewhere on here. I would imagine. Now it's real, Jamie. Would you just googled for, OK? I'm just saying just Google, um, put a pull up an image of Ferrari. 2024 Ferrari, uh, SF 90. And you'll see it. There it is. That's it. Oh, the wing. That's a, that's one that's like prime for racing, but you go to images, please. There you go. That's it. Oh, so how does a company make that look? Look how gorgeous that is. That's incredible. That's so beautiful. How does a company make that and then that Johnny IV piece of shit? Fuckin thing. There's like three, three dudes, one dude, like, I guess, design the iPhone. And there's a couple, there's two other designers involved. They probably work for Lamborghini. They're probably, probably spies. You know, the infiltrated and decided to like ruin it from the inside. Probably the same guy that made Billy Squire's music video. Dude, that guy's gotta be stopped. What the guy? He's like, listen to what I did for Billy Squire. I could do this to Ferrari. Yeah, I can thank them. I took Ferrari down with one, one whack ass. You can electric car. As I sold them a phone design. Yeah. Just, but, you know, that's what happens. Yeah. You let people, you know, you don't have enough people that are smart, that are, yeah. Fantastic around that are going to look at that and go, hey, hey, hey, no. Yeah, no, go. What's with all the yes, man? There had to be somebody that went, what are we doing? I don't know how the fuck that ever got greenlit by someone at Ferrari. Yeah. How do you not look at all the other cars that you've made? And then look at that one and goes, I'm a fake. Yeah. I'm a factorial on me. No, nobody was doing that. I don't get it. No. But, you know, companies make blunders. Yeah. You know, every now and now in a band puts out a shitty record. You know what? It happened. It happens. It happened. I get it. I mean, Ferrari's still Ferrari, they'll bounce back. But, you know, guys, they can always go, hey, we're not in the electric car business. Okay. We fucked up. Well, that's what they probably should because most of the other car companies that do make electric cars, people really don't want them. You know, like the portions, the tie cans, like those outties, like the Audi ones that are just like a couple of years old there, you can get a like half price. Yeah. Nobody wants them. I know. Nobody wants electric cars, especially use electric cars. Yeah. That's weird. It is. But if you think about it, like electronics, we think of as disposable. Right? You know, you don't want to buy someone's phone from 10 years ago. No. No. Right? So you don't want to buy a Tesla from 10 years ago either. No. Right. Be a mother. Great. There's nothing wrong with them. Yeah. You have a 10 year old Tesla. It's a fucking awesome car. Yeah. But you don't want it. Yeah. People think of electronics as something you throw out and get new. Yes. Engines. That's a different story. Yeah. You know, like 2005 Porsche is still very valuable. People love those. Oh, yeah. Those things have gone through the roof lately, like, but the Porsche is like, yeah, there's no so many guys that are just like, buy it them up, collect them. Well, I think also as things become more electric and more numb, people like they really love the sound of engines and the feel that you get from those cars, the actual experience of it. Yeah. You know, yeah. It's like as things get more and more digital, I think, with AI and music and everything, people are going to want to see live performances more. You know, no doubt. Yeah. I think they want that experience, the experience of like raw live, something that makes you feel alive, something that all about to experience, man, all about it. Are you, you guys are touring again? Yeah. Coming up, mid July, we're out. How fucking pumped you for that? Couple months. So pumped because I've actually, we've been home. We just, we did the big stadium tour with Jeff Leppard, went all around the world. That tour was fuck two and a half years long. Like dude, that's what I'm saying. So, and I started to realize I'm like, fuck, I can't remember the last time I've been home. Like with the, with the break, like we intentionally, we're like, let's just fucking take a year or more than a year off. And it wasn't until 2016 was the last time we had like taken a break. So for me, it's just been fucking wonderful. I, I actually enjoyed the whole last summer at home. And, you know, going into summer now, we're getting ready to go back out, but just having that time at home was really fucking cool. So I'm super pumped. The grass is always greener, dude. Right. We know when you're out there fucking ripping it, you're like, this is fucking rad. And then after a while, you're like, I'd shoot my own mom in the back to sleep in my fucking bed. You know, yeah. And then with them when you're at home too long, you're like, dude, I got to get out of here. Right. You know, I got to go fucking go do the shit. So it's, I don't know, it's a weird balance. You know, you're, you're happy until it's too much. And then, you know, let's just achieve the balance. But it's awesome that you still love it so much after all, all these years. Oh, man. There really is. Dude, dude, let me just, there's nothing better than imagine why it let's trade places for a second. You're back there. You're playing drums and you've been doing this for a while long enough to see this is the fucking best in the world. You see your fans, all the sudden, your fans have had children. Now their children are on the shoulders of their, of their fucking parents, who are your fans. Now they're bringing their kids to the show and their fucking kids are on their dad's shoulder gluing. Shout. Shout. We're fucking double horns up. And you're like, you're sitting there going like, dude, that kid. What is he fucking 10? And he's just fucking, you know, and just air drumming. Yeah, just to see that you've, you've sort of, you know, you've, I don't know, just you've done a full circle to where now it's the whole another generation that's just now seeing this for the first time and they're fucking and you're sitting back there playing one like, that's pretty fucking incredible. It's pretty fucking incredible. That doesn't get old, man. To watch that happen is probably why the, become the reason why I love it so much. That really like puts a fucking nail in it. You know what I mean? Fuck that. That's, that's like then that can only be achieved through, through time. Yeah. Right? So that's nothing I've ever experienced until, until recently, the last few years, I, you look out and you see a whole bunch of kids, man. And they're all just checking it out for the first time, maybe. For sure. Some of them, right? And you're like, dude, fuck. This is wild. Wild. That's awesome, man. Yeah. That's beautiful. You've had an amazing life. It's been an amazing ride. And I'm so happy that you're enjoying it so much. Thanks, buddy. And thank you for being here, man. It was really cool. Dude, we enjoyed it. Thank you for having me, man. My pleasure. My pleasure. I've been wanting to come by and see you and come hang out and talk shit. I'm glad we did it. Yeah. I'm glad we did it. All right. Thank you. All right, buddy. I love you, you, brother. Bye.