I'm ready. >> Heavenly Father, thank you for this chance to for us to be together where two or more are gathered, you are present. Lord, can you help us to put aside any prejudices or biases that we might carry into it? Can you help me, Lord, not to look at Tucker as a person that's exists for my benefit or to facilitate me, but to know that he is like me, a person that's broken, and that we'll die one day and that we're here to love one another and serve one another. And by the way we love one another, they will know that we are in you and that you are in us. Lord, >> let us communicate graciously and with grace and do nothing that dishonors your name or your kingdom which we are here to serve however you decree. We pray in the name of God the Father with all your infinite creativity and wisdom. God the Son with your compassion and your holy sacrifice taking on our sin and God the Holy Ghost who moves among us mysteriously now in communication and endless unity. Amen. >> Amen. Thank you. >> Boy, that is the prayer, isn't it? Not to look at people as someone who can do something for you. Yeah. >> Yeah. Sort of objectify even powerful people. >> So, you were just uh you were just reading me cuz I want to talk about your book and I want to talk about your journey as a Christian. Um, and we will, but I just can't resist uh this. You were just reading me from Daniel in your marginelia Bible from Daniel 11. And I was just completely I was so struck by it. I took a picture of it and sent it to like 20 people. Can you read the passage that you just read me? >> It's from Daniel 11:36. The king will do as he pleases. He will exalt and magnify himself above every god and will say unheard of things against the God of gods. Would you like me to continue, >> please? >> He will be successful until the time of wroth is completed. For what has been determined must take place. He will show no regard for the gods of his ancestors or for the one desired by women. Nor will he regard any god, but will exalt himself above them all. Instead of them, he will honor a god of fortresses, a god unknown to his ancestors. He will honor with gold and silver, with precious stones and costly gifts. He will attack the mightiest fortresses with the help of a foreign god and will greatly honor those who acknowledge him. He will make them rulers over many people and will distribute the land at a price. At the time of the end, the king of the south will engage him in battle, and the king of the north will storm out against him with chariots and cavalry and a great fleet of ships. He will invade many countries and sweep through them like a flood. He will also invade the beautiful land. Many countries will fall, but Edom, Moab, and the leaders of Ammon will be delivered from his hand. He will extend his power over many countries. Egypt will not escape. He will gain control over the treasures of gold and silver and all the riches of Egypt with the Libyans and the Kushites in submission. But reports from the east and the north will alarm him, and he will set out in a great rage to destroy and annihilate many. He will pitch his royal tents between the seas of the beautiful holy mountain. Yet he will come to his end, and no one will help him. ripped from the headlines. That was just so striking uh to me. Uh shocking actually. I've read it. I don't completely miss that. Um it it hits differently right now. How often do you read the Bible? Well, every day. I was reading the Bible in one year by uh Nikki Gumble. And obviously the Bible's not by Nikki Gumble, but I was reading [laughter] although I'm sure he would come close to making that claim as many Christians do. Sometimes I feel like I've made it up. I'm brilliant for like even now I'm trying to take credit for reading this out. [laughter] Yep. I've understood this in a way no one else ever has. Anyway, like um so I started off with that which is like having training wheels on a bicycle and then I left it on a plane and I thought, "Wow, I'm going to have to just start reading it." Now every day I read the scripture for about an hour and I uh pray and meditate as well as reading some devotionals and doing some breath exercise. I remember when I met years ago his holiness the Dalai Lama someone said like you know oh he meditates like 8 hours a day and I thought well that seems excessive but now like what else is there to do except be in continual prayer increasingly as my walk with him yoke to him continues I recognize any time I let go of his hand anytime I step back into even neutrality neutrality metastasizes immediately into self and therefore sin I see sin now Tucker not as the transgression of stealing ing or lying or whatever, but as the mental state that precedes it. When I'm in that mental state where I suddenly I elevate myself like Lucifer, like the fallen one, I think I can create my own circuitry, my own neurological circuitry without his a angelic agency. As soon as I'm in that, I belong to the world again. I belong to empire. Forget the tyranny of those most powerful people in the world. Even in my petty trivial tyranny, I bear their insignature, not his. It was you in fact that made the observation one of the times we met. I think I was doing one of your tremendously successful and well attended live shows [laughter] in Fort Lauderdale. I'm still show biz. I still now to do those bits. Um and like we were I showed you this bit from Orwell and and you said oh well you said Orwell's anticipate this is prior to the most recent American electoral cycle. You said that Orwell understood Soviet uh communism well and at this point you said in 1984 he's talking about social democracy's tendency to evolve towards or degenerate one might say towards tyranny and we discussed together oh wow what is Orwell's most famous maxim if you want a vision of the future imagine a boot stamping on a human face forever. And in that moment I think both you and I discussed. Yes. And what is the face? That is the image of God. They are annihilating the image of God. They remove the image of God. Once the image of God, our personal imperture, our signature, the hieroglyph, he's present in us. The creator of meaning without whom there cannot be geometry, mathematics or music. But even meaning itself, he is a storyteller. our Lord, he comes and tells stories to show you that meaning itself is what we must uh align with because you know when people say oh it's astrological the three kings and the virgin is the star virgin it's an astrological description of movements and [laughter] Osiris was this and Isis was that and Dian Isis meant that you know and they tried to say that Christianity isn't unique particular and special that the incarnation of God that these principles being made flesh didn't establish establish the new frequency through the Holy Spirit They tried to say it's just another story. When you go into the word, you feel it. You know it. It changes you. It reverses and undoes so much. Your whole life, CS Lewis says, Tucker, your whole life is redeemed. You look back at all of it. The father and you see it differently. The career, you see it differently. You see that you were being prepared always for this. As CS Lewis says in the great divorce, when you accept him, your whole life will have been heaven. If you reject him, you are in purgatory forever. And why do they stay in purgatory? In the great divorce, I'm recommending read the great divorce is because they won't let go of their earthly identity. They won't let go of it. We have to let go of that in order to receive the kingdom. We have to let go of who we are in shame, who we are in fear, who we are to the world. And once you do that, you're kind of already dead, but you're also in eternal life. And that's what's been amazing about watching you in the last month in particular is a sort of a the jaw-dropping boldness and bravery that sometimes can seem like frightening. >> Well, not to me. I I've never felt calmer. But no, I Yeah, I mean, I just don't care at all. Um why would I? >> Mhm. >> Nothing. I mean, you know, winning the thing the prizes that are held out for us. Haven't won them all. Won a few. Not that great, you know. It's not that great. That's not why we're here. So, um, but the you've been a reader your entire life. Even when you were like a dissipate in Hollywood, you still read >> a lot. >> Yes. >> How is reading the Bible different from reading Evil and Law? >> Well, how it's different? Firstly, I've not read Eivelyn, you know. I've [laughter] >> That's your birthright. Are you kidding? >> I'm lazy. I'm an autodidact. And like, you know, Woody Allen, he says with the autodidact superficial. I've never been properly educated, so everything's thin across the top. This is the first time I've gone deep into anything. How it's different. How it's different, Tucker, from what I've acred culturally. Is that it moves effortlessly into mystery. It is divine and profound truth. Now, I think that one of the conversations we might have is if you think during the brief time that you and I have both um I'm going to say the word transitioned now, but don't panic. transition [laughter] from mainstream media into whatever this is this kind of independent media what that's been accompanied by if one envisages a spectrum and at one end of it the New York Times the BBC MSNBC one might even include Fox and more sort of particular flavors of mainstream media and over here your Alex Jones your David Ike where is the needle moving well it's obviously moving radically in a direction that Alex Jones and David Ike have been some time that's not to say that either of those two men are without flaws of course I wouldn't make that claim for any human being. But during that time, people have started to look at pedophile rings, conspiracies, glo global events that seem to be managed and manipulated, the possibility and potential that real power is not government or party political, but is in fact controlled by institutions that are uh imperial, transcendent of global boundaries and may even be occultist and dark and demonic. I mean certainly the trend is moving in that direction. And I think one of the great challenges for people that are telling the truth at a public level to a lot of people is how do we remain in that which is corroboratable? And and what I feel is so important here is when you're dealing with people that might say there are demonic forces at work. They're occultists. They're pedophiles. They're doing child sacrifices. Well, it's all in here. Like when I f when I prior to coming to the Lord or rather more accurately him coming to me I felt I knew what was in the Bible because I thought I understood >> I didn't read it but I thought I get the idea totally the guy I get the gist >> I felt the same. Yeah. >> Yeah. And like so I felt it's going to be about ethics and morality and sort of a kind of rather obviously piety but I sort of felt that it might be a bit um anemic but what was what's really struck me is it moves between sort of like myth so powerful that it takes you to the sort of edge of what consciousness can ever comprehend obviously while telling you that's what it's doing. My ways are not your ways. Do not conform to the patterns of this world. The evil one is in control of this world. We fight not against flesh and blood, but we fight against the authorities, the rulers, the dark heavenly powers. All these things are in there. My children, don't worship false idols. Don't make gods with your own hands out of metal and then stare at the the whole time. Uh [laughter] like and um you will you will glimpse God as if through a glass or perhaps for contemporary language as if through a mirror darkly. It'll be like you're looking at yourself and you see that Christ is in you and coming through you. But then you will return to yourself again. You will flick it in and out like see the promise of Christ is redemption. That means I you are owned by him and there is a restoration of the original state. It has been completed. Our God breathed life into the dirt man Adam and Christ on the cross exhales the final breath. It is finished. It's possible for us to return to absolute harmony with God. For us to live not in some utopian afterlife, but in the present moment to be in the kingdom of heaven, which our Lord said is here, ever present and all around us. I did not anticipate the depth of the mystery that we live among forces undicernable to the senses, angelic and indeed demonic. that there are dark energies that are affecting us and impacting us and attacking us and significantly controlling the most powerful institutions in the world and that is not North Korea. So it's rare these days a company that actually makes things here in the US not just designed here or assembled here actually manufactured here start to finish in the United States. Brooklyn Bedding builds every mattress in their factory in Arizona not in the Far East in Arizona. No middlemen, no cutting corners, no outsourcing to save a buck. The founders started with nothing. No degree, no corporate backing. Just learned the craft, built a factory, created a product that actually works. That's the American story. We ought to support it, and we do. And here, we love the Thermo Balance mattress collection. It's made a huge difference in the quality of the sleep of a lot of people who work here. No more waking up hot in the middle of the night thanks to their cooling technology. Your back feels better in the when you wake up. They're endorsed, in fact, by the American Chiropractic Association. So, it's not just marketing. It's real. They also give you 120 nights to try it out. That's a lot. If you don't love it, they take it back or swap it out. No hassle. That's how confident they are. Visit brooklyn betting.com. Use the promo code Tucker at checkout for 30% off sitewide. This offer not available anywhere else. And that's the story told in in the Bible. >> Yeah. >> So, now that you know that and believe it, and I believe it, too. Um, in fact, I believe it to such an extent it's kind of hard to remember when I didn't believe it. But as you look back on your own now redeemed life, do you see those forces at work on you? >> Yes, I see the work of those forces and I see the presence of God. I see continually this unfolding discourse throughout time in my own little life. I see I'm being shown this. I'm being offered that. You know, uh, one of the things I'd forgotten, Tucker, is that at the point of first becoming famous, there was a kind of glory in it. And by true glory, I don't mean personal glory, because anything that's personal is not true glory at all. There was a moment where a world that continually said no to me suddenly after decades said yes. That suddenly the golden light was upon me and open that I was appearing on television. People were saying yes to book deals. I was in movies. I was experiencing and this is where I think I went wrong abundant sex for example and and and as that took hold that's where I feel and see the presence that I you know the tempter the accuser the fallen one the enemy requires our complicity I did participate I did participate in elevating false gods I did allow sex to become a kind of idol fame to become an idol and neither of those things are possible if you don't first fall into self. I consider sin to be in self. In self. Once I'm in self, the sibilent s lacking vocal. The serpent has no vertical axes. I crawl upon the floor. I'm only a belly. We're continually in the garden. And we're continually, as Rene Gerard obviously observed, observing Satan fall from heaven like lightning because he wants his own kingdom. I'm continually believing the lie. The lie that I'm worthless, the lie that I'm ugly, the lie that I'm shameful, the lie that I don't deserve to be successful. I enter into that lie. And once I'm in that lie, then I belong to the world. Now I have to prove myself in the world. I have to make myself beautiful, lorded, and applauded, celebrated, adored. I have to perform all of those rituals before his altar if I don't stay with the one that made me. It's an apostasy to be in this world. You don't convert to Christianity. You let go of the false conversion of being in this world where you have been placed by the evil one, by the enemy, lured, tempted, hypnotized. We all understand it. We all understand the idea of faximile, the counterfeit, the emulation, the simulation. You know, see when people posit about the like the sci-fi version, perhaps we're already in a simulation. You don't need to use that lexicon through the electromagnetic electromagnetic moment where sensory information is converted neurologically. And that happens to all sensory input. You live in a synthesized reality in your own consciousness. There are peculiar inexplicable moments as with all scientific disciplines when you take it to it to its edgeand i.e. between the synapses as electromagnetic energy travels around in the brain. There's a moment where it's hormonal. It's inexplicable. We're surrounded in every direction by endless miracle which we nullify through dumb orthodox science as we witnessed at length and in depth through the pandemic. We deny him continually. We are continually Eve. We are continually Lucifer. Why does our Lord say when the hubristic disciples return saying we moved among scorpions? We were casting out demons. He says straight away and it's an odd nonsequittor. I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning. You will move among demons. You will move among scorpions and snakes and do great healings because your names are written in the book of heaven. What can that even mean? You are encoded. You are encoded. You are made. Did you see that? It looks like a cross at some micro micro microscopically observable level. There's a cross down in our DNA. There's so much poetry in it. Of course, it's interpreted cuz interpretation is relationship. Of course, people will say, "You can use the Bible to prove anything you want to prove." But I one of my teachers said, "The main things are the plain things, and the plain things are the main things." We're meant to live here harmoniously with one another. We're meant to be one human family. You have to accept Christ as the Messiah. If there's any particular group of people that deliberately do not accept Christ as the Messiah, you might want to investigate that thoroughly, and there's instructions for how to do that in there. you know there's some powerful information in here that must be acted upon. Now from the other side from the countercultural perspective they say oh this is you know it's called the council of na and all that kind of stuff and and I'm thinking now of like the sort of the people that you surely we must pay our due to the likes of Ike and Alex Jones who clearly are carry not Alex Jones actually because he's so sort of in the moment isn't he but David Ike I feel that he carries this weight of I've been saying this for ages I've been saying this for ages but what he doesn't do with love and respect to him is honor that Christ is real real that this is a transcendent manifestor of all real reality. The author of reality entered into his own story. The creator of the simulation entered into the simulation to establish a new way of communicating and being. And I think to forgive this ramble is I think that what we're trying to do is look at um anodine and sanitary Christianity and look at where it needs to be revived and reignited. Then we're looking at a conspiracy culture that's endlessly kuming and tangled. We have to look at these two worlds and recognize that the same thing is being approached. And without the cross, without him, without personal acceptance of him, we'll just end up critiquing without energizing. We'll end up in dead [clears throat] tradition, just ashes and incense. And we have to revivify this now. We have to participate in the resurrection. He says, "I am the resurrection." And he says that when he brings back Lazarus. >> Can I ask just to move back a couple moments about your you said you pray as you >> read. What are your what is that? What what is prayer exactly? I'm trying to recognize that there is a subjective experience and we might be told an objective experience and through prayer collapse that. The kind of Christianity that I feel like I've been called to is a kind of a quantum physics Christianity. And of course I don't understand quantum physics. No one does because it's sort of unknowable. But what seems to be real is that the process of observation alters physical reality. It is smallest observable at the smallest observable level. So in prayer, it's an incantation to become who you really are and to be in absolute truth and to recognize as with Paul's great analogy that we move in and out of Christ. Like that there are moments like now I feel all right. I feel like I'm doing this properly. I feel like I'm not trying to get anything from you and I'm not trying I'm not frantically panicking about what other people think of me, but I know there will be points over the course of the day where I'll experience either temptation or intimidation and in those moments I'll lose myself. Prayer is to ensure that we establish such a strong connection with God that it can withstand that we can sleep in the storm with him that when the storm comes and we know it's coming that we can rest in the boat in total trust and faith in him. Oh, jail. Okay. Jail. Assassination. Okay. Assassination. Like that you you when you no longer belong to the devil. When you belong to him, then as Paul says, like I'm only here to talk to you, Lot. I go now. I want to be with him. I want to see his face. I want to see his face. I love him. But I know at the moment I'm meant to be here to be with you, to love you, to train with you, to be in disciplehip and training together with you. I don't question that. It's not our job to question it. So prayer is to collapse it. To collapse it, to collapse the wave particle, to live in the unknowable, to recognize that we are being made pure in him and through him. That in and of ourselves, we do nothing. We do nothing. We saw what we did when we were in sin. And he loved us then. I have a vision of you in DC. And I know because you've told me and you've been honest about it. Cocaine and the things I assume accompany that. And he loved you then and he died for you then. And he bought that shame onto himself that you may know him. And then when you are not, he can't be with us when we're in sin. When we're not in sin, there he is. The Holy Spirit will dwell in you. Do you not know that your body is a temple? Do you not know? Oh god, you've not realized you poor sods. Otherwise, you won't be living like that. Your body is for me to live in. Stop using [laughter] it to get stuff. Stop like putting pleasure on its sensory surfaces to try and defibrillate some synthetic spiritual experience when you're already here. You're already here. I'm here in you. He's here. He's here and he's real now. So, it's quite psychedelic. And the problem is if I'm hungry or I'm horny or I'm afraid, then they can they've got me again. And so, now I try to do whatever I need to do to not go back there. And it anticipates all of that. It tells me the flesh is weak. It has so much guidance around sexual morality. It has so much guidance around power and false power. It's all it's telling you this is what I intended you for but I had to give you free will otherwise the whole thing would be pointless. It wouldn't have time in it. If there was no free will it doesn't even need to happen because it's a foregone raid. Exactly. But through his grace and through his greatness we are participating in something. But don't you see? Aren't they even now observing what they are calling large structures? Aren't they even observing that the cosmos intergalactic influence? Did you see Randall Carlson the other day sort of say that maybe things that are happening on our planet are influenced by other galaxies like it's not because you know cows are farting or because cars are going too quickly or too not the wrong type. No, we're in an intergalactic eternal and infinite poem [clears throat] with him. We've got a new partner. It's a company called Cowboy Colostrum. It's a brand that is serious about actual health. [music] And the product is designed to work with your body, not against your body. It is a pure and simple product, all natural. Unlike other brands, Cowboy Colostrum is never diluted. It always comes directly from American grass-fed cows. There's no filler. There's no junk. It's all good. It tastes good, believe it or not. So, before you reach for more pills for every problem that [music] pills can't solve, we recommend you give this product, Cowboy Claustrm, a try. It's got everything your body needs to heal and thrive. That's like the original superfood. Loaded with nutrients, antibodies, proteins, help build a strong immune system, stronger hair, skin, and nails. I threw my wig away and right back to my natural hair after using this product. You just take a scoop of it every morning in your beverage, coffee, or a smoothie, and you will feel the difference every time. For a limited time, people listen to our show get 25% off the entire order. So, go to cowboyclustrom.com, use the code Tucker at checkout. 25% off when you use that code tucker@cowboyclustroom.com. Remember, you mentioned, you heard it here first. And all systems of power attempt to impose a narrative that facilitates their further power. I realized after you, but like I realized that the problem with the kind of imperialism that would have occurred if Camala Harris had been president is it's globalist and it's bureaucratic and it's managerial and they use compassion to maximize total control. I was not uh you know everyone's got 2020 hindsight but I like you know the videos exist. I think Trump is an extraordinarily enjoyable public figure. I think he says what's on his mind in a way that's sort of almost unprecedented but it's certainly seeming to become somewhat unpreent. In addition what I didn't enter into was the idea that Trump MAGA could be anything other than a bullvver against the annihilation of bureaucratic global imperialism. That's I because I think a personality like that can slow things down and I think it's an obstacle. But the thing that's particularly disheartening about this war and I know that you spoke about it extensively prior to the election of Trump with the Iranian war is that this war would be happening if Camala Harris was president anyway. That's what like that's my very distant hazy I'm not really in this view is oh if someone as particular personal and uh extraordinary on the human plane as Trump ultimately ends up doing what the globalist imperialist would have done anyway then what are we all discussing when we're talking about America first and MAGA and all of that stuff so what I'm saying there is global bureaucracies is a terrible instantiation of Satan's counterfeit power omnipotence omniscience omnipresence through technology, absolute ownership. >> Nationalism, I thought, would instill a temporary preservation at least of the nation, but the nation is corruptable and is corrupted and is fallen. And now I think the call is and you seem to understand this and I know you understand about the me historically and geopolitically and politically and nationally and domestically and I would run out of words in all of those ways. But what I know as a Christian is that there is something about your sovereignty in absolute submission to him that we need to tell people. There is something in the principle of democracy when practiced correctly using the maximum technological efficiency that gives us the chance to live truthfully. We can't live in this loopy lunatic illusion any longer of moving between false polarities that appear ultimately to have an ulterior or at least superior power that directs them regardless of the mandate offered through some fhatic electoral process. I don't I know you can double the speed of a YouTube video. I don't know if you can cut it in half cuz I want everyone to hear every word that you just said cuz I think they're inspired words and I think that they're all true. Um, and I won't summarize but I just ask people to rewatch what you just said in case they missed all of it the first time. I'm good at listening to fast talking so I caught every word. I think you're absolutely right. And so let me just rephrase what I think you said. We spent all this time trying to construct a defense against what was clearly happening to us in the west, maybe the world, which was this globalist totalitarian nightmare, only to awake to realize actually we may have been participating unknowingly in the creation of it just from the other side. Where does that leave us? What's our duty now? >> If we had any faith in any personality or person other than Christ, it's only in him like that. What I was kept thinking about today is let people like that verse that's like by the way we love one another let them know that we're Christians. That's right. So my job while I'm here I know you're in Christ and my job is to love you. That's my job here and with my friends Dave and Jake that I'm traveling with and beloved Lexi and the people that I'm working here with Merc is familiar with just to be loving and present with them. And that's that's my primary job. I can do that. And when I notice myself stopping doing that, which I will do cuz I'll get hungry or something, then then to [laughter] intervene with myself as best I can by honoring and knowing my weakness. Now, I didn't believe that and I don't believe that there is any political figure operating within current systems that is going to bring about the type of change that's required to at least forall total annihilation. I don't see anyone Gavin Newsome, AOC, Bernie JD. And in fact, what I was saying around 2015 when I first um stepped into when I stepped out of what you might call vanilla celebrity and and into political aining, even though my vanilla celebrity was shellaced in a particular kind of louch decadence, when I stepped into [laughter] when I stepped into um because I was had a girlfriend at the time that was um involved with a new statesman and so I did an addition of the New States, British uh one might say Fabian kind of uh uh Fabian. So, so sort of fetishizing leftist ideas in order to create centralized bureaucracies that will never deliver to the people that they purport to care about the uh famed ordinary Brit or average American. That poor bunch of cattle churned and tossed about on the storm of any passing breeze or fad. Anyway, so I said yes to this thing and like man, I had knew a lot of famous people back then. Alec Baldwin, David Lynch, that I wee dude out in China who just said that he went back to his native China, Aliwi, I think I'm saying his name right. He went back there. He's like super famous and the left love him and like you because he left as a dissident from China and lived in Germany for a while and he's apparently a very brilliant artist. I don't know that. I think he did the cover as long along with Shepherd Ferry, the you know ardent Democrat supporting American artist. Um so I we went back just went back to China. He goes Germany's worse than China. like it's like there's more centralized control, manipulation, less freedom of speech in China. And this guy's a darling of the left type figure. Anyway, so when I was doing that new statesman thing, that's when I I did an accompanying promotional interview with our defining show was Jeremy Paxman's News Night. Jeremy Paxman was Fox News Tucker. He was like the guy that people got off on like watching that dude mess with politicians. I'm not talking about like, you know, he'd probably be more liberal left than you were sort of a traditional conservative during your sort of Fox Pomp and heyday, but we got the same commodity from him. Jeremy Paxmore would sit there with a home secretary and just go, "Oh, come on." Like he was more bombastic. [laughter] You know that time like, "Oh, no. I get why you think it. No, you just don't want us to have guns, but you have them." No, I get it. I do it. Like he had great stuff. No, I get it. I get it. I loved all that. Um like so but when I went on there right it what was cool is even I was 33 or four I was much younger and like I just said none of my friends vote we never vote and he oh come on you can't talk about polit if you don't vote you've got no right to be in the conversation and I said like what are you talking about I see you every week on here attacking politicians for being vapid and empty and insincere and machavelian and then when I say I'm not participating you attack me I don't want to participate none of the people participate we have a and it caused this big national conversation And I was talking about I'm going to run for mayor of London because like an idiot like the disciples actually I thought this is what I thought. I thought you've really what I should have thought is people have heard what you've said is true and they're responding to the truth in what you've said that's why I should have recognized. But what I thought being foolen and a fool was oh I'm really great and I should be powerful. I made it about myself. I thought that I was fantastic and I got involved in it. I got involved in my own thing. Obviously, it all went terribly, terribly wrong, as it always does when you Well, I did say that I was going to run for mayor of London. And I did say that uh that um there's Yeah, I participated in some brilliant movements like housing movements in London and we led like this big march into Downing Street and outside Down Street. I go to a confrontation with a reporter and they had to talk about me in parliament. This is 2015. And what happened was is I think from that moment I think I was on the uh I would say the u radar of certain forces that probably monitor online threats and vocal critics of establishment power and my I would suggest that in the UK it's a little more insidious nefarious and the image I have is like um like dirty soil like oil in soil like toxic land like Britain's a deeprooted toxic land. Now I know a good deal of British UK imperial power migrated to your country in the same way that Nazi physicists migrated in order to ensure [laughter] Babylon succeeds. What happened was is I got attacked a bunch like seriously attacked seriously attacked and I sort of withtood it somehow but that's what it did. It eviscerated me and I withdrew to the country and I got married and I bought my beautiful dog bear and I had my beautiful children and I lived out there calmly. But something was nagging at me the whole time always. You're going to be participating in this in some way in some new way. See, I'm doing a new thing. Find the new thing. Find the new thing. But I always always like an idiot. I've been inculcated and indoctrinated by our culture. Our culture. I think that individualism is our religion. Progressivism. And I don't mean cultural progressivism as in multiple genders. I mean we're going to the moon so everything's cool. [laughter] We've got this device now that's going to solve everything. And Gandhi in like 1940 said check this from Gandhi. Gandhi said as the British were finally expelled. He said there he said there's no point in us beating the British in this revolution and then imitating and emulating the systems that we've have been bequeef by them to us. India is a country of 70,000 villages. Each village should be fully autonomous, trading only where necessary. We must lose our fixation on gadgets and technology. 1940s he's saying this. Of course, India, we know what happened. It emulated and like is essentially sort of, you know, it got conquered in an entirely different and more insidious way. Now, we care about supporting companies whose values align with ours. We do not want to shill for sleazy companies. [music] It is better to give business to like-minded Americans than people who hate us. That's our rule. And that's one of the reasons we like Charity Mobile. When you make the switch to charity mobile, the company sends 5% of your monthly price plan to pro-life, pro-f family charities of your choice. That's millions of dollars in counting sent to pro-f family philanthropies. [music] Okay, you're probably thinking that sounds great, but Charity Mobile must be super expensive to pay for that. But no, they've literally never raised their mobile planes and no plan exceeds $50 per month. Charity Mobile is a good company with good service and good [music] prices, so it's all good. Switch day and try it. Keep your number with a compatible phone, no compromise on quality, and support a truly great company and a good cause at the same time. Promo code Tucker to get a free phone with free activation, free shipping, and a free gift with every new line of service. Visit charitymobile.com/tucker. So, >> and what happened to Gandhi? Was he rewarded for that? >> He was People said, "This guy is a wise prophet. Let's rever [laughter] him." But before we do that, we're going to shoot him in the head just to be sure. Lone gunman. AND [laughter] WHENEVER THERE'S a lone gunman, just some crackpot. Hey, these these crackpots, I noticed that a lot of the time they do stuff that really benefits the most powerful interest [laughter] in the world. These like I tell you what, the most the the powerful should start using these lone gunmen [laughter] because you know there's a natural alliance. It's a good thing. It's like Coca-Cola and McDonald's. The two of them go there and like Coca-Cola McDonald's and the Olympics, you know, like a the and like Coca-Cola, McDonald's, the Olympics and satanic festivals where you mock Christian imagery. THE WHOLE THING [laughter] SHOULD GET TOGETHER AND if you find people that are prominent and outspoken and willing to risk their lives, probably what you should do is shoot them dead and [laughter] then blame like something that will work in the culture like I don't know trans people [laughter] that that wouldn't work. Knowing in your heart of hearts that Christ would love and minister to all of us seeing us all as one family. I'm not interested in race. I'm not interested in color or skin or sexuality. Although I am a bit interested in sexuality. All of you don't make a god out of it. whether you're a heterosexual, homosexual, single, celibate, whatever you are. Anyway, so um I got in a lot of trouble, but it was the first time I got in trouble. I learned from it. >> Well, I just want to pause and say note to the editors of this. Please clip that. That was like my favorite thing I've ever heard. Sorry. Excuse me. [laughter] Sorry. But the what I wanted to say what I wanted to say was that um that the thing is because he is real and because it is true the very fact that as a result of presumably certain demographic information in your country there's a requirement even to imitate Christianity as with that lady sort of charging her way to be first rather than last and if she'd read the Bible that's not what she would do she'd want to be last rather than first then >> in in this condition, they can't then deny. You can't deny what's in there. You can't deny the word. Once you've said, "America is a Christian country. We're running this on Christian principles. We need to return to how Christianity informed the Constitution and the founding fathers." And as Charlie Kirk, God rest his soul, used to say, "This was meant to be practiced in alliance and alignment with Christian principles." If you that telos will be used in his service because we now have a standard. We now have a standard. Now, of course, we have forgiveness and we have anyone. He will forgive all of us if he can forgive me. He's taken my sin. He's taken my shame. He's taken yours. And he'll take anyone's. The most powerful people in the world, the most vulnerable and weakest person in the world. Indeed, he has no favorites. He don't even care about those categories. He doesn't recognize those categories. So, what I'm saying is is the reason that they annihilated Christianity is because it gave us a verifiable, permanent, indeed eternal basis upon which to run kingdom. It gave us instruction. It told us what's going to happen. Now, if as some kind of gambit, people have been emulating and performing Christianity, that's in there, too. He says, "No problem. No problem." Because they people will hear the name of Jesus Christ and they'll be saved. They'll be saved by that name and by acceptance in their hearts. And more practically, once those environmental conditions have been set, those of us that truly are following him and are trying our best to follow him and are trying to make ourselves smaller so that he can become greater, we can say, "Well, we've been looking in here and it doesn't say that you're meant to have a war with Iran. And it doesn't say that you're meant to validate people performing surgery. In fact, you are perfect already. Did you not know? You are so beloved. Let's help you. How can we help one another? Cuz you know our Lord, he would have been down with a trans, down with a homeless, down with a fentinel, down with a junkies. He would have been going this is disgusting. He how can I love you? How can I love you? And I spend surprising amount of time actually speaking to gay people about Christ and like you know because obviously there's they're concerned and I'm trying to understand how we love and what but what I can tell them absolutely is I overly identified with my sexuality. I'll tell you that I made my sexuality the most important thing about me and I thought it was okay to be hedonistic and decadent and it was an expression of my sort of neopagan self and can I say there's been some consequences so you you might want to consider you know there's something more beautiful about you are you saying for for example that Jesus Christ and the beloved disciple John would have improved this great intimacy and total love between them by ejaculating is Is that what you're suggesting? There is more to you than that. There is a supreme intimacy with God. He's actually wants to be inside you right now. Look at the carnality. He's incarnate. We eat his flesh and blood. There's a there's as well as the agape love, there's os love in that. He's we are his bride. We are his bride. >> We like it's there. It's a very powerful energy, the sexual energy. And I definitely definitely misused it extensively by worshiping it and identifying with it. So, when I'm talking to people about problems around identity and sexuality, even though I've never had the challenge of samesex attraction, my certainty is that we shouldn't be sex should not be our god, that love must be first. In fact, the 12 steps puts it so well, Tucker, in the great big book of Alcoholics Anonymous, which I a student of, it says, um, we want to stay out of this debate around sex. Some people think that sex is the be all and end all, and some people want to live in absolute denial of sex. This is a controversy. we don't want to enter into. Some people would have a man with no flavor for his fair and the other camp would have them on a straight pepper diet. Someone pointed out to me that straight pepper diet would be eating a condiment as if it were the main course or the meal. Sex is a condiment upon which you which adds flavor to the meal of love. That's what it is according to scripture in a marriage between a man and a woman. I'm still, you know, for my own I'm trying to understand how to be completely loving to all people and not I don't it says here clearly don't judge get the log out of your own eye. So I guess it's not my my ministry is not about that. But I'm just what what I don't want is to be a participant in a in a church that prioritizes judging and condemning others rather than dealing with our own evident internal fallen broken problems. >> That is the truth. I we we had this conversation at breakfast this morning with uh a wonderful person who works for us and um I was telling her about being in church a couple weeks ago and somebody got up to read who you know I knew a lot about and and had was judging so much based on you know behavior that we judge or whatever and this person gets up to read and I really felt very strongly that God just like spoke to me which doesn't happen every day >> and the message was, "You are no better than her." >> And I turned, it makes me emotional thinking about it. And I turned to my wife who I know was having similar thoughts. I thought she was, and I I whispered to I said, "We are no better than her." And she goes, "I know." And I think that is that's really at the center of it. >> So much instruction. Love your neighbors. Then he removes any limited liability for the category of neighbor. Who is your neighbor? Whoever's in front of you, that's your neighbor. That's your neighbor. Whoever's in front of you. >> Absolutely agree. But if you begin with I am no better than any other person, I think it's a it's a clarifying. It takes the blinders off like you can see things clearly >> cuz what then you feel like you don't have your own personal little mandate to go around telling people. >> Yeah. And also but it I mean there is not a sense in which I hate that phrase but there it is true that all people are connected to all other people in some way that's impossible to understand as a person or for me to understand in any case but that is absolutely real and you can feel it and it's almost like there are moments these rare transcendent moments in your life. I mean sex is one of them where the barriers between people get thinner. They may not dissolve entirely in this life, but they're definitely the membrane is thinner. >> Yeah. >> And and you you feel a great satisfaction in that because that's kind of how it's intended to be. That so much that divides us is fake. It's put there on purpose in order to divide us, but that it doesn't reflect reality. Like our humanity, the fact we're all created by God is the most important fact about us. For decades, Russell Brand was one of the most famous actors and comedians and agnostics in the world. Today, he is one of the most sincere Christians we know, a follower of Christ. His personal transformation is remarkable. We saw it up close. He has now recounted it in an amazing book called How to Become a Christian in 7 Days. And it recounts what happened to him. And it makes the case to all of us for stepping away from our secular assumptions and returning to the [music] only thing that matters, which is God. I've read it. It's amazing. And right now, there's only one place to get it. Tucker Carlsonbooks.com. This is the first release from our new publishing company. We created Tucker Carlson Books to bypass the sensors and bring you things that are actually worth reading [music] and sharing. And we're starting this venture with what matters most. And that's Russell [music] Brand's message of the promise of forgiveness and joy through Jesus. We're proud to launch our new bookstore with Russell Brand's How to Become a Christian in 7 Days. It is the message this country needs most. Find it today on tucker carlsonbooks.com. >> Yes. And that if we are able to receive our identity in him, then we will find in that a kind of harmony, not necessarily ease or absence of suffering, but at least a certain truth. And isn't it extraordinary that in this world of counterfeits that identity politics a peculiar faximile and emulation of individual sovereignty has come to the forefront? >> Exactly. >> Can you explain that a little? Can you flush it out a bit? >> Well, you are you were fearfully and wonderfully made knitted together in your mother's womb. He loves you. Who is it you say that I am? I think that you are son of the living God, that you are the Messiah. Well, this insight, this is from uh I guess it's in a few of the gospels there, but that's a moment between our Lord and Peter. After after after Peter acknowledges Christ as God, as a son of the living God and the Messiah, he gives him the name Peter, you are the rock upon which I can build my church. When you see God for who God is, then you will know who you are. If you don't know God for who God is, then you will be looking for an identity in the world. I'm an Englishman. I'm an American. I'm a proud homosexual. I'm a young black woman. I'm a little Dutch boy wearing clogs. Like, [laughter] you know, like you start to identify with false things that you made with your own hands. He that no to the message to the to people about gender identity is go further. You are more individual than that. He loves you more than that. You are more unique than that. You're not part of a group of people that happen to feel that you don't fit with the arbitrary gender identities of 2026 American cultural identity that wear this and wear that. Indeed, in the word in heaven there is no manw woman. In heaven in the supreme reality there is no man woman. He says that that's in there of YOU'RE RIGHT. YOU'RE RIGHT IN a way. It's a kind of a performance. But if that performance leads you to like you know changing your body surgically then that's potentially there might be another route. But we can look at the data and see if that's working for people postsurgery and how many of them are happy with it. And I guess we could make a scientific kind of a scientific judgment. But the problem is is that all of us have been now recently exposed to the total illegitimacy of science in so much as we all know that only profitable experimentation is being undertaken. who's doing and conducting the experiments to demonstrate absolutely that there is no causal link between the childhood vaccine pro program and the rise in autism. Who's going to pay for that? Vaccine manufacturers. I wouldn't have thought so. The government I don't and then that's the end of the list. There's no one else that can afford to. Who by the way I mean one of the moments of the a deeper awakening to the immersive ubiquitous insidiousness of global imperialism came for me. You know when you sort of realize things yourself that then become somewhat culturally uh evident and obvious and explored in this >> happens to me. Yes. [laughter] >> Yeah. Yeah. So when with the vaccines like how are they clinically triing that for the impact on pregnant women because which pregnant women are going to allow them to in this time frame have experimented and how do we know the long-term effects because there hasn't been a long period of time in which to witness the long-term effects. And all those questions that one might sort of ponder chewing a pencil on your own, it turns out were unanswerable because we were being dreadfully deceived. dreadfully deceived and it seems like the ultimate aim of it may have been population reduction >> of course >> and then of course I suppose the additional benefits of how much authoritarianism can we leverage how successfully because remember the bit it's like well you won't be able to do what you did in China in America Italy and the United Kingdom turns out that you largely can but there was kind of a stumbling block because people online with significant audiences were talking about it okay so that's a problem we can't have significant audiences online where people are getting non- mainstream information. What do we do to annihilate that? Well, can we create some kind of ideological das diaspora where they're all arguing with one another? Sometimes about important things, sometimes about dumb stuff. And as Dave Smith, I know he's a collaborator and friend of yours when he said that 2008 and the Occupy movement was a kind of unique solidarity when it comes to the typical political taxonomies in your country and mine. People transcended that and recognized, hold on a minute, it's financial institutions that are to blame for this. Why don't we start targeting them? That was the advent of identity policy. Let's have a race war. >> Yeah, race war quick. >> Super quick. >> So, you were on involved in all that stuff. I mean, you were um assessing British politics in 2008. That was a long time ago all of a sudden. And now you're talking about Jesus. So, how did that happen? Well, you wrote a book about it. How to become a Christian in seven days. What did you become a Christian in seven days? No, I became a Christian both instantaneously but over the entirety of my life. When it happened, it happened in an instant. It happened when I was I reckon even though I wouldn't have termed it this way at the time probably um contemplating suicide. I was probably considering do is this would this is there a way out of this? And the reason was, of course, was because of the allegations in the UK of criminal sexual conduct, specifically rape and sexual assault, at the same time as my son had been diagnosed with a heart condition, which we've discussed previously. And those two things happening simultaneously, did something extraordinary to me in so much as it was exposed to me that I've I mean, I heard it as a voice like you just described. Sometimes you hear these voices. You've spent your whole life worshiping fame and sex. Well, now look, fame and sex have come together. Is this what you wanted? And all the time that I was famous, by the way, I think there would have been people that the only things they would have known about me is, "Oh, isn't that that guy that was married to Katy Perry? And isn't that that guy that likes always talking about sex and stuff and being all like a sexy rock star in movies?" In your country, they might say that. And um so those two things sort of compounded to show me the nature of my worship. You have been worshiping false gods. You have been idolizing yourself and shall fame can be glorious for the kingdom. He is a tool he can use. Sex magnificent source of creation connection of course but I was misusing those things. Now, when that hit me, even though I kind of understood it a little bit before, I didn't understand it as viscerally as I did in the new context of your son. I tell you this, man, there was a moment where I was walking my dear beloved dog, Bear. And check out this thought. This is I think the tempter. I think this is the accuser. This thought occurred. Would you What if your son Laura is still pregnant? My wife is still pregnant. What if your son died and this could all go away? would you accept that? And I sort of went, "Oh, God, no." Like that. Like I felt I sort of fell to my knees and I cried. I cried for thinking it. I cried for thinking it. Like how could you even think that? How could you even think that? And it sort of purged me a bit. That cry and that cleanse. In this period of contemplation, a friend of mine from I uh from a 12step support group sent me a video of Rick Warren. And Rick Warren, I never heard of Rick Warren. I don't know that purpose-driven life sold 30 million. I don't know things like that. I'm not Christian. I don't care. Right? He sent me a video and then I see and it's the most sort of slick televangelical TV show of like, hey, we're going to be speaking with Rick Warren. And I see Rick Warren, he's kind of beardy and plump. I'm like, what's all this? And then when he talks about like he's and like the everyone's too toothy, too tax breaky, like you're not going to get me with that. You're not getting me with like proper American evangelism. I'm clever. I'm not I'm British clever. I'm British workingass clever. That might be the cleverest anyone can be. You'll negate me with that. That when he but he talked about his son killing himself and like and the way he spoke about his son's killing himself cuz for me in my mind this is Tony Robbins like someone who I deeply admire as a matter of fact. I'm thinking Rick Warren. He must be like a personal coach kind of person who brings out your excellence or whatever. You know, I didn't even have a reference for what Christianity is thinking about it now. like but like so Rick Warren spoke about his son's suicide without shame with pain and sorrow but without any kind of indulgence of that and I thought what is that what is that what is that that you can cuz if your child kills himself you ain't better not be writing no books about personal development because the worst thing that can happen has happened so shut up but I when I saw it modeled delivered when I encountered it I felt like oh he's what is it and that sort of somehow glitched something in me and I was out there and I was in the fields by my house. You visited my house. I'm by the river temps by the river by the still waters and I'm in green pastures and it was only when my dog died that I realized that my dog is a German shepherd that he was a shepherd and that the shepherd made me sit down in green pastures and he made me be still by the waters and I understood I was being spoken to and that through my son I was being spoken to. Tucker in those moments where you if you hand over your boy like 12 weeks old to surgeons and you don't know if you'll get him back again like and then when you see him with the wires and the tubes and all that stuff it's so visceral and in those rooms me and Laura we felt okay we felt fine we felt peaceful we felt protected and I was going into those hospitals in like first time I wore a mask during that pandemic let me tell you was to be out in the streets in London because every single newspaper and every single TV station was dedicated right up until October the 7th peculiarly to saying Russell Brand's a rapist. We should have known. Could probably have done something like and like in plain sight suggesting that somehow I'd conducted my entire career and in anticipation of a time where in the future I would be accused of sex crime like brilliantly he was flirting with every single woman he ever met on TV on camera and chatting up. If like if there's if there was a talk show and there was a female here, I'd like to know are you single? And if she said yes, I'd like start flirting with her and try and detect is she attracted to me. And if she was, I would pursue that till it's natural con literally natural conclusion. If I on the other hand detected revulsion, resistance, then like I'm like, okay, luckily I'm famous, you know? So like, and they tried to somehow reframe that as some as like I don't know how you would even do that. But [laughter] the problem is is I created a lot of data out there during those years. I was sleeping with thousands of women and I was sleeping with women that will have sex with you immediately in a bathroom or backstage or in a corridor in a car. So I created quite a lot of I hurt people. I exploited people. That's greedy. That's selfish. It's inconsiderate. It's mean. It's certainly sinful, immoral. It's all of those things. There's no question about any of that. So when show me the man, I'll show you the crime. If people's phones are getting scraped, as Edward Snowden revealed, from more or less the late '9s, just in case one day you do something we don't like, we're ready to go. It's either going to be the pink or the green, the money, or the honey. We're going to get you financially, or we're going to get you sexually, unless you're a person that's lived in Christ. If you've lived in Christ your whole life, they're going to have to kill you for doing nothing. They're going to have to kill you for doing nothing. Probably happened to Charlie Kirk. Probably there was nothing shady to get him with, was there? That may be what it was. So, you know, luckily I [laughter] was a philander and a head in this. So, well, we'll just do rape and sexual assault with that guy. That's that's going to take minutes. So, they're able to It's unbelievable when you see the material that was generated initially. I mean, their documentary um by this company called Hard Cash. It was a actors played the women that were making allegations that had not gone to the police or anything like that. And they used bits of my standup where I was saying stuff like um you know like really in a camp I'm a British comedian so I was being super camp and crash but using campness to take the edge off very vulgar anatomical and sexual and erotic jokes which I was very explicit about. And they would pose that next to someone being shot in silhouette even though it was an actor. Shot in silhouette even though it's an actor to protect the identity of an actor [laughter] like they should like you know if you put them with music you know people don't realize a documentary is a construction. What archive music did you choose from the archive library? What music for that scene? Why why did you cut away there? Where's the rest of the interview? How many times did you talk to that person? What did you tell that person when you were talking to them? So, it was an extraordinary time and I have absolutely I will say this, no animosity to anyone involved because I can see why you would do it. I can see if you look back at something 20 years ago, 25 years ago where you had sex in a bathroom with a stranger, why would you not? Like, if you see a documentary, that guy, he's a villain. He was dressed in black. He loomed, his eyes changed suddenly. You [laughter] It's extraordinary. It's extraordinary. But the reason that there were no allegations, I'm assuming contemporaneously or during Me Too or, you know, all the way up till there was a television program called Russell Brand has secretly been committing all these sexual offenses. I'm assuming and then there was a phone number at the end of Have you ever met Russell Brand? [laughter] Then I'm assuming that was a cons a component in this. So either we believe that the Times owned by Rupert Murdoch are a great you know they're a force for good in the world and uh you know hard cash whose name has certain indications are that they're there to help us and that the mainstream media at large are here to help us or there might be some other agenda at play that if people are prominently talking about COVID and Madna and FISA and Rishi Sunnac invested in Madna when it only had five employees and then when he was chancellor and prime minister they did deals with Madna to the tune of millions and all the things that we understand took place in the COVID period or the Ukrainian war and that the CIA CIA carve out I should say made content saying Russell Brand's an asset for Russia and put it into Ukrainian language that's an indication of the presence of the state or if the 77th brigade run by Mark Lancaster who's married to Caroline Dinage who's the the department head of the social media department and Caroline Dinage on like day one of uh of Russell Brand's accused of sex crimes is like he shall be demonetized on X and YouTube when did she learn what the word demonetized memes. When did she learn that? Does she know about CPMs? Does she? And and and programmatic ads. Or did she have a conversation with someone? I wonder who I wonder if it was her husband, Mark Lancaster. Guess what their job is in in when Britain are occupying or working in Afghanistan or Syria or wherever to protect us like [laughter] the 77th Brigade. What they do is ensure that there is no significant uprising by managing the social media by deamplifying and controlling social media in eg Afghanistan or Syria to make sure that only the correct rebel factions are able to organize their information. Shadow banning we'd call it here. Well, 77th Brigade aren't allowed to operate in the UK cuz you're not allowed to use military scops on a domestic population except in COVID. special suspension was made allowing 77th Brigade to operate inside the UK and to allow them and it said this in the Times newspaper, the same newspaper in fact that published much of the nefarious and untrue reporting about me that 77 Brigade are going to take down vaccine misinformation social media commentators. Now in the UK that's who I was and what I was that was what I was doing. I was providing an alternative narrative. The YouTube channel was exploding. It was extraordinary. And I was beginning to think I have to be involved in politics. It's not enough. It's not enough to just talk about this. Indeed, look at what's happened with cryptocurrency. Technology means that the same centralized financial institutions cannot control global finances in the way they once did. Don't look too much into where that power is primarily housed, but it seems that you can generate false revenue through inflationary measures. You can control entire economies. and indeed base an economy on the one thing that's explicitly forbidden in here, debt and usery. Thankfully, all our debts are paid by the one who truly loves us. So, technology changed currency and finance forever. Technology is changing media forever. It's inevitable that it will change politics. When people accept that we now have the technology for direct participatory democracy where every single issue could be pled and voted on by the population that you could have minimum centralization and minimum intervention as the principles that the states each state could be independent wherever possible. Each town could be independent wherever possible. Each individual could be independent wherever possible. In here, of course, we have some significant guidelines for transgressive behaviors that would require legal intervention. And pretty much all of us know what those are. We've all like indeed CS Lewis's primary argument along with Aquinas is morality doesn't have to be engineered. And it's not some sort of post-truth, post structuralist, there is no truth, arbitrary thing. We all know good and bad because we feel it viscerally and we feel it in our cardiovascular system. We have inbuilt sensors if you don't turn them off with vaccines and bad food and bad signals continually. in a manageable way. Tucker, the city of London is having an election for mayor in 2028. The reason this is fascinating is because the office of mayor is manageable. The London mayor, Sadi Khan, right now is only in control of the Metropolitan Police Force, London transport, and certain issues regarding planning and housing. All of these areas in a participatory direct democracy could be opened up to people that live in London, that love London. All of a sudden, you don't have politics that thrives and runs on ideology and debate. You have a pragmatic democracy. Do you want ULES cameras that charge you if you have a certain type of vehicle? Do you want a congestion charge? Vote for it. If you vote yes, we'll do it. If you vote no, we won't. Do you want this type of policing where people are arrested for Facebook posts or do you want to focus on knife crime? Which burrows? Which areas? What time of day? Do you want us to investigate historic crimes or do you want us to focus on contemporary rape gangs? The beauty of it is you would say we have an opinion and we have a voice and we have advocacy. You could even, if you wanted, for free, because there's no way I would pay people to do this, have a council of elders from the LGBTQ plus community, from the Muslim community, from the white workingclass community, from the left and from the right, from all potential groups, and say, "Why don't you advocate and advise?" Because I don't want to be in charge of London. I want to participate in an end to the kind of politics that we know is birthing, midwifeing the apocalypse and Armageddon through duplicity, through conflict, through endless self obsession, through pornography, through addiction, using addiction even where it doesn't typically play out every time we look at a screen, the food that we eat, the things we believe about ourselves. I would like to run for mayor of London in 2028 so that the people of London would run it. So that politicians are not involved in politics. So we have true open-source transparent democracy. I bet you, like me, do polymarket adverts. They seem to be advertising absolutely everywhere. That technology for polling and electing could be used to determine where you want your local budget spent, who you want running a particular area of public life, if there is a requirement for any representation, and most importantly, you will be in control of your own lives, and we don't need to quarrel and squabble about Islam and Islamic invasion. If the people of Eping don't want to have migrants in their community, then let them vote on it. Now, that's not an area that the London mayor controls, but certainly if the polling was available, it would be difficult to impose that on the people of Eping. Perhaps if people in other communities are very pro- refugees, they would get a budget for and the ability to house refugees. There's no point in us living in this tower of babble, madness, of incessant, unending conflict online and sometimes in person when we have the opportunity for real community, real change. At this point, Tucker, we know that the Republicans aren't the answer, the Democrats aren't the answer, the Conservatives aren't the answer, the Labour Party, the Greens, Reform, Rep, whoever. What you want is for people to be absolutely empowered in their own lives as our Lord suggests. Each of us has direct access to divine truth and you can participate as much as you want to. So, that I want to tell you as well that my intention amidst all this madness with a forthcoming trial and a book out that I'm very pleased with, I'm going to run for mayor of London in 2028. You're going back to the UK. >> Well, yes, possibly to serve a jail sentence. >> I wasn't going to ask you about this cuz I'm upset [clears throat] about it >> and I just want to say for the record as clearly as I can that I buy your explanation completely and I think you were I think this is a lie and that you're you're facing like a real jail term because you spoke against the people in power. I don't think there's any other way to uh to interpret it. So, that's my position just to be clear. But what exactly are you looking at? Like what what happens next? >> I be I'll be on trial in October of this year. >> Yes. And I I don't want to be willfully ignorant, of course, but I tend not to ask what will happen if I'm not acquitted because I've got a wife and three young children. Also, by the way, I do believe if someone committed a rape 20 25 years ago and that's proven to be true, that person should go to jail. Like rape is aborant. I watched the other day like something like Pretty Woman with my wife and like when there's a an attempted rape by the brilliant Jason Alexander. It's an appalling aborant jarring moment. The worst thing. >> When I watched it from the position I'm in now, I was like, "That's what? What the HOW DARE YOU SAY THAT I would do that? How dare you say that I would do that?" >> Exactly. I had a kind of a magnetic allure. I'm not saying I wasn't a pretty appalling low life of an individual, but what I was not doing was imposing, forcing, coercing, attracting, charming, seducing. Anyway, of course, the that's the pleasure in it. It's like fishing. That's why dynamite fishing is no fun. Fly fishing is lots of fun. >> Do people use dynamite in fishing? >> Of course they do. >> Well, that should be banned as well. I mean, >> but I'm just saying like five of London that goes on day one. >> But most men Yeah. I mean, I know that there are rapists out there and I think they should be severely punished. Most normal people think that. >> Yes. >> But most men I've never met any man uh who, you know, got drunk and told me his secret desire is to like force sex in anyone. That's the opposite of what I think most men want. >> Yes. >> Correct. >> Because the currency is love and sex. >> That's exactly right. And it's also like I lured this person with my charms. Isn't that how men feel? I think they do. >> I think primarily and I pray ultimately most men Yes. >> So why Okay, so this whole thing happens. You get charged. I was actually in um the British Isles the day this happened and I called you. I'll never forget it. And I gave the bad advice I give to everyone who's charged in a political case like this, which is run as fast as you can to a country with no extradition treaty. And like don't, which was is an option. It is an option. Of course, run away. like this this whole system is rigged against people who question its most basic premises as you have. So like why are you submitting? You're choosing to participate in this to take the risk to submit. Why? Firstly, because I believe all things are from God and I recognize that this is what it took for me to accept that my life is not my own. That I belong to a higher calling, a higher purpose. I recognize that. I also recognized that what I demonstrated and how I lived for a long time was wrong. I also believe in trial by jury as a matter of fact even though the United Kingdom are trying to obliterate that and that's not a good sign. They're trying to remove that except for murder and rape cases but they are try as well as advancing surveillance technology, facial recognition, digital ID, all of the things you're aware of in the dystopian UK. They're trying to get rid of jury trial. And I believe it is possible to have a fair trial. And I believe it is necessary to confront and stand up and stand firm in your conviction. In this case, in my conviction about the truth of what I've done and what I haven't done, because as a Christian, we're all forgiven for all of the things we've done wrong. But you don't need to be forgiven for things you haven't done. And there is of course in a way no choice. You say that I could, you know, go to a place where there's no extradition treaty. And in the moments of my worst fear, you know, those are the kind of things I think about. But in reality, Tucker, it says in here the the book of James opens with, "We consider it pure joy when we face trials of any kind." And there's no exemption in the Christian life. It's not like well except unless you actually do have a trial in which case go and [laughter] get yourself to Bora Bora quick smart you know it's this is what I'm called to do this is what I am called to do this is what we are being called to do I'm not trying to drag you into my terrible trial with me I'm saying that your trial I think is of a comparable nature because in a sense it's sort of inadvertent that we find ourselves in this position that you had an enormous audience on Fox and then you become an indep independent journalists and become even more successful. And you go from advocating for Trump for reasons that are perfectly understandable to condemning Trump for equally evident and obvious reasons or less, even if we take personalities out of it, the Iran war. But where does that go for you now? What are you going to be called to do? You will note that most of the people that get called in here are like, "No thanks. I'd rather not. I'd rather not." I I've always been a sort of a bit of a glory hunter kind of, you know. Well, well, that's actually the wrong way to put it. I felt so worthless and inferior as a child. So disord unapproved of, unwanted, and unloved. That's not to do with my parents. They really did their level best. And then as a drug addict, anyone who's like the kind of drug addict I was, you're moving among poor people, prostitutes, broken people. And all of that time, I felt a kind of an emptiness and a worthlessness. And when my identity was fulfilled, it seemed at least to me in a kind of stardom and acceptance and being lorded and applauded and celebrated and loved and given the kind of attention that I thought would work and it was really quickly meaningless and empty after this beautiful golden moment of feeling like oh wow Lord you love me. I feel that there is nothing for us to do but to lovingly participate in whatever he puts in front of us. And the examples are alive in here that all of them are persecuted and often just killed for what they believe in normally because at some point they encounter conflict with real power. either the kind of cultural pheriseaic power or of the early Christians or the monarchical oligarchical terrifying desperatism of the kings of the of the earlier empires and for the first Christians their role was to well indeed isn't the the primary um character of their conversion all these people that were willing to look into the eyes of people people including the you know the 12-year-old girl at the fire and Peter said, "I don't know him. I've never met that guy where minutes ago he was willing to sort of get in a fight for him." Like that these people, these men, these ordinary men and women, these ordinary Christians, when they're confronted with a moment where they might have to die for what they believe in, take it. Now, I recognize I'm not standing trial for being a Christian. I'm standing trial uh according to the uh lexicon of the British judiciary for the crimes that I've already discussed. But in what this is my opportunity to do is to show that I believe in truth. I believe you can have a justice system because there is a God. If you don't believe in God, you can't have absolute justice or absolute truth. They are by definition constructs of the human mind arrived at using a mind that by its own belief is itself an arbitrary system born of chaos. You can't have morality. And when you live in that culture, and most people do, a lot of people seem to anyway because I'm talking about like a lot of Christians aren't living like, "Oh my god, this is actually real." And that's of course forgivable. The first Christians had that problem. They found it hard to live as Christians, as live as disciples of Christ, yolked to him, following him, eyes on him at all times. This is for me a difficult thing. I wish it would go away. I wish it would go away. But what I pray for is the strength to be who I am in him as I walk through it and to go where he wants me to go. I don't want power no more. I don't want the power of being a celebrity or the mayor of London or a lethario. I don't want that. All I want is to know him intimately. And I forget that sometimes because I'm weak and I'm easily distracted and I'm fallen. But in him, I am none of those things. He made me and you and everybody for to know him, to know him and love him. And it doesn't all have to be on a big grand global stage in great big trials against a fallen nation. Britain's fallen apart. That's obvious. It's evident. It's on a different trajectory from your country. It's still owned by dark imperial power. And the thing about the idea of participatory direct democracy, Tucker, is I don't care if I don't want to sit in an office somewhere making decisions. I want to pray all of the time. I want to be with God and I want to be with my children and the people I love. And to tell people to do what it says in the great commission, tell people in a language that they'll understand God is real. Christ is real. Stop worshiping the world. You're going to die. You're going to die. And it's all meaningless. All of us, evidently, all of us have experienced grief and death. I can't I can't even get through the death of my dog without Jesus. In fact, but with Jesus, [clears throat] the death of my dog shows me, oh my God, I may find it hard to think of a Galilean man 226 years ago laying down their life for me, but I know that dog would have done it. I know that dog would have done it. And that opened enough in me to for me to receive him more deeply when my beloved dog died. I don't want to be in any other communion. I don't want to be in any other conversation. I don't want any of [clears throat] the world's power anymore. I I know how broken I am and how corruptible I am and I know I can't take my eyes off him for a second but thankfully I see him everywhere now. So you began this process, well you began the process at the beginning of your life, but you began the conscious change from pagan to Christian or whatever you were before to Christian after your son was diagnosed with a very serious ailment and you found out you're going to be indicted for rape. That [laughter] >> that's what it takes. I'm not easily converted. >> No. >> HEY, THERE WAS THIS GUY. He helped people. Yeah. So what? That's probably not true. He's [laughter] the son of God. I don't care. People are doing miracles. You're in trouble. OKAY. ALL RIGHT. WHAT? OKAY. [laughter] OKAY. YOU'VE GOT ME. THIS IS WHAT I NEED TO DO. Explain it. The what I So, I watched it carefully and you and I talked about it as it was happening. And I just thought it was one of the most wonderful things. And by the way, I just have to just pause for a two-minute story, which I think I've told before, but it's my favorite story ever, that we went to Easter a few years ago, and we had dinner the night before. Uh, and you were talking about about how you're going to get baptized. And we went to this Easter service. It was an outside Easter service on the beach. And these two kids come up to me. They were college students from Purdue in Indiana. And they said, "Is that Russell Brand?" This is the next morning after we had talked about baptism. And I said, "Yeah, that's Russell Brand." I Yeah, Russell Brand, my friend Russell Brand. They said, "That's incredible. We have been praying in our church that Russell Brand would get baptized and we just find ourselves here this morning at this church service which is nowhere near where they live. And I said I I just was I felt emotional hearing this. I said we were just talking about his baptism last night and then they walked up and introduced themselves to you and I just thought wow. I mean I guess I already knew this but there aren't coincidences. Like >> we are >> in the middle of a of a drama that we didn't write. Um, so then you get baptized and then you start talking about Jesus and immediately people say, "Well, the guy's an actor and a comedian. He puts on personas for a living and they don't believe you and they make fun of you." What was that like that experience? >> I didn't really mind that actually. It's obviously a different reality at that point. Yeah. You I And also remember I've got this good foundation of 12 steps. The 12 steps too requires that you surrender your identity as an alcoholic and as a drug addict. You come to believe there's a power greater than yourself. You hand over your will and your life to the care of God as you understand God. But the problem I think with paganism is you will always one will always revert to self amidst if everything is if if everything is God then anything is God and I know what I tend towards me. I'm God. I should be in charge. That's where I inclined towards. But when I was in here, I don't like people saying that, you know, if it was up to me, people would only say nice things about me all of the time and they would [laughter] but like I reckon >> that would be bad for us if that happened. Don't you think? >> Yes. I don't think that would work cuz I tried to surround myself in a little sickopantic bubble and in various points in my life and it hasn't worked out at all well for me. So I don't mind about that. I don't care about that at all actually because >> really because it infuriated me watching it >> really cuz I actually got >> because I knew it wasn't true and it really bothered me. >> Thank you. That's really kind of you >> but it had no effect on you. That's funny. >> Well actually I was around really good Christians that were like sort of like going well done. Well I was being I was so encouraged like I was sent people like you know like when I got baptized cuz those kids they were trying to they were b like I remember those kids from hanging out with you that time around Easter. They were like hey I baptized her. Can we baptize you? We baptize each other. It's like they're going to [laughter] gang baptize me there and then. And like like and I I knew that Bear Grills had been saying to me, "Hey, he actually termed it this way. Shall we get baptized is what he said like and I thought, oh, I me because I'm had been so solopistic up to that point. I didn't know that Bear Grills is a pretty passionate Christian and had been public about it. So I thought, oh, Bear Grill's on this trip, is he? I'll get baptized with him." Well, when he arrived, it's quite plain that only I was getting baptized. Then there was the obvious and evident demonic coughing. Like I could not stop coughing. The pastor arrived by boat. My friend Joe who's a Catholic was one side of me. That hefty fallen man. And like bear on the other side. It's like you know it takes for me sort of career criminals and the SAS [laughter] to baptize me. We got in that water and I couldn't stop coughing. You know when you get embarrassing coughing like one of them happened. They were looking at each other. We got in that river temps. I went under. I came out and I felt different. I felt different. Now, a lot of companies in the UK that are in charge of water franchises have not behaved responsibly with that river. So, [laughter] it could be dtheria, could be all sorts of things. It could have been many of those things, but I came out and I felt different and I've not really I've felt an increasing look, anyone that's Christian or has come to Christ as an adult knows what it's like. There is a subtle vacasillation. There is at least temptation, a calling to go back. What if I did this? There is I can feel the old identity. Wasn't it Spurgeon who says you know you are drowned in Christ but sure sure enough the old guy can swim. The old man can really swim. I feel the old man. I feel the Adam man in me. The old earth man the fallen man calling back. But I feel closer and closer to him all the time. I feel like I'm able to have this conversation with you in Christ enough so that it doesn't seem to me to be a problem if some people go I think you only I don't know if you know how the British legal system works but there is no contingency for Christians. Britain has just made like abortion legal till your 25th birthday. Like we [laughter] CAN ABORT YOU NOW if we have to. We can euthanize you if you say I've got a headache. Euthanize him. Euthanize him. They're changing the law to put the power of God into the hands of man right now. So saying I'm a Christian is not like you know in Britain the way things are going right now where they I pray for revival. I pray for revival. Yes I do. But you no one seems to be questioning. In fact you can't have a justice system without a God. Without God there is no justice because the justice means absolute right. >> Right. >> Absolute truth. That's what it means. It means it's possible to aspire to that it's there. That there is a path that there is a way. No one's thinking about these things as they churn through mad post enlightenment despair and and atrophy and entropies. The whole thing seems to dissipate and degenerate. And as we nominate AI to be our moral center and create new false consciousness, new false gods and alarming rate. No one's considering that we've got no grounding in truth. And until we have systems that represent our true role, yet we are stewards of the earth. That's why we love the earth. We are its stewards. We must love one another because that's what we're here to do under God. When we get rid of that and put ourselves at the top, then we're just quarreling about ideologies. Hey, how much longer in American politics do you want to go between, right, we won. Let's spend the next four years desecrating the beliefs of this group. Right, we won. Let's desecrate the BELIEFS OF THIS GROUP. WE WON. Let's describe, well, this isn't real. What are we doing? The real agenda is carrying on in plain sight. And it seems to be a geopolitical agenda that has some weird connection both to energy which is another word for power and indeed occultism which means hidden ritual hidden power. Something is going on. Something that I don't think any of us really understand and you more than anyone it seems to me at least right now appear to have been nominated to describe it to people. You're doing good job. Well, I don't understand it at all. And luckily, I do understand almost everything on like a dog level. It has to be very obvious to for me to pick it up. And I but I do believe that symbols are resonant. That's why people use them. And if all around you you seen see obvious signs that people have a religious agenda, I have been around powerful people for so long that one thing I've learned is they're the most religious people of all >> and they all pretend to be agnostic or I don't believe in anything. I believe in science. No, no, no, no, no. They are observant religious people. They're just not worshiping the same god. But they think their power is supernatural. There's no doubt about it. I know them and they believe they're special because they're getting supernatural power and I think it's demonic power. I think it's really obvious. Look at the fruits. >> But they know it. They know it. They're observant religious people. >> You mean through practice, through ritual. >> Correct. Correct. Yes. Yes. Absolutely. I mean, and it's always the same. It's the temptation of Christ. Bow down before me and all this will be yours. Mhm. >> But I mean there's no question in my mind that um you know the the killing the ritual killing of other people whether through war, abortion or euthanasia, the death penalty um it is it's a religious ritual of course and through killing the shedding of blood of others especially of innocents they derive power. What's what's child molestation? There's no sexual attraction to children in nature because there's no reproductive possibility. So normal people are not of course there's nothing sexual about molesting a child. The point of it is to defile, right? I mean that's that's why it's so common. >> Yes. >> It's not because they have like weird sexual or there's nothing sexual about it. It's like when I destroy purity and beauty, I gain supernatural power. I think that can be eroticized by but the eroticization is in itself a kind of charge. I believe this is where again we would look to the outliers in the conspiracy community of I know that you know we talked at the beginning of how we've moved from mainstream media purview where you know just to say that I'm from the New York Times or the BBC is insufficient. That doesn't that is not a badge of honor and authority anymore. Those days are gone except for the sort of the kind of nostalgia around it I suppose. But then like um you know people that have been that are eccentric and are kooky and perhaps because our culture hasn't afforded the roles that are emerging from this new kind of yungian psyche that we're creating. We create a new consciousness through AI through the internet through masscoms. And so you will have the dark woman, the shadow woman that tells truth and mad and frantic red-faced preachers screaming or broken wounded men in you will have converts and apostates too. That's you and probably me too. You will have the and like see David Ike what I always felt about him is why can't the culture accommodate him? And what on earth was it that happened even in the brief time that I was in media where we could I used to have a radio show on the BBC BBC 22 very popular normal. I got thrown off it of course cuz I did something ridiculous as usual. Um but like um David Ike this about he used to just come on. I go David Ike so tell us what the queen's a lizard and yes there are reptilian entities. Now, what David Ike would say about the uh rituals that involve child abuse are that it generates an energy that I believe they call louch that sort of is being utilized and all that adrenochrome stuff is starting to seem eerily. We're not moving away from that direction is what what I'm saying is it's like that there's one vocabulary that describes it that seems conspiratorial somewhat sort of barack in its imagery and it's and then but the other one is in here. I mean it's like child sacrifice is clearly what they play at those high altars for Mollik and Baal and Beelible like that they're demanding innocence and there is some sort of weird right component and what was Jezebel doing when Elijah had to take all that time out drove himself >> none of this is I mean it's all bad but it's certainly not anomalous or strange it's like the story of every civilization from the beginning of recorded history is always operated on the basis of what we're describing >> I saw you say what you think all of a sudden Like throughout for time in memorial, the elites, the most powerful people have had access to like sexual pleasure. You think that's all of a sudden stopped now? You think they're not doing it now because of rationalism? Because of what? So silly. Of course they're doing that. And I suppose, isn't it strange because now we can't like we can't talk around power anymore. That's what the decline of Trump does, I think, is it means you can't have this convenient, albeit temporary, symbol of resurgent American pride and nationalism through common sense and free market and America first when there's a war with Iran that appears to be beneficial to extra American interest. You can't have that anymore now. It's like, oh, right. So, you too, huh? like and that's >> But what do you mean we can't talk around power anymore? That's >> when we talk about power now I you know of course even though I don't particularly read it I can I could one can sense the hysterical glee of the Democratic left. We told you Tucker Carlson that Trump's a mad man. We told you that he was a narcissist. We we could have had Camala Harris in that White House right now. She would have never have gone to war with Iran. CAMALA HARRIS WOULD HAVE STOOD FIRM. YOU saw the way that woman described problems and definitely wasn't drinking in the daytime. She would have resolved all of this. Get her now. Is it too late? Would she do it? She might RUN AGAIN. QUICK, IT'S NOT TOO LATE. WHAT ABOUT GAVIN NEWSOME? He's got nice hair. AOC. She was a bartender, YOU KNOW. COME ON. SEE REASON. See Reason. But like also Republican party. Who we going to get excited about? I mean, look, I look, you know, I what I used to criticize when I was affiliated with the left by virtue of the class of my birth and the champagne socialism version of that as a sort of a star type guy. I used to the argument that I used to really find quite repugnant was, well, of course we know the left's not perfect. We know that Tony Blair is compromised. We know that Kia Starmer at the CPS was dreadfully authoritarian. I heard you once say you won't make me you won't convince me even at gunpoint that that guy's making decisions himself. I love that. Um like we just let them because the alternative is so much worse. The alternative is so much worse. And using that polarity modality they've bounced us around for about 100 years if not longer. If not longer and now so when I say real power surely we should be considering now. Okay. So, ethnoist, America first, populism, conservatism with kind of allusions to Christianity with without uh heeding Chesterton's warning, Christianity has not been tried and found wanting, it has been found difficult and not been tried. [laughter] And like for us to recognize it's hard to be a Christian because it starts with you. Like I'm the chest also said, I'm the problem. I'm the problem. That's the truest thing. >> And like you said, yeah, you said that. I see that resonates. >> That's the price of admission. Well, I just think that's the beginning of liberation is real. It's like the beginning of a healing. A fractured relationship is always the same. You acknowledge that it's your fault. >> Yes. >> And it stays fractured. This is true of a relationship between another person and a relationship between you and God. It only begins to be healed when you admit what you did wrong. That's just true. That's just a fact. It doesn't work otherwise, does it? >> No, it doesn't. And I'm trying to do that in the areas where I have been wrong while in the difficult situation of being accused of things I haven't done. And that's been a real little tightroppe walk and certainly more than I can. >> So are you going to get a chance to say this? I want to come by the way. >> Will you? >> Oh obviously. I mean >> I don't know if they'll let you in the dark cuz I'd like you in there. I mean they got excited when I had a Bible in there. Like they someone came and took the Bible off me. She was a lovely lady actually. But I was holding the Bible in there and also when the news report my father-in-law, my beloved father-in-law, God loved that Catholic devout lovely man Bernard Gallagher. like he's a like a serious like he's a golfer like he's a rider cup captain you know like he's a beautiful guy and he like when I saw him last I was okay what you doing Russell it says that um it said in the paper that you stood up and started trying to preach in the courtroom I was like no I did not do that I didn't like grab the Bible SO I GOING NOW HEAR THIS THERE IS ONLY ONE TRUE JUSTICE AND IT'S NOT THE CORRUPT JUSTICE OF the British I didn't do that [laughter] I just was quietly holding it then I saw someone else clutching his Bible THERE'S [laughter] BUT THEY WEREN'T METASTASIZED. >> Clinging to I think is the term we use >> clinging to his Bible which I think we saw him sexually assault earlier in [laughter] the in 1992. Like I mean like the whole like they won't miss an opportunity to turn everything negative. So when I say we can't be confused about power you with your constituency, you with your voice, how can you ever again say all right I advocate for this party or this group? It's got to be principles. It's got to be principles. It's got to be these are the principles. And the one that I keep coming to is democracy could work, but it can't work at the scale of nations. You're going to have to look at what how what the limits of democratic reach are. And we've got to let go of some pretty baked in ideas. The individuality, individual sovereignty, beautiful, but individual expressionism, the ridiculousness of you've just got to be who you truly are. What do you mean? Well, people are truly violent. They're truly corrupt. They're truly broken. They be who you are in God. Be who you are in God, not who you are according to your mad culture. That will turn you into all sorts of crazy things on a any given Sunday afternoon. Individualism doesn't work as an idea. Materialism doesn't work as an idea as a highest principle. Of course, I recognize we're in a reality that, you know, has edges. Uh and progressivism, the idea that we're advancing. People in the old days, they were idiots. We've understood this now. You they needed the Bible back then because they were dumb. We've advanced beyond that. That idea has to go as well. We have to move to a position of humility and righteousness. Righteousness means I know your real God and I know me cuz I am me and I know you've been with me all the time. So you know how broken I am. You know what I've done. You know what I've not done. So that's the basis now for the rest of my life. Seek thee first the kingdom of God and all this and his righteousness will be granted to you. If I'm in the right position with God now I can do what God wants me to do, not what I want me to do or what the culture wants me to do. So real power is God's power. But as you already alluded to in both Luke's telling and John's telling of the temptation, when the devil tempts Christ, he says, "I'll give you power over all of this. It's mine and I can give it to whoever I want." And Jesus doesn't go, "Well, steady on." He goes, "Yeah, yeah, recognize that." But actually, that's not what I'm here for. I'm paraphrasing, but like but like you know that Christ recognizes and as it says in John's first epistle, we know that the evil one is in charge of this world. And as St. Paul reminds us in Ephesians, we're fighting against dark spiritual power. So real power, I saw it on one of your shows actually and it's it was a good video title by the way, whoever came up with that. Everything is downstream of spiritual warfare. Everything is downstream. So if we operate on that basis of how is this what is this doing spiritually? What value is this promoting? What role is this casting me in? What lie am I believing in thinking that if Congress goes this way or the executive branch goes that way or the Senate does that? It's not enough anymore. We've got to look rigorously at what's happening. And I think the one principle is maximum power to individuals, to communities, to families. But you can't like go around making people be Christian at gunpoint. So it works for me. It took the breaking apart of my entire reality [laughter] in order to recognize that that that he's real. The simple fact he's real. He's here now. He rose. He didn't die. He ascended. He granted us the Holy Spirit is within you. It's not just a poem. It's a deep essential reality. It's more real than you're called Russell and you can speak this language that you didn't invent using lungs that you didn't give yourself. Walking on a land that you didn't build in an infinite space that seems to be expanding with a molecular world that's full of weird paradox and miracle. You didn't do any of that. But you can through his grace participate in it through truth. first truth, like you said, confession. Confess all this is all of my brokenness. This is who I am. Do what you want with me. And in a way, that is liberating because there is part of me, Tucker, that doesn't want to be convicted of rape and go to jail. And there is [laughter] part of there's a part of you. Hey, there's a bit of me in there. I'm trying to get rid of that little guy. But there's a part of me that also thinks, well, hang on. If this can happen, anything can happen if you can conjure it up. And also, by the way, I'm, you know, like we say, watching your content. I'm thinking, oh man, am I just some guy banging on about his divorce, like, oh, this thing happened to me. It's not fair. I can show you. [laughter] It's logically that guy. He better not be coming to dinner. Like, so like Yeah. So, um, yeah. >> Are you afraid sometimes? Yeah, sometimes. And in that fear, that fear fear like uh fear of God is the beginning of wisdom. But 365 times do not be afraid. And so what is the fear of God? Is the beginning of God has absolute power. It's the beginning of wisdom. It's not the end of wisdom. It's the beginning. So if I sort of recognize that God is the person that must be my focus, I will be taken on a journey. And if obviously God wants me to go through this because this is happening. So, but and it's also sort of kind of not odd in a bunch of ways other than the odd anomaly of I didn't do the things I'm accused of. It really makes sense in a lot of ways. I worship the world. I I um was exploitative and greedy and there's loads of ways that it makes sense. I kept missing opportunities to live a good life like God would show me, hey, look, you've got this amazing wife and these beautiful children. Should I be grateful now? And I was like, no, I should have more. Shouldn't I be powerful? you know, I keep falling into I need I obviously am a person that needs clear instruction and I've received it. [laughter] >> So, are you going to start your campaign while you're in London on trial? >> I'm starting it now. Right now. And it's in 2028. You have to, you know, like the business end of running for mayor of London's pretty practical. You pay 10 grand. You get some signatures in every single burrow of London. But this is the thing that I think is important. It doesn't matter if it's me. It matters about the ideas. If you have a green mayor of London or a reformed mayor of London or a conservative or even if Sadi Khan continues doing it, you know what you're going to get. If you vote for participatory open-source direct democracy where every single decision where possible, and I don't see why all of it wouldn't be possible and open for referenda. Switzerland does it four times a year, massive referendum. That's a whole country. You have the opportunity to change London meaningfully. Now, that is populism and populism is a kind of dirty word. People sort of seem to think that the population are dirty, that there's something wrong with people, mob rule. But I'd say what we have now is closer to mob rule. Oh, yeah. Mafia, mob, mob mentality. We know what mob means. And also, by the way, I rather object to the fundamental principle of contemporary politics by leadership and governance by appointed leaders that you don't understand. You're stupid. You don't know what we know. We need people that have been through these institutions to run government. I don't like that. I object to it on the most sort of personal sociological and and relational grounds. I some of those beautiful people I meet haven't had formal education. Some of the most intelligent people I meet haven't had a formula formal education. And the idea that power belongs to an elite is for me is disgusting. And I think for a minute, if I can be entirely honest, I was so sort of um blindsided and overwhelmed by the events that, you know, we've talked about a lot over the course of this conversation that I actually forgot you're supposed to be doing something for other people. You're not meant to be here just for you. You're supposed to be doing something for other people. And the idea that someone as um self-involved as I have been, as narcissistic, socistic, hedonistic, and indulgent, as epicuran as I've been in my life, will now say, I listen, it doesn't even matter if it's me. I don't It doesn't matter if I'm the mayor of London. The system, this idea is what matters. Open source direct democracy where you vote for if you want cameras or this kind of policing or that kind of policing. Is it Facebook or is it knife crime? What do you care about? You're not stupid. You're not an idiot. And indeed, it is possible to transcend this hysterical, endless conflict between uh Muslims in the UK, gay people versus stra is pointless. It's irrelevant. It's abstract. I care more about my dog dying than the horrors in Gaza because when my dog dies, I'm falling apart in grief and I'm coughing and I'm puking out. And that's how God made me. Of course, I should do everything in my power to prevent genocide and destruction and war and hypocrisy and lies, but I got a lot of that in house and [laughter] and until I deal with that, I'm no good to anybody. I'm no good to anybody. Maybe people in London shouldn't be thinking about Israel Palestine all the time. Maybe they should be thinking about how to run London themselves. How do you want it run? It's up to you. Why are you an idiot? Did you believe what they told you? Do you want to live in what they told you forever? Or do you want to take this precious gift of life granted to you by God or an unknown cosmic force of random molecular chance that somehow ended in your consciousness and everyone you love and grief and mourning and poetics and archetype and participate in it while you're here all too briefly unless you accept him repent and enter into eternity through him. That's one route and yeah we got a book about that. Also though, you could be running your community if it's bothering you at all. Then the post Epstein file release era, we're still just like, maybe we should have this one or that one. Oh, do what do you think? Like what? We've been told they're mad occultists having sex with children on an island. WHAT DO YOU NEED TO KNOW? HOW MUCH LONGER? HOW MUCH LONGER? I'M JUST SO glad there's the footage out there of me on YouTube or on Bill Maher or wherever saying, "Hey, listen. Fox News is no worse than MSNBC or no better." You know, it's out there. I've said it on the television and I'm saying it now. And I'm saying it now from a position of I recognize the position I'm in. I recognize my own fallibility and brokenness. I don't think I should be in char. I don't think anyone should be in charge. They're all broken and fallen. The problem with representative democracy is on that little horse ride from their constituency to Congress or to Westminster where 400 years ago representative democracy at least had a rational undergirling as well as no obvious technological solution. It seems that other interests get in the ear of these people and say, "Maybe would you vote this way?" Or, "Maybe would you never say that again?" Or, "Maybe shut your MOUTH RIGHT NOW." AND IF WE don't change that fundamental flaw, then you're going to live in an endless whirling downward cycle, a senseless spiral of their insanity, which we could intervene in with the one gift we know we have. Consciousness, love, life, glory, inclusive of everyone beyond. It's not your job to worry about whether someone's a Muslim or a Jew or an atheist or homosexual. You worry about running your own life. Here you vote. Do you want that? Yes or no? No. Okay. 67% of people voted no. We're not doing that anymore. We want another vote. Okay, we'll have another vote. Not like Brexit where just keep voting till we can do what we were going to do anyway. [laughter] NOT LIKE EVERY SINGLE general election till all right, even Trump, but even someone who seems pretty in themselves eventually over time. I thought that was a great post you did by the way, like you know event like give him some grace. That was great. Um, like even someone like him can be just turned into whatever they want and and like the people that are ultra conspiratorial and I think probably closer to the truth than any of us would say, "We told you all along it doesn't matter who you vote for, you're going to get the same results." Like, you know, the macro picture, you know, the geopolitical picture better than anybody, but that they I think the only way to do it is this this thing I'm starting to trust from being in your country. The American people are beautiful. They're brilliant. They're not full of hatred. I'm like down there in like the pan handle. They're not all they're not all like caught up in racism and bigotry. They just want to love their families and stuff. I saw a brilliant thing in my country, the farmer movement in my country is lively. The people love their land, you know, John Bull. John Bull is like a British archetype, you know, and like >> they're getting into it and it's kicking off as you will be obviously aware in Ireland and like I saw something on the BBC said like like in the countryside it's too white and farmers are too racist. And it like made me laugh out loud because I thought like imagine being a farmer and the sort of graft involved, the jobs, the duty, the toil, the trial, right? We got to get up, we got to plant those crops, we got to till that field, we got to feed those cows. We've got to get in there and cleanse that soil for next year. Then I have to stop for a while, burn some Qurans. Then I've got to [laughter] go then I've got to shout a hate language over a over a hedge into an adjacent field. This field goes fow. This one here, this one's from my bizarre rituals of racial hatred. That's my homophobia barn. [laughter] Barers don't have time. So, they're telling you that people have got problems that they don't have. The British countryside's white because that's where British white people have lived for ages now. Like, what are you making people hate one another for? It's reached a kind of an absurd frequency. And I feel that the that he I believe in him. He's real. So, either I'll uh run for mayor of London and nothing will happen or I'll run for mayor of London and go jail or I'll run for but what will happen if people talk is the idea of hold on a minute. Yeah, hold on. That technology they're saying will work for our digital ID. Wait a minute, that would work and then we wouldn't have dominion voting machines that might be maybe centrally corruptible and compromised. You put the docu democracy in the hands of the people. open source it. The technology exists now. That's why dear Joby Weeks is on house arrest. You should talk to that guy, by the way. He like he was a Bitcoin entrepreneur. He did some mining early on. He got rich too quickly. The FBI just came, took all of his equipment, put him in jail. They've confiscated billions from this guy. He's in he's under house arrest this day. He's awaiting trial. You should meet him. So like we're in these areas of innoving exists. The grace exists. The righteousness exists. The talent exists. this whole country that came from like dirt and and paganism and in 250 years is the most powerful and unprecedented and glorious nation in history which I by the way I think it is Jerusalem now because if Israel was the original people and Paul says go to the Gentiles and our Lord says be a light to all nations and everyone will come from everywhere I start to sound familiar and all of these railroad entrepreneurs and all of these miners and this rich soil and the furriers and the trappers and the banks and everything then all a sudden it gets captured in a peculiar way that I don't quite understand and it's got another agenda. This is a the greatest country in earth on earth. This this this could be Jerusalem. But that won't happen with current institutional biases. Don't you reckon if the founding fathers of your nation were alive now, they'd say, "What should we do to implement the changes that are possible now as a result of extraordinary advance?" Russell Brand, how to become a Christian in seven days. I I think it's pretty obvious that God is using you and I'm going to your trial. >> Oh, good. Thanks. October the 7th. [laughter] >> Me, is it actually October the 7th? >> Oh my god, I didn't even see that. >> Yes, it is. >> Your trial is October 7th. >> You know, one of my friends said to me from he goes he goes, "What I know about the state and the kind of interest we're talking around is they do things preemptively. Like if they think right if we're going to take this course of action what are the potential obstacles in this reason all right well preemptively get rid of that one get rid of that one get rid of that one right that's the puff I didn't realize yeah it's >> I assume you're preach hearing us on 9/11 [laughter] >> just I'm just guessing I don't know thank you for that >> thank you >> we're proud to launch our new bookstore with Russell Brand's how to become a Christian in seven days it is the message this country needs most today on tuckercussbooks.com