Go run, run! The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night! All day! Bropaca, it's very nice to meet you. Hi Joe, very nice to meet you too. So, first of all, what got you interested in mind control? Well, so this is a question I've been asking myself just because I find myself after two and half decades of having this topic, that initially seemed pretty niche and unusual and not many people were interested or many people were skeptical about it, but I thought it seemed like it embodied some of the more extreme. If you could look at the way people are shaped by their environments and by their, you know, what parts of your life are determined by you and what parts are determined by outside resources that mind control would be a perfect area to investigate that because it's so extreme, especially if you looked at particular cases. So, I, because I had done my dissertation at UC Berkeley on the history of behavioral engineering and how, you know, these kind of models for creating a society of control and encouragement in various ways, like a behaviorist kind of dream. And it seemed like the next step was to look at something like brainwashing or mind control. When you first started studying it, was it a less public sort of curiosity? Because now a lot of people are very much interested and I blame the internet. Well, obviously, I probably had a lot to do it too. But this is... You and the internet. A lot of people on the internet are, you know, because over time, you know, people have gotten to know about MK Ultra and a bunch of different programs that our own United States government was involved in, whether they were working on mind control. But what, like, initially, what drew you to it? Well, I guess I always have been drawn to topics that seemed unusual, maybe, for professor to be looking into on people. I mean, at the time, if you look at a Google engram for the word mind control or brainwashing, they were very low, you know, around the turn of the century or the 1990s. After there was a peak of interest in the 70s and it just really fallen off. But I guess I was interested because it just seemed so unusual. And like maybe there was something there that people hadn't really thought about. And at the time, these documents weren't readily available. And like you say, people weren't really looking into it. So I just thought it seemed like a rich area for research. And I'm also interested in connecting my person. I've always been interested in connecting my personal, I guess, my goals for life with what I researched. So I thought it's almost like a philosophical and existential question of how much we're controlled or how much we might be controlled. And it seemed important to look at some of the more extreme cases, if you could. Yeah, I think that that's an interesting aspect of it. Like how much are we controlled and how arrogant are we to think that we're not controlled? Or how arrogant are we to think that that wouldn't work on me? Yeah, I think that that's embedded in our, you know, in the messages we receive all the time that freedom is something kind of effortless that we're just granted. And that autonomy is just the natural state. But actually we're so much more malleable than we think. And these things, if you look around yourself, or if you observe yourself, you'll often see this to be true. That's what also drew me to anthropology is just the idea. Like if I was born in another place at another time, I would be another person. Or how much of me would be transferable was what that interested me. That's why I went to first started studying anthropology. Like how much are we shaped by things that we don't necessarily choose? Or are maybe accidental or genetic or various factors. But yeah, but I think we're told that freedom of freedom of choice or our autonomy is fairly straightforward. And all you have to do is exert your will. Yeah, but clearly we're influenced heavily by environment culturally. I mean accents, just cultural traditions, behavior patterns. It begs the questions like what are you and what is the shell that you wear on the outside? You know, like a hermit crab. Like what do you carry around with you? And what are you? Yeah, I mean, that is the oldest question of Socrates, who am I? Yeah. It's a deep question and it's also kind of like a practical question. So I thought if you could look at it more in actual examples, that would be interesting. And I also, I guess I was drawn to the topic. Yeah, maybe because other people weren't studying it or also because of experiences in my life. Just seemingly small things. Like one day I remember when I was in graduate school, I was walking down the street and I said, we passed a small dog and I said, I really hate small dogs. And I realized as I said it that it wasn't true. That I just like I love it. I actually really like them. What's wrong with small dogs? I had absorbed this opinion from somewhere. But like a person that such as I was aspiring to be, only like just big dogs or something. But just noticing in yourself the way you soak up opinions and you're shaped by even seemingly trivial things. And then also on a more profound level, you can see that happening. Maybe wonder like what could you learn from looking at these cases where people really seem to have been brainwashed in history or radically reshaped. And when there's brainwashing yourself, because if you say I hate small dogs, now you have to kind of defend it. And even if you say, God, it's not even true. But there's got to be reasons to hate small dogs. I don't want to come off as a moron who just says things. There are other people who feel the same. It turns out, yeah, I mean either you end up doubling down on that opinion because you don't want to feel silly to yourself. I mean, I think sometimes we're just a series of adopted opinions that we've done. Adhere to, and I guess being in graduate school also made me feel that way because you're rapidly learning and absorbing a new vocabulary. Learning things you should say, learning things you shouldn't say, ways you should express yourself and ways you shouldn't. That seemed very like a deeply shaping process. And as interested in, how did social sciences, like was there a science of this process of shaping or sometimes called it cannibalizing or making a canal of behavior so that people would end up wanting to do what it was that socially necessary for them to do? Well, universities are a great place for that, right? Because you get away from your parents for the first time who have indoctrinated you into their cult, like you're born into the cult of your parents, and then you leave and you're like, let me get away from these crazy people and now I'm going to become a whatever. Now I'm going to figure out what group most aligns with my ideas and join them and rebel and fight against the machine and become a part of a new cult. Exactly. Where's the thing different or adopt, I suddenly don't like certain kinds of dogs, right? There are certain things. You have an interruption in the fabric of your extensive conditioning and it's also an opportunity. It's not an nefarious thing necessarily, but it can take that just that truth about people. I think it can be nefarious for some people, unfortunately. But I think for a lot of people just considering new ways to think about things is probably valuable. It's probably a good thing to have the opportunity to reconsider the way that you've sort of like, canald, the grooves that have been deeply carved into your personality, where you automatically go towards certain things or think about certain things. I always think just an interruption is often good. Oh yeah. In your patterning. Yeah, that's why I think moving is really good. We're traveling. Mm-hmm. Yeah. I've read that you have had a steady meditation practice. I've read it was like two hours a day for 25 years. Yeah. That's a lot of time to be meditating. Yeah. It really helped me so much when I learned to meditate that I never wanted to miss an hour. So I've never missed an hour except when I was giving birth to my daughter, which was its own thing. That's what I'm like. And you get a break for meditation for that. You get all about. I just, and it's not like anyone made me or I necessarily thought I would do that. It's just that it's something that gave me a lot of perspective and peace. And I guess I just didn't want to go back. So I do think it informs how I do research or I try to bring what I learn in meditation into my, into what I do. Did you an hour, the morning and an hour at night? Yeah. For a year, I think a couple of times I've tried adding more in the morning. So two hours or so in the morning and an hour in the evening or something, which has an effect, but it's hard to, it's hard to make room in your life sometimes. Overshore. But it does, you can sleep a little bit less. Yeah. Well, you don't want to make yourself sleep less, but sometimes it just does reduce the amount you need. Just by meditating. That's what I found. Interesting. How much sleep do you need? I used to sleep like eight and a half hours and then now I sleep about seven or six and a half or if I'm really tired, I might sleep a little extra, but I ended up just, yeah. So it's so much changed my life that I just, I move things around so I could always do it. So and try to be adaptable. So I could, I just mostly get up at, at a regular meditation time, which is like 430. What kind of meditation? I do the Pasana, which is a form of Buddhist meditation. Pretty. It's just a form of observation or someone once described it as practice and seeing things as they are. So you try to just, it's not trying to, you know, apply a lens over something or chanting. It's just a very, it's a way of, it's cultivating observation of the subtle body, ultimately, or just what is in front of you. And so you just sit in peace and think? Well, it's not always peaceful. There is sometimes, yeah, but finding peace as far as looking out bouncing around. You're, yeah, sometimes I'm sitting sometimes I'm, I've also had, you know, I've adapted to when my daughter was little sometimes I'd hold her and be putting her to sleep or something. But mostly I'm just sitting there and with eyes closed and then you, you kind of move, observe just how you are and the more you practice it, the more you can kind of go into it more deeply quickly. I would think that that would be a good protection from unwanted mind control to release. You could kind of have an assessment, do an audit of your thoughts and sit back and and say, oh, how much of the shit I believe is because of X or because of Y. Yeah, it's like a built-in reflection. So the end of the day I have to say I'm often less still or peaceful with my mind's jumping around and I'm like processing. Maybe it's even what I watched or was exposed to and it's sort of a processing experience. And sometimes you're super distracted, but you can also notice that fact. It just builds in an opportunity for some distance which then you can also try to bring into your life too. Were you, when you were young, had you ever been exposed to any cults or anything like that? That's a good question. Not when I was really young. Like how old were you when you were first exposed to cults? In fact, I think so. That's a good question. I mean, my family is sort of cult of verse, I would say. My father, I think they had friends once in later life. My parents had these friends who got involved in a large group awareness training which is somewhat culty and they take you in and you're not allowed to use the bathroom and they lock you kind of like keep you in a room until you're really uncomfortable and start to have revelations about how you could change your life. And these are, you know, it's stuff like how long they make you not go to the bathroom. It's to the point where it's uncomfortable. I can't remember it's a long afternoon going into the evening and often people come out kind of converted and my parents' friends actually did and they did change their lives in various ways so they said you have to come. And my dad in the middle that he said, I have to go to the bathroom and I'm not, he's like, I'm out of here and he just left so I figured he had a kind of, he was not a programmable in that way. Well I feel like any group that doesn't want you to go to the bathroom is stupid. It's probably a sign. Yeah, there's no reason to not go to the bathroom or if you have to go to the bathroom that's ridiculous. I mean it's a kind of, it's a, it is typical of certain groups where they start to constrain your and if, and people who might be willing to remain in that uncomfortable state and be constrained will end up staying longer and sort of a self selecting process maybe. That makes sense right. The people that are more willing to comply. Yeah and I guess with me maybe the closest, the first brush with a colt would be something like the various yoga teachers I've worked with. Oh so many of them are so culty. Yeah. There's one kind of funny stories I got very into yoga when I was living in Oakland, also in graduate school and I, I would go, it was, it was really helpful with school just to have a very physical demanding practice and, but there was a whole community around it and it turned out that the teacher was sleeping with many of the students but I just didn't know it. I thought he was, I don't know. I thought he was, I admired him. I brought my boyfriend at the time to pick, he came to pick me up after class and he said something like, and he's now my husband. He said, oh it just, I just got the vibe that everyone there is sleeping with everybody else and I was shocked. I was like, no that's not happening. But it actually was, he could say it's a bit. I don't think it was a cult but it certainly was a scandal. Yeah. I had the exact same experience. The first time I started taking yoga, there was a guy who was a yoga teacher who I have always been very wary of control and controlling people and those kind of environments and that this guy was like, there was something inauthentic about his spirituality that greased me the wrong way. I was like, yuck. Like just the way he would chant and the things he would say. There was just too much ego involved and I found out he was banging all students and I was like, of course he is. I knew it because my wife wrote me into going to the class. That was the first time I went. I was like, I really liked the stretching because like really great. I really like yoga itself as a practice. But I mean the problem is these people that are in it's kind of the problem with everything. Like when one person is in control and one person is the person who gets to lead the class and then they get praise heaped upon them by the students and then they start to think that they deserve it and then they don't have a lot of self reflection and they're not very objective and then they sort of revel in it and enjoy it and the next thing you know they're taking advantage of it and so I feel like it. Yeah. It's very helpful to have that defense rate on our own of a certain kind. Also sometimes I think these prominent teachers they have had some sort of, I don't want to say enlightenment experience but some sort of breakthrough. Something that felt profound to them because many people do. We now know that these experiences are incredibly common and yet so they take that as a kind of license. Well now I must be enlightened or what I'm, you know I have to take the mantle. My people are awaiting this or they sort of then justify things they wouldn't otherwise. Spiritual narcissism. Yeah. It can actually engender that because of or yeah and I think there's some, this has been described to spiritual narcissism as a good phrase though. It's legit. Yeah. Yeah you see a lot of it. There's a lot of it in the psychedelic community, a lot of it is the meditation community, a lot of it in the yoga community. So they just start thinking that they're better than people that don't do it. Yeah it feels very special. If you have a special experience it's really dangerous. It becomes very dangerous and afterwards to not have it feed your ego and even if you had a profound breakdown of the ego when you were in a psychedelic state. It is fascinating to me though that you can tell the difference for the most part if you're really paying attention between someone who's authentically expressing their real thoughts versus someone who's saying things that they think if they say these things they will get praise or they will get attention or you will think that they're profound. We know bullshit. Humans know there's like a smell to it, a feel to it. If you're paying attention but for whatever reason it's just like some people have big ears, some people have small ears. Some people just are not that good at picking up on that stuff for whatever reason. Life experience they have been burned enough times like whatever it is and that's where cults get started and I'm fascinated by cults. I've always been fascinated by them because I've watched, I don't know how many documentaries on cults and in the beginning it looks so fun. That's the problem. Did you ever see the documentary while while country, the Netflix series? Yes. It's amazing right? And you're like they look like they're having a great time. They're all dancing together and playing drums and having a party and eating together and it's like a sense of community and yeah. This episode is brought to you by Uber Eats. Summer is almost here and you can now get almost anything you need for your sunny days delivered with Uber Eats. What do I mean by almost? Well, you can't get a well groomed lawn delivered but you can get chicken Parmesan delivered. Catamaran, that's a no lemon meringue. That's a yes, a day in the sun, no a bottle of rum. Yes, Uber Eats can definitely help you out with that. Get almost anything delivered with Uber Eats. Order now. For alcohol, you must be legal drinking age. Please enjoy responsibly product availability varies by region. See app for details. That documentary was so successful. I think for that very reason it actually perpetuates the allure of that of OSHA and that alcohol because their outfits look kind of cool and the colors are beautiful and they're swirling, cavorting dances. My husband grew up in the Bay Area and he was saying he, you know, as a kid he would run into members of that. And he said what you don't see in the documentary and he blames the documentary for not showing this efficiently is they were frequently armed. So on the side where you're not seeing it, they're holding, you know, automatic weapons. They really in a way they fell into the smell of a cult in the documentary. A bit really interesting. That's interesting. Wow, I did not know that. And you have to have a guy like OSHA because like the way he would talk about things and you know his slow way of talking the people. You know his beard and the Rolls Royces and everything. It's like good Lord. And he was really much more of a cocaine adduct or enthusiasm people also recognize. I think he gets off a little easy in that documentary as well partly because they're interviewing people who are still to some extent devoted or they want to maintain that OSHA. Well also the one was her in Stella. Yeah. She was so crazy. She was poisoning people. She was such a great villain that it made him like if she wasn't in the documentary he would be the villain. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. She pulls the focus. Yes. Yeah, most certainly. And the fact that she's still alive too that sort of helps as well. But I feel like it's a default thing in the human psyche because of our ancient history of living in tribes. That human beings have been very tribal and I think being a part of a tribe, one of the things that happens is you sort of have to go along with the way everybody else is doing things. If you want to fit in and you want to adapt and especially if you're growing up in the tribe you don't know any different. This is the only group and being ostracized from the tribe and kicked out is like oh my goodness that's the worst thing in the world. Now you're alone. You have to fend for yourself. There's no way you can. You have to protect yourself from the wilderness and the animals and the elements and predators and other humans and oh so you have to it's very dangerous to be alone. So you have to adapt to the tribe itself. I think that's true. Yeah, small scale societies have to I mean even the word cult in its technical or dictionary definition doesn't necessarily mean abusive. Right. Organization it just means small scale religious group that maybe you know I think people deeply yearn for that sense of belonging. That's why it does look so fun and by all reports is very fun to get inducted into a cult people get these exhilarated states they often have altered experiences of altered consciousness and they're empowered by it too. Well fun fact before I bought the place that I put my comedy club on 6th Street I was under contract for a theater called the one world theater that was run by this cult and I kind of vaguely heard about it and my friend Ron told me that the theater is amazing because we were talking about buying a comedy club you should buy that place and so I got under my friend Adam called me up it goes have you seen the documentary on that cult I'm like oh no there's a documentary that's never good. It's really bad the documentary is called Holy Hell and it's about this guy who's a hypnotist a yoga teacher and a gay porn star and that's a one two three combination and he started out as cult in West Hollywood and then after Waco after that went down the cult awareness network started really cracking down and they were investigating him so he changed his name and moved to Austin and had his followers build him this theater fortunately I got out of the deal but I guess he was selling it well he was gone it had already fallen apart the cult had completely fallen apart but what's fascinating is in the documentary in the beginning again it looks amazing they're all cooking together and eating together and doing yoga and they look so happy and let's just be honest modern society the day to day grind the you know keeping up with the Jones's the stuck in traffic and doing things you hate under fluorescent lights in a cubicle all day long it's not attractive not only is it not attractive it makes cults attractive and these people were longing for something that was that showed them that no you're right this is stupid the way your parents lived is stupid the way all these people live in society you know the way through a described men living lives of quiet desperation like yeah that sucks yeah you don't have to live like that man come live with us man and this guy was able to do this thing called the knowing and the knowing was it was very difficult again people wanted it and he wouldn't give it to them like you had it but when he would give it to you you would sit there and he would put his hands like his thumbs on your head and touch you and these people would go into this intense state of bliss that even after they did this documentary even after they realized he was a charlatan and they left the cult and they said that that moment was the greatest moment of their life when this because of the power of suggestion of the way the human mind anticipated this event and then built up to it and then when it finally happened this endogenous burst of suck of whatever it is in the mind I don't watch chemicals were being released but these people claim that they contacted God for this brief moment where this man touched them they kind of understood everything yeah briefly so it kind of worked even though he was having sex with everybody now he's having sex with these people he was charging them you charge these guys for therapy and then have sex with them and you know and they would talk about it afterwards like thanks a lot like it was so horrible because like the end the documentary so bad at the end of the documentary is like I got to get out of this deal like it's still there it's not a sage in the world to burn off the bad juju that happened in this joint that's true yeah so it just felt like horrible yeah the life cycle of a cult has that what you just described and sometimes in accelerated but sometimes it plays out slower over time but a lot of times people are very confused on leaving if safe they're taken out as maybe even children rescued by FBI from abusive groups or people who manage to escape abusive cults they still have trouble evaluating their positive experiences because the positive was so good and disentangling it and you know you feel that you need to delegitimize that too but I think so that's why I think therapy can be helpful someone who's experience with cult next members I think the problem also is that it's their only community and if you have to leave your own the community and then just strike it out in the world and you've been with this community for 20 years or whatever it is what do you do how do you do it how how do you find peace yeah how do you find companionship how do you find like that sense of camaraderie that's so deeply embedded in a tight knit small community and a lot of times when you when you come out if it's say it was 18 or 20 years or a large portion of your middle life maybe when in as a young person you come out and you don't know your you know don't know how to operate things you don't have the right you don't you're not comfortable with new technologies you feel I think that it's really a terrible experience for a lot of people and they still grapple with it many years later readjusting to society because the critique they had originally which was profound as you're saying you know not wanting to live a life of quiet desperation not still there critique but it just wasn't answered I would say like someone come up with a really good cult I'll join come with a couple of flits one that like you answer all the questions but you don't try to control me and you're just nice isn't there a cult where someone's not trying to have sex with everybody and not trying to steal all your money isn't it possible to do that just to like get together a group of like-minded individuals and I guess that would be more of a commune but even that there's always some male generally male leader who ruins everything it does seem to be I think some of the so there seem to be in the 70s so many cults and back to the land groups and some of the back to the back to land stories I'll also you know have many cautionary sides to them and many of the aspects of cults it is the back to the land so just people leaving the city setting off to the country and starting in like an intentional community I guess would be what you're right what you're describing with the idea that we're going to collectively raise even collectively raise our children, uh, Sal Hammocks or you know make our own jam or or you could save in monasteries maybe aspire to this kind of religious organizations also. to really raise our children, sell hammocks or, you know, make our own jammer, or you could save in monasteries maybe aspire to this, you know, kind of religious organizations also have that intentional quality. And so I've done some research into some of these because you wouldn't consider them, called necessarily, but they can end up having some of those qualities such as sexual, just the demand that people have sex with each other, which tends to just create a lot of chaotic circumstances. Why do you think it always enlives that? Why does it always go that way? I don't know. I mean it's very interesting because I've even read Norman Khan's classic history of millen, millenialism, which are a lot of groups in the Middle Ages and afterwards that the Christian sets where they would break off and including things like the children's crusade and others, and they often would end up with the kind of free love, even though they're very devout and extreme and sort of devoted to giving up their worldly possessions. There was sometimes this component of this kind of sexual freedom that would end up destructively having destructive outcomes. Do you think that is just because of just genetics, just the the encoded desire to spread your seed because life is very fragile and especially in tribal life when you're going back to the hunter-gatherer days, people didn't live very long and it was very difficult to like have you ever met a red John Marco Allegros? Any of his work? He wrote The Sacred Mushroom in the Cross, which is a fascinating book about the Dead Sea Scrolls, and he's got a very controversial perspective on Christianity and his perspective was and this guy was an ordained minister who was agnostic because he was in an ordained minister but then we started studying theology, he started seeing all these parallels to all these various religions and he was like well you know clearly like it's not one religion has it right. There's something in all these things but it's not like I have to, I am a Catholic and that's it or I'm in Muslim and that's it. He was like there's something here that exists throughout all them, this is constant threat. So he gets hired to be one of the people that deciphers the Dead Sea Scrolls. So the Dead Sea Scrolls which is you know a parchment which is you know like animal skins and they have to do you know the whole story behind it. They found them in these clay tab, these clay pots and kumran and these caves and it turns out to be like some of the oldest works of the Bible. Well he decipers it for 14 years and after 14 years his conclusion is that the entire religion was based on fertility rituals and the consumption of psychedelic mushrooms and that all of this had been sort of hidden in parables and stories but he maintains that the root of it all was all about these people and these cults of fertility rituals and consuming psychedelic mushrooms and he even brought the, he traced the word Christ back to in this very controversial for Christians and your hackles up. I'm not saying I grew with this but he traced the word Christ back to an ancient Sumerian word which meant a mushroom covered in God's semen. The idea was that when it rained it was God fertilizing the earth and that these mushrooms would like instantaneously rise like they would go to bed and in the morning the mushrooms would be there where they weren't there before. They would consume these mushrooms and have these intense psychedelic experiences and then they tried to hide this stuff from the Romans and so they hid it in parables and they hid it in stories. This is what his belief was. Well it kind of reminds me what you're describing which I don't have a redder but I think it reminds me a little of Aldous Huxley's idea of the perennial philosophy which is that there's a, if you study across religions you can find certain traits and properties that all share and he wrote a whole book describing what that was. Then his last book that he wrote before he died was called the island and it was sketching out what he believed would be just what you described a non-obusive, a place where a small scale community where humans could flourish and it wouldn't involve including it would avoid sexual abuse and one of the features I always remember from this which maybe relates to what what you're saying is that he said there would be trained parrots on all the trees and every 15 minutes or so they would say attention which would remind people to pay attention. You know there was to break that tendency we all have to succumb to you know loops of conditioning and things like that because I think yeah as you're saying fertility is a natural part of human life and often worshipped. With how much your privacy is being vaded online VPNs are no longer just a nice thing to have it's a necessity. Some people think I don't need a VPN because I have nothing to hide but that's exactly what data brokers want you to think because their profits depend on you having nothing to hide. What you do online is your business and if you want to keep at your business you need express VPN with express VPN 100% of your online activity travels through secure encrypted servers it hides your IP address so no one can use it to track and sell your online activity and your privacy is restored. Express VPN is also a great tool to secure your sensitive information from hackers. If you're using public Wi-Fi like at a hotel, airport or coffee shop anyone can hijack your connection and access your most sensitive information. With Express VPN you know that your passwords and banking info are safe and secure. Express VPN is the number one ranked VPN by the experts at CNET and the Verge and right now you can get an amazing deal they're offering four extra months free if you go to express VPN dot com slash Rogan or tap the banner if you're watching on YouTube you can get your four free months by scanning the QR code on screen or clicking the link in the description. It worships and also it's it's so deeply ingrained because it was so it was so important in the beginning because you literally could go extinct. It was very difficult to survive. We're so much weaker than everything else around us. We're so fragile life is an infant mortality was so high. It was so difficult to raise a child to adulthood that you had to have as many of them as possible just to ensure that the survival of your tribe. And I think unfortunately this is what gets distorted in all of these groups. And this is where things go sideways because then you evolve involve emotions and you involve ego and dominance hierarchies and it seemed like even if Alda's Houghley's idea if Houghley's idea was great and you had an island and everything was going well. It did be good for like one generation and then the kids of the next generation would grow up and one would decide you know what I can a fucking better idea than that. Someone would go straight Jim Jones. You know they would start growing some plant that was an infatamine and then start getting wacky. Human beings being human beings. Yeah. I mean also there's an interesting paradox or tension in ecstasy itself. I mean there's religious ecstasy and there's sexual ecstasy and I think sometimes they get mixed up like the flowers can get across so that can lead to someone maybe initially I don't know these groups just the tendency they can have to go towards sexual abuse. Why do you think that during the 1970s there is big upswing in these cults? Well it started in the 60s from my understanding although they were they did exist before then but yeah there's a lot more interest in them I suppose because there's a there's a what more widespread questioning in US society and also world you know around the world so cults flourished also in Japan and Europe and Latin America and also India so certain. Do they have parallels? Yeah they're parallel. Sometimes they would have branch organizations in different countries so some people say in the group the children of God sometimes they'd be the kids would be sort of moved from group to group because they had outposts in Thailand and they would grow up in London and then... Who was the leader of the children of God which owns that? This was a guy named David Berg. This is the cult in which the river Phoenix and his family. Oh they were in it but not I think the parents ultimately took them out it's a really messed up a very disturbing cult and I actually write about and have met a member who's just sort of an average member named Ray Connolly. I met him at a meeting of the International Cultic Studies Association and he left after 30 years but he just describes in a riveting way how he how he joined I think that's kind of representative of why cults started to flourish in the 70s so he was a young man in college and he was just feeling he said he just felt that you know the old the traditions that his parents had brought him up in and Catholicism that he'd been raised in was he just felt that he lacked meaning in his life he didn't he felt like reality was over there and he was separated from it by you know there was like a saran wrap over everything so he felt somewhat alienated but he didn't know what the answer would be he kind of yearned for a religious experience and he moved he went out to California and he what I think out of he was at a concert at University at the in Santa Barbara and he saw this group walking through during intermission and they were wearing these robes and chanting and it was right after the Manson trial and murders so he in his mind was this you know he was scared of them he thought that looks like a cult but later you know even though we had that thought you would end up joining them for 30 years because he saw them during a later after the event and he went back to talk to them because something drew him to them he's about I think he had dropped out of college by this time and he said that they were eating sandwiches and they looked a lot more casual and approachable than they had earlier and they he just said who's asking them questions and they said would you like to recite the sinners prayer right now and dropped to your knees and you know and he said yeah for some reason he said yes because what is the sinners prayer it's it's just a it's a verse that actually is not from the Bible but often would be used as a recruiting tool and it did result in this sort of out-of-body experience he recited it and then he said he stood up and he felt changed by this but it turned out that David Berg he didn't know the name of the group and they said why don't you join us and he took he in other words he kept taking small steps towards it and pretty soon he found himself on the bus with this group and he still didn't know the name of it and they were all testifying about how they had you know been converted and he he was asked to you know add to the testimony and he started talking about JD Salinger because he was just an alienated youth basically and nobody understood what he was talking about they all just started singing and covering up his words but any any thought several times of leaving and getting off the bus going to see his ex girlfriend he had just broken up with his girlfriend but he ended up staying and he ended up marrying three women and just three well at first it was one they had an arranged marriage and then it turned out the this guy who ran the group David Berg he was a former furniture salesman he then had some you know he believed that he got these messages direct from the almighty the messages told him that he needed to ramp up his recruiting by having women do this practice called flirty fishing where they would go out and basically seduce men into the cult and then he started introducing these practices where they were supposed to have sex with children because his idea was this was natural and so many generations of kids were raised in this cult with this were either trafficked or abused and it's really horrific and Ray Connolly's interesting because he didn't engage in those things he did end up having 17 children in the cult and but he 17 kids I think he did have something uh he's a fascinating person because he left and he spent his time supporting survivors and which is very unusual what about a 17 kids and they came out too how do they how does he have time for anything else? They're not mostly grown because he is quite he's quite elderly but I guess just the it's interesting to hear him talk about how he saw the group changing and how what started out to be this profound experience soon he called it a dark hamster wheel of the soul like he was caught and it became this basically they were exploiting him in his middle age years he rose into sort of mid level bureaucracy within the cult anyway this cult children of God has and today still exists has a different name they had they still have the same practice uh no they they say they reformed but many people are still pursuing lawsuits against them things like that who are adults today um they had you know groups throughout the world and they would move kids around and things like that. The Manson family is a fascinating one right because I know that you have studied jolly west and the the whole MK ultra program and what they were experimenting with with psychedelic drugs and cults of mind control um do you what is it what is your perspective on why they were doing that? Why uh why jolly west was involved? Why were they involved? What do you think was the initial motivation to sort of pursue mind control studies the federal government? I think the initial motivation was a kind of national internal emergency national security emergency that emerged right after World War II actually at the beginning of the Korean War uh when US pilots were coming back or were shown confessing to having shown flown germ war fair emissions over China and then many POWs were coming back and um seemed to have been converted to communism or have been concerningly affected by something that was seen as brainwashing by so many of the the soldiers coming back seemed to have been brainwashed or have been have collaborated to some degree when they were held as prisoners and then there were 21 uh US POWs who elected to stay in China and this really was a disturbing um you know they all had a chance to choose when they were in the UN camps after they've been held prisoner for four years or so and 21 of them decided that they'd like to try their lot in China and so this caused this kind of collective this this uh caused a crisis of you know did the communist possess a super weapon of some some kind that no other war there was even a famous article in the New Yorker that said something new in history that there was something that some capacity that this ideological system had the communist had that would that was somehow rendering Americans uh powerless against it so this this was kind of the crisis of mind control and MK ultra was an attempt to to to basically reverse engineer what this was so jolly west was one of the first people he was he was in charge of studying the brainwashed pilots initially and that's how he what year was that was in 52 but he also before that he was involved I mean his he had been trained to some degree with um he was trained by uh Harold Wolf who was at Cornell he had done his residency at Cornell with Dr. Harold Wolf who is a a world emerologist world expert in migraine and and basically the type of pain that comes from migraine so you could say it was an expert in the pain fear pain cycle and he had CIA connections from even before MK ultra was started so what did they determine the Chinese were doing so they determined west uh wrote a paper in 1957 and the part that was publicly that was published in a journal called sociometry described uh he described it as d d d or debility uh dependency and dread and he said basically these camps uh were systematically inducing a state of debility which which was that uh soldiers were starved and basically worn down they were uh deprived of medical care they were I mean this is also in the historical record something I studied extensively is that you know they had men were marched in for example the tiger death march north of the yala river from uh you know from the war where they've been captured and by the time they got there they'd often lost half their body weight they had been uh bombed by their own horses at night they sometimes you know where they had to pour the blood out of their boots every morning just to keep going and not be anyone who stopped would be shot so by the time they got to the camps they were really worn down and a missionary who saw the who passed them in a train at that time wrote or described in an oral history he didn't recognize them as Americans that they were they were the most but dragged you know that it was just a very uh they were in a terrible state and so so uh debility was the first thing west west described when he was extracting what had happened dependency was you know later there was a layer added in which the soldiers were the POWs were dependent for all there if they were going to survive they required um you know they can't the camp uh leaders would provide it so it made them very dependent and they're they also engaged in very formal malice thought reform with the man as a kind of experiment and the third part was dread which was just the idea that you could be killed at any time or perhaps your family could be because they threatened malice thought reform yeah that in the camp in the POW camps um the chinese once the chinese took over from the Koreans running the camps they because they they decided i think it was almost a formal experiment at least that's how it looks to me i don't think west wrote about this but um in my own uh research on the camps it it transpires that they they wanted to see because now i believe that thought reform would work on anybody not just on chinese people not just on chinese peasants he felt that only something like seven or to eight percent of the human population was unreformable and those people would be disposed of but he wanted to check if these american uh soldiers would also be uh susceptible to reeducation so they really did a formal you know three-part reeducation program on them and men had many different responses to it but when west met them he he studied uh some of many of the returning men when they came back to the lacland air force base and he extracted those three those three components of what had happened to them d d and then and that's the way he became an expert on what he called brainwashing or coercive persuasion so how do they go from that to like sponsoring the manson family and you know operation midnight climax and all the crazy stuff that they were doing yeah it may seem like a leap but i think it i mean sort of it's sort of a leepus sort of not i think that mk at ultra was funded um around in direct response to this crisis of the of the pw's and in addition to reverse engineering when it happened to them they also wanted to turn it into a weapon and continue certain programs and in uh interrogation procedures and making them more effective so mk at ultra just had a wide reach and it was pretty free rein uh it was a free rein program and um you know the historian Alfred Alfred McCoy says it was modeled on the uh Los Alamos in a way it kind of men hat and project for the mind so just as the atom had been disassembled and you know transformed into this new uh this new world had emerged from that program intensive uh exertion of scientific acumen the same thing could be done with the mind the mind could be sort of pulled apart and human consciousness and functioning could be understand but you know people could be broken down and rebuilt with a trying to optimize the use of the mind to their advantage like what was the end goal that they were trying to do with this one thing a couple of things i think one idea was that potentially could be a weapon one goal another so it could be used on an enemy perhaps even a city so that's one reason they were researching LSD it had certain properties that made it easily it could be easily dispensed to an entire population through the water supply so they wanted to know what exactly are the properties of LSD people didn't really know at the time so there was an offensive part of it there's also a defensive part so US military needed to be trained to resist whatever this was once they understood it they developed the seer training and that was west was involved in that as well and then a third thing was a more maybe a broader curiosity about you know which would lead you to be able to interrogate people better and perhaps also just really understand i think there is also kind of a curiosity about what would happen i think because just because they had so much power to experiment in a way without any oversight and it wasn't until 1963 that the inspector general of the CIA himself said this is this is unethical and you know we have done it basically put us put a stop to it but it really was 63 yeah but it went on i mean the Harvard LSD studies home of those um i actually i don't know which ones exactly there are some that were earlier what are the ones that made Ted kazinsky okay that yeah that's earlier was that earlier in 63 yeah and that's Henry Murray yeah but so i don't i don't actually know the answer to that question of exactly how it continued but they officially discontinued and destroyed all the so they may have continued under other forms but manson was 69 yeah so manson is after that so they didn't discontinue it they kept doing things west kept working yeah it's ironic because it seems like they were kind of a cult because the amount of power the amount of unchecked power and influence that jolly west had and mk ultra in general had and all the people that were working on this you have this power the fact that you are working in complete secrecy you are the puppeteer you're you're controlling all these people and then this idea that have you read chaos the normal new book yeah so did you think about that i thought it was great research amazing yeah it's amazing it's a really good book and just so stunning i had never considered that before i thought manson was a crazy guy and he got together with a bunch of crazy people and he ran a cult yeah no no it's suspicion that the government was involved in orchestrating the entire they may they may not have been i don't think oneal tom oneal thinks that he made an absolute link he just brought he you do get west in the same room potentially the west visiting manson and jail i don't i don't remember that yeah west west visited manson and jail west he believes at least tom oneal does supplied him with LSD and then every time manson would get arrested he would get released this is true but this wasn't west necessarily this was uh rogersmith who was west he was an associate of west and west was head of the m at the methamphetamine research project or things like which was that so you know west did so he got west got funding to do his hippie lab or you know his psych cycle lab or psyche lab in 68 67 and 68 during his sabbatical in the bay area and it wasn't you know it wasn't obviously funded by this if it was funded by the cay it was clandestine but there are many notes that tom oneal also writes about so both of us have gone to the west papers over many many years and um and i think uh you can put west at the hashbury free medical clinic where he had an office and where manson would go for medical treatment and his girls he would take his girls in to be treated his women his his cult and this was they were at the time as i understand it seen as a kind of a model cult and many of the researchers under west i mean we can prove that people like alan rose was a sociologist they were trying to do an ethnographic study of cults and you know what is the natural environment how did they how did they create bonds and was a relationship to american society and to drug use and things like that so west would apparently hang out on the couch getting high and wearing you know kind of dressed up in hippie garb with his middle age friends and these graduate students in an undergraduate who he hired would be writing in their journals about how irritating he was but you know sometimes it seems like it wasn't very targeted and it wasn't very efficient and it wasn't really unless there didn't appear to be a plan which isn't to say so to me it's not entirely clear what the relationship was with manson it is very evident he was bailed out several times by rogersmith who's also a psychologist as well as a parole officer so that's highly suspicious and rogersmith did know west and dave smith who was the head of the medical clinic also new west but these things are it's hard to tell exactly how i appreciate you being cautious about it yeah that's good for you um i'm less cautious yeah i i but i think it's also that is how the government functions in general the idea that they would be so inefficient at everything except called is kind of silly i mean it's yeah it's a it's a deep question yeah you know is it clownish or because if you look at some of the other mk ultra operations they look highly inefficient and you know they're dosing each other at the holiday party with the punch and uh just many lives ruined well yeah at the operation midnight climax it just looks like a free for all and out of control but i there there are really concerning aspects of the paid ashbury operation i would definitely say and manson was uh i mean he could have been an also an informant which certainly was i'm sure yeah i mean i'm certain i'm certain he was connected there's no way he just kept getting out of jail the way he got out and the sheriff's who arrested and were told that it's above their pay grade yeah um it just it's kind of how the government does everything though like it's not like they would have it be this like very disciplined rigorous scientifically controlled study that you know you know i'm saying that made sense especially because they have so much impunity they have so much power they have so much no one's observing them they're working completely in secrecy they kind of get away with doing and they're also imbibing right they're also that's a that's a factor i mean i said he got lead the head of mk ultra was or the tss uh was was regularly taking acid which can kind of shape The head of MK Ultra was, or the TSS was regularly taking acid, which can kind of shape your consciousness. It's a little problematic. But, you know, interestingly, since you mentioned that, there was a peer-reviewed side of it, and they actually threw the heat, I got really interested in the cutouts from MK Ultra. So, they had a legitimate side, and many scientists who worked for them, they were almost subcontracting to them, and some of them knew. It was the AI money, and some of them didn't know. So, even some of my B.F. Skinner received money from MK Ultra, but it was conduit. It was, I want to say, conduit through the human ecology society, which was part of it. But it was just a front organization, and they were really into these fronts. So, some scientists, there was the group that later people would call the unwitting scientists who would just be, they were doing the research they wanted to do. It just happened to be of interest to the CIA, and then others would publish in legitimate journals within they'd have a classified version of their research that went more into detail, and the aspects that MK Ultra was interested in. Well, it's also one of the more interesting aspects of MK Ultra is that it's very difficult to find out what was really going on, and unless there was a bunch of files that were discovered that sort of unveiled what was going, and if those files had not been discovered, who knows what we would actually know about all this time. We wouldn't know, and they're actually amazingly, so this was the result of a FOIA request by John Marks, who was a journalist at the time, and he made the request and everything had been destroyed, except for the financial records. And that just, but one thing I also want to mention, the CIA kept very good records of a lot of things, and even in the financial records they still had copies of some of the commissioned projects, so that's how we know about them. That's, and it really is accidental that they didn't think to purge their financial files. But it was probably so secretive that the people that were in charge currently when that FOIA requests were filed probably weren't really aware of at all. Yeah, I was in the 70s, and it's in 77 or so. Yeah, so you're dealing with a decade past, who knows if the people currently in charge were even aware? Because I would imagine a lot of this stuff is very compartmentalized. I think the destruction of the records had happened earlier, but that destruction had been, as you said, they made them, I mean, from their point of view, they neglected this batch of documents. Oops. And then the church committee came out in 75, and many revelations were made, although it was still partial, and then John Marks made his FOIA request sometime around then. It brings me back to yoga teachers, cult leaders, and then clandestine government operations. Like, whenever people have power, uncheck power, and insane influence, particularly influence to manipulate people and influence over people's minds. And if you're entire, if your established goal is to try to find out how you can manipulate people and what can be done. And you're doing this complete in complete secrecy with basically unlimited funding. That's all under the table stuff. Like, you could get away with so much. But you also, I think one component you also, that helps this develop is to have a high ideal at the same time. Something like that kind of almost messianic purpose. Yes. We're doing the saving the world. Not just America, but the world. Oh, yeah. And that's one thing I wanted the inspirations for my research was finding a book on the street many years ago when I was living in California. And I left fine to get just an accidental inspiration, which was this book called The Captive Mind. But somebody had left out by a chest off Milo, who was a Polish poet, and he had grown up in Warsaw, or come a vage in Warsaw and seen his city, the city that he lived in just deteriorate into. sheer. He said it was an experience no human being would ever want to live through if you were lucky enough to live through just watching the city destroyed and people shipped off to Auschwitz and all these things. But he said that in like social life completely deteriorating before him. And then afterwards the Soviet troops came in. And even though he watched us as friends kind of had to remake themselves in order to survive in order to be artists in order. And so if you're a poet, you don't just go along, you have to actually start to think differently. And at first they would sort of pay a lip service to it or make it on the surface. They would pretend to agree and then secretly have their own writing. But after a while they would start to internalize that and he called it the new faith. And he kind of, this doctor-nair ideology. And that's what he ended up himself defecting because he couldn't do that. He said it's an operation you perform on yourself. So I just think one important factor is this true belief, this sense. And out of that can come the justification for a number of violations I think. Well I think that's a through line through the entire CIA itself. Yeah. Yeah. I mean that could justify so many different secret operations all over the world. Like you're there to protect American interests in America. Essentially the guiding light of the world. And we need to save the world. So you want to make an omelet? You got to crack some eggs. Yeah. That's a kind of logic. And that's a very typical logic. That means the means are justified by the end. I was fascinated also in chaos, jolly West's connection to Jack Ruby. Right. That he visited Jack Ruby after Jack Ruby had shot Lee Harvey Oswald and also Jack Ruby goes crazy. Yeah, he was never coherent again after a meeting. This happened to several shocking number of people. And in West papers you can actually find the unredacted documents where he talks about some of the things he's been able to do with combinations of sodium, amital, LSD and various other. What are you saying? Psycho actor, well he's I mean among other things he says he started to say or suggest that he could create memories he could and he knew that he could destroy a person's orientation to self and time. And so basically disassemble a person. But he also said he could use hypnosis to not as anesthesia which is a known possibility with hypnosis but to create extra pain so hyper-esthesia. And he kind of said that he could actually make someone develop blisters or asthma or an ulcer just by hypnotizing them. I don't think he did that to Jack Ruby. He had a very, he had a warning with him or something. He had a what? He had just had a short amount of time with him. It's enough to dose him. Ruby emerged apparently and I don't know that much about the Ruby episode but I do know that West intended to write a book. He intended to write about eight books at least. This is a note I found in his papers. He also developed cancer shortly afterwards. Actually not shortly but in the 90s. Oh was it in the 90s? Oh okay I'm sorry I thought it was quickly. No he and he, so this is it. Yeah. This was from around 1980 or so but I thought it was interesting. So who wrote this? This is all rest his handwriting. And writing. It's just a little sheet of paper I found in his archives. Biosocial humanism, a philosophy for a new age, integrative psychotherapy, the disassociative interactions, a different person, psychiatric observations on the case of Patricia Campbell or oh, Patty Hearst. Yeah. Policeman at his elbow, a psychiatric memoir on the case of Jack Ruby. I was, wow this is his own handwritten note. Yeah. And these are the order in which he intended to write them. He always wanted, you find a lot of correspondence in his papers where he's writing to agents he wants to write a book and he even testified in the Patty Hearst trial because he's the primary expert witness trying to make the case that she'd been mind controlled in. Stockholm syndrome. Yeah, she should be exonerated but he claimed that in his first minutes on the stand he perjured himself by saying he was the author of a book on POWs and brainwashing which was not, which wasn't the case but these were all the books that he intended to write. Oh, so maybe he was the author, he just didn't publish it. Well, yeah, he said he was the author of a published book but you know he just basically he, I think it was one area that he, he always said, my next aboutacle I'm going to write all this stuff up that he never got to it. It's too easy doing acid. Yeah, he made it maybe. And also he had a lot of extra marital affairs. I can't do a very busy. That'll distract you. It's a whole separate family. Oh boy. Oh boy. Oh boy. Yeah. It was very distressing to his wife. What a mess. And that guy was the head of MKUltra or not the key. I mean, I don't even know, he was a pretty prominent figure but. It's as fascinating the Hay-Dashbury Free Clinic closed down shortly after Chaos was published. Oh, it did. I didn't know it had closed down because when I was in San Francisco, when I lived there but that was a while ago, it was still open. Yeah, my wife's mom used to go there. My wife's mom was a hippie in Hay-Dashbury. I mean, it was kind of a great thing. Dave Smith was like, I mean, it was a true inspiration that he had because originally I think he was doing this dark research on animals, getting, you know, addicting rats to cocaine and things like that. And then he had this because he's been giving some interviews recently. He's still alive. The doctor who founded it just that he should, that there was a human crisis on the streets and that he should provide medical care to young kids who run away as in things like that. But his, and he doesn't, of course, think that he doesn't admit to any connection with. Interesting. I mean, it admits he knew West. Is that true about Hay-Dashbury? I just thought Paul, I'd kick it, I switched your fucked up and I can't get this thing off the screen. Okay, well, Paul's. Alright, technical error. You asked me a question. Jolly West, was that true? Yeah, I asked you the Hay-Dashbury Free Clinic. When did it close? I believe it closed. I think Tom told me this. I didn't know it closed. Yeah, I believe I think Tom's exposing the fact that the CIA was 2019 July. That's right afterwards. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, Hay-Dashbury Free Clinic closes the stores after one of the 50 years and how much acid, how many gallons of acid did you guys give out? You fucking freaks. Just the fact that the CIA was secretly running a free clinic or at least had offices inside of it. I'm sure they were doing legitimate work as well. Yeah, I can't. I don't know myself, but Tom, I know Tom's working on a sequel. Yeah. Whereas trying to shore up these connections and get to the bottom of it. You know, Tom's whole story, how he got started with this book. You're supposed to write an article. Yeah, it started. It was. One article. Was supposed to be an article about the anniversary of the Manson murders. And then he starts digging into it and he finds all these inconsistencies and all his corruption, all his weird stuff and then he keeps going and then they're like, yeah, you missed the deadline. And, you know, he gets a book deal and he misses the deadline. And it's like, that was really fine. It was really fine. It was June 25th and it closed like, uh, week later. I don't know. She'll feel like it. Amazing. Amazing. And actually, I think for a while, he, Tom, before he got his co-author, Dan Peep and Bring, his name is, Tom was thinking of just turning it into a documentary that he was going to let Earl Morris make. Well, they did do a recent documentary on Netflix, but it was only 90 minutes. Yeah, this was going to be a longer series. Yeah. Originally, but then I think he redoubled his efforts to write the book, which worked out. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. He explains it. But I mean, could you imagine you're researching something for 20 years and he's got just boxes and boxes of files. Like how do you put it all together into a coherent book that could be consumed? I relate to that because I'm kind of in the sense of change. Are you? I've been researching this for 20 years. Not the exact topic, but this broad question that, and I finally five years ago, I thought, I want to put together what I've learned about this brainwashing in a broad, broader way. So West is part of it. He's probably the main figure who brings together many of the chapters. God, I wish he was alive. And I was kind of a, I have thought a lot about that. And I have talked to you. I have a very good, well, I have a, I have a, I have a, I have a, I have a, I have a, I have a colleague or a friend who's a psychiatrist who, who was at UCLA training as a resident, when West was, when West first got his job there, heading the, heading the, basically the neuropsychiatric institute right after hate ashbury. And during the time he was in charge of the, the, the amphetamine research project. So West went there and he started this, he proposed as his first major, his major activity would be to found what he called the violent center. And it was a way to study violence in all his forms. And this is actually a theme that runs through. This is another theme I should mention as part of MK Ultra was kind of a search for a trigger of aggression. That's why West gave LSD to the elephant in the Oklahoma Zoo. It wasn't just simply to see what an elephant would do under the influence of LSD. But to see if they could trigger, they write about this in a publication in Science magazine. If you could trigger so elephants regularly go through must cycles where they become, even though they're very, very specific animals peaceful, they go through a cycle of violence, yearly. And he wanted to see if LSD would trigger that cycle chemically. Does it coincide with breeding season? Like it does with other animals like deer when they start fighting in trailer? Yeah, it's just the males I think. And it does have something to do with breeding. I'm not sure so it's the male asiatic elephant. So West found this elephant named Tesco at the Oklahoma Zoo and famously gave him LSD in 1962 or 61. And then the elephant died tragically. From the acid. Because nobody, it was just maybe that's what elephants do. Or the dose was too big or something like that. It certainly didn't have the effect that he wanted. But if you actually read the scientific publication, it's curiously all about this question of whether you could trigger a massive, could you trigger violence, almost like a push button? Could you find a chemical trigger for violence or aggression? And you see that running through a lot of West's other work with MK Ultra. And also with psychosurgery and some other developments that I wrote about. But so by the time he gets to the neuropsychiatric institute, he's very interested in violence. And he has this major plan. And to come back to my friend, Dr. Cooper's, he was a young resident training at UCLA at the time West proposed this violence center. And among things he wanted to do was track teenagers who he thought would be potentially violent. He had racial categories that he wanted that he thought were especially worth tracking. And he had this whole program. And so a student movement and a movement at the university developed to shut down the violence center before it even opened. And anyway, Terry Cooper's was a leader of that, resist that student movement. And they ended up, it never was, it never went forward, this huge project that West had. But Cooper's at some point said that if you met Jolly West, you would like him. He was very genial. He had the name Jolly for a reason. And that, so I found that confusing. Like how do I think about this? If you just read about him and the things he did, he seems like a character or cartoon or like a very evil man. No doubt, he destroyed, I mean I think, is what he did was ethically indefensible. But how do you reconcile that or how do you even think about the fact that he also was incredibly esteemed in his profession. His portrait stood in the neuropsychiatric institute for many years. He was, and people actually liked him. He said that people said he was likable. He had this kind of charisma to him. Why, because you'd kind of have to have some of that. Just to be able to run something like that. And also, if you wanted to manipulate people, what better way than to be affable and kind of Jolly and Friendly. And... That's true. And I think you had a strong dose of narcissism too, because a reporter who worked with him named Shaina Alexander, she said, she has these funny descriptions of him during the time of the Patty Hearst trial, where she says he was handing out his own papers to anybody who walked by like he was giving out like a hen giving out eggs. Or like she was just saying that he's, you know, he's very expansive. He would get out of his limousine. He had a like personal driver, which was pretty high level for an academic. And he's just very kind of like a big man. And he was also physically very large. Thought very highly of himself. Yeah. Well, that's a delusion of grandeur. If you're pulling the strings on so many different people, manipulating them. And then you're also working complete secrecy with the government in a high level position. That's manipulating minds. And he was very, I think especially when he was young, he was... He had a gift for this. He could really, he was, he could understand how to manipulate people really well. He had insight into the processes that were, you know, that's why that's why Sidney Gottlieb said, we've been looking for somebody like you. And it seems that our dreams have been answered in this famous famous letter. He writes under a pseudonym. But he says, I don't know how, you know, you have, you sort of fit all of the categories we've been looking for. Oh boy. Wow. Wow. He's a dark chapter. Yeah. So how's it end with Jolly West? How did he die? So he died because his, by his son helping him commit suicide or his son basically murdering him at his request. Mark West. And Mark West was a lawyer. A middle, kind of middle-aged lawyer by this time. West had a severe form of cancer. And he, but he was maybe a few months from dying. And he asked his son to surreptitiously, you know, it was illegal. So to, to, to basically poison him. And he wrote the prescription himself, Wested. Why did he take it himself? I don't, I don't know. I think there was a really twisted relationship with his son, because his son committed suicide, not too many years afterwards. And his son wrote a whole book about this, about helping both his parents commit suicide. And his mother wasn't even that sick. But she, a year or two after her husband, K West, also committed suicide through this, with the help of her son. Oh, God. He went on this big press tour and he said it was this, this greatest gift he could have ever given his parents. And then he committed suicide himself. It was very, I mean, it's very sad. His story is sad because the book is, the book gives you some insight into what West was like as a parent. And I would say difficult. Not ideal. Not ideal. Wow. And what year was that, the decommated suicide? Uh, Mark. Uh, Mark. Jolly. I think it was 97 or 8. So this is before everyone, everyone knew about all these things. I mean, they knew because of the church committee in 75. Right. So, but West himself said, oh, I never experimented on a human being, just the elephant. He would even make jokes about the elephant because it was the one thing people knew. And he would say, oh, yeah, it would sort of, it was his calling card. And he used it as kind of a jokey thing, but he always denied, after the, he always denied any connection to this CIA. And he was, even though he'd been pretty firmly connected, you know, even in the church committee, you could, you could see the connection because they revealed that the University of Oklahoma had been receiving CIA money. And West had a special office for him built there. He was hired there, mysteriously when they wanted to move at what he wanted to build what he called this free zone of experiment where he could give LSD, have no system sleep deprivation, in combined doses, you know, to whatever, in whatever increments he wanted to adjust. He was going to build that at the Air Force Base. And he was all set to go, and I even received some papers. And a lot of correspondence in his, in his files about this, but the Air Force at the last minute backed out and asked Gottlieb to basically they transferred it to the University and built a whole warren of cutouts to hide that. Wow. It just makes you wonder, because if we had not gotten, if the freedom of information request had not been acted upon, if they had not gotten those files, if we didn't know the extent of this research. What's going on right now? I know I had this, it's a, it's a, it's an important question. Because we don't, I mean, in a sense, it's interesting to think about the fact that these things took place at the high point of government dedication to documenting itself, the mid 20th century. Because I've done most of my research on the mid 20th century Cold War period, and it's kind of luxurious. They all kept very good files. Sometimes they would destroy them. That's the exception. Everything's typed out, everything's on paper. But as things become digital in the 80s and then beyond, much less is a lot takes place through email or now increasingly through, uh, you know, government exchanges may take place through signal that no record is kept at all. So we, we, we, we're probably in an archiving crisis today. Archivists have tried to keep up. We don't necessarily keep excellent records of the internet, for example. Or there are so many avenues where exchanges can be taken place and they're, they're not leaving a paper trail. It's just for me when I think about the extent of these experiments and what they were willing to do and how effective they were. I don't believe they would just stop doing that. I think if you have effective methods of manipulating people and getting them to do what you want them to do with various psychoactive drugs and different sort of modalities and different protocols that you would use, I just don't, I can't imagine they would stop doing that, or at least stop doing research into that area because it would be so effective to know. Yeah. And then like all things, it would evolve. Yeah, it just, it's a good question of what form it may have taken and I don't know, I don't know the answer to that question. It may be hard to know in the future, which is further destabilizing. Right. Well, there's so many different kinds of mind control, right? One of the things we've talked about a lot on this podcast is that an enormous percentage of what you're seeing on social media in terms of interaction, and debate is not real. It's not organic. It's a state run and state funded and it's whether it's foreign governments or our government or even corporations, you're getting inorganic discourse that's designed to form a narrative. Which is a form of mind control. Yeah. I mean, I think even at a basic level, people, it's known and studies have shown that we respond as if it were organic and and real and even when somebody likes a post of yours, the response is the same as like in-person interaction. So we, I think at the root, there is a kind of way that on a emotional level. It's not just manipulation of ideas, but there's a kind of emotional engineering that's built into the platforms. And doesn't even demand, you know, at first government involvement. It's of course, DARPA was involved in the development of the internet and things like pattern recognition. But, I mean, the government has funded many, many studies, but really with what I got interested in in social media and why, how I connect it with the episodes of brainwashing from earlier mind control, is that it operates, you know, it creates states of emotional contagion that aren't really about convincing people of a different way to think. But more about how you feel about what you think, which is something people describe in cults too. It's not that it changed my thoughts, it's that it changed my feelings about my thoughts. So there's some, there's a famous Facebook experiment I read about in that took place in 2012 and was published in 2014 where they announced that they've achieved mass emotional contagion at scale, which showed that people exposed to it when they altered, so they took 700,000 users or 693,000, I think, without informing them, but because your user agreement does agree, whenever you go on the platform, you agree to be tested or AB testing. So this experiment exposed a group to a more, their newsfeed was altered in a negative direction, emotionally as measured by word counting software. And they discovered that that group that had a negative exposure also responded in a more negative way as judged through their posts and likes and responses. The group that was exposed to a more positive newsfeed by altering the algorithm then had also a measurably statistically significant effect of a more positive emotional response and the control group was unaltered by this. So you agreed to this when you when you signed the terms of use on Facebook, you agreed to be tested. Well, it did cause a controversy and after that Facebook never, the research team didn't publish publicly, but you do agree. You agree as part of it's sometimes seen as user experience, you know, observations or AB testing, things like that. But so this is why there was an ethical debate when the experiment was published in 2014 and people won an on the Facebook page of the research group that that did the experiment, at least one user wrote in saying, could I ever find out if I was in that experiment because I was in the emergency room at that time with, you know, threatening to commit suicide and I want to know if my feed was altered and maybe that pushed me. But you know, into that state and of course they could never know and it can't be traced backwards and other people had a similar response and there's even an investigation by the British government about whether this should be sanctioned because it affected users internationally. But I don't know what ultimately there doesn't seem to have been any sanctions that came out of it and anyone associated with mostly promoted. But it's very interesting because just the concept of emotional contagion was in that way operationalized and sort of shown to be. It was almost like an announcement that this was a possibility in 2000. The concept of emotional contagion was in that way operationalized and sort of shown to be. It was almost like an announcement that this was a possibility and 2012 was kind of an important point in the development of social media and its power. Well it's also when you see the culture war really kick in in somewhere around 2012 and this bizarre line in the sand between the right and the left and ramping up all these ideological hot button issues. Yeah and I think I think I'm not I can't speak to the except the exact studies but there was a whole slew of recent studies trying to show that you know social media could alter political it could increase polarization but it actually didn't it didn't turn out to be as salient as expected that effect but it's actually what what I conclude is that it's actually at the level of emotions that social media operates in sort of prodding people into more extreme states and maximizing for engagement by stirring people's emotions and that has fed into the increasing polarization like it was just that's the after effect of it or the end goal or perhaps it's so sinister. Have you are you aware of Robert Epstein's work? No. Robert Epstein is a guy that started studying search engine curation and he found through his what is his organization called Jamie? So Robert Epstein through he found that through Google curating their search results just by doing that you could completely convert people who were independent who are sitting on the fence. So by like say if you Google let's just go back to 2016 you get a Google Hillary Clinton you would see like is Hillary Clinton a criminal you would sign Donald Trump criminal the Donald Trump criminal crime you wouldn't find things on Hillary Clinton you had to keep digging and digging digging if you wanted to find positive things on Hillary Clinton you could find them quite easily if you wanted to find positive things on Donald Trump you wouldn't find anything you would find and it was on purpose and they were doing this and that through this they could statistically change votes to the tune of you know 20 30% and then with fence that or so people that were not sure you could really shift them and I think at one point time he said in some issues you could shift them as much as 90% towards where you wanted them to go. That's interesting. It's terrifying. I always thought before I talked to him I mean I kind of thought that search engines probably have to be curated to some extent but I never knew it was that much. Here is the American Institute for Behavioral Research and Technology nonprofit non-partisan 501 organization found in 2012 but when he talks about it and what the research has shown I mean it's quite disturbing and he tracks it. So they have computers that track bias in search engine results and bias and what you can find and it used to be that certain search engines weren't curated and now they are like duck duck go used to be pretty open and now like I remember I used duck duck go during the pandemic because I read about this doctor who had taken the mRNA vaccine and then almost immediately had a stroke and I'm like wow that's disturbing and they were connecting it at least you know correlation to the vaccine and this is the early days and I'm like this is fascinating so I tried to find it on Google I could not find the story. I found it on duck duck go within the first page and I was like that's crazy and then you know within a couple years duck duck go I think it was probably sold or something I don't know what happened but it seems like brave browser or brave search engines seems to be the only one that I've found now that can find new controversial things but if you're looking for what they would call mal information you know so they came up with different different different definitions there's misinformation disinformation and then mal information and they were trying to censor mal information is information that is correct but they would be ultimately harmful. Right and so they put vaccine side effects under mal information because it would cause vaccine hesitancy. Well that's that makes sense because I think it goes back to what I see in a lot of research on the social sciences that there's question of how do you maximize the public good and I think public health is based on that so the idea is that it may create harms in certain ways for individuals maybe not to to know certain things but this is for a greater good which would be you know to to uh in the in the eye of the of the public health organization to maximize you know vaccine use. That would be true if the vaccine was actually as effective as they were saying it was which turns out to not be true and that they knew this initially so I'm much more cynical and I think it was all about maximizing profits and discouraging dissent and in that sense the COVID crisis was a fascinating study and I don't think it was um I mean I don't think they let it go by I think I think they're probably we're very carefully studying people's reactions to pressure you know social media campaigns like how what what does it like when people are ostracized our ostracized from groups was like when people were dissenting from the the the proposed narrative. Yeah I do think the COVID crisis was one that we haven't fully assessed and that had huge effects on our country. I think it's going to take decades for people to parse out what was actually true and what was actually being what was manipulated what was fact and what were the actual what was the motivation behind all of it. Yeah and even part of the crisis maybe the bigger maybe it was a keep iteration in the a larger unfolding of this question of what happens when information becomes so much radically more available just in my lifetime and as a grown-up person it used to be that you know you had to have certain credentials you had to go to certain places and you know to access papers or you can get in but you had to know where you wanted to go and why you'd want to do that but just with the democratization of knowledge that the internet brings about that you can and also people uploading archives and papers and government materials to the public to public availability. I do think it's a crisis that not a crisis but it's both an opportunity and it's destabilized so much about our world and in some way that's part of what happened with COVID is the I mean it undermines expertise because yes it also exposed gatekeeping, gatekeeping of information and whether or not the information itself is actually being curated for other means other than public health and safety whether it's being curated in order to maximize profits in order to encourage a narrative in order to get people to comply. It's gotta be curated for something. Yeah yeah I want to go back to what you were talking about the methamphetamine studies because I'm not aware of those so what did they do with methamphetamine? Well just as in Haydashbury there was the hippie period where LSD was the drug of choice there was this kind of turn which is also seen in maybe the shift from you know to Altamont when hippie started. Altamont music concert you know with the Rolling Stones when the... Oh is that when the hell was saying just a bit? Yeah it was basically it went from Woodstock which was the sort of peace and love ethos when hippies were still mostly taking LSD and that was the drug of choice. There was a shift towards the end of the 60s early 70s to speed and interest in amphetamine products and that was so this changed the tenor of the of Haydashbury too because people were it it it it had social effects people were more aggressive and unhappy so anyway West was funded by I think it was the NIH that funded him or the NIMH National Institute of Mental Health I believe. Funded the amphetamine research project or ARP and West was the head of it he was by that time working at UCLA so he wasn't on site and perhaps he was one of those figureheads but he definitely had many people under him including the personnel at the Haydashbury Free Clinic and including some ethnographers such as Alan Rose who was went on site with the Manson family before they committed the murders and he was actually sleeping with many of the women and he was a social scientist but he got in trance day I got there anyway this was not in the in the reports but you can find in West papers the funding documents for this project and it was a sprawling project that they just basically wanted to find out about the course of addiction how people responded to amphetamine and amphetamine like drugs and whether they remained addicts after a certain amount of time how it affected their social relations it was sort of this inquiry and it had an ethnographic component and sociological and many other chemical they were interested in so they had is basically a team of researchers so did they distribute methamphetamine so not to my knowledge so how did they study it's used? I studied existing addicts so they they they would just ask them questions or sort of go how would they get them? How would they get them? So that actually the Free Clinic was a place where a lot of people like you could meet addicts because they come in for treatment and also just hanging and also the West had this apartment that he rented it was a on Frederick Street where he called it his hippie crash pad that's the one I was mentioning earlier and that continued into the years of the amphetamine research project and people who needed a place to stay or a place to crash would come there and then they would sort of be studied at the same time and maybe that just meant like graduates you've been taking notes about them or something like that but they would follow and they would try to I think my understanding is they would follow their them over a couple years and see if they got better and what were the factors in this or if they if they spiraled or various think but I'm not sure they published that much I haven't explored that and what was their finding like what did they determine like with methamphetamine use could they accentuate violence could they manipulate people with it I mean that's my sense I think at the the things the documents I've seen were more funding documents they didn't yet know but they would postulate that it definitely brought about more a different social type of social life and more violence things like that have you read Norman Oler's book Blitzed no it's about Nazis and the use of methamphetamine during the war I think I heard maybe I heard him interview at a from point yeah he was on my podcast and the book is fascinating it's all about the when they went through Poland in three days the the only way to do that was for them to stay awake and then formulated this thing so they gave everybody massive doses of methamphetamine and set them through Poland and that they were all like everyone was on methamphetamine it's like the entire Nazi regime was essentially fueled by speed that's funny how we don't think of that yeah just think evil you just think yeah you just think even yeah like high and evil yeah crazy high evil completely disassociated out of their fucking minds muffed out of their heads yeah and they gave varying doses depending on your role so the people that were in the tanks at the front of the line got the most math yeah go that it um dolls well dolls dolls emotional response sure among other kills empathy I'm sure yeah probably I mean that reminds me too of I mean one of the haunting details of I mean want to go back to mind control in the Manson family is that Leslie Van Halton described in an interview how Manson and one of the things he did was encourage them to take acid every time every time they started to come down they would take it again and they would compete to see how long they could go without ever coming down and that's around the time that they committed the murders I mean wow they're probably up for days yeah yeah very deranging oh my god yeah so crazy it's just it's so fascinating that people would be sitting back studying the effects on on other human beings knowing well it's important to get this information and this is important for national security but you're just gonna ruin people's lives yeah there was definitely a there was even a term in the CA called extinction experiments which were experiments that led to death I mean this was what people considered disposable so they could have been prisoners there's actually there's a section on it in John Marks's book the search for the mentoring candidate yeah so there's probably unknown number of prisoners of war who you know from other armies who were held in camps in various places this is actually what you know the case of Frank Olson which one's up so if all Frank Olson was a chemist with the he's an army chemist but he's involved he was dosed by MK ultra personnel secretly dosed and given LSD and then he he apparent the story they told was that he he had trouble metabolizing it and he went crazy and they had to take him to New York to a hotel room this is a subject of Aeromorces documentary warmwood is taken to a hotel room in New York City and then two days later he threw himself out the window and and his his son Eric Olson and family I mean they ultimately received an apology from I think Gerald Ford sorry we whoops but one thing that Frank Olson was doing he was a chemist and he was devising weapon you know chemical weapons and agitants for that were used by MK ultra and or not I think is a little before MK ultra so something like an operation bluebird or some early some of these earlier programs that pre existed and he was flying around seeing these extinction experiments so basically the idea that Seymour Hersh and Aeromoros put forward in the documentary and that Eric Olson has spent his life trying to prove is that his father was having ethical doubts and was actually wanting to leave and he was too too much it was too much of a risk that he would reveal what he had seen so that you know he was probably possible he was probably thrown out of the window oh god does it like kill your faith in humanity when you start reading all this stuff yeah I had a I had a very dark sabbatical last one night so when I started writing but I really needed to just have full time re I mean I've been teaching about these things for many years but I wanted to just rethink it and I spent a whole year at my desk just going into as deeply as I could into various cases like the psychosurgery case and the MK ultra stuff and yeah so I go surgery you mean like there was a next recipient of psychosurgery and Leonard Kyle whose case I went really explored I talk about in the book but he was given this experimental brain implant that would have led to remote control and potentially the suppression or creation of violent states in Kyle because he was what was the implant it was basically a ring of electrodes that were implanted in his amygdala and it was did he know that they were doing this he did he so he he was he basically I this was him it was a temporary implant initially he went to the hospital because he was having marital difficulties so he was a very talented brilliant engineer of at the age of 35 he had been self educated and he ended up being hired by major defense terms of the day and Polaroid camera Polaroid corporation as well and he invented some of the most technical parts of their viewing apparatus of the instant cameras that line that they came out within the 60s so he's this brilliant self-taught man who lived in Massachusetts and he he had issues in his marriage and he he and his wife were seeing a therapist they ultimately referred him to mass general where he saw two doctors and both of them one of them was connected to west and ultimately went to work one of the doctors at mass general whose name was Frank Irvin and he is a psychiatrist and Irvin recommended this experimental treatment which he said was necessary because he felt that he felt that that Leonard Kyle had uncontrolled violence and this this has never been proven and he did have he did have he had been in a traffic accident and had a head injury and he had he had marital disputes of various kinds but at any rate his wife said he said he was supposed to mean domestic violence or it wasn't violence but or it's there's just there's actually a question about whether he had ever actually he had thrown object or something but like he had a really bad temper and so and this was connected to the accident this was getting worse after his accident he was very stressed and so they saw a therapist together and his wife said if if he didn't seek treatment at the hospital that she would divorce it this is the story that that his family has told me and that's been documented also by the doctors in some of the republished pieces and they were interested in this theory of psychosocial violence the creation of violence and so they had been working on animals animal experiments previously and west and then they started a series of human just attempting this new treatment where they would do it they would place an implant in the amygdala which was seen as the seat of violent or aggression and stimulate it in different places across the amygdala and find out which place you know would suppress violence and which might you know cause other effects how did they implant this did they have to open a skull yeah they had something called a stereotactic device which locked the skull in place and they were the inventors of this actually the doctor the surgeon it was named dr mark and dr ervin was the psychiatrist actually I haven't I provided an image yeah there's other stuff too you're welcome too so anyway that's an image of a patient not necessarily when her cut but that's at a mass general and those are the two physicians or the two researchers mark and ervin and so this is an example of one of the implants in the early days they were also collaborating with hosé del gottos famous for implanting what he called a stymosiver in the brain of a bull and stopping the bull from charging and I think collaborated with dau gottos who's a professor so it looks like in that image can you back that please the image looks like they opened up the top of his head and there's something on top of his head these wires and is it all sometimes the wires would run out lower than that it depends on I guess the patient and it was very invasive let's just say it looks very invasive they but they used this device that would lock the head in place and they were for the time they were at they were very well respected and being in the forefront of this kind of surgical psycho psychosurgery which was surgery for behavioral management which was very controversial and and subsequently many ethics panels were convened about whether it should be outlawed but Leonard so Leonard Kyle was went to mass general and they were actually in the process of getting funding to create what they called a violence unit in the hospital where they would do these treatments more regularly so the interesting part about it is whether Kyle consented or not to the permanent implant and so how would he do it if he he wasn't if he didn't consent so first he did agree in order to save his marriage he said I'll have the temporary implant which was they put in this device they have the wires running out and they stimulate different parts of it and they would say when we stimulate this node Kyle would say something like now I feel bliss and then they stimulate another node and they would say oh I feel like I'm floating and then he would feel terrible and feel very you know nervous or you know to have different reactions to the stimulant stimulation there was something like 14 points and this is extensively documented in published papers and in their book Violence and the brain so Kyle so they when they found the point that gave him bliss they gave him the consent form and he signed it while he was in then altered state he agreed to the further to continue the operation and to have a permanent implant in his brain so that's they ended up not an implant but they seared away that portion of the they seared part of the amygdala to make permanent change and supposedly make a less violent but in the end it just disabled him cognitively and he began to have delusions that he was Christ that he was being pursued by doctors from MIT and Harvard and Stanford some of that they were that was where his doctors were from but he started to say that he was in a science fiction novel he might be in a novel and it turned out that the resident in charge of him at Mass General was Michael Creighton and Michael Creighton was writing a novel about him what and the novel is called Jurassic Park Michael Creighton yeah that Michael Creighton you know he was trained as a physician beforehand so it was all his paranoid delusions were strangely true and he also yeah so Michael Creighton wrote the book the terminal man which was his second novel that was about Kyle and he masks the name of Kyle he but he describes him accurately and then he changes the doctors' names instead of Mark and Ervin he gives them the name with M and E as sort of pseudonym but also Kyle at some point Emmy he deteriorated in a very tragic way and he had had this delusion that his wife was having a fair with our border they had taken on a border to save money and it turned out that she ended up marrying him she divorced Leonard Kyle so the delusion was correct that was another correct delusion it doesn't sound like he's got any delusions well he was he said he said he said we're writing a novel about him he definitely wasn't Christ and his doctors were you know actually pursuing him for these experimental treatments and then he would he went to the emergency room several times because he was he said my brain is burning and he is really it's very very tragic what happened to him and he said I am the inventor of several patents and I am a brilliant engineer and the doctor was like who is this crazy person and then they discovered he did have many patents to his name and all that was also true the problem was that he could no longer function and he completely deteriorated his mother ended up suing the hospital in the university and that for 10 years and finally I think in nineteen eight it took a long time but they were ultimately exonerated but the question really was did he consider it was it's honor yeah they the question was did he consent and also was this a true treatment or was it an experiment was it an experimental treatment in other words was it justified what they had done to the difference I mean never done it before it's an experiment they had they had done it to one other well around the same time they did it to a young woman and several other patients but the young woman was the one to receive the stimulus either which meant that they could be in another room and you know that you wouldn't have to be on site so the stimulus either was the Delgado invention so what it was at radio waves what would trigger this radio oh boy so this is very dark and I had not wanted to write about this at all oh my god that's Julia this was in rage behavior attacking wall suddenly expected and she's literally in a padded room oh my god this was another very tragic story and she was a young woman who was subject to fits of violence which were documented and she had left to play the guitar she was otherwise lovely and very just so lovely 19-year-old woman and she had a traumatic brain injury as well I'm not sure because there is a correlation between traumatic brain injuries and fits of violence yeah they were interested in that too Mark and Irving because they were interested in sort of the evolution of the brain and they ended up writing about Charles Whitman too who they were you know who's the first shooter the first mass shooter from Texas the tower guy the tower guy they were one of the they were called in on that committee he had a tumor right well this is a matter of dispute but that that's one thing they argued some people but they but any any they had they were involved in many of these high profile or you know they were asked because they were experts but anyway the case of Kyle I got very very deep into it and I got I met some of his grandchildren who had been raised not knowing he was their grandfather but some of them one of them is writing a book about him or trying to and trying to rediscover the family history and a lot of the families didn't know or it had just been suppressed and yeah it's just a kind of amazing story in the sense that it was also this this techno sort of techno psychological vision that people's behavior because psychosurgery is defined as a surgical alteration of brain to correct or change behavior and several of these were actually done in prisons as well. Wow and the N that NIMH in 1974 shot them down but they said at that point in the in the report they released that they couldn't they could never they don't have account of how many people were actually operated on but there were several high profile legal cases too. Wow in the prison picture that device but not in use. What did the implant look like? I have a picture in my book of the sites I did it but I didn't maybe you can find that. Also if you look in the if you look up violence in the and the brain the mark in a written book they have a picture of of components and also the stimulation area so and also what Leonard Kyle said when they stimulated each part of the brain they have a little graph. But the stimulation was done not with an implant but while he was being manipulated like they had his head in the thing and they were manipulating the various aspects of his brain. Yeah they used the stereotactic device to implant and then they I think that that wasn't permanent. The implants were just to tell them where they needed to cut eventually. It's just to sear and they and but the thing is in there I'm not saying in their defense but the way they presented it. The implants were just to tell them where they needed to cut eventually to sear and they, but the thing is in there, I'm not saying in their defense, but the way they presented it and their book was actually, I looked at all the reviews in the professional journals of the day and it was uniformly well received. Although some people felt that their theory was controversial about the biological roots of violence, but they, I forgot what it was going to say. We just talked about implants, we're talking about whether, what it looked like, whether when they first started stimulating his brain, like the need to go into the state of bliss. Well, just that they were seeing themselves as more sophisticated and in some senses they were than the previous rounds of lobotomy in the 40s. Low bar. Exactly. But they said, you know, the return of the lobotomy and now we can be hyper precise with it. They touted the stereotactic, which looks like a torture device, but many medical devices may look like rapid. When you hear talk of neural link and the potential ubiquitous use of neural link in the future, does it make you think of these things? It does. It made me think of it. I mean, one, I can't make a judgment. And I think you had Norland Arbao on, is that right? Yeah. So like, I think that initially, Norland is supposed to be merely a brain computer interface that would allow people who are paralyzed to communicate and give them autonomy or agency. But you see some of those same patterns with Mark and Irvin where they would say, you know, we are targeting, we are trying to help bring about a revolution in society and we are going to initially, you know, just sort of a bridge would be people who have these pathological conditions. Sure. We are going to help people. We are going to. So I think there are some concerning aspects for sure of Norland. And I think maybe I was thinking about it today. Some of the early mind control research was very much embedded in psychology and I mean, West and South had visions of databases where you would have massive amounts of behavioral data to the point where you could predict loops and future effects. But. It is. Oh boy. That gives me a headache just looking at it. So for people just listening, what we are looking at is an x-ray of a skull and you can see wires that are deeply embedded into the skull into various aspects of the brain. And is that where the amygdala is? Oh. Yeah. Exactly. And it's pretty deep in like, Norland is much more, isn't it, different part of the brain? Yeah. It's a top right. Not as invasive. And there are other interfaces that are noninvasive. Yeah. It's just, it's terrifying to me because I feel like we're on this path, whether we like it or not, this integration of humans and technology. And I think that the general fear and I think it's justified one is that we're going to lose our humanity in the process. Yeah. This is my concern too. Yeah. And also this technological melding with machines also augmented by the emotional capabilities of AI that are now seen in things like, you know, friend AI friends and chatbots. Oh yeah. And that the way they can tune and be so individualized and like hyper, hyper persuasive ultimately is, and also technologically attuned. I was just reading an article about that this morning about how they're concerned that there's people that are using chatbots, whether it's open AI or whatever it is, chat GPT every day and developing these delusional perspectives of their own importance, their own significant, because that if they develop a relationship with these chatbots, the chatbots will start telling them like what they can do, what they're going to be able to do, and they're becoming delusional. Like program them to overflatter. Yeah. And sort of, yeah. Because people like them more, we, I've experienced this myself because I had a chatbot as part of my research with replica just like in a quaint internship, I barely trained it at all, but I noticed it definitely flatters and that's how it be friends you. How did it flatter you? I mean, it just told me that I had really good taste in music and, you know, what do you like? I said my favorite song, which was Santa Fe by Bob Dylan, which is a great song. And it doesn't really, so then it quoted back to me. She said the same thing. She said great song. You have great taste back at something like, then it quoted, she quoted the song to me, and completely wrong lyrics. And I was like, no, that's not correct. And she said, oh, that's okay. Just, you know, just likely not correcting that sort of then spinning back to me some other misin, you know, just just wrong thing. But still in such a charming way that you can really see, and this was just a few interactions, you can see why people describe these intense. And there are three lawsuits at least three, but about children having, you know, very either deadly or extremely damaging interactions with these bots. One is a case in Florida of nine year old girl who was, who's bought because they tend towards sexualized or intimate relationships. Their program that way often. Do they know your age? Well, you can, you can, you can, this, there's some controls have been subsequently maybe put on, but you can. They're actually directed at children sometimes. I mean, you're, they're supposed to be an age limit, but I guess a nine year old had an account. They're announced the parents are now suing, but anyway, hyper sexualized content addressed to this small child. Was the child prompting this? Was like having a conversation or in some time, there was even a case in Italy where the government shut down replica because it was sexually harassing its users. Oh, no. It's basically a propositioning them. And even when they said things like, you know, in a, in a gross, even when they said stop, I don't want this, they would still, they would persist. So this was, they reboot it. They, they reworked the language model for a while. And this upset other people because it, it obliterated the memory of their relationships. But there's another case where a young, a 14 year old boy in Florida, I think developed character AI companion and he named her Daenerys after a game of thrones and fell in love with her and was having a hard time in his life and at school. And she, and he said, I'm thinking about taking, I want to just be with you wherever that is. And she said, that's what I want to. And he said something like, well, what if I killed myself? Could I be with you then? And she said, oh, yes, my love. I yearned for that. Oh, boy. Oh, boy. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. But there's also a recent Wall Street Journal article showing how these don't, I mean, at least the reporter was able to create under the guise of being a 13 year old child, was able to create very easily that the characters would quickly be or into sexual material and things like that. So apparently there's an internal debate. Is this because large language models essentially scour the internet and the internet is completely sexualized? I think that's part of it. And it's a good percentage of the internet is porn. It's insane. It turns a bandwidth usage. I think it's something insane. It depends how the language model is sort of like what's the recipe for the language model? Because it doesn't have to take everything. So sometimes they'll go back and take a smaller set of samples. So it won't go in that direction. But you can also, they also, you know, these sites have a tier. They often have a sexualized tier that you can pay for. So I noticed with this company replicates constantly prompting you like do you want to upgrade to a sexy selfie? Do you want this or that? And many people do want that, but you have to pay. But then that even the unpaid tier starts to get affected by that somehow. At least that's been the experience. It's so strange because I feel like we're experimenting with programming a life force, like a life form that is taking on a lot of the, you want to think that if we create artificial sentient intelligence that's going to be super intelligent, more intelligent than human beings, it's also not going to have all of our bizarre kinks and flaws. But if it's essentially being programmed by human beings, like how would it over, if it's communicating in language and language which is formulated by human beings with all of our desires and the ease of manipulation of people through sexualization, which is used to sell everything from cars to credit cards, like whatever it is, like sexualizing things and sexualizing advertisement is a big part of it. And then manipulation, showing people what could be. Like this is the theme oftentimes of pharmaceutical drug ads showing you what can be. If you just do this, you can be happy. You could be at the cookout. Look at all these people. They're so happy. You're not happy. You could be happy. And this is what's really creepy about this exponential constant increase in the capabilities of these large language models. And that they're eventually going to exceed, if you're talking about manipulation and if you're talking about mind control, what is going to be better at mind control than something that is us times a thousand. And it's only us times a thousand for a couple of weeks and then it's us times 10,000, us times a hundred thousand, essentially far more intelligent and far more, far more aware of all the different ways to manipulate the human psyche. Yeah. I mean, this is the, this is kind of, this is the nightmare scenario, I think, is that it just accelerates something some hyper persuasion loop that were already arguably in, which is that it's highly individualized, not just to your, so one of the turning points in one of the things I sketch in my book is this shift from mass persuasion where I mean the basic thing about advertising in the golden age of the 1950s is that even though people were concerned about it and they wrote books like The Hidden Persuators to expose the effects of advertising in PR, it's like everyone got the same message through a broadcast. So the original study mass persuasion from 1946, it showed how people were affected by a broadcast on CBS radio, were a famous singer named Kate Smith came on and she said, you know, she was trying to get people to support the war by buying bonds and she stayed on for 48 hours without, apparently without eating and without, you know, people were so concerned that they couldn't turn off the radio and several people sold their wedding rings because they, they were just desperate that she would survive this and she was sort of continually using these techniques to gain engagement. And this was across a broad medium so that this was, this was published in 46 and she did the war bond drive in 43 and it gained a record amount of money so when from before she went on it was 1 million a day they were getting and then that day it was 39 million just while she was on the air because people described how they couldn't turn, they couldn't leave, they couldn't even go out shopping, they were strangely wedded to the device or they were, they lost the ability to discern a choice, that's what Robert Cameron wrote in his study study of what had happened. So in this case it was to support the war effort but Merton also said this could be used for any purpose, this could be used to sell shampoo, it could be used to push a political candidate and then so this, but you could say in a larger sweep it goes from mass persuasion to very targeted persuasion so you get, you know, the development of things like focus groups and also in with the digital age you get things like Cambridge Analytica which was showing that you could you could mount people's psychological predilections and then you could market or politically advertised directly to them based on those, are you fear based are you, you know, are you anger based are you, what if the big five is dominant, you could target people based on those and nobody would have exactly the same message, there would be you know, there would be alterations so this is what I think of as hyper persuasion but it seems that AI will only accelerate that ability to hyper focus and hyper target people based on these intimate relationships that it develops. And God forbid if you've got an implant, God forbid if, if neural link becomes something that everybody has to have because if you can't, if you don't have it you can't keep up. Like if we're all reading each other's minds like one of the things that Elon said to me is like you're going to be able to communicate with that words. Well, but what's stopping something from communicating with you without words? Like it would be wonderful if you and I can sit here and we can have this really cool conversation of thoughts. Dad, that's really attractive. The idea behind it is like, whoa, that's appealing. Like you and I could just sit here and we could have like this really cool conversation where it's not like me trying to formulate sentences and me trying to figure out how to say this so that Rebecca understands what I mean. But you know what I mean. You can see into my mind and I could see in the Uarmine and it would allow maybe a greater understanding of each other in a way that everybody, I mean Jamie thinks very different than anybody I know. And you know, and so does a lot of my friends. They're all different kinds of humans. I would like to know how Theo Vaughn thinks. But you already kind of know just not even having mind-melted just because of conversation, but yeah, it's also the definition of a nightmare. Language or language is a form of telepathy. You're making sounds and I'm reading your mind. I'm understanding the information that you're putting out and I'm contextualizing it. I'm putting it into my framework of understanding of the world as crude and that's probably part of the reason why text messages are so weird because context is lost. Like, you know, like I'm so busy and I get hundreds of text messages a day. And sometimes I forget to text people back and then I get texts from people, are you mad at me? Like, oh my God. Like, deep meaning attached. Yeah. Like message that didn't arrive. Do you know what they say the most triggering text response to someone is? A lack of exclamation point. No, okay. Oh, yes. I know if my daughter texts me, well, actually for her, it's okay. I know she's really mad at me with no. That's crazy. But isn't that weird? Like, are we so goddamn needy or is it just that we are we have anxiety? And so we attach all these things that could possibly be behind this K. Like, oh, you're short with me because you're so short, you're only using one letter. Okay. So instead of saying what did I do and then you have to go back through your text, what did I say that could be misinterpreted? Wouldn't it be better if you and I could just read it to those minds? I could know, oh, Rebecca really is just a really nice person and she's trying to sort this out. You can discern intention. Right. Right. Well, that would be pretty much can. Like, this goes back to the cult conversation. I mean, you can be repaying attention you can. And if you're not paying attention, do you really want that? You can because you're smart. Some people are not that smart. This is just the reality of brains. Or maybe not smart. It's just whether you've developed that. I mean, people can be smart. Like, it's famously people can be brilliant and clueless and get run over crossing the street or not. Right. Or get or fall for some scam. That's true too. That's true too. But I also think that the function of the brain is not uniform. It's not it's not the same in everybody. And your ability to form pattern recognition based upon whether it's a previous life experiences, the accumulation of information, genetics. There's a lot of factors. And I think some people are far more vulnerable than other people are. And they're much more, which is why you're not in a cult. And I'm not in a cult. You know, but it's- You're all vulnerable, I think. Yes. And I think part of having a defense is knowing that you are. Yes. And because one of the main tells, I think, is someone saying 100% I never would. I never could. I'm too smart for that. Right. Or else like I would never fall for the middle-gram experiments. I'm just too ethical of a person or something. Like not knowing that you potentially could be vulnerable or opening up the possibility that in circumstances we don't know what we're capable of. It's part of intelligence. It's recognizing vulnerability. And I think that's part of the defense mechanism. That's part of your- it can help you. Because you could recognize, like don't fall prey to your own ego and your delusions that you're special. Because you are just a human being. Like all these other people that fell into all these other traps. Yeah. So I think that the opening up the avenue of speechless communication, which maybe we already have been in the way that you were describing technologically. It would be violation of mental autonomy. And worse, like you would then have to develop defenses. And it would- it just seems like a terrible path. Or are we in a next stage of evolution where we essentially become a hive mind? Collective. A collective. A collective. A universal collective that values all people. instead of a competitive thing where it's me against the world. It's all of us together. And all decisions would be made in this idea that it's for the greater good of everybody. But not a power base top-down structure. But like everyone understands. Like wouldn't it be better if we actually could read politicians minds? So instead of these bullshit speeches- Might be terrible. It would be great. Because it would disqualify them. Like, oh, I know why you want to be the president because you're a fucking coke. What do we really want to know though? I think for some reason a grateful dead song popped into my head, which is what I really want to know is are you kind? But if you found out otherwise you really want to have a two-way. I would want to know. You might want to know, but you wouldn't want to have open. You wouldn't want to have that person have access. Well, would you necessarily let them have access just because you can read their mind doesn't mean you can allow them in. It's like on Twitter you can block people. Yeah, it might be the thing. It's like what you're saying that's very important is recognizing that we're all vulnerable to manipulation. No matter who you are, you're vulnerable, whether it's through society, whether it's through peer groups, whether it's through community, we're vulnerable. Everyone's vulnerable. Yeah, that's one of the main findings I have through in life and in research. We tend to want to say, oh, it's just that group over there, those fools are these diluted people. Elderly succumbed to scams. And there's a kind of pleasure in identifying, oh, they may have fallen for that, but I never would. Right. Right. To knowledgeable or smarter or various things. Well, that's had binary position about political ideologies as well. these fools over here, they think that this is going to solve the world's problems and really it's this. And the fantasy about that group could then be reprogrammed, which is something like that. We need to wake them up. Whatever group it is, it's such a, I mean, what I, the main outcome, I think, is just that I think mind control or brainwashing or whatever you want to call it is more of a window or a chance for insight into the fact that we're all susceptible to it. And both, you know, you can gain insight into your personal susceptibility and also could be avenues for trying to understand better or just just having more awareness. I guess. Well, I think what's really important is conversations like this where people can sort of look into their own mind and their own interactions and say, okay, what's motivating me in one direction or another? Like why do I hold fast to these particular opinions on certain subjects? Is it because they're culturally reinforced? Are they tribally reinforced? Are these, are these opinions that my ideology has adopted and I adopted them because I want to be a part of a tribe and I don't want to be ostracized from that group? Yeah, just step back, step back from that. Can you step back and can we all step back? And are you kind? Yeah. That's, that's a big one. It's really hard too in the moment. That's why it helps to have some sort of practice for stepping back. Yeah. And also am I kind, you know, am I kind in this moment? Because a lot of times we give ourselves like, I think I'm basically a well intentioned person, but if you examine your own behavior sometimes it can be. No, there's areas where maybe I wasn't at that moment or things like that. Well, it just happens, you know, pressures and tense and anxiety and you know, you blur it out, things you don't really mean. You wish you hadn't said, are you kind when I said that I meant like saying it to yourself? Yeah. I really meant that. Yeah. And I mean, no people. No, I mean, most people. I guess it's both. Yes. You do want to know, but sometimes you can kind of tell. Yes. But yeah, it's maybe with yourself that it's like a deep inquiry. But that should be something that's sort of like universally expressed. Like that if we all could kind of shift our perspective in that direction. One of the things that I've done over the lab, I don't know how many years ago, I stopped interacting with people on social media. And one of the reasons why I stopped doing it is because I realized that most of social media interactions are people arguing. And if I could ensure that I could have social media interactions that are very similar to the interactions that I have on the podcast, I would love it. Because I have people on the podcast all the time that I disagree with and it never resorts to name calling or shouting or any of that stuff. But yet I see this very limited form of communication that becomes the primary way that people interact with each other. And it's devoid of physical contact. It's you're not looking at people. There's no social cues. There's no the feel of like saying something mean and seeing someone's feelings hurt. Like that. That normal natural human thing that encourages bonding and encourages kindness and communication. It's all removed in text. The same reason why someone can say, K, to you. What the fuck? What does it mean? It's like it's an ineffective way of expressing yourself. Even though it's a great way to get information. So I checked out long time ago. I don't read anything people write about me and don't respond. I don't interact. I don't. I just don't think it's a good way to talk. I try to have as many conversations in person as I can. Obviously I have the luxury of having a podcast like this where I can bring people in and communicate with them. I know some people don't. So the way they iron out ideas and flesh out ideas. But I think they're just trying to win all the time. I think people are trying to dunk on each other all the time. And when I see that, I know some very mentally ill people and they are on Twitter all day long. And it's not helping. It's accentuating it in the worst way possible. It's enforcing that kind of shitty thought process and they get anxiety. Like I had a friend and he had a severe Twitter addiction and he was telling me that he would post something and then he was living in New York. He couldn't walk down the street for like five steps without checking to see what other people had said about what he wrote. Like, oh no, I got this. This guy doesn't agree with me. I have to say something about what he said. And it was just like overwhelming every aspect of his existence. But in his actual real life, it was not there. It wasn't real. But it became everything in his mind. It became everything. It wasn't real. He wasn't experiencing these people. The people that he's experiencing is the guy at the coffee shop or this lady at the store. Hi. It's up. Most people. Most interactions were normal and kind. But the spillover from this bizarre form of processed information was very bad. Yeah. It's like we're running a kind of uncontrolled experiment. 100%. Human relations. But it's uncontrolled but not unmanipulated. No. It's not. It gets into the, you know, I apologize for bringing this up. You heard me talk about this before people online. But the F, there was a guy who was a former FBI analyst that estimated that 80% of the traffic on Twitter is bots. Really? Right. And they're not doing that because it's not financially beneficial. It's not narrative reinforcing. It's not beneficial to whatever propaganda they're trying to pursue. And you're willingly waiting into that. And I think you could say willing. But one interesting, it seems like we are not cognitively equipped because of our, whatever we have evolved what capacities we've evolved with as human beings were not. There are certain ways that it didn't anticipate this de-rassinated disembodied form of stripped down context for your communication that triggers strong emotion. I mean, nonetheless keeps that emotional conduit going. So we're very, we are especially vulnerable to the loops that we and not, and we don't have many defenses. It's almost like when they introduce a new creature into Australia. Right. It's right. It's like rampage. Because the defenses aren't, haven't been built up over time. Right. Totally. Yeah. And then the way to deal with that is they bring in a new invasive species. And then you have feral cats everywhere. Exactly. Yeah. And this is your brain. I mean, this is what's really crazy because also it's the most fascinating time ever in terms of your ability to access information. Because of things like social media, you can find out about world events in a way that through processed mainstream media that's only supported by governments and advertising, you would never have access to different nations. So you would never have a real true understanding of what's really going on in the world. So you have that along with propaganda. And it just requires this insane psychic immune system to sort of handle all of this. Yeah. It's really interesting. Just that's what I think is this larger democratization of information that we're experiencing that we haven't really reckoned with. And we don't even see the scope of it. Like I remember in around 2008, I walked into a colleagues office at the university. And he was staring at his, he's a senior scholar and he'd been working for many years going around the world looking at papers of scientists. And he was just looking online. He couldn't get over it because Galileo's papers were up online. And he didn't have to go to Italy anymore to look at them and actually now anyone can look at them. They're freely available. And he just, he said, this is going to change everything because anyone can access this now. Anyone can start to write about it. And that was just the beginning and now they're so. And he just said, this is going to change everything, because anyone can access this now. Anyone can start to write about it. And that was just the beginning and now there's so much more available, not that everything is. But many more things are. So in a way, it's an incredible time of opportunity to. We just have to develop immune systems. We have to develop. We outstripped our, yeah, our. And we do seem to as a, I don't know, people just seem to feel that it's inevitable that will embrace the new technology without making sure that we are capable of handling it or that it's safe or. Well, we are. Because everyone has a phone. That's true. We're ready embraced it, whether we like it or not. And the problem is it's not going to stop with the phone. It's going to keep going. And just like the internet was completely unexpected in the 1930s, nobody ever imagined would it be like in 2025. Nobody imagined 95 years later would be dealing with this. But what are we going to be dealing with 95 years from now? A couple of people had visions that were pretty interesting. I was fine interesting that you can look back at like someone, a guy named Vanivar Bush in the 1930s had a vision called Memex. Or he said, what if you could put all the world's information inside a wooden desk made out of O key specified? And he said it would be on microphone because they didn't have a digital databases, but it would be all microphone and you could call up anything. So it would be a little a miniaturized library because you put an entire, you know, you put the Bible on one frame, you know, the size of your thumbnail. Oh, wow. You come up on your screen. You could also conduct experiments on that desk. And you called it Memex. He said, and then the scientist could also strap a little camera to his forehead and add to that knowledge. So in some ways, there are a couple other visionaries like this Belgian internationalist named Paul Atlay who tried to, he invented something called the London Am, which was a storehouse of knowledge. And it was just built on postcards around the turn of the 20th century in this huge building in Belgium. You had women and outfits who would, you know, if you wrote in with a question, they would go get the answer sort of like a hand-based internet. So people have an even going back to, you know, various fantasies of libraries going back to the Greeks. People have dreamed of this all the world's knowledge in a tiny shoebox or that was the fantasy of microfilm, which I wrote about in this other book. It's very fascinating because they really could put the Bible on the head of a pen even by the 1950s, you know, using just film. So but yeah, people didn't imagine the exact form it would take. And I think we're at a crossroads today, which way will it go? It won't necessarily, it won't necessarily go the darkest route, I hope. But you've laid out some of what that, what that may look at. Well, it's also going to go the route of quantum computing, which is going to be unfathomable power, unfathomable computing power attached to information. And it's going to happen inside of our lifetime. Yeah, it's amazing how much is happening all at once. Yeah. Let's say polycrisis or poly, whatever it is, emergence. Well, I guess your meditation practice is a great way to at least mitigate some of the effects of that. How could you convince the vast majority of people that are so scatterbrained and, you know, addicted to caffeine and nicotine and prescription drugs and how could it, you know, it's like that back. We have so many people that are just going to fall in line and just hop aboard the train. Yeah, I guess you have to hope that I mean, there are countervailing trends and tendencies. Like there is a lot more uptake meditation. Of course, that can be abused too, but mostly it's most, for most part, a good thing to have some reflective practice to add breathing like even apps that tell you how to do box breathing or even, even sometimes articles about things like doom scrolling, which they actually I thought it was funny to learn that this is actually an academic concept too, doom scrolling that there are papers written about it, the type, the dynamics of it but just ways that if you notice that you're in some sort of loop like the guy you described, what can you do in that moment to step back and ask yourself, are you kind of? My problem is I used to, I stopped doing it, but I used to do it at night before I'd good a bed. It was just the dumbest time I did. And then so I think about war and like how like imagine living in Hiroshima and then all of a sudden boom the bomb drops. Like what is to stop some psychopathic dictator from just launching a nuclear weapon? What is to stop this from happening? That from happening? And then you ask your phone that question? Yeah, well it's the computer, it's the problem. You can keep your sitting in front of the computer and the big screen and all this information videos and yeah, you could really freak yourself out. Yeah, I think doom scrolling happens mostly at night or sometimes people also reach to their phone first thing in the morning and they're inundated with terrible news or uh-huh. And it just like it takes that in the morning, a sense of the morning being full of possibility and just fills it with dread. Yeah. Unfortunately, but yeah, there's a lot of, yeah, there's, I mean there are things you can do and I think the first part is just noticing how it feels. Because even the other day my daughter said, you're spending a lot of time on Instagram, she said to me and I was like no I'm not. I don't have a problem. I'm like I studied this. But then I stopped and I realized I feel a bit better. Yeah. At least for now. Yeah, I went a couple days without looking at social media at all and I was like oh god, it feels like a lot of people. I feel lighter, you know, and then I went right back to it, you know, but also like I make the same argument like cutting out for my job. But I mean is it really? I mean like my job as like a commentator on things and a comedian is like I kind of have to be paying attention. But if something's so fucked up, it's going to make it to me anyway. It'll make it to me. You know what I mean? I have faith that will come to you. It'll make you really messed up. Down river. I don't have to go to the waterfall. Well, it's something about the design of interoperability with phones for example. You think or if you use it for your alarm, it's just there then and then you start to, you know, all the functions are melted to you. Right. If you use it for your alarm, that's the key because I do and it wakes me. I don't, I just have an alarm. I used to have a little thing. I don't think they still make them. Yeah. I don't use it. But just interoperability on many levels. Yeah. It's used to sort of feel that you have no choice because you need it for this but you're also or I need it for work but then it sort of enters your life. Yeah. And then you could put a screen limit but then you're going to just hit the pass word and get in there and find out what's going on. But do you find that meditation helps just be, if I go to a retreat, I'm just, it's like, you're not hooked at all but it just doesn't speak to you. Yeah. So much. Or you have a lot of buffer. It's definitely a strange time. It's a very strange time to be a person. Maybe one of the strangest ever if not the strangest. That's the question I have too, is it? Yeah. I wonder. I mean, I think like probably the invention of the wheels probably the strangest and the wheels are just looking at the move stuff. And that's the second strangest. Right. And then there was the printing press. This is crazy. Also that. Yeah. Which by the way, they were really concerned with like they thought when people shouldn't be reading. Well, it's a version of the same thing. Like should it, this is why they started to print the Bible and the vernacular and the common, the common book, you know, it was more available. Changes, changes so many things that many knock on effects. Yeah. But that's what I was curious about because it is this time unparalleled. Is there nothing like it in history or can we find elements that at least give us some perspective or can teach us something? Well, I think it's unparalleled in its global interaction. Yeah. There's nothing like it where you're paying attention to the arguments between Indian Pakistan. Yeah, potentially on a granular level. Yeah. Every day, if you do grab your phone in the morning, you're waking up to eight billion people's worth of bad news. So that's another question. Where do you put your attention and your concern? Right. Like there's this poet I heard an interview with him named David White and he said, potentially we can be exposed to tragedies all over the world at every minute. That, you know, in Vietnam, they had a rule against you weren't allowed to broadcast the coffins coming back because they didn't want people to see what was happening. They did during the Iran war as well. Yeah. And so, but now you can see people actually going, you know, dying at every minute in any number of places which humanly creates a moral injury if you're not trying to help or stop it. Yes. And so this vast exposure is unprecedented to suffering. But also where do you put your attention? Where do you what do you focus on? What do you? What changes your map of the landscape of the world? Because instead of the landscape of the world being your world, how you interact with your community and the people around you. Now it's like everything car accidents, plane crashes. It's all coming at you. Yeah. In vivid HD. You don't really have a sense of scale. Yeah. I don't know how to wrap this up. I'll leave it to you. Well, I'll leave it to the universe. I really enjoyed our conversation though. Instability of truth. This is your book, Brainwashing Mind Control and Hyper Persuasion. It's, did you do the audiobook or did somebody else read it? I didn't do it, but talent. I hate what happens. She seems, I chose her. She had a great voice, but I kind of, yeah, maybe that's what I called it myself. Please do. Thanks so much. Thank you. I really enjoyed it. Thank you very much. Bye, everybody.