Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. OK. Joe, what's happening? Nice to meet you. Yes, you too, sir. Both of you guys were in the program, which is a, that's why I wore my bra's while shirt. UFO disclosure documentary, all about what's going on behind the scenes. Why don't you tell everybody before we get started, Jay, tell them what your background is, what you do. I'm a retired master sergeant from the Air Force for 22 years, retired 2007. Started off in the Airframe Guy, ended up in Intel. And that's when things got strange. At my second duty, it's time when it was an Intel guy, and got introduced to the program. And that's how I ended up in the movie, as I had some strange experiences that I could talk about that were unclassified. So I came forward, and that's where James found it. And we got it all home pretty good, and everything is a history from there. And Logan, you were in the documentary as well, so tell everybody what you do. So I am a pull this up to your face. I'm sorry. It's OK. So I'm also a retired master sergeant from the Air Force. Started off as a B52 crew chief, cross train in Intel, retired after 21 and a half. And I ended up being part of the UAP task force. And I was one of the first people to come across J here, and some other people. And from that, James found out about me and said, OK, we need to talk. So him and Leslie Keen approached me, and I was like, yeah. But I kind of got out of it by Jay Stratton. Everybody was ganging up around me, around him, and he was like, why are you asking me? Logan worked for me, and everybody was working at us. OK, I guess I'm out. Oh, boy. So let's start with you, Jay. What was your first introduction to this whole concept that we are in possession of alien crafts, or that we have communicated, or there's been some contact? Like, what was your thoughts about it before you had these experiences? I had had a childhood experience with a UFO, previous to that when I was 10 years old. So I didn't really get an interest in UFOs at all. I just thought it was strange. I also shared experience with my mother. What was the experience? Well, it was just a red orb that came down. It looked like it came from the atmosphere, distance and then approaching my bedroom window. And ended up kind of hovering near the bottom of my street. And I was screaming through my parents, there's a strange light outside. And nobody responded. So I ran out to get my binoculars, my dad's binoculars, and ran out to the front lawn. And finally, my mom was the only one that responded. And we both got to see it taken off as it came across with the rooftop of my friend Eddie South at the bottom of the street. And that's what she's got to see my mother when I did. Did it make any noise? Zero noise. Now it just looked like a total mirror, completely polished mirror kind of oblong kind of a ship or a craft. How big was it? It was about 30, 35 foot, really? It could be even 40 foot. Yeah, it was about the half the size of my friend's rooftop if you were to measure it from front and head to back. So it was pretty big. It was enough for probably your eye to stand up in it and walk around a little bit. And your mother has the exact same recollection of the experience? Actually, I've been asked to write a book, so I've got her writing her part of that and I'll have the same thing. I've had another couple of experiences that my family and members and other friends will probably write up some. And so this was all when you were young. And so you had this memory in your head when you started working for the government. But when will you introduce to the whole idea that this is a real thing? Well, I know it's on mission because I just kind of filed away that UFO experience at 10 years old for many years. And I just was kind of even skeptical sometimes about, well, maybe it was just something in aberration in my mind or eyes or something. But anyway, so I got really convinced that this was real when I was at right path on a mission when I was in the program. And we intercepted some calls that literally were speaking about an NHI presence in the program and they were working in labs. So right path for everybody, right path to an air force base in Ohio. And NHI non-human intelligence, right? That's correct. And so they were saying, what were they saying? How much can you say? Like, is any of this top secret or is any of this? I can pretty much talk about the culture and the presence of the NHI. But I can't talk about weapon systems and the technology of developing. That's all going to have to be national security stuff because we don't want our enemies to know what we got. Of course. So what was this talk of NHI? What did it entail? Well, you first heard it. Well, it was between two people that were talking about the day's interview with this NHI that they had they called an even. And an interview. Yeah, he had had an interview with him and he was relaying what was talked about in that interview to another individual, probably his boss or somebody that is kind of, you know, passing on to the rest of the folks in the group or whatever. Do you see this written down? I did not. I had it recorded just like you would with anything else that's, you know, it's recorded in such a way that it can stand legal forensic kind of analysis. That's the level of stuff that you have to do with an Intel guy is you have to be really specific about what you're recording and make sure it's accurate. Even whether you believe it or not, what's going on, you have to be able to transcribe that word for word to where it goes. So you heard the recording. That's how you found out about this non-human intelligence thing. Well, it was an active phone call. That's what I did on the red team that I was on for the program because I was monitoring for the Air Force. And in this case, I'm monitoring for the program. Can you say how the conversation went? Like how does someone bring up non-human intelligence? What was like, was there any discussion before this non-human intelligence of UFOs at all or aliens at all? Yeah, there was quite a few times. We had a scientist on the team. There was an officer. He was a nuclear scientist. And he was able to give us some insights and stuff like that because we'd have some really strange things like things that were turning at 90 degrees. And how do you not break that piece of machinery or are not kill the occupants? And we were hearing stuff like that. And they had like very technical parameters that I can't discuss, but we're talking about these. And we get the scientists to come and talk to us. And he say, oh yeah, that's this, this, and this. This episode is brought to you by me undies. When date night comes around, you want to look good for your partner. That's normal. So here's some advice guys. If you want to impress your date, it starts with some nice fitting clothes that compliment your body. And I'm not just talking about a suit or slacks or a blazer wearing a nice pair of underwear, you can go a long way too. Me undies knows how to make an amazing pair of fucking underwear, like their contoured pouch and ball caddy. It helps you look and feel amazing. And like all of their other clothing, it's made with their signature fabric that's breathable, stretchy, and comfortable. If that's not your thing, me undies also has plenty of other options for you to choose from, including lounge wear. And everything else comes in a range of sizes, colors, and prints. There's even some fun Valentine's Day prints and styles like electric hearts or love birds. You and your partner get a matching set to make the night extra special. Try them for yourself. If your first pair of underwear isn't a match made in heaven, it's on me undies. This Valentine's Day, good things come in big packages at me undies. Score huge site-wide savings at meundies.com slash Rogan and enter the code Rogan. That's meundies.com slash Rogan. Enter promo code Rogan for huge site-wide savings. Me undies, comfort from the outside end. And so how does the conversation go or the non-human intelligence gets brought up? That was just like the two of them, when I picked up the call and started the recording on it, and there was some guy that was there at Wright Pat. And apparently he had been talking to this even. And he said, yeah, up to day session, yeah, we got some more information we need to hear about. This is what is going to happen. He says that there's going to be another meeting and that if we don't return the equipment and the prisoners, there's going to be some bad things happen. We have prisoners. Yes. This is what they said on the phone call. And the other guy's like, well, hey, what if we can't get them to return all the equipment into people? And the guy that had given the interview, he's like, you don't want to do that. And the guy's like, well, why? He said, if you don't, they're going to be put to death. And I was like, I literally step back for a minute and I was like, what's going on here? So I had to finish out the call. They talked about sundry other things, just stupid. Can you be a little bit more clear? Like who's going to be put to death? The program folks that are responsible for keeping the tech that's not theirs and also doing things to these extraterrestrials. How did they allegedly acquire this tech? Retrievals? I'm sure you'll. Yeah, when I was first introduced into the program, one of the very first things they asked me was, do you want to be part of the retrieval program? And I said, well, tell me about it. And when they said the things they said, I was like, no, number one, it sounds gross. Number two, you probably can't give me enough PPE gear and has met gear to make me feel safe around these things. And no, I'm not interested in that. Thank you very much. So how do they describe it that freaked you out that much? They're talking about biological entities that are retrieved along with the crash. Yes. Why do they crash if they're so fucking smart? That's always the big question, right? Well, I think the new guy on the block, Jake Barber, he's describing some of the ways that you can do this ironically against the sonic team. He's going to start showing some of that to the world that some of these crafter are manned and piloted by consciousness. And apparently they have a sonic team that can actually get in the head speed of these craft and cause them to land. So it's not really a force landing. It's just kind of a mutual thing. So wait a minute. The United States government has the ability to contact or interact with these craft and force them to land? Yes. And then there's other ones that are done kinetically, which is more of the scary side of it, and the ugly side of the program is that what you've got here is it's not so much the military doing this, but the corporate people like Lockheed, Northrop and all these other companies, they treat this stuff. It's very high value target kind of stuff. And it's very valuable for them to get the retrievals. So you've got really what amounts to a bunch of treasure hunters that are hired with mercenaries involved as well that go out for these retrievals. And that's where Jake Barber comes in, is that he sees some of these people that are hired to come out and retrieve this stuff and he's done that. So the idea would be that the retrievals would be very valuable because you could back engineer the tech, figure out how it works, make weapon systems, make superior craft. Exactly. How long has this supposedly been going on for? Decades. It's been going on for a very long time. And but OK, so is the tech. It would be a bit more important. But if the tech that we have now that allows us to tell them to land didn't exist before, why did they crash before? Like what is Roswell? Well, Roswell, the most accurate account is the one where the microwave radar wave form upset the onboard avionics inside these craft that these are in a child we're flying on that day in Roswell. But it just radars just a detection signal, right? Right. But if you look at some of the stuff like Gary Nolan said about how even at the very molecular level these things are organized very minutely. So you can imagine what, even a flow of electricity, if it affects it wrong or if it's the right wavelength, it does break down the electrical current and the electromagnetic or whatever drive that they might have. And that seems to be what happened at Roswell is that they actually accidentally went in and we're just sweeping like a radar and it caused this crafted crash. What a shit design. You know what I'm saying? Like imagine, imagine like if you bought a Tesla and the wheels fly off when it rains out. You'd be like, what the fuck? You guys have this like super advanced vehicle that you can come here from another planet and radar makes you crash. That kind of stuff makes people incredulous, right? So I'd like to add something here. Someone gave me an analogy to say think of it as there's a type of metal that is totally non-magnetic. But as soon as you put a current through it, it becomes magnetic, all right? And he said, imagine this, you're in Roswell, you're cruising along, you're checking out everybody doing their thing. And then, because remember that night there was a huge electrical storm. That's one of the big things they keep talking about. If one of those things gets hit and all of a sudden they slam together because now they're magnetic and then they bounce off and that's why you had one that landed in Roswell area in the one day that landed somewhere else. Yes, or two. So that was what someone told me. Now, I've never been able to figure out if that's the actual truth. But the two most likely possibilities is that one who will watch JJ said. There's actually another person that was approached by the same race of NHI. And this guy says that they actually recounted what happened is that they thought they were attacked by a directed energy weapon. And then they quickly found out that, no, this was a accidental. This was some sort of a radar system that just caused their onboard computer to go haywire for just that second enough to cause to crash the cabin. It almost doesn't make sense to me. Because if you were going to go visit an uncontacted tribe in the Amazon, you would assume that they have weapons. You'd assume they have bows and arrows. And if you got hit with an arrow, you'd be like, this is crazy. I can't believe I shot by an arrow. But you wouldn't be surprised that they have arrows. Like you would probably rate, hey man, we should be real careful that they might have arrows. They might shoot us. So if you're visiting the human race and you're so advanced that in 1947, you can come here from wherever, another plan and another dimension, whatever you're doing. Wouldn't you know about radar? And wouldn't you have like a system to prepare yourself for storms? Yes. And that's something that might have taken them by surprise because you're talking about 1950s radars. We're not all that new, but they weren't all at old either. When was radar invented, you know? There was one, two if I remember correct. Yeah, there was World War II. It was right around the 1950s. Right around the same time. Right. So it may have been unexpected technology for them. And maybe they just didn't have their countermeasures or something. And there could have been some type of arrogance there because think about it. Based on our understanding, we believe that they've been coming here for thousands of years. Nothing's ever happened. And then all of a sudden, all of a sudden, this new technology and the cost of their ship to crash. So you have to think about the timeframe of when this radar stuff was actually being, and besides that they do not always have intercepted a different call that states that they do have a period of ethnicity between when they come and go. They're not always here or they're out doing other things, I guess. And I treat this like a segment on the Arsenio Hall show. Things that make you go, hmm. Not sure. It just seems dumb. It just seems dumb that radar could take them out. But one of the things about the Vargina crash, which is another James Fox documentary, which is excellent, which is all about the crash in Brazil, which is heavily documented, including the guy who handled the body wind up dying of some unknown bacterial illness that they have no idea what it was. It was a young, healthy guy. He carried this supposedly, carried this being, put it in his patrol car, took it to a hospital. They wouldn't accept it. Had to take it to another hospital. And then two weeks later, this guy's dead. And he just got unbelievably sick. There was nothing they could do to help him. They flooded him with antibiotics, all kinds of different things. There was nothing worked. He died very quickly. When you hear about that story, the big thing was that there was some sort of like crazy electrical storms that night. Yeah. But again, you're gonna have a Tesla. You would assume the wheels won't fly off when it rains. You're gonna come here from another planet, like what's on that planet? Oh, well, they occasionally have lightning. Well, it's not a fuck around if they have lightning. It's not going to the storm. If you're in a plane, you can go above the storm. You know how, like your pilot says, we're gonna take this plane around 45,000 feet to, you know, the let you know. And then you look down. You can see lightning below you in the cloud. It's kind of crazy. How come they can't do that? You got me. I was born in 63. This has happened earlier than I even got there. I'm just trying to go off of what I heard on my interest. I mean, I'm just playing devil's advocate. Or... And I agree. I kind of had the same thoughts. But at the same time, you know, we've made similar stupid decisions when it comes to battles. And we're not. But I would just assume their way better than us. Right? I would assume they, like you were talking about arrogance. I would assume they don't have that anymore. Like, no, let's not fucking work that out of the system. We should work it out of the system. Well, I think that that's true to an extent. But I think also they're very common. They have things in common with us as well that they do have, you know, the same sorts of desires to want to live their life well and all these other things in part of it. So, yeah. Well, it seems like if you want to go and do something, anything, like you want to explore the universe, you want to accomplish things, you want to make technology, it almost seems like some kind of self-acknowledgement or some kind of ego has to be present. Yes. Like, otherwise, there's no motivation to do anything. Like, this is the question about artificial intelligence. We were talking about this. And I said, but a artificial intelligence doesn't have any human needs. It doesn't have any... It doesn't have the desire to spread its DNA. It doesn't have the desire to achieve status. Yes. Why would it do anything? Why would it just sit there and just observe and just watch us be stupid? And maybe it would say logically it would interfere if we were about to blow each other up or something crazy with that. But other than that, why would it do anything? Why would it have any desire to take over? Well, look at us. And this is where I think there's a commonality between us and the NHI. We're intelligent, intelligent people. It's humble of us. So much. Yes. Go on TikTok. I've seen that stupid a year, right? Oh, yeah. OK, too big what I said now. But actually, they... Oh, obviously, we're intelligent and broken. But they probably have a desire for entertainment, which we do have a great... Oh, yeah, we're very entertaining. We love that. Yeah. And they probably have a curiosity as well. Well, they have to, right? If they're exploring wilds of the Explorer. Yeah. Whatever it is that made us us from ancient primates to what we are today, a big part of that is all these needs and desires. And you got to wonder, like at some point in time, does that get engineered out of the biological system? And if it does, that system seems like it wouldn't need to explore at all. Unless it's facilitating a process, unless there's a very delicate process where advanced life forms like ourselves are experiencing this new technology. And a lot of the people that are in possession of the technology aren't even the ones who created it. So they have all this insane responsibility, but they've done none of the work. And they have power over this technology, which is what we find ourselves today. It's real weird. Imagine that's a process that all intelligent life goes through as it's evolving all throughout the universe. Maybe they know this. Maybe they've... Maybe it's a precarious thing. And maybe it has to be monitored because like, oh, you know, star 15. Remember that third planet? Yeah, they're fucking whacked the whole planet. You got there too late. And then you realize, oh, that took like 4 billion years to make intelligent life that could figure out cell phones. And these dipshits blew each other up. And now there's nothing but microbes. And it's going to take billions of years that it might not even work. Because they might be too far from the sun by then. And... I've run another test kit. So let's prevent these territorial primates from killing each other. And just maybe that's a thing that they do throughout the universe like farmers. Like, you know, make sure the wolves don't eat the calves. You know, just like protect it until it gets to this next stage. And I have to say that on mission that I did get that feeling that no matter where the NHI were mentioned, it was not a co-pesthetic free-for-all exchange of technologies at all. It was very controlled by the NHI. If there was a lab environment, the NHI demanded that no human being in the lab while they're there, or are watched what they're doing and record what they're doing. And then they would leave, and then the humans could come in. So it's very precarious little game they're playing. So how long have they supposedly been having these interactions with NHIs? I'd say since... I don't like calling them an HS. I'm calling them aliens. For me again. I wasn't. I like just calling them aliens or whatever. But yeah, I think it happened in the eyes and hour days, you know, that's when it really started to come because that's when they were saying that this UFO came to home and landed and actually talked to the president at the time. And all that stuff. Imagine a UFO talking to Trump. So he probably tried to tax him. Oh, yeah. So my biggest question anytime someone brings up NHI aliens, my first thing is which one? Which one? Because they talk about it as if it's one entity. Oh, they did that. Oh, they did this. But when you break it down, we're hearing some like us and want us to evolve. Some don't like us and want us to kind of pull back, pull back. And they want to control certain things. So I'm like, well, which one? And then they look at me with that deer in the headlight look like, oh, I don't know. Right. So there's the idea that our superiors, that the military, the top levels of government, they, even they are not given all the information. Correct. Because probably we're like a bunch of children. We're like, you're too stupid to figure this out. I'm not going to tell you what a nuclear bomb is. Just duck and cover how it is at the table. We could be the greatest show in this part of the universe. I'm sure we're great. Sure. Yeah. I mean, imagine when we talk about the things with the nuclear bombs where the missile silos, they start accounting down or whatever, maybe it's like, hey, let's see how far they'll go if we do this. Right. And everybody gets all excited. And then I was like, OK, we're just getting. We'll turn it off and go from there. Well, perhaps, I mean, listen, we run experiments all the time on animals all the time. And we have collars on bears. We send them loose. Like, let's follow the bear. Where's he going? We do that all the time. We do that with all kinds of species. We do. They don't make sense that they would do with us, especially. So since we literally have the ability to annihilate all life on Earth, and we're pointing at each other multiple times. Yeah. Yeah, madman, madman world. It's a madman world. I had that argument with Neil deGrasse Tyson. He's like, why would they be interested in us? I'm like, what are you talking about? We could have the jungle to study a frog. You know, like, of course they would come here. We're so strange. We protect the turtles in that one real area that EPA says, oh, no, you can't mess with those turtles. Yeah, imagine Elon gets to Mars and we do find life there. And we'd be so interested to figure out how it works, what makes it tick. You know, they believe they found actual water on Mars, not frozen water now. Yeah, on the poles. Yeah, heard about that. That's nuts. Yeah. Because if there's actual water in there and they can find something in that water that's alive. Yeah. But if we don't, if we're going to expand onto the universe, which is what Elon Musk says, the fact that we don't have to bring water with us, right, that's huge. Brian, you can Mars water. I don't drink tap water and I definitely drink in Mars water. It could be better than it could be. Magic. Imagine if it's like filled with crazy minerals. You drink a glass of Mars water and you just feel incredible. And then we have to shift Mars water from Mars back to LA. That's the war right there. That's the war right there. People are going to be like, how come they have it? We don't have water. Water wars. But Mars water just makes you go back in time. You look 20 again. Yeah. I mean, who knows if the fucks in that water? I don't know. But those are the kind of things you write, though, that that's kind of how we are. It's that very curious about what's on that planet. Yeah, we can utilize the resources that are there, like the water and everything else. And we're going to learn some stuff. And I'm going to take a long time. But I'm really curious about is what was Mars like before it lost its atmosphere. Me too. And was there a time a few billion years ago where Mars was like Earth? You know, and it's to be what people are saying. That's that's the craziest of all theories, right? And the most interesting. But if you know, Earth still exists five billion years from now and now it's cold and dead and there's not how much would be left? How much is left after a couple of billion years? You know, what is really left over? What does it look like? Does it look like Mars? Because Mars looks completely desolate. But we know that Mars had water. And we know Mars had a warmer climate. So you kind of just assumed there was something grow in there. What does it look like a couple of billion years later? Probably like Mars. Yeah. Which is great. If we do find out that Mars at one point in time housed by a logical life or maybe there's microbial life or something like that that still exists on Mars, just the climate is so harsh it can advance past that stage. That alone would just change our whole view of the universe itself. Because we would start to consider, okay, maybe this isn't just this one thing that happened. Maybe the Fermi paradox is just that we don't have the ability to detect all these things that are there. Yeah. Or maybe they really do pass by and keep their doors closed. Okay, we're fucking shooting fireworks at 4th of July. We're nuts. We're the craziest species on this planet by far. Everything else is normal. Everything else just kills what it wants to eat. Everything else does normal stuff. They fight over resources, but that kind of makes sense biologically. Honestly, after my experience in the program, I found that it seems the more I think about it, the more that they are very much like us in a lot of ways. But they have probably a world government that we do not have. In other words, they can get along in their own society much better than we can and their former government is not broken enough. I think if you branch out into the solar system and then into the galaxy, like as you start spreading out, if you do become some sort of an interstellar species, you kind of have to be united as a planet. Right? You got to go look all this bullshit about this country and that country. Let's let it go. Let's let it go. I mean, I don't want one world government because I don't trust the government. But if I did trust the government, I'd be like, one world government is the way to go. Everybody should have the same resources. Everybody should have the same access to healthy food and water and clean air. It should be the same for everybody. It shouldn't be that you can make an iPhone in China because they can make it for 15 cents because the people are working like slaves. Exactly. It shouldn't be like that. It should be like the whole world as the same rules. But the problems you can't trust the government. So what do you do? Well, if you get to a point where everybody's is so advanced that we don't have all of the same greed and lust and all the bullshit that ruins human society, if aliens get to that point, then it only makes sense that they would operate as a planet. But then they would have like their interest in ahead of these fuckers on that other planet. So you know, a lot of those lines, it's those things that you talked about. Those are the things that inherent that has human. I'm sorry. The hand moves, you can't see. Okay. Those are the things that inherently make us human. So the question would be, depending on when we're trying to child you're thinking about, what inherently makes them them and how compatible are we and what we're looking at? Because those could be some of the things that attract them to us or detract them away from us. What I'm interested in is are there things just like us? Is this like, if you, you know, like there's similar plants that exist in similar ecosystems all over the world where ideally the seeds have never been able to get back and forth, but they're similar. In at least in some ways, it's just a matter of climate, resources, these plant over millions and millions of years, these same kind of plants grow similar kind of animals. There's rats all over the place. There's a pattern to it. Yeah, there's a pattern. At atomic level, there's a way that things occur naturally and they've met form different things. So bird, I agree. I think you and I talked about it the first time we spoke on the phone and said, yeah, there probably is a bird. Kind of looks like a bird on another part of the universe, but maybe it has two sets of wings, or two heads or something. I don't know, just because. This ain't the little Eddie Biddy teeny tiny bowl. This is Super Bowl 59. Get in on the action at Draft King Sportsbook, an official sports betting partner of Super Bowl 59. Scoring Touchdown is key to hoist. Get in on the action at Draft King Sportsbook. An official sports betting partner of Super Bowl 59. Scoring touchdowns is key to hoisting the Vince Lombardi Trophy and you have a shot to score big by betting on them at Draft King Sportsbook. The number one place to bet touchdowns. New Draft King customers can bet $5 to get $200 in bonus bets instantly. Download the Draft King Sportsbook app and use the code Rogan. That's code Rogan for new customers to get $200 in bonus bets instantly when you bet just five bucks. Only on Draft King Sportsbook. The crown is yours. Gambling problem call 1-800-GAMBLER in New York. Call 877-8-Hopenwire. Text Hope in Y-4-67-369. In Connecticut, help is available for a problem gambling. Call 888-879-7777 or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly. On behalf of Boothill Casino and Resorting Kansas, 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction. Void and Ontario. New customers only bonus bets expire 168 hours after issuance. For additional terms and responsible gaming resources, cdkng.co slash audio. Something similar. I mean, the birds vary so what? I mean, you can get a sparrow. You get a fucking eagle or a condor. There's so many different kinds of birds too. But I wonder, is this the only kind of way life evolves or are there planets that are just radically different than our planet and life forms in a completely different way? I would think that that's true also is that there's exceptions to the rule. Just like there are here on earth that got some really strange creatures that roam around like people are starting to say octopus, octopi and stuff. They don't fit the normal way that things evolve around the earth and stuff like that. There's no bones there so you know, you're not going to find any fossils anywhere. Yeah. But if you think about some of the things that we're being told now, 99% of all life that lived before is all gone now. Right. So if this is what's left, maybe some of those unique things that were out there, there's something similar because one of the things that I ponder is there's got to be some grand design because when we see these aliens, whether they talk about it's a gray, it's an Nordic, it's a draconian or if it's a mantis, they're all standing upright. So is that a part of the grand design that is intelligent as you get further up the food chain? You start to stand on your two legs and whatever. And then I think about if it's a mantis, whatever, how do they build their ships if they don't really have a poseable thumbs and those are the things that we're always taught. These are the things that make us unique as humans. And we can build things and that's why the other animals didn't, the only other animal out there is what the chimpanzee or the gorilla or something primates. But obviously nature finds a way. And it's not human nature. It's something other type of nature and they do something else. Well, it could be genetic engineering too. It could be that they read from that. They reach some point where they say, well, what's the best structure for a body? A mantis structure way better than a person structure. We break so easy. Mantis are insanely strong. Ever seen a mantis catch a hummingbird at a feeder? Yes. It's nuts, man. You're taking up tarantula is a scorpion. They're so little and they just snatch that fucker up and he can't move. And like if you looked at them like the the hummingbird is probably four times heavier, at least probably more than that. And he's just like, that's like that design, the exoskeleton design is superior in terms of like durability. And also lobsters and crabs and all these kind of insects like that do mantis regrow limbs. Let's find that out. All I know is that like crabs do. Yeah. Little crabs can't. Yeah. Lobsters and crabs all I like to think of them is just armored spiders. Yeah. Yeah. You know, your bugs. I mean, and if you think about when they said that the oxygen level was at 30, 35% and some other stuff, they're saying some of these spiders were the size of small dogs. I'm like, yeah, that's not a place I'd like to live. So they can't. So praying mantis undergo incomplete metamorphosis. Sometimes if they're cages to dry, a mantis may have trouble shedding old skin will lose a limb in the process of molting. If it happens, it's possible for a mantis to regrow the lost limb, but only when they molt again. Okay. So they molt again, then they regrow that limb. But they do regrow, they limb. They regenerate limbs as long as there's at least a cocca remaining, whatever that is. Yeah. It won't regenerate right away. And maybe a tiny knob and then then they molt, I guess. Wow. It makes sense because the the hardest shell would prevent that from continuing. Right. But it just seems like that's a superior form of a structure. So if you get to the point where technology is all done with the mind, right, we've developed artificial intelligence and quantum computing and the being has been generated over genetic engineering to the point where it no longer has to have sex to recreate new versions of the social and so instead, the way they procreate is they do it through design. And maybe they say, look, it doesn't matter what you look like anymore. No one's fucking. Let's all become mantis as a a good boy. Right. Like this. This soft shit on the outside. Like we're like, fucking water balloons. We're so vulnerable. Yeah. You'd better be, wouldn't it be our better if you're hard on the outside? And, you know, we don't need to like use your fingers and thumbs and where we do everything on their mind. I mean, if it gets to the point, like this was the thing that I've heard about people that have supposedly worked on crafts is that one of the most remarkable things is that there's no, there's no gears. There's no levers to turn. There's no buttons. There's no controls that everything is done. Somehow or another, where the being and the craft are one. Yes. Yes. Consciously. Yeah. I've had discussions about that. Have you talked to anybody that has said that any of the crafts have controls in them? No. All I've heard. Basic. Basic controls. Well, I was talking to Jack Sir Fadi about it. There was a craft that did have some place where the hands were in there, but it was only to sort of do some minor adjustments for the craft is what he was describing and other people have described. You know, that's what I was going to say. There's just all I've heard is that there's been two places for you to put your hands and maybe for other parts of the crew. But that's about it. Maybe that's how you don't use your phone. Get distracted. Just use your hands. Well, put your hands down on the thing. So there's no problem. It's hard to put around. Maybe they have something similar to like cell phone addiction. So if they're putting their hands on the thing, wasn't that what Lazar said as well? Did you say there was something similar to that? Yes, he did. Yeah. So no controls. And somehow or another, putting your hand on it, syncs you up and then they're just using their mind. Correct. Did they try to explain how this was developed? There's a lot of people that are looking into it now and they're starting to see that yes, it's possible. And I think that's, again, some of the new whistle blowers can shed some more light on to how this happens. And I think we need to hear a little bit more about these folks that came forward about the Sionics team. And what exactly is this meditation? What are they linking up with? Does it feel mechanical? Does it feel like an entity? Because you know, we hear Jake talk about his experiences. He had a really spiritual experience with one of these things while he was carrying it to the next place. He was literally crying in the interview. This is that egg looking thing. Yeah, he said that he felt well, it was he called it the eight goner thing craft. That one was the one he had the spiritual eight gone eight gone like an hexagon, but he has eight sides, but or octagon. I think would be the actual term, but he said it had like eight sided kind of a disc. So this is not the thing we're talking about. Yeah, this is a different one. Different one. Yeah, so he's really different one. Yeah, okay. I didn't see that interview. Yeah. Well, the detailed one, I think you can pull that one out of there, but he mentioned that that one he had like a real new kid and it was beautiful. And he cried about it because it was so beautiful of an experience. Wow. And I have a question about all those things because if they can get into our minds, my thing is that how do you know that that's not what they're putting into your head? Because like what they experienced out of the skin while crunch when they saw the creature on the top floor, they said as they approached it, they started feeling fear. And as they approached it further, the fear just kept intensifying to the point where it was like a physical change in the temperature. So if someone can put fear into you, why can't they put love into you and all these different things? And I'm not saying that it's not genuine, but part of being on the task force, you have to question everything. Well, we can do that to each other. Yes. You know, we can do that to each other through threats. We can put fear into people. We can do that. You know, there's a crazy documentary called Holy Hell. And it's about this guy who is a cult leader. And one of of the things that he would do to these people, he was a hypnotist too. But one of the things that he would do these people, he called it the knowing. And he would put his hands on them. And they would say that they would experience God. They had to be prepared for it. It was a thing that was very difficult to get. He had to prove you for it. And all these people wanted it. And they never got it. It was like a thing he held over your head. And then when he actually did it, even though this guy turned out to be a complete fraud and the cult disbanded, all those people talk about that moment when they had that experience with that guy. And they say it really happened. Wow. Because the human mind is weird. Right. And if a person can do that to you by touching you, it just makes sense that some like super advanced being would say like, what is the best feeling that I could give to this primitive entity that's studying me to let me know like, don't blow me up. Don't fuck with me. What do you know? And this is the best expression that you can have in life. What is the best expression you have in life is love pure love. It's just pure just just untethered love. It would make sense. It would like put that in you so that you would protect this thing. And that may be part of it. And I think that's what their desire is. Just like we, you know, we tried to put our best foot forward if we knew that we were similarly being scrutinized. Sure. You know, we'd want to do that. Well, we visit on contact to try to give them free food. Yeah, but just like, where are you if we guys would see that's where my fear is. That's why I came forward is that I was hearing stuff that actually brought concern that, you know, in the way I kind of package that up is that the military happens to be unfortunately the face of humankind here in this situation that comes to the program because it's definitely not the public. We're just, you know, apparently having people come forward with, I got abducted or I saw this and I saw that. but in the military, that seems to be where there isn't interface going on. Right. And I'm just wondering is that too heavy handed because they're not seeing the full human. Right. They're seeing the military humans. Right. And that's why I'm kind of ticked the tack that I did instead of going through all the other channels. This is I guess was like, let me try something new. Let me talk to the people and get to know the people, but they feel about this. And I'll just tell my story, whatever happens happens. Yeah, I took some spears, but you know, most of the most part, people are ready for this. People will be definitely want it, whether they're ready for we'll find out if it actually becomes bigger and more profound than what we've currently experienced. Yeah, I got, I got to ask the question and they said, if you were going to go to Congress and say, here's what we need to know about the U.A. pay experience, what would you tell everybody? That's a good question. My answer was, we don't need you anymore because so many groups now have caught on that if they attune themselves to whatever it is, they can talk to these things directly themselves. Now, whether it's good or bad, but because of the the badness that has transpired over the years, more and more people of like you, you said, you don't trust the government. There's people they don't trust the government all in this other thing. So they're like, let's reach out by ourselves. You've got people doing, you know, RV and out of the body experience and all that other stuff. You've got people that are being contacted directly. So now they're trying to say say things. So and also to where evolving. So as we're evolving and other things start happening, you have to start questioning, why do we need the government in the middle of this? Please don't take this the wrong way because get angry. It's kind of like the Catholic church. I was always told if you want to talk to God, you talk to God. But then why do I need a priest? Right. You know, so the government's always been the middle man. So do we really still need him? So when you're saying that all these people have figured out these methods, how to communicate with the aliens, what you're talking about is like people sitting down, suppose this is something I'm hearing a lot lately, sitting down and supposedly summoning them, putting out like an intention and that they would they will come. Yes, does that happen with you? You ever try it? I haven't yet. So why wouldn't you try it? If you feel like I tell everybody I'm black and I'm afraid of the wolf. Okay. But at some point, I know I'm going to have to embrace it because it is part of the experience. So like I'm good friends with Travis Taylor. And when we first started talking, it was like, okay, I'd like to talk to you about coming out to the ranch. You and some of your your friends, your intel guys. And we just, we know we talked about it. And then I kind of put it up in the room and said, Hey, guys, if we had a chance to go out to the ranch, who would go? And all the white people put their hands up right away. I don't know what black people were watching the corner going, no, let's think about this. And I sat in and I go, why is it that we're so reserved about going? And I remember something that someone told me was when the woo happens, you embrace it. But you don't run towards it because that whatever that experience is, it was probably meant for somebody else. And now you're interfering when you run towards it. Right. So if you summon the UFO, like if they come to visit you, that's meant to happen to you. What if you're summoning them? Yes. Yes. You may be, do you really want that in your life? You're not. So like, what do you? I mean, people say that yeah, if I could, if I could experience UFO contact, I would. Well, would you really? Because that might fuck up the whole rest of your life, like what if it does happen? And then it never happens again. And then you have a wife and kids and a house and you just sit in your fucking living room trying to pay attention to this football game. When you're thinking about, I've seen you fucking alien. I've seen UFOs. They've come down to communicate with me telepathically. I know they've real. Yeah. Well, would ruin your whole life. Remember that movie would be an act like I think it was called like Chasing Amy. And Chasing Amy, I remember the name. I don't remember. There was a, not that Amy. No, but there was something that was said in there that always made me think after you have a first experience and in this particular case, there was talking about your first orgasm. You're always chasing after that first best feeling that you ever had. You never, you're never going to get there, but you're chasing it. They're saying they're going to be in an heroin too. Yes. It's chasing the dragon. Yes. So, so if you're one of those people that had a really profound experience with a creature from another world, yeah, you can't really explain it to everybody else. So you're looking for something else to to make it seem real because you start questioning everything that you know. You know, and that's, that's how I was. My, my first experience was when I was a kid in England and me and the friend were just throwing a ball back and forward. And you know, in the old days, people used to wrap the sneakers around the telephone lines. So I just happened to see that there was some sneakers up there. And then all of a sudden, I look off in the distance. And there's this UAP UFO that looks like an iron, that you would iron your clothes with the whole bottom part was glowing. The top part was just Dollish great because, you know, England at great skies was the shape. The top like an iron as well. Yes. So like a hump too. It kind of had a hump to it. So I'm sitting there going, well, what is that? And he goes, that's got to be a helicopter because it's just standing there. And I was like, but I don't hear any noise, you know. And then next thing you know, we saw, I believe it was two F4 jets coming because you could hear them. Those engines allow. And these two jets come out. And this thing just goes, and this is when I was living in Nottingham, England because I'm British by birth. All right. So, you know, our parents are like, eh, too much imagination. And I just kind of kept it in the back of my head. And then I saw things later and I just kept questioning them. And finally, it was like, I'm really going to have to look into this. So how old were you? I was about 10. So you were and you said you were like 10 as well? This is one of the things that I keep hearing about this idea that children and their innocence, or they don't have this blockade in their head to keep them from, they don't think it's ridiculous to think about aliens. They're open to it more. We talked about this. And that was programmed as we get mature. Yeah, we don't want to be fools. Right. So I believe, and this is just my belief, not anybody's, but I believe from the mid 1950s, all the way up to the mid 1990s, I think there was a deliberate attempt by these entities to reach out to schoolchildren and going to the schools. Because remember the rules and bobways, right? That was crazy. That's crazy. Because all those years later, they all have the same story. They all drew the same thing independently. They pulled the side. All the way down to the remember it. Yeah. And then there's the stuff in Australia. There's the stuff in England. There's the stuff in France. It's constantly, I think Australia wants to roll similar to, right? Yeah. I think his name was Preston Dennant. He wrote a book. I hope your viewers read it or take a look at it. It's like the top 100 school sightings and half of it is based on just the sighting. Another part of it is based on the actual thing landing and trying to communicate with the kids. And I said they're just thinking were they doing that to prepare us for now? For when they do come back? So we're not so afraid the kids are more open minded. I'm not sure. But you have to think about those things and go, you know, aren't your most in your home? Yeah. Things are made to go. So those were some of the things that we just started thinking about and going, well, what if? And then I hate to play what if games because my favorite what if is what if forms had machine guns, birds wouldn't mess with them. But but you have to play that game sometime and just kind of draw it out and then see if it if you have a hypothesis that can start repeating itself and then you go, hey, there is something to this. Well, the real question is how long have entities been visiting us? And are the same entities visiting us over and over again? Or like the Zimbabwe incident? Is that like the first time that species has ever been here? And did they just seek contact and didn't know that they're dealing with little children in a school? They just knew they were dealing with a group of intelligent beings that they could communicate with? They probably don't even have the concept of a school, right? Right. So if they're landing, I mean, they probably understand basic culture for human beings. But as they land and interact with people, this might be the first time they've this species is interactive with anybody. We don't know. I mean, we're dealing with hundreds of billions of stars just in this galaxy alone. And personally, from just my belief in it is that we have millennia of these sorts of encounters all through manuscripts, even towards Washington's got his story. You know, in Washington, a story? Yeah, he met a green somebody before he actually went into a book. Yeah, pulled out of Jamie. George Washington had a UFO encounter. Well, yeah, an entity encounter. He just said that this was George Washington also had lead poisoning. Shane Gillis. Shane Gillis has the best bit about George Washington. I don't know if you've seen it. It's fucking hilarious. But going to the George Washington Museum and seeing George Washington's teeth and George Washington's teeth, that well, no, they were slave teeth. First of all, they knocked some of the teeth out of slave's mouths. And the other ones were from horses. Oh my God. And it was set in is all in lead. So they had lead in his mouth. I always thought they were all in. So his joke is all about like George Washington being fucking mad with lead poisoning. He killing everybody. That's what I said. He was out of his fucking mind. It's a great bit. But but the point is like George Washington was being poisoned by, you know, medical science at the time. They didn't know that lead was bad for you. Yeah, it's crazy. kept lead in his mouth. Yeah. But I know. But like makes you wonder, like, what are we doing right now that the future people going to go, these fucking idiots were doing that. But George Washington, if you found his account, Jamie. So from Asian aliens about the founding father, good enough. Solid reference. It's legit. Yeah. Get George you're too close to say it was yeah. So all those, all those things that happened to those kids, we don't know if it was, I mean, we're hearing stories now that they can mess with your mind. We don't know if they're pushing these kids forward mentally. We don't know if they're, you know, dumming them down because they know that these kids are going to be the ones that are going to make a difference. Because it all depends on what they're all doing right now. Yeah. Or any of them like real exceptional or any of them like PhDs or something like that. I have not, I have not gone to check any of that. But one of the things that coincides with that, that I kind of, I think there was exceptional people usually have to do some exceptional things to get noticed. And I think even if you're exceptional, you may not have fit the right block to get to get noticed. So that someone was sitting there and go, Hey, what's going on in your past, whatever. And then there's a lot of these people, they just don't want to talk about. Right. Because of whatever the stigma, but now that the stigma is being lifted, you know, who knows, maybe about muscle. The stigma is being, the stigma is being lifted, but people still live with the haunting memory of the stigma being a part of their life. So I think people that have had an experience a long time ago, even though the stigma is lifted, they're still reluctant to talk about it. It's like there's still people that are in the closet. Like homosexuality is like way less taboo than it's ever been in modern history, right? But yet there's still people that have been in the closet for 20 years and then trapped, and they just like fuck and they can't get themselves. They can't get out. I think for a lot of people that have had these crazy experiences, they probably had some moments where they told people, friends, they got mocked and people called them liars. They felt like an idiot. I'm just not telling anybody this anymore. Yep. Which totally makes sense. Yep. It's the same thing that's happening on X and other platforms as well as as people coming forward trying to speak their truth and they get shut down by people that don't have never been there. They're just coordinating. Yeah, but that's just toxic internet. That's just a lot of hundred percent. I agree with you. It's just human beings online. They're just not good at it. We're not good. It's too new. We suck at it. We're real shitty to each other. Yeah. Yeah. And too many people, it's like they're mentally ill. And what I mean by mentally ill is like if you're on Twitter 12 hours a day and you're constantly tweeting before you go to bed, you're mentally ill. You might not think you're mentally ill. Just like when you're an alcoholic, you're mentally ill. If you're gambling addict, you're mentally ill. You're not well. Right? You're fucking trying to bet your house on a football game. You're out of your fucking mind. You're mentally ill. You're mentally ill. If you're on Twitter all day, just arguing with people. It's just the nature of the technology and the very crude way that people interact with each other, which leads you to think that as technology evolves and it gets to the point where we're communicating telepathy through telepathy telepathically, like supposedly they can. It sort of eliminates the need to even know our language. They can just come and give us thoughts and express things in a pure way without the need to decipher it through syntax and but they're still the the worry of misinterpretation because my family was pretty religious and when I was going up there, like, God is omnipotent, God knows everything. God doesn't make mistakes on everything. And then I was like, that's not exactly true. But if you think that God is omnipotent and he's communicating with everybody, how is it that all the leads of it to serve a church have different views on how we're supposed to talk to God. If God is right, why is it just saying experience really? Yeah. And it's the same thing with the thing, the NHI is that like you're saying it, you'd like to put a pattern to it. But maybe there's not there's some very random things that have happened in other encounters, but there's some of them that do seem to be have a concerted effort, a prolonged effort from even millennia because we do see like old stone ancient monuments and monoliths that do have these depictions of what look exactly like grace. Yeah. The craziest one is hit in Australia. The one that's on the wall where there's all these dudes are the big eyes. There's a couple of places where there's a couple of those key paintings that are like that. Where there's from? I think there's some down in South America. I saved one. I'll send it to you, Jamie, because it just I've read so much that they online and it freaked me out so much. I saved it on my phone. I was like, this is so crazy just to look at it. Yeah. And there was one on the side of a like a hillside or a cliff face. Yeah. That was no. Yeah. That's why it why it freaked you out. I think that there's one. Well, because I just sent it to Jamie. We take a look at it right here. Jamie, you could run that through a Google search. You could find out where it is or I'll do that while you put it up on the screen. It freaks me out because these people were starving. These people were like barely getting by right. They have stone tools and they took the time to draw these things with these like weird helmets on and these big black eyes, which is very similar to so many different encounters that people have. They all describe a very similar thing, a big head with giant black eyes. So those are the typical grades, but I heard in South America, there were people that they showed that picture to and they called them the ant people because they said they came from underground. Yeah. Well, that's that's the other question. Like we're just sort of assuming that these things are definitely from another planet that they're not here and they haven't been here all along. Yeah. That's a size. Yeah. So yeah, these are aboriginal drawings or aboriginal paintings. Yes. Yes. So this is from Australia, which is just really wild. And you get them all over the world. All over the world. Yeah. And real similar all over the world. Yeah. You got them in Ireland. Yeah. You got them in the United States. Central Central America. And the vast majority of those children that saw UAP that came down the other school, if there was an entity that was there, it was usually the typical gray looking ones that were there. Well, the ones that they saw in Vargina, Brazil are kind of similar, but they seem like a darker color. Like it was almost like a purple, right? Yeah. With reddish purple or something like that. But they did have the black eyes and the large heads and they had horns. They had horns. They were very specific. Well, they said the pictures that we're seeing for Vargina, this one had red eyes. And the reason why I'm bringing that up is because a friend of mine contacted me, a mutual friend that we talked about. Oh, okay. Yeah. He was talking about something known as the Dover demon and it's over by Dover, Dover Delaware. And there was supposed to be an incident where a UAP came down and there was a creature and it looked a lot like the Vargina creature with the red eyes and whatever. So he was asking, that's what the Vargina thing was. Oh, that's the Dover demon. That looks like a shoe bill bird. That crazy bird. Yeah. But he said it had bright red eyes. Oh, fun. Imagine that. Imagine running into that thing in the night. Right. So the question was never sitting in. Never sleeping in. Yeah. Oh, I know is I like a what you're having. It does like a lot like the Vargina one though. Yeah. Go back to that last drawing you drew, Jamie. You put up pulled out by there. Now, if you can, will you pull up the image of the Vargina drawing because they had an artist who talked to little girls that saw that. And those women and you know, the, the really that look at it. Come on, man. That looks exactly the same. Yeah. And there's those bumps on the head. Yeah. You can see that maybe that's exactly the same fucking thing, man. Right. Like literally exactly. Yeah. So I told Travis, if you ever seen, if you ever get me to go to come to Skinwalk around, I said, know that I've got a plan and he was like, what are you talking about? And I said, I will not be the slowest runner. However, I will not be the fastest runner because I don't, because I don't know what's really going on there. I don't want to run for one thing. I'll be the slowest runner. Okay. However, I will not be the fastest runner because I don't because I don't know what's really going on there. I don't want to run for one thing into another. So I'm going to make sure I have an escape plan. I went to Skinwalker Ranch. Oh, you did. Yeah, how did it go? Well, I was doing it for a television show and we interviewed a bunch of people that lived there and one guy. There's a lot of people that they wanted to be interviewed and then when we got there, they chickened out. It seemed like there might be some drug use going on in the surrounding areas. A few people seemed like a little on tilt but I think that's a good part of America. I think there's a lot of people. You could find some packets of people in America that are just doing drugs. So I wouldn't say that that was what it was but there's one guy that I talked to who didn't seem like that. It always seemed very respectable. I don't remember what he did but he was a very smart guy, blue collar guy and lived in this very modest house and he had this story of this thing that flew into his yard and through his house and he said it was a small orb and he said it seemed to be communicating with him. And this guy didn't have any other bullshit stories. You didn't have any claims of just this one experience that he said was beautiful. He said it was incredible that this thing seemed like it was alive. It seemed like it was communicating with him and it went right through the walls and it went through the wall again and disappeared. I had a similar case. So every March I go to Seaside Oregon because they have a paranormal conference and I'm not into the paranormal stuff but my friends are. So I want to listen and I want to learn. Because this is me trying to get over my fear of going in there and fear of paranormal or a fear of being around the people that believe in paranormal. No, the paranormal because of certain things that I've heard from when I was a kid, you know, and you have to overcome some of those childhood fears and stuff like that. Okay. So when I was there, I was giving us talking about my app and all this other stuff and these two Asian ladies were watching me walk on the stage and I was like, why are they looking at me like that? I was like, is my flight down or something? What did I do? And as soon as I stepped off the stage, I said, Mr. Look, what are they? What are they? And I was like, what do you mean? She pulls out on her phone the most beautiful, pristine picture of an orb sitting in a doorway. And I'm like, what happened there? And she said it was my birthday. And she said, all my family was there. And she said, but I got tired. So I was laying down and she said, I heard like this electrical discharge going on. And she said it came right through her wall, started floating across her room. She said he got to her doorway. She screamed. And all her family came in the sun, I guess, it was took the picture of the orb. And I was so amazed by her story. I even forgot to ask her to give you a copy of the picture. How long ago it says? This was like two years ago. Weird. So fairly modern phone. Yeah. It was a, it was an iPhone. She was, they were from Northern California, and they drove up to this, to this thing. And I'm just like, so what happened? She said, she said, it actually sat there and did this like a heartbeat getting bigger and smaller. Wow. And it just kind of went back out the way it came in. And she goes, what are they? You were on the task force, don't you know about these things? And I was like, whoa, you know, we're not on the other side. You know, we're trying to learn just like you are. And every year I've been back there twice now. And every year I go, hey, if those two ladies are in here, can we talk? And they haven't shown back up. But it sounded just like your story of what happened to this other day. He was the only guy that was compelling. There was a bunch of other people that had goofy stories of bulletproof wolves that appeared out of the mist. And like, okay, they just seemed like some people just wanted to be on TV, which is normal, right? You're right. Show up with cameras, people tell stories. And this is another show that I worked on once. It was called Game Show in my head. And this is pretty funny. We told people, so there was a, the game show was, we would take a contestant, the contestant knew that they were going to pull pranks on people, but they didn't know what the prank was going to be. And so we had a piece in their ear. And we would put them out in the public. And my thing was that I had to tell them that they are a news reporter and that someone had just seen a UFO and had an encounter with an alien right there in Hollywood. But the person who was the witness took off, would you be willing to go on camera and say it was you? And everybody said yes. They all did. And people had crazy stories. They talked about being abducted and being on the ship and experienced, and they were communicating with me. They just fully made up stories. And that was an eye opener for me. I was like, wow, you put a camera on people. They just are so hyped to be on TV that just bullshit you. Yeah, they can. That was because the guy who was in on it was shock too. Because he was like, I can't believe that these people just started fucking lying. Yeah. When you're getting granddies like that, that's where you kind of have people that do that. That there's two granddies that enlarge themselves. Sure. Everybody wants to, especially, you put a camera on people. But then you get, with other people, like the whistleblower's I know, they're pretty much giving up everything like me. Well, this guy was not interested in much attention. He just wanted to tell us his story. And he was a regular dude. Like we talked about all kinds of stuff. He had a big trout on his wall. He had a trout. Like when they make trophies out of fish, they don't really make trophies anymore. They now that what they do is they take a photo in the measurements and then they make like a plastic version of that fish that looks exactly like it. That's how they do it. But this guy had like a real trophy fish that he had mounted. I'm like, they don't even do that anymore. So I started asking him questions and came to show my head. Yeah, that's it. But long time ago. But the point is, this guy was a sincere dude. He was telling me how he caught the fish. You know, when I'm asking people questions about stuff, I want to know how you think. You know, when I'm talking to some guy that tells me in any counter with an orb, I want to hear what you talk about. Like how do you talk about you at work? How do you talk about you with your kids? How do you treat your dog? You know how do you, you know what I'm saying? Like I'm trying to like get a gauge of this guy. He seems super sincere. She's a regular good guy, very accommodating, like very friendly. You were the made a good analyst. You're amazing. Because the thing that we're trying to do is the all source analyst is to look at all aspects of what happens. Yeah. And sometimes people just go in there. Well, I mean, the thing that really upsets me is when I was part of the task force was someone just handing me a picture and just going, so what is it? Oh, right. No context. There's nothing. You're just like, oh, OK. You can't fake. Right. You know, what the fuck, man? So he's through the image analyzer. Right. You know, I don't know if you've had any mental issues or, you know, right. Right. I mean, someone showed me something that it was a button on a glass. And at first, I was like, that looks really intriguing. But there was something about it that was just, it wasn't quite right. And I'm like, I think this is fake, but I don't know why. And then finally the guy said, yeah, you know, but not a glass, you know, I was like, it's a thing that do you know that feel if you've ever seen photos of miniature cars? Yes. Yeah. There's the autistic kid that does that don't really get a picture. Yeah. Yeah. But there's what I was getting at. There's something wrong with the car that even in a photo, you know it's not a real car. Yes. You know it's a miniature car. Your brain is very good at that. It's real. That's a real weird one because it doesn't make sense. Like there's a, there's a perception. You look at it like, oh, that's a miniature car. It's a fake. That's like a hot wheel because they're really good now. Like if you pull up a photo of like a miniature Mustang, there's an autistic kid out there that's all he does. He gets miniature cars and puts them in a real background. But he's not. Yeah. I've seen that. Yeah. So these are miniatures. Okay. Well, that's really good. That's really good. That's really good. That's a lot better than normal. Yeah. But that's really good. But that's really good. You know, flat like there's weight to the car. Oh, that's a good point. That's a good point. So you know the things as an analyst, you look at in the image. It's just you're looking at, you know, things like that. Yeah. That's the kid. 13 year old. Yeah. He's really good at it. Because these look other than what you said, Jay, that you don't see the weight of the tires. But it's like, okay, that one right there, that Nissan. Click on that with the blue one. Yeah, that's a Nissan GTR. I'm looking at that. I'm like, that's fake car. I don't know why. Yeah, that looks like a model. But why does it look like a model? It's got to be that driver's window. It's the details to me. I bet everything looks pretty fucking good. Yes. Well, yeah, it looks good. But there's just little details that your mind is picking up on going, it's not quite right. I mean, there's something about it. Right. And what is that? Something about it. This kind of falls into the area too of when you do see a UAP, something about it is what's telling you that it's a UAP. But you're also looking in your in your mind's, you know, memory bank to say, this is fake. This can't be real because it's not doing X. It's not doing whatever. Right. And then sometimes you end up going, it's it's just not real and throwing it out of my head. And then all of a sudden someone either tells you something that makes you go back and go, oh my God, that thing did that somebody be was real. Or you see something about it, something weird about it that just triggers you and you're like, oh, OMG. And now your whole thing, your whole view on the whole universe is changing because you're like, yeah, that's one of the little things. It's like give people when they, you know, because I have a lot of people to ask me, can you vet this guy? He says he said an encounter and then I kind of go through the experience because you know, the one that I had in the desert, there was a telepathic kind of a thing that happened during that conversation I had with that gentleman in the desert. And there's parts of that that people have only really experienced it. They actually know about like the residual data that or information that's left behind in your own mind. Because you're sharing a mind space and things like this. And there's certain things that when I ask questions of people that, you know, sometimes I can tell right then and there you weren't there, you know, they're not an experience. But the people that do describe it and I know that they're telling the truth, there's certain characteristics about that communication type that you only get when you've been talking to kids telepathically with them. Right. Well, especially you as a person has had an experience, you have something to gauge. There's certain things like in your field, like if you ran into a dude at the airport, there was a faker, you know, there's a lot of guys that put on like fake military outfits and pretend that and then they get questioned by rolling. Yeah. It's weird. But people are weird. People will make up crazy stories. So like when you're dealing with the craziest of crazy stories, which is UFOs have been in contact with me. I'm special. They chose me to talk to me. I don't feel special at all. I was accidental. Well, that's probably because it was a real story. So when he first showed up, I was one of the first people that he had his, he knows my whole history. When he first showed up, first thing I read through everything, I was like, hmm, I'm going to have to run a background check on this guy. Right. He might be cooped. Right. And then I was like, so I did the basics. And then I called up David Grish. And I was like, boy, do I have a doozy for you? I can't do anything with this guy because I, there's not enough here for me to do a thorough background check, but boy, you've got to listen to what this guy has to say. And from there, David took it off. And I was like, he came back to me because, well, this guy looks to be the real deal. And I was like, holy crap. So we kind of teased that then. So let's get to your experience. Why don't you tell everybody what happened? Just doing my job at Nellis. We had two things we did. We did the telephone monitoring like we talked. Where is Nellis? That's in Nevada. So we're going to Nellis Air Force Base for the debt three. And that's where the program they have a shop that a four guys that was one of them that would go out and monitor for the program. So anyway, the other side of my job was also doing monitoring for everybody else that wasn't in the program. And what do you say monitoring? What do you mean by that? You're actually plugging into like just like you heard tapping telephones all the way as we tell communications type. We make sure that we listen to radios. We listen to radio waves, all that. And we gather it all in. And what we're tasked to do is say a commander at Wright Patterson, we went to do it's all with the two-week mission mostly, unless it's part of an operation like Desert Storm. And you stay for a month or two. And then you change out teams. But two weeks is the standard. So we go two weeks to Wright Patterson. We gather all the information we can and all the telecommunications means. And we also have a NOAA side team that's trying to sneak in the doors and get into the facilities that shouldn't be at just to test the security. And that's all we're there for it. And at the end of the day, on the last Friday, we go in and we talk to the staff. And then about 90 days later, we put in a final report and give that again back to the staff. And that's kind of how we rolled. So we're going up range. For those kind of things, we don't do the telephone monitoring. When we go up range to the test range, it and tell us that was what we called Red forcing. And what our job was there is we were also trained to do combat ops against our own pilots so that we could help them survive in a wartime environment. And that was done at the top of Black Mountain and that we called that as a little schoolhouse there. And then if you walk up another few yards, there's really this big golf ball looking radars or satellite dishes were up at the very top. But anyway, that's where we were heading this one day. So we all packed up where in baby Nevada, which is the burrow in, I can tell you that's where we all sold up at. And we take off from there every morning to go do the AM and the PM push. That's what you call it. When the war is on, you call it the push. So we had one in the morning called AM push, one in the afternoon PM push. So we were all heading up for the AM push in a con where there's three vehicles, probably about three to four people per vehicle. I'm in the lead vehicle with the Rankin guy. He's driving and I'm right behind him. And then there's another gentleman in the passenger seat across from the driver and then there's a young lady next to me. And we're all going up. And the Rankin guy had been there the week before and he had seen the craft fly by. because that was and that one's out there on the internet. You can pull down the video. There's a report that goes along with it. This is the video that we can watch right now. Right now. Yeah. What would he search? Search for, we think, Nellis test range UFO 1994. Don't don't don't don't miss. This was filmed by the operators on the range because we're putting these pilots in a risky situation by playing war with them. But we're training them. So if there is any kind of a mishap or a pilot or playing goes down, everything needs to be recorded. So they have it right here. Yes. So this is being taken, this video is being taken by one of these cameras that's up on the range. And along the bottom you see that this is also trying to lock on to the craft so it can, you know, follow it as it goes in and out because this is the kind of way that you want to track if there's a craft that is having problems. This is moving very radically. Right. So this is what my ranking guy saw. Can I pause your first thing? This tracking, is this manual or is this like, this automated system? This is an automated system. So the automated system is having a hard time locking on, locking on, do it. Yeah. If it locks on, you'll see a big spike. And that means that it finally locks on right now. It's trying to. But something is stopping from locking on. And they think it was the craft. It's moving like crazy. So I decide all over. There's actually a recording that goes with where you got, you hear the guys going, Hey, does anybody know what this is? What's going on? Can we hear that? OK, that sounds terrible. Yeah. They need better mics. Honestly, this is the podcast working. But I'm sure. But he's saying what is that? I don't know. We're having a hard time locking on to it. Right. This is the video operator. So this the following week after this happens, this video is taken. The ranking guy who had been there the week before and saw this thing flying. He takes us in this. When you go on the range through this one gate here, it goes up a little ways. And then there's a Contoman area. It's got a very small place where you can change your tires, get gas, minor maintenance to get you but home. If you have a car that's busted. And then in the back of that Contoman area, there's two huts that look like camper is really glorified camper. So the video operators are in the one that's off to the north. East of the Contoman in a very corner of it. And the ranking guy just says, we all have to go in here. We're going to go talk to the video operators. We have to do this. And this was because the week prior, everybody came back to Garrison or back to our unit. And they had seen this thing. And they were all talking about this UFO. So we go in there and there's the video operator. He has us all right our names down, whether we were there and saw it the first week or not. Then he mixes all sit down and watch that video. And he says, do you know what this is? And we're like, no. And then he just said, OK, thank you. And then we, as after everybody that was there, saw it and had their name down, we were allowed to leave. And that was all that was required. And so I was like, what was that all about? But then as I'm exiting this lady that had been sitting against the wall on the far part of the, this little hut that we were in. And she like grabs my arm and she just says, there's somebody on the range. Don't talk to them. She was really, really freaked out. And I'm like, thanks strange, freaky lady. I got it. And I'm like, whatever. So like we all hop out, we get in the vehicles. And then start taking off towards Quartz Mountain because right at that containment area, there's a heart rate. There's a heart rate that goes off to Quartz Mountain. And about a mile, half a mile to a mile down that road. It's all dirt road, by the way. There's this guy. Looks like he's wearing a uniform like we are. Got Baladress uniform on. So he sees us and he starts to look like he's running. And he's got this really weird run like his arms are kind of flailing behind. It's like he was running against the hurricane wind. And it was like he was going to fall over at any time. And I was like, yeah, it's a bit windy today, but it ain't that bad. So it looked really strange. And then I began to notice his skin tone looked like he might be hypothermic. And I'm thinking, oh crap, this dude's been out here. It's freaking freezing out here because it was a very cold day. And when it was blowing, it was, you know, those cold days where it didn't matter how many layers you had on. And so as we're getting closer, I'm talking to the ranking guy. Hey, we need to slow down. So anyway, I'm thinking this guy's probably in big trouble. I need to pull off my jacket. I need to give him something to get warm real quick. So I'm starting to do that and we're approaching. And by the time I get my jacket, most of the way off, he's right there at the corner of the front of the car. And so he looks pale, is that what you're saying? You look like an albino with a very bluish kind of undertone. If you could imagine, you know, you're assuming like you're immediately associating that with like, he's freezing. Yeah, because that's all I could equate it to. And then as I'm starting to open my door to try to, you know, administer aid to this guy, the dude in the front passenger seat, screams he's got no ears. And I thought that was pretty rude because I was like the guys in person. We have a hat on, does he know? He's got a hat on and he's got B2s that look absolutely clean pristine. And when you're up range, you do not wear your cleanest uniform. You're in a dirty environment. You wear your scuffed up boots. You don't take them with you. So he's got a clean battle dress unit. Everything. I'm late state military out of place. Yeah, it looks very out of place when I finally do it. But anyway, step out onto the roadway. And this guy screams that he's got no ears. And I just think it's really rude. And then it closed the door and I look up and he's got no freaking ears. And his eyes are twice as big. And I just am like, yeah, what the hell is that I just walk into? This guy's not from around. How far away from him, are you? Probably from me to low. Just a few. Just a few. Just talking distance. OK. And I'm starting to freak out. But then he starts to talk to me. And it's not my language. But it's coming to the understanding is like coming into my mind about every word he's saying. Because. So he's actually saying words. He's saying words, but it doesn't sound like anything I've heard. But you understand what he's saying. But I'm understanding. So I know there's a telepathic thing going on here. And it calms me down at the same time because I'm having to respond to him. And he's like, hello, I'm having trouble with my craft. I need some repair material. Do you know where I could find some trintium? And this is what he's talking to me about. And I'm like, you mean titanium? Because I didn't know anything about trintium at the time. But titanium, he's like, no, it's not it. And I'm like, well, at this point in my career, I had just left the program. So I knew where Dreamland was. And I pointed to the mountain range because you can see for days in the desert. But I pointed towards the mountain range. And I said, Dreamland's just over there. And this wave of emotion hit me like discussed, like, I am not going to talk to those barbarians and murderers. And so he was saying that to you and his reaction to going to the military base. Exactly. Yeah. But he did not like it. He said, I am not going to talk to those people. And I was like, well, shoot. And it was barbarians and murderers. He literally, that was what he called them. Yes. And mentally, that's what it was. But this is motion. Trintium, is this a real thing? Well, that's what I've had a lot of friends. There's analysts also that were on the top secret network that were trying to help me understand what material is. Throw in everything at it. We're like, is it best? Is it best? And then finally, that's the one when they hit Trintium. I was like, that's what it was. That's what he said. And what is Trintium? It's a type of, can he bring it up on the show? Yeah. Because it should pop up on Wikipedia pretty quick. But it has some properties that probably are. Are you saying Trintium? Yeah, Trintium is, that's the stuff that's in loom. Like in your watch, when you're watch glows, that's, or they make those where they, they're basically radioactive isotopes that stay lit. So like if you get like a marathon watch, marathon makes military watches. And it doesn't need like this car, this watch, you need the light and the light charges the loom. And then when it's dark out, you could read the hands for like a few hours. The thing that is to put on the end of the guns, right? Exactly. They still do. A lot like Sig has a lot of guns. Look at Trintium also put in the mission. Oh, I did that. Oh, that's not going to be much. So Trintium, Chunky Glow and the Dark Glitter. Yeah, oh, these are all like, these are game websites. Oh, I don't know. OK, so it was Trintium, then maybe mispronouncing it. But Trintium is, that's that radioactive isotope. That's the stuff that emits light. Yep. So it's a weak form of radiation. Yes. Rare radioactive isotope of hydrogen with a half life of 12.3 years. OK. So this is what he's asking me for. So he asks you for that stuff, Trintium? Yep. And I'm like, I don't know where to get that. It's used in boosted fission weapons and thermonuclear weapons. Oh, great. That sounds pretty good. I wonder what the fuck it's doing on your wrist? Is it better? This is what the best image that we have. Oh, what he could have looked like. Oh, boy. Can you send that to Jamie? Yeah, I don't know Jamie's number, but I'll find a way to. Yeah. Is that an iPhone? If I had my phone, I would, but I can hear it out there. I think. Yeah, air droplets, Jamie. Do you know how to do that? There was that. I mean, I know how to do that. And there's a three-day network with UFOs. You better know how to do that. Well, there's a three-dimensional image of the craft as well that is really spot on from what I saw that day. Yeah. Because not only did I see this guy running towards us and talking to him, but off the shoulder of on the north side of the roadway, that's where the craft was just resting on the desert floor. And that's I got a really good look at it at that point. And this guy did a 3D rendering of the description. And it's like it's spot on as I've ever seen. It's almost perfect. So he asks you for tridium. You tell him dreams. This is what it looked like. This is what the guy looked like. Pretty close to it. The nose was a little bit rounder on the end, but that was a really good rendition. But his eyes just, his eyes almost came out to hear on the temple. Wow. And that would freak me out. If it freaked me out, I mean, honestly, I'm not an easy guy to get freaked out, but that really put that, like you just saw an alligator pop up out of the water can if. Right. So when you tell him good dream land, it says I'm not going to go where those murders and barbarians are. And then what happens? And he said, no. So I was like, well, where else can I possibly point him to? Because I'm like, I don't know any metal or just or whatever. So I'm thinking to me, to myself, and I relate to him. I said, well, I'm taking college classes down in the city of Vegas in Las Vegas at the community college. But I have a geophysical professor that I've taken a class from. Maybe he has a metal or just friend. And he's like, so you're thinking at this time, though, it's a metal. I am. Yes. Right. Because you're thinking it's some kind of titanium, some type of. Right. Right. And there's also, when he uses the 3D image with the craft. That is almost as spot on as I've ever seen. That is about it right there. That's almost exactly what I saw resting on the desert floor. And so you're trying to find different people that you can connect this being to. And what is it saying to you, Wyatt? He thought that that was a good idea, I think, or he was like, hmm. I mean, he had that kind of, hmm. And he wanted to take action. So he just, he doesn't really even say goodbye. He just kind of turns and off he goes back to his craft. And I'm thinking, well, OK. And I get back in the car. And sometime during that conversation with this entity, I remember looking over at my friends in the car. And they had the weirdest look on their face, like they were all zonked out, totally zombeed. Like they couldn't even, he were just drooling on themselves. Were they just, because they were flabbergasted? Or was it because something was going on? Well, I figured out that maybe he was done by this entity because none of them seemed to even remember the incident. Only a few people seems to remember that we stopped, that we had talked to somebody on the roadway, but it was mainly the people that were in the back of the convoy. So they didn't see it up close like you did. Like we did the people that were far away with they be. They'd probably be a good two car lengths behind us. That's still enough to detect whether or not someone looks blue, though, right? Correct. And that's probably what they saw. But you know what I mean? I'm kind of wide and I'm big. I was very muscular back then. And you're standing in front of this thing. So they'd have a difficult time because this guy stood about a good half foot shorter than me. And so they probably could see his arms from time to time. Maybe clips or clips of his face or something. So they probably didn't get a very good view. Because if you're looking at me, I'm standing right next to my door. And they're behind me kind of almost obfuscated by just the angle that they're looking at him. So all the windows are tinted in those vehicles. And they can't just see through the windows right to whatever on the left. And the people that were in the car with you, you feel like something happened to them that froze them. They did look like that. Yeah. Like you said, just a look of just utter like, you know, like the guy who said it has no, he has no ears. Does that guy have a recollection? That guy they can't find. They can't find them. No, I've tried. I was asked by the UEP test where David Grash to reach out to these folks, the people in the car. I got a hold of one, got a hold of him on LinkedIn. And we started talking. And you know, just how's the wife, how's the kids, that kind of stuff? How about that UFO we met? And as soon as I did that, the guy just disappears and goes to me, and I can't. I don't know what happened. But he was the right. of the kids, that kind of stuff. How many of you have? We met. And as soon as I did that, the guy just disappears and goes to me. And I can't. I don't know what happened. But he was the rank and guy in the car. The guy that was the passenger and nobody can seem to find him because they did try to verify the people in the car and I gave the names and the young lady that was off to my right. I don't know if they contacted her, but I've heard from other people that were part of this background investigation about my story. They found two people that verified my story. And I don't know who they are. They've been told to keep their mouths shut by somebody. And I'm kind of pissed about that. But I think James Fox knows who they are and knows exactly who told them to shut up as well. But what was that incident where James Fox and you were on a show? What's that? Well, I shouldn't have said that James Fox knows the guy who told him to shut up because I don't know. I'm not sure if that's true. So this thing, does it tell you why it needs a tritium or just as it needs it to fix its craft? Yeah. Well, along with that, this is the other part that was telepathic. Then he mentions this metal in the part that he is. But it's not metal, right? Do we think it's not metal or do you think maybe it's a metal that we don't have? I think it's something or an alloy that we don't particularly make a lot of and or just can't make. But when he spoke about this, the telepathic image was almost like he opened a Sears catalog in my head that had all the specs for this part that he was needing fixed. And it was the strangest thing. It like described some of the nano channeling of electrical and electromagnetic stuff that was flowing through it that caused these toroidal energies to emanate on both sides of this piece of the equipment. So you because it was describing it to you, you all of a sudden had access to all this information. Like he downloaded into your head. It was like me, if you and I were telepathic and we were talking about a science project. And I could just all the information. Yeah, and I could just give you all that instead of talking it out. That's what he did. Did you then try to talk to someone and relay that information and like download it? I've had well, once because in the in the in the in the the forum, we have scientists and stuff like that that yes, we're very interested to get me in a room and talk to me about this. I had people from DARPA wanting to talk to me people from people from threats, departments all over the place that wanted to know more. And even when I talked to Jack Surfati and Gary Nolan about this stuff, I was telling them things before they even opened their mouth about like when I talked to Gary Nolan, I just said you got that part. You know that it has that that nano size atomic level layering that can't be reproduced unless you actually physically are putting these atoms one at a time next to each other. And he's like, yeah, yeah, that's it. You know, so I'm telling him this and he already knew. But I was the first thing and so that's why I knew that what I'd been given in my head, he was given me that that high sign that yes, that's exactly what I analyzed is that piece of material I had. It sounds just like with this guy described to you and gave to you telepathically that there's these really minute little things that create toroidal forces. They're doing things at a very small level. And then when I talked to Jack Surfati later and he's got all these fantastical physics equations about how things work. And I'm looking through his documents and no, I can't do the math, but I can understand what he's doing with it. And I just fight out ass and I said, so the smaller you get because there's always that resistance level when it comes to putting in energy and then losing it due to you know, after free and all these other things that are right before it. Anyway, the whole thing was this that when you get smaller, it actually reverses itself. Is that now you get even more power out of things if you'd have a small enough energy source that works at a very it's kind of like miniaturizing a fusion device of some kind. And so did you talk to someone from DARPA? Did you said these people wanted to talk to you? I emailed back and forth, I gave them what information I could, but they didn't want to interview you. They wanted just email. At the time, that's the way it went. Yeah, I've had a couple of meetings though with different places that I can't discuss, but they did talk to me. Yes. And is that information still in your head? Yeah. So does it seem like a memory or what does it seem like in your head? To me, it's like a very clear like this is it's just like a picture that never goes away. Could you draw that picture if someone gave you a pad? I've already done it. Yeah. Is that available online? Can someone see that? I don't know if I pulled that down off the top secret network, but I can reproduce it. All I did was just recreated in like a PowerPoint draw thing. But does it remain in your head like normal memory? Like, you know, like you learned certain things in school. Yeah, the telepathy was felt absolutely normal. I mean, there was no headache. There's no dizziness, no buzzing. What I mean is, is the memory, the same as a regular memory or is it clear? No, I remember it as just being part of the conversation, just like a normal conversation. That's what it feels like. But it just somehow or another in that conversation, he put this information in your head. Exactly. And then it just leaves. And then he leaves when he realizes that, you know, maybe there's some other venues, maybe I mean, me mentioning that there might be a middle or just on staff somewhere that maybe that prompted him to think, oh, yeah, maybe I should go research this or that and then maybe I'll find somebody that I could talk to. Something like that may have happened. Did you get a sense of where this thing was from? Yeah, there was a star map from that day, but it also relates to the lunch hour after we started coming back up to Black Mountain. I had a very strong compunction to go eat my lunch outside, even though it was deathly cold. And I don't know what prompted me to do that again. Maybe he was giving me a telepathic message, but after I walked about 150 feet down the road, the dirt road from the top of my Black Mountain, I don't remember what happened after that. All I have are two images that keep on flashing back. I remember seeing the schoolhouse from about 150 feet above, or 200 feet above the schoolhouse. I remember looking at the rooftop and the other, only other memory is I've got this star map in my head. And David Grusch made me reproduce that on a PowerPoint slide. And I handed that into him because I have no idea what it was, but he's like, do you understand what this is? And I was like, no, I have no idea. He's like, do you know what star constellations are? I said, I know what the big dip is. That's about it. And he's like, this is the constellation Leo. And I'm like, oh, I didn't know that. And so he's like, yeah, this is a really close rendition of that. I'm like, that's kind of cool that I could reproduce it just out of my head. And not even know what the heck it was. But I did know it was a star system. And for some reason you just felt compelled to draw this particular star system. Well, just after David Grusch asked me to yes. And was there a specific planet in that star system? Yeah, the red star that's kind of like, you know, there's a part of the Leo system that has like this, like very sharp turn into it. I guess it's like it looks like a nose or part of a triangle. And at the tip of that is the red star and it's reticulae I think. But anyway, that one seems to speak about alien zeta reticulae. Yeah. And then the strangest thing about this, this is what I'm talking about when it comes to telepathy when you're sharing that mind space. There's some residue memory there. Because they've kept pressing me on it. And he said, can you tell me about the red star? And at first I'm like, well, no, and I was like, and all of a sudden some memory came back. And I was like, holy crap, yeah, that's where he's from. That's that's his home star system. And he came from there, that's his home. And then we just went on from there and he said, did you know that they've actually just now discovered a few years ago that there were exoplanets around that star? And I was like, no, I had no idea. So all these things started coming together at that point. And that's when they started saying, okay, well, we're going to do some more vetting. And within about a month or so, they were bringing me to Congress and everything else happened after that. Now, what is the rest of your life like after that day? So you have life before you experience this creature. And then now you know that this is a thing. It's a thing. And I changed me. How do you explain this? If you get imagine the entire human race, you and me, you don't have to talk to me, but you can feel my presence. You can feel who I am, my personality, and sharing all of that. And then imagine that by millions, the entire planet you can actually commune with them. It brings with that a level of civility in the control of your thoughts. Because right now, we don't read each other's minds. So our minds are like, oh, look at that girl. Oh, look at that, you know, the sports over here, is a football game on. We're so distracted. But this guy's, when I was engaged with him telepathically, it was like civility to the maximum. It was like very courteous. He waited for me to say, he talked. And it was like just like we do. We have a certain etiquette. But on top of that, there was this part of him that he left me with that was part of the community of the consciousness that he is able to feel all the time. And that has never left me is that there's a community of consciousness out there that when they've been living for so many years with this sort of ability, it has changed them for the better because their minds are under control finally. Their emotions aren't running them like you were talking about addictions and things like this. They don't run their lives like that anymore because of it. And if you do, they end up in a criminal list somewhere, I would imagine. But there was such an ever since then that's feeling a peacefulness and civility is what I was strived for. Never has left me, never has left me. Wow. It stays with you. But what, like what is your experience trying to relay these thoughts in this experience that had to be weird in the sense that like it's very hard to believe. I mean, I believe you, but it's one of those things where you know what you talked to an alien. Like that's most people are going to think you're ridiculous. Well, yeah. And honestly, that's why I need people to back me up on it because this is the thing that we're trying to do with the whistleblower is we all kind of know each other just like low would tell you or not low, but just like Logan would tell you just that I call him low for short sometimes. It's a slip understandable. Anyway, so anyway, we get to talking about stuff, but we don't know what's going on daily with each other. It's like I've brought whistleblowers forward to Congress since I went forward, but I don't know their lives. I don't talk to them every day like I do some of them. And it's a strange thing, but the more we seem to be coming out now that we've got these few weeks now where we've got folks like, you know, Jake Barber and folks like that coming forward. Now I'm starting to piece things together in my mind because now I'm hearing his side of the I didn't want to be part of the retrieval. Well, guess what? He was on it. And he's telling that part. And I'm like, Oh, no wonder they did that to me. And oh, that makes sense. You know, now I'm making those conclusions now because of what he said. And then if you try to put us all on a room, we're all definitely scared that, you know, some jerk is going to come out of the department of defense and shoot us all or do a drone strike on us and kill us all just have done with it and then get on with their lives again. So you've got this problem here with us coming forward in a group. You're really worried that much that someone would try to take you out. They've already messed with my clearance. They've already shown me that they can break into my car on the NSA campus. They're letting me know they were they were trying to intimidate me. Because they don't want you talking about exactly. But do you know why they don't want you talking about this? Yeah, why? It's because they know that what they have done that there are some parts that were really bad decisions in the long run. And they don't want anybody to crack open any part of this because they know it's going to cause questions to happen. And they're going to get put on a spot. Okay. So you finally are coming clean on the fact that we've got any child here. But we've got other whistleblowers that have these concerns. That's what they're going to have to face. And when you say bad decisions, like what do you mean by bad decisions? Well, think about it. If Rosswell did happen, what do they do? They chop up some, you know, think about it. You'd have etiquette of it was a Russian craft that fell. You'd catalog every part of that crash site and you'd repatriate the patriot, the dead bodies to where they came from. We give them back to the Russians in honor. And here we are. We've got a civilization just crashed there in Rosswell and look at what kind of crap we did to them. And we took all their stuff like it was some kind of a treasure trove. And now we own it. Hell no. You're talking about a craft that was manufactured on another part of the galaxy or something that they can't explain. Nobody knows where it came from. And here they are treating these people like they're just some kind of a lab experiment. Let's chop them up a little more, you know. And then, you know, if they ever got approached by the people that came to look for them afterwards, I wouldn't want to be the person that answered them on. So we chopped up your buddy. We had an interesting talk about this. There's a video online where shows like some great kind of strung up and they're asking him questions and whatever. And I was asking him. I said, if you were in an H.I. and you saw that and this is what the humans are broadcasting. Sorry. And this is what the humans are broadcasting. I said, I'd be like, yo, they got Jimmy. Look what they're doing. Jimmy, it's on. We're going to go get Jimmy. But that video of the alien, that's fake, right? The video of whether it's very easy to speak. Because like we've all. Everybody says they talk telepathically. And here he is. Oh, here's this voice coming out to whatever. Yeah. Yeah. But we've always assumed that they've got the same type of, some type of emotions a lot like us. But maybe they're a much more controlled, much more refined. You know, kind of like how we can not that I'm telling us now versus us 50,000 years ago. Yeah. Well, honestly, when I had the telepathic experience, it was very difficult for me to distinguish what emotions and feelings were coming from me as opposed to him. It was very obvious when he felt discussed about going to ask about things because I was like, well, I'm not disgusted and I had that that that ability to go. That's not me feeling that. It must be coming from him. Right. But it was your emotions. Right. But everything else felt like we were sharing literally not only the thoughts, but the emotions that went along with it. It was a true sharing of a mind space. And he felt just like me, his inner voice is just like my inner voice. His feelings are just like our feelings. He feels sadness. He feels all the things that I do. What is the general consensus and the people on the program about Roswell? They don't like talking about it. I think that was where they probably are trying to bury it even amongst themselves because they know they made some very bad mistakes about that first confrontation that could have been a lot better than what happened. So the general consensus is that this is a real event. Yep. And they don't like talking about it, but does everybody sort of agree or are there people that are dissenting? Do they have dissenting opinions about whether or not they're scratching the phone? The sense you know, I've heard people say, I don't want to talk about it. They don't want to talk about it, but that it wasn't ours. Great. Well, the only thing that's, again, when we talk about the intel analyst and everybody else that was on that forum, it's totally weird that you can go through all these different things as an intel analyst and say, okay, it's not China. All right, it's not that. All right. Let's look at Russia, anything. No, it's not Russian. Is it one of ours? Well, hell, no, it's not one of ours. Well, who the heck is it then? Does anybody talk about it? Is there anybody that has shared information about Roswell to you? Yeah. Is there anything that you could talk about? No. No. It's all top secret. I've just gave the person the confidence that I would not mention. Got it. And Logan, have you had personal experiences other than the one when you were child? Yeah. But I didn't know what I was seeing, but, you know, like, um, after the program came out, I mean, not came out, but after James Fox, um, finished editing everything, he sends me, he said, well, you haven't seen everything, um, put together. So here you go. And, you know, tell me if you, you know, don't like the way you look or whatever. And I'm going through it. And he starts showing, I see the stuff about Calvin, the Calvin, um, Scotland image of you. Yeah. So that image was taken, if I remember correctly in August 1990, pull that image up. Yeah. Yeah. You could just type in Calvin, UFO, whatever. So I'm going, I had just cross train from, yeah, that one. I had just cross trained from maintenance into intelligence. And I was going to my first, uh, intel assignment. And I'm flying from Philadelphia to Frankfurt, Germany to Rhine Mine Air Base, somewhere between Iceland and Scotland. This thing is zipping around in the, in the clouds, doing this Ziggy Zaggy thing. I don't know what it was doing, but it was doing this. The sun was just coming up. And I'm eating a Philly cheesesteak. And the other guys with me is eating a hoe game, the other guy that's standing up over the top where I'm like, anybody know what that is? And, um, they're like, dude, what is that? And then all of a sudden in my head, I'm like, oh, this is my first intel assignment. I'm going to get clued into some cool ass shit. But I don't know what the hell that is, but I'm just thinking it looks just like that. It looks just like that. And the way it was moving into clouds, it was like because the shadow was like going from like that color to like dark and then light again as it was moving in. And it would go into a cloud on one vector and come out on another vector. And I'm like, what, what is that? So didn't know what was going on. So I called James back. I was like, dude, dude, where is this talking machine? And we're all excited. And, um, he goes, explain to me everything. And what happened was I got to my unit and I talked to them and I go, we have a, um, weapons tactics guy. They use, you know, they're the best of the best in their leading the group. And I was like, so what is that thing out there? And he goes, I have no idea what you're talking about. Now this is in January of 1990, that picture is August in 1990. And what I didn't realize was that the Belgian wave, I don't know if you were familiar with that, a whole bunch of triangular devices were seen over, um, Belgian for almost a whole year. So they just call it the Belgian wave. Police officers saw it. They launched F 16's after them, whatever. Have they photographed for that at all? No, but the general that's in charge actually gave a briefing to everybody and showed what the F 16 radar was seeing. And I guess every time they tried to get close to it, it would just pull the way just far enough, you know, that they couldn't catch it. And then when they would try to cage it in the radar system, it would move to the left and you know, it was, it was playing with them. So, but I didn't know any of that. So I just kind of was like, yeah, okay, I'm stupid. Maybe, maybe it was part of my imagination, but what I saw as a kid kept coming back into my head. So dead to storm happens, whatever. And I'm at my base and British AWACS shows up. And they're looking at me and they're, I still had my accent, my British accent. They're looking at me going, what are you flying with the X for? And I'll go, what do you mean? They said, you know, and I told them my, my family thing, they said, why don't you come fly with us? I'm like, sure, let me ask my boss. My boss says, you ain't got nothing going on. Go fly with them. So we're flying around and finally I go, I go, hey guys, what's that thing in the sky that does the Ziggy Zaggy thing? Do you know what I'm talking about? And they're like, you know, I don't know, I don't know, don't play with me. And they're like, come on, Logan, you know. And then finally they pull out this tape when they plug it in and it shows Europe, all the aircraft flying around. And you see this thing go through the middle of it real fast. Like all the other aircraft, the sweet pull of radar, you just see these minute movements. This thing is like, psh, it's gone. And I was like, who's that? And they go, you know, I was like, look, stop playing with me. Kind of find out. They said, well, that's your SR-71. And I was like, well, that ain't him. And they're like, okay. And then he looks at the other guy and he said, show them the other one. And they show me this radar scoping in. And this time there's a target in the middle not in the middle of the screen, but off to the side. It was like, could have been like East Germany or whatever. But every sweep of the radar, he was somewhere else. And I was like, that guy, I was so excited. I said, that MF right there. Yeah. Who's that guy? And they go, you know, how did it look? Stop this. I don't know. And they finally said, we don't know either. They said, we just assumed it was you Americans playing with us. We don't know. We don't know. We don't know. We don't know. We've experienced things too. Everything's America if they can't explain it. Right. Did you see the Trump administration address the drones today? We heard about it, but I didn't see it. Yes. I had a friend tell me they made an announcement, but we were getting in the car at the time. Yeah. Essentially they said it was all ours. And there was some sort of scanning that was done that was approved and the other ones were hobbyists. And there would be some sort of test that they were doing, but they were saying that it's ours, which is very the whole thing stinks. It does. It does stinks. I actually had information. Yeah. I actually had a person that was up there and that she said, one of those things came down low and slow over her house. And she said it had the sound of a helicopter. So she was like, her and her husband were like, oh, you know, it's a helicopter. But then all of a sudden they realized she said, Mr. Logan, were you ever here? I said, yeah, I was in special ops and I fell in helicopters and da da da da. And she goes, when it came down low, it had the sound of a helicopter, but she couldn't feel it. And I go, huh? She goes, you know, when you can feel the road of washing and it's hitting in your chest. Like, blah, blah, blah, blah. She said there was none of that. She said it came down slow, low over her house. And then it went back up and then she said it looked like it went back into formation with something else. And she said, that's not any drone I know of. And she said it sounded like the actual noise of the helicopter and several other noises from the drones were all prerecorded just to make them sound like they were conventional aircraft. And those are the same things I've been hearing too. Because a lot of people are shoving videos at me a lot in their descriptions of things and some of the stuff, you know, looked like maybe it could be a spotlight from a helicopter. And then when the light moved, then you could finally see the helicopter behind the light. Then there was these other ones. that was like, this is really weird. My friend Mark saw one. Mark Norman, how did he describe it, Jamie? He said it was triangular, right? I was from saying SUV sized. Yeah, he said it was a size of an SUV. He said it was triangular. He said it moved really fast. So when they initially came up, they said, oh, they're all manned. All right. I think it was John Kirby, that was the speaker. And I used to work at the FAA. So my first thing was, well, if they're a man, you just call them up and say, cut it out. Right. Simple. But it kept going on. And then later on, there was a report that DHS said, oh, one of the drones has come down in a mall parking lot. But DHS is assessed, it's just a regular drone. So when you hear that, what are you thinking? DJI, Mavic, something small, whatever, do it. So one on X is on a train going behind that exact same spot. And they show a drone next to two police cars. And this thing is as big as the police car. And I'm like, so I have no way of confirming if that's the what it really was. Right. But I have no reason to believe that this particular person was leaving. He said, you guys, I don't know what you guys are thinking, but I'm passing that mall right now and take a look. And it's like a, maybe a 30 second clip or something. And you see this thing, it's as big as the SUVs. So it looks like it, it looks like kind of like a gondola with like large blades on the four corners. And so it looks like a very large conventional drone. Very large conventional drone. And so I'm sitting there thinking, was this a test that nobody knew about was, you know, what is going on? And nobody got any answers. So the other thing that is the stay in the sky for like five hours of time. That's what puzzles me is that that takes industrial sized power generation. Yeah. What are you using? Like, what is that thing using? Jamie, can you see the, if you break cold fusion, can you find the video of the disclosure today? It was, well, while he's talking about the disclosure, the one thing I do want to mention is when I talked to the to that AWAC group, I thought it was kind of interesting because I said, so how many know about this? And he goes the whole squadron knows about it. And I was like, what? He says, yeah, but we just don't talk about it because people lose their jobs over this. And I was like, I've heard that as well. And I was like, so this is an AWAC. And I said, am I to assume that if you're British AWACs, then American AWACs can see it, French AWACs can see it, NATO AWACs can see it. And he just kind of, yeah. And everybody does know what it is. No one's talking about it. Everybody just says it's got to be American. Let's hear what the lady says. And before I turn to questions, I do have news directly from the president of the United States. That was just shared with me in the Oval Office from President Trump directly, an update on the New Jersey drones. After research and study, the drones that were flying over New Jersey in large numbers were authorized to be flown by the FAA for research and various other reasons. Many of these drones were also hobbyists recreational and private individuals that enjoy flying Jones. And meantime, in time, it got worse due to curiosity. This was not the enemy. A statement from the president of the United States to start this briefing with some news. Part that gets me is the hobbyists being included in that is like, well, they definitely were hobbyists too because there was hobbyists in Austin around that time. There was a ton of drones. They just like people were like, whoa, it's a drone party. Everybody was like, everybody with drones is flying around. So it makes sense. It makes sense. So it's a drone activity. Here's the thing that I got to look at it from an analyst point of view. The first thing that came up, I was like, so they knew this the whole time. Why couldn't they have said that from the very beginning? It's a different administration. Right. Right. And then two, why were they required to have a skiff briefing on drones? Nobody's ever answered that. At one point, Congress guys all went into a and got a skiff briefing on drones. And then they didn't have a press conference about the results. Right. Which would have been, could it be that they wanted to see what happens when you fly things over a metropolitan area and you fly a bunch of drones over highly populated parts of the country? I would say that if you reasons why I would say that you include both federal and hobbyist drones in any kind of an activity. And there's only four of the hobbyists including themselves. Yeah, and that could just be that they're accidentally there. But the feds, what were they doing? Yeah. And why would they have a skiff? That's that's my point. Explain something. People that don't know what we're talking about. A skiff is a place for information above secret. And it's a special compartmentity. That's my point. It's not explaining something people that don't know what we're talking about. The skiff is a place for information above secret and It's a special compartment at intelligence facility where we can go in there and talk about things that are above And there's no recording devices. Right. No phones. No nothing. Just right, but the thing is this I Mean Most of us that are in the intelligence community or whatever We're gonna look at it and say something's not quite right here because this is something domestic happening over the US So would it really require a skiff? You know especially if it's authorized right correct, you know, so would it really require that level of security To go on and have these guys talk it just doesn't make any sense if the federal presence To me dictates the fact that if this was innocuous and unclassified Like you're saying why was there not a press conference that described it and said the hobbyists are out there Flying to and they're just kind of interfering with our our lanes where we go in fly normally Between one place to another that never came out. So why was the skiff even mentioned? That's something that they did release in the press is that they were receiving briefings that were in a classified environment And they're still the yeah, they're still the problem with these drones popping up all over the world Especially over military facilities and that part's not being addressed. It's just the other stuff that they you know Right that was right Patterson Air Force Base had to get closed down, right? Patterson Langley Air Force Base there's others and then there's reports of stuff in Australia There's reports of things that other places in the world. Let me ask you this and tell me if this makes sense If you were the government and you knew that there were non-human Intelligence that were operating vehicles above our cities Would a way to sort of obfuscate that to launch a bunch of our drones as well and Have some shit that you could explain and then tell people don't worry about it It was just drones. There's our drones like see here's our drone. Here's a drone that crash. Look. It's got propellers Normal drone. Yeah, it's big, but it's normal. You have no idea how many people have said that already Yeah, yeah, you're you're you're the direction. Yeah, you've heard that one you've heard the other theory They're looking for a dirty nuke right they're looking for that one You shit out of me. Yeah, I did too I honestly I thought that's what it was about but and then they have what looking for HVTs like anti terror or looking for terrorist groups because we Think at that time it went through the press that there was over a thousand of these You know Dehaddis that were in our midst. We don't know where they're at right. You know Kind of think maybe they're looking for those those are so those are just some of the theories that you come up with with This kind of a scenario and then there was the guy you know the congressman that said oh there's an Iranian mothership out there And we were like what you know in the ocean. Yeah, none of this stuff was making any sense and then You you have to wonder Where was he getting his intel because if it's that crappy right? Those people need to be fine Well, you have to take another thing into the into the calculus and that is wasn't this worldwide I mean, we got reports from China even right this stuff was happening right and they don't just Have hobbyists flying stuff around in there. They're maybe they don't right maybe they have a much tighter control over their media So they don't have to obfuscate they don't have to Yeah Trick this one part that I find very confusing is just like if it's happening in Europe and China and all these other places What really is going on? Well, it could have just didn't know it. I mean just said hey Yeah, I'm gonna be doing the test in this area not don't want to scare anybody whatever But we're just gonna test in this area if it's just hours Yeah, right, but if it's not hours and there's a bunch of shit flying around there and we want to confuse people Wouldn't you have a bunch of conventional drones and fly them low over city so people could clearly see that? It's done a totally different way and I not had all this hub up going on so yeah You're right, but why would you if you know the truth? Why would you leave the Americans afraid of what's flying over their head? I think they're still it look Assuming you guys are completely accurate about all this if they have had this information for a long time I would assume that there's a lot of pressure to never release it I think there's probably a lot of problems with lying to Congress lying to Congress about budgets and allocation of resources for these programs that are all top secret like how have you done this What have you done? Who's responsible? Who made that call is that even legal and who are you? If you've been in contact with non-unintelligence and you have Retrieve crafts who are you to keep that from the rest of the world exactly and speak for the American government for for that if you're not Right, right. Especially if you're not officially I mean you don't have the clearance to do what you're doing right? I mean they're making decisions for the entire human race not just America But the whole race and that's what my beef was when in the film when James Fox asked me about that Well, why are you doing it? You know kind of a thing and I was like well I feel like this is the right of every man woman in child on the face of the earth to know the truth about we're not alone That has nothing to do with the weapon systems in the classified parts that I know of But the fact that we're not alone shouldn't that be something that everybody should be invited to make their own decision on? Yeah, I would imagine that but I would also imagine if you wanted to keep your job But if you have a high intelligence clearance and you're working for the government in your a long time Career employee of the government you want to keep moving up the ladder and keep you keep your fucking mouth shut Right, and that's what people have to make that decision on their own that you know have they seen enough malfeasance to want to Report it or not and they're gonna throw their whole life into it as if they do that and that's what happened to me. Yeah, yeah And what has it been like since then? Have you gotten support from more people than you thought you would or if more people throwing you on the bus than you expected? I actually feel more support Than I expected I've made it through it's not been easy financially for me When they messed with my clearance I haven't gotten the job since I've been out of work since August of Last year So that's not been fun. Was there a reason why they said they mess with your clearance? No, they just made it sound like oh, it's just an administrative error Sorry, yeah, we still have your clearance here and everybody that wants to employ me I've had very Quite a few employers want to hire me and they say yeah, we can see your clearance over here. It looks like DOD is trying to reactivate it, but month by month by month. It just sits there and they won't pass it To the employer Somebody is just sitting there going oh another request for Jason My delete that's what's happening because you've stepped on a lot. That's what it feels like to me. Okay Logan, have you experienced same kind of situation? No, no, I'm He's in a different Class than me. He's an official whistleblower me. I just stepped forward to say That I don't think I need the government to do this I think we as the public need to do this and I created an app to do that. I was hoping that was your app My app is called Phenom It's an app to report UAP paranormal encrypted like events And the idea is that we can get multiple people to see the same thing recorded And then look for the outliers and get people like Jacques Valet and Dr. Eric Davis and how put off another's the graybirds to look at it and say okay, here's what we can figure out You know Gary Nolan and all these people Let's get them the information that they need and then after we get them the information They need let's get it out to academia so we can have kind of like a More organized approach to finding out what's going on. I wanted people to To use my app on the drones some people did but not enough and I had a little bit of a problem because when I put it out on Android There was only one other app that was close to it that was in the same name Go back there. There's like almost 10 apps with the same name so people didn't know what was there? Confused but anyway to answer your question about the support yes, I do get a lot of support There's people like you know Stephen Deener There's Dibi for now and Tom Thompson. There's UFO Sarah that's on X there's a ton of people that I can mention that not let alone how much support James Fox is throwing at me That's what's getting me through this How many different Versions of these life forms have been discussed with you on mission. I can say Three I know of two mainly tall whites Grays those are the main the tall whites like this one that you encountered the one with the big eyes Yes, yes, like that wasn't that tall you said right but apparently according if you've seen the video from mr. Hall The guy that was supposed to be the weather man and actually interfaced with The two whites no yeah, I totally believe Too much but anyway, he says Coated out of my brain. I could verify the fact that what he said about his position there as a weatherman that he could walk around Anywhere he wanted to because that's what the base commander told me when I got my orientation drive through on On dry dreamland and he mentioned the weather site in that that person does not can walk wherever they want to and what was what did they report Well just what mr. Hall. Yeah, yeah, he says that the tall whites go through a growth cycle where they're kind of normal heights But they're very long live they live like 800 years or more But when they start getting older then they get very tall like seven eight foot tall and then they begin to you know The bodies begin to not function properly and they die Kind of like somebody who has a growth problem. Oh a giant exactly and they're the vital Organs just can't pump enough anymore tag large dogs that die early because they're heart problem Right so the guy that I saw That's probably a young person, you know Probably only like 70 years old or something like that Which was kind of an adolescent to them or a young adult. Oh, okay, so And this was explained to him through some sort telepathy Well, he would actually as the weather if you listen to that video I really encourage you to do that but mr. Hall Also published some books on it, but He claims that what he was there at this one place that you know, I can verify it's there That on the other side of that mountain or that hillside That's where the trail goes off into where the tall whites are apparently have been given an annex of land To live Where they they don't get bothered. I mean it's a part of the military complex. No. I'm Google Earth There is parts of it. Yeah, can we like look where the tall whites live? I tried to get I don't think it my laptop out, but yeah, it looks like It does look like there's some circular patterns that does look like there's some possibility that there are some light doors inside the mountain that Looks like it's camouflage to look like it's part of the mountainside So the idea is that that's a base for them when they visit us. Yeah, because apparently the according mr. Hall They come here for a five-year stint Yes, and they have to refuel and then they have another ship come through and the other ones refuel Fuelled and it takes so they're closer in the evolutionary chain to us than some of the other Yeah, that that's my assumption. Yeah now the other third type that got mentioned on mission was reptilians But every time They were mentioned it was really quickly hushed up by whoever else was on the other end of the line shut up Don't say that Is what they were doing that don't want to talk about They don't want to talk about the reptilian presence at all they would talk about the tall whites and the gray is being in the lab of the armaments You know not a lot, but some but these reptilians was it was like nobody wanted to talk about it Was there any sort of an explanation that anybody give you of why they don't want to talk about it? No, the only time I got any inkling was that when I you know was out of the program and other people started to talk to me about all the different You know things they're like well, how many races are there? I don't know but um Some people talked about the reptilians. They're like do you realize that these are evil? I had to listen to that and and the thing is we don't know if it's because of their appearance You know you would assume something that's reptilian is maybe a demon or whatever an anordic Where the blonde hair blue eyed is considered like an angel or is it? That's just our perception, but those that's what you hear well every every reptile here is evil You're right, you ever seen a kimono dragon eat a goat. It's a horrific. Yeah, the book and monsters Every single reptile is a monster. Yeah, that's here. There's not one cuddly reptile you can hang out with Cuddles with you. He's it brings you your newspaper in the morning. No, I thought that was funny because the lady Right my snakes sleep with me every night and the guy says no It's laying next to you because it's sizing you up for eventually It's gonna eat you out like one day's gonna eat you have a monster that you feed as long as you keep feeding won't eat you Yeah, people with like the high-fons for pester. I've given some credibility I did do some research after that person talked to me because I did see that there is a reptilian race that is very malign like that and they even have according to what I read This one race has a penchant for blood for some reason. It's like a shark frenzy with them They have a real reptile you fork experience for them. Yeah a reptilian rice. It does that it just makes you wonder about human history about the stories of demons and angels and This is what Tucker Carlson believes that they've always been here and that this idea that they're coming from another plan and it's not It's not that simple. No, that's more complicated and he thinks that it's the demons and the angels from the Bible. Yeah So they could be seen that way, but here's here's something that so long We were just talking and throwing ideas at each other He said if humans have actually been on the earth like say this long right? All right When the dinosaurs were here they were like yeah this long So is it possible though some of them could have evolved to a certain point? Know that something bad is gonna happen. They're so advanced. They go off world and then they come back and go What happened here or is there a place where the The the you could on impact never happens Mm-hmm and so those dinosaurs eventually evolved to become super intelligent. Yes Because remember back in the day there used to be a Omni magazine All right one of those hypotheses was if mammals like us hadn't shown up What we do we have looked like and it shows a lizard walking upright and Doing you know every day things that they wouldn't you think that it would have done that already Like they were around for like a hundred million years 200 million years. Yes, like in that time period They didn't evolve at all those fuckers. They just kept each other Save way that's the assumption right now we're going back and looking at all kinds of different things like they said that Maybe it wasn't the asteroid that took out the dinosaurs. Maybe it was a combination of things like There was some kind of mutation something that they drank in the water and it's and all at the same time Maybe the asteroid was the the catalyst to start it And then all these other things that happened after you know the fireball the all the other stuff But if there was a group that was so advanced that they could sit there and go That's an asteroid. It's gonna kick our butt. We better get off or or Let's go under you know because there's some legitimate looking things I can go underwater and do their thing underground That kind of thing yeah, because I heard a story why no But anyway, got you heard a story. Yeah, okay. I just heard a story that so one just said imagine this The aliens are coming down. There's another society here that lives on the ground highly advanced and They like to keep things the way they are so they're gonna direct all their energy to make sure that the alien The any child that we're seeing are paying attention to us and not them. I was like Let's see for me The way I look at all this reptilian presence is just like I've read in the Bible You know that For some reason I feel like this whole experience. I've had in my life actually increased my faith in the Bible and God because Even in the Bible it mentions the serpents and that Lucifer being the head of that that genre or species Did cause the fall of mankind You know, all this other good stuff so to me. I feel like I've I just got experience with the reality of the fact that these things exist and even though they try to keep it all hidden that I got exposed to the program where I could see some of it and I think that There's some credence also to that side of it as well. So to give credence to that the whole thing is just to say that I That's what I believe but at the same time. It wasn't there This eben thing that you talked about initially. Yeah, this creature. What did that thing look like? They didn't really describe the even They didn't know they just said that it was just like them reporting on something For that day so it was kind of like a daily thing with them So they had already described it. You just weren't privy to it and so they were just Yeah, because then we were just saying that everybody was talking about You know somebody asked me what you look like today You know after the first time they asked me they're never gonna ask me about that again So it was like that was just not a gothic so this eben was it here against its will was it here to It's not like it was a prison It's not like an interrogation result is what it sounded like if you hear any of the stories they make it sound like He was one of the survivors and he got stuck here and He started working with us and eventually he died in the eventually Natural causes but it's all speculation because we're in you know We're hearing all this stuff. We don't have any way to verify and how many other stories that are similar to that like the interactions and the Thing being here with us have you heard There's another one that actually escaped captivity. Oh He actually convinced his interpreter or his interrogator to help him escape because The program was trying to get him to open a portal for them and they wanted to control of it and The guy eventually the interrogator actually pushed him into the portal and had served Tastishly gave him back to his own home world and it ended that guy's career probably A portal yeah, and what kind of portal are we talking about? You're talking like it's kind of like a way of opening A wormhole that you can control and did they say where this thing was accomplished and how I think it was also in Reticuli I think it was another being from the reticuli system right, but the portal where's this portal? How is it accomplished? Oh? The portal I thought It's trying to think where was that call from into because you always get the originating Location, but you're all trying to figure out who the distant end is I'm trying to think all the parameters because you have to write down the phone number and every stuff sometimes It sounded like it might have been on the Pacific Northwest or The West Coast area is where this was taking place and Did they say how the portal was made was this made by them? They had recovered parts of one and they were trying to complete it and they were trying to get this being to help them Complete the portal so they could use it for their like a stargate. Yeah, like a real stargate correct Yeah, remember what I was telling you that story about you know, let's go get Jimmy. Yeah, the The rumor that I heard surrounding this was that he convinced his interpreter that if he didn't get back and if He didn't get home Really bad things were gonna happen and that guy just kind of felt like you know Hey, I got kids Right, I don't want society destroyed Had some compassion for him. Yes, it's been working with a for a while. Yeah, so when he got the chance he was just like You know, get him there and care remember all the things I think they had to keep this this entity tied to its share or something so he couldn't do anything And that's why he needed the help of the the guy that was the interpreter He had to push him into the portal on the chair that he was tied to so the rumors I heard I didn't hear the portal part. I just heard that he somehow he was able to get him outside and Just as he got him outside They just showed up above and did a snatching grab and he was gone and things you know He's out there. So there's different versions. Right. There's some versions I'm just telling you that that's the only other one I've heard that you're mentioning that you want to meet him describe that Was there any other entities that we'd captured and had something similar that's the only other story I've heard? Do you know the Richard Nixon story? Yeah, where he went with Jackie Gleason. Yeah, yeah, do you think that's bullshit? Actually not for that time frame now. I could see Jackie Gleason and Richard Nixon Talking some suds down that data definitely could say and also Jackie Gleason did become obsessed with UFOs afterwards And even how the house built the shape of the UFO. Yeah, it's a wild-looking house That was apparently for sale recently. Yes. Really. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It wasn't in power songs It was in up in know-home knows in upstate New York It did look like it's very bizarre looking house like you see you're like why would Jackie Gleason build up? Want to see it? Yeah You look at it. You're like why would you I think Gleason build a house like this? But then you hear that story you go well, maybe that's why he did it maybe because the word was that he had become obsessed with UFOs at one point in his life and This story came out. I think as told by his wife Just a Jackfield house Which is so weird. Yeah spaceship like house very strange Very frustrating for someone to do something like that. Yeah, I would have to believe they had something profound or there were me That I've never had a UFO or a UFO or a UFO or a poor fucking house. I love that house I kind of like those two it's like when I'm down at Navarre Beach where I have a home down there in Florida But there's a UFO house down there. Oh really yeah, and it looks just like a UFO I think there's a UFO house in California somewhere. I think there's one in the hills above Studio City I think there's one it's like a famous UFO house that I think they've filmed things they I think it's like on stilts and it looks like a UFO Hmm. I mean people are always gonna want things that look like that. It doesn't necessarily mean that the Jackie Gleason Yeah, that one that's in the Hollywood Hills called the chemos here Yeah, that does pretty cool fucking dope I want to cool shit, but that'd be terrified living in California with earthquakes and stupid place to live Yeah, you don't you wouldn't want it as your main house That's how's your visit every now and then when you want to get drunk Frankly, yeah have a party have a little cocktail party at the UFO house. There you go. Yeah, exactly how I treated Yeah, it's like fun. Yeah, but um So the so the graze the tall whites the reptilians, but then there's the mantis too, right? Right and those are things honestly, I've had We've only discussed a part of my life I've had experiences all the way from three years old on And even after I was out of the program and I was just working in Florida and I've seen the Delta or triangular craft like three times and One of those times with my daughter when we were coming back from her gymnastics class Pretty much just before I retired. What did that look like? It was like a the size of a three-story home But it was you know pointed and on the top it was kind of angular kind of like what you see the f1 17 look like where it's angular It kind of looked like that it had pale Grays white lights on the underside on the on the cardinal corners and then in the back There was a flat panel that looked like a grill where there was a light There was like these stack of straight-up lights like fluorescent lights are that would go to the right and then to the left and did it make noise? Zero noise zero noise energy is fine to the air. Yeah fast slow It was going fairly slow And then when it banked it turned and then that's when it sped up a little bit and then I lost it in the trees Then I saw it two other times one time was going to work and The other time was in 2022 when I reached out to some of the program folks that I used to know to tell them Hey, there's a space on the top secret jwix computers that they're talking about UFOs and I pointed them directly to this this Delta shaped craft because I was like I know what this is and I know what they know it is So I was trying to let them know that you need to look at this this imagery that we have our hands on and Ends up they ended up showing up with it and they showed me flying in flight They followed me home the next night and It was right there above my car and I'm looking kind of like this is ours It's ours. Yeah, it's a hybrid or it's ours. I've always told people a hybrid meaning Yeah, well here to the whole thing is that in the 90s I know they were on mission with me at right path and we saw a Delta shaped craft It had different nacels at the timer engines at the time. That's what a nacelle is and then So this new version looked very similar in shape However, it had these glowing orbs that looked like they were part of the propulsion system So they had upgraded part of it and now it looked fully functional and operational because back in the 90s It was not so this is the other thing that I keep hearing is that we are in possession of technology That is many many years ahead of it anything that anybody could anticipate And and when we get that I call that exotic material and or whatever you want to call it But we get our hands on that and about every you know 10 years we get a breakthrough on it Because we do study it and sometimes somebody is smart enough to figure something out and The next thing you know we've got fiber optics We've got cell phones and we've got transistors now. We're taking nanotech You know, we're all this stuff come from is some of this part of this in H.I. presence and that they've taken a patent that would develop inside the program and now these people from Lockheed in Northrop are Patenting this stuff and then making lots of money on the outside Other than the the beings that we described other other ones that people have talked about. Yes I've actually like I said as a young adult I probably encountered more of a spiritual sense, but they were Nordic looking You know platinum hair kind of a look blue eyes like the tall whites are different no different they How many documented different species have you heard of? If I'm talking about my mission days, it's only that handful and then if you're talking about other things that I've had other people tell me about I Think I've heard enough from enough people that I trust that I Think our concept of life in this universe is totally off. I think there are literally Trillions of other life forms and anything you can imagine is probably true So that's an interesting thing because I always one of the things that I wondered when we we used to talk in the task force was if this is the you know, we're the alpha species here on earth So what if what we're seeing is the alpha species from another planet Think about what other critters and other things are running around and maybe if we see something wild and crazy over here What if it's somebody You know who's got a dog like psycho You know something go like what was that? You know we just don't know so the you know we can speculate in everything and build all these Hypothesis up but we're constantly looking to to add to what we think is out there so we can figure out going Here's what we figured out here's what we have in now is the conventional explanation that these things are from other planets or is there speculation that they're interdimensional? Is there speculation that they live in the water? Yes, all of them all that all of you have I would say that the way they appear and disappear is interdimensionalism that and I've had other friends that have had encounters that have talked to me that they could see a larger craft and then it turned and all of a sudden there is a door opening and a creature coming out and Yet this other part of the craft seemed to be like a long way off So it's like inter dimensionally large however You know when it turns it's not like our four dimensional world I've heard of a craft that you go inside of it and it looks like a couple hundred feet on the outside you go inside of it You know, when it turns, it's not like our four dimensional world. I've heard of a craft that you go inside of it and it looks like a couple hundred feet on the outside. You go inside of it. Exactly. It's an example of a field. Yeah, Doctor Who style. Because it's going into this other dimension and there's actually more space to that. Yes. And that's what this guy was describing. So we've we've all heard that too. The other thing too about the dimensional thing, because of the speeds that they're moving in, it could be that they're moving so fast. It looks like they slipped into the dimension. Because sometimes you'll see these things go off into the sky and then do some weird whatever and then they're gone. And then other times what you're seeing is this thing is moving slowly and then almost it's gone. And you're like, did it just slip into it in the dimension or is that there? Is it speed so fast that you can't track it with your eye? Yes. I've heard people tell me that they were seeing some of these things moving at 16,000 miles per hour plus and we're still accelerating. I've never been able to verify that obviously. But because there's some people that seem to know what they're talking about and you know, they just kind of come forward. I would just have when I was on the test force, I would just get a phone call and they said, hey, are you Mr. Logan? Yeah. Like, uh, check your email in about five minutes or, you know, hey, there's something I want to tell you. And I have no way of verifying it. But the idea would be to put it in a little box somewhere to say, hey, this is an unknown and maybe someone like Jason would come along and verify what this guy just told me or verify what I just saw in a video that maybe he can corroborate on. We would look at primarily for the task force. We were looking at the safety of the pilots because they were having so many problems and they kept filling out all those safety reports. You know, so we're like, but and I remember asking, uh, the task force director, J Stren. And I was like, what about all the commercial stuff that's going on? And he says, I want to incorporate that, but I can't because with their stuff, we don't have a good chain of custody on what's happening. And if someone's manipulating the data with this stuff, that's coming directly from the pilots we can. So I was always looking at what the pilots told me they saw. And then me and several others in and outside of the task force were looking through the commercial stuff to see if we could find the same exact thing. Because that's how I, I, when I first got it pulled into the task force, it was, um, I talked about my app and I was going to do this just to figure out just something for a hobby when I get older, you know, when I grow up. And then Lou Elizondo came out with Leslie Keen and their story. And I went and found Lou and I said, if you're serious about what you're talking about, stop by my office because I just wanted to see if you could do it. And he showed up with the gang and they presented their story about the pilots and everything. And we were like, okay, and I said, well, what about this weird thing over here? And they're like, how do you know about that? And I was like, I got friends in low places, kind of like you. And they looked at me and they said, don't worry, that one's, um, we've been told that something mundane is nothing important. And I was like, I beg to differ. And I was able to show them in a video of the same thing seeing somewhere in the world through civilian stuff. And I remember when they were leaving after they heard everything. And all of a sudden Lou just turns back around and goes, you're in. And I was like, in what? And he goes, you'll see. And next thing you know, I was in the task force. So, and for me, I was like, oh, my life just came full circle. I saw some things and now I'm, I'm actually going to investigate these things. And so that's how I kind of pressed ahead. And then just to add on top of that, remember I said when Jason showed up, I called David Grush, right? But the funny thing was I hadn't even been in the task force that long. And I was trying to look at things all of a sudden I get a phone call. And I'm like, yeah, how can I help you? And he goes, um, my name is David Grush, are you serious about all this stuff you're tracking? And I go, yeah, because I want in. And I was like, huh? And he goes, I think I have something that could not help with you guys. And I was like, well, I'm not in charge of this. I got to introduce you to, you know, a Stratton and company. And so I introduced them. And every now and then I would say hi to him. And we'd talk and he called me on the phone. But who else I mean, I'm going to Stratton, I'm going to all the people in the task force. And he pops up and I'm like, oh my God, you know, what do you do with that? You know, I don't have the reason. I didn't get invited like he did. Yeah, I didn't have the resources to check out everything that he did. One of the things that we keep hearing Christopher melon's talked about this, many people talked about this is there is evidence that's been classified that is high resolution video on photographs that are very distinct, very different than some of the blurry stuff that we've seen. Have you guys seen any of that? Yes, you have. Can you talk about it? Nope. All I can say is that there's some really, really good, clear, high-def stuff out there that can explain. You can explain you're just sitting there going. We went through the whole rigamarole on these objects. You had people on one side of the fence, people on the other side of the fence, people in the middle of it all and nobody could draw. The first thing we're trying to do is go, okay, could that be Russia? Could that be China? Okay, who else is there? And you go through your whole list. Then you once you put that off to the side, you go through now, what are we observing? And some of the things, you know, like Lou said, the five observables plus the six, which is kind of the psychological effect on that. But you're kind of going through those looking for all those. They're not always there. Yeah. But they're super clear. And some of them, you're like, how, I mean, you look at it and you just keep saying, how can that be? Yeah, because you've got also, you got to understand that these are professionals. We had imagery analysts go through looking for false positive, like camera artifacts that look like something they're not. We, they could do AI analysis of images now. They're pretty exactly. And we had a whole data database of all these false positives to go through and it wasn't matching any of that. We were going through the imagery analysis of the video looking for flaws, like artifacts couldn't find anything. And you talk about a high resolution video, much clearer than stuff we're seeing. Exactly. And what's the resistance to that stuff getting out there to the general public? It's just classification. It could be where it's at those type things. It could be any. Because one of the things that I think the community really gets hung up on when it comes to the Intel community is that the classification is one thing. But when you don't know if something is a threat, you automatically assign a value to that as being credible or not credible. And right now they can't draw a conclusion. Therefore they don't want to declassify it. Therefore it will not be divulged in public because of those reasons. I was telling him in my, my first thing as an Intel analyst to go through friend or foe. Right. And then the next thing I'm trying to do is, you know, break down all the characteristics and, and we would sit there and you're looking. When I first joined the task for a siren over there was a group that I used to walk in their office because they're, they're smarter than me. You know, so I want to make sure I'm getting the best input. And the first couple of times I showed up, everybody pulled out the aluminum hat. They plucked us, started playing the X files music. And I'm like, okay, guys, but what about this? And I throw it out there. And they're like, oh, yeah, what is that? After about the fourth or fifth visit, no more music. No, I come in. Everybody's already hunched over what I've already sent them. They're like, yeah, what is that? Because we would J. Strike and asked just to, he said, lean forward and get out there and, and use an all source approach to looking and gathering all the information on what we can find. So I would get captured like I'd call up a drone guy and say, I need you to come to my office. Take a look at this. And he would look at it and he's like, holy crap, how big is that? What? How? And I was like, yeah, I need answers. Can you take a look and he would look and I'll get back to you couple of weeks later. He's like, dude, I got nothing. And then, you know, we would have an imagery guy look at it. And you know, sometimes they could sit there and say, dude, that's this. If you had one piece of footage or image to release, would there be one that really stands out? Like if you said, if they said, look, you could release this one, just one of these classified high resolution videos. Is there one that really stands out as being unique? It's a group for me. There's a group of people. Can you describe any of it? I think Lou Elizondo described one. There's the story that he talks about. I think Commander Freaver discusses about the the torpedo. Do you remember that one? What he said? The story is that they were launching torpedoes and you know, they blew the ballas on the torpedo. The torpedo came up to the top and the divers came to hook the torpedo. And just as they were about to to hook it, something very large like an island came up underneath them. All right. Um, so I get this weird call. And it's you have to play devil's advocate because when you when you're trying to tell guys that there were they were the observer and you're trying to say, hey, well, you know, it could have been this. Some of these guys get downright angry. They're pissed because you're questioning their ability to discern what's going on. They were there. You weren't, you know, so you have to be careful because after a while, nobody will want to talk to you again because I would look at the NASA because he's talking. Right. So you're very careful. So this guy just sends me this thing. And I'm looking at it. And I just maybe a couple weeks before I'd heard this story with Freaver and Elizondo. So I'm like, what is this? And there was all I can say was there was something very, very, very large. Yeah, moving under the water, but not not too far that you can't see it. But it's moving under the water and it's passing objects that I know are really large. And this thing is bigger than them. Right. And I'm sitting there going, well, I think they mentioned one of them. And that was the oil tanker one. Yes. Yeah. That one confused the hell out of me. And there were people saying it was just a shadow. That's something going 500 knots. Yeah. But some people were saying it was just some kind of a round object that the sun is just making a large shadow in the moon going across the earth and not somebody did another analysis. And they looked at the wave tops and they're like, this is not a shadow. Otherwise we show up on the wave tops. This is under the surface. And this thing is disturbing the water underneath it. This thing made this oil oil rig out in ocean looked adorbed it. I mean, this was like three or four times bigger. So the speculation is that they're hiding in plain sight in the water or is the speculation that there's always been a civilization down there? I'd say in my opinion, yes. No, in my opinion, I would say that they have been here a very long time in that the certain underneath the ocean and underneath the ground are through the best places to stay hidden and out of the way of prying eyes. You go out in the booty somewhere or you go like there's a whole bunch of activity going around around Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico. Yeah. There's a whole bunch of activity that is going on. You know, we're the name of incident accident. That happened. All right. So there's things that we want to verify because you hear stories about things like you've heard of the Baltic anomaly. All right. So the first thing you want to know is what first of all is it actually there. Once you verify that it's there, you want to know what's this composition? What's this composition? All those things. There's another thing on there. You can look it up right now. It's called the Cuban Atlantis. It's supposed to be 13 nautical miles west of Cuba. All right. And it looks like there's triangles and everything else there. And I'm like, from the moment that thing came out, I've never heard anybody else say we've been there. We've checked it out. We've verified it. It's there. Let's send a dive team down. The thing on the right there. You know, yeah, that's under the water. Yeah, that's supposedly 13 miles off the coast of Cuba. Oh, that's what we want to know. We want to verify that. You know, whatever that is. Yeah, where's the national geographic documentary on that? It's that made a of that for real. Just the one that we've all seen that before. All the other ones I'm thinking are fake, but this one up top right there where the thing is click on that Jamie. Yeah. Agent origins. Is it a crackpot site? Doesn't it doesn't get the vibes of a place to start looking for relevant information? Right. Wait a point. So suppose there were some people doing something coming across the water and they thought so could it be that the Caribbean we analyzed this one? Yeah, the Caribbean's hot and there's something out there. You know, let's get that eventually goes in the water. Yeah, it's very weird. Even even this one we've we've looked at it. We argued over this for months. How fast is things supposedly going? It's not going that fast. Yes, it's it's it's kind of quick like a like a leer jet would. But it looks like no one right in the water. The two things that stick out about not to go in the water. It does. There's no reason to fast in the water. Yeah, there's no roots to tail up. That comes off it. Right. And the other thing is at one point near the end, it actually looks like it splits in two. There's like ones a holograph on ones. Right. And now there's some other imagery guy that's saying all that he didn't it didn't actually go in the water. It's just a little bit of that. It's up. Yeah, there you go. See, that's the part that you can't. And what do we see with the drones? Some of these are splitting. Yes. And these are the ones that I find very curious because those are the ones that get sent and they're like, it's an ore, but now there's three of them. You know, how do I explain that? Well, listen, I want to thank you guys for having the courage to even talk about this because I know it brings with it a lot of ridicule. And for people like me that have no idea what's going on, it's very fascinating. And you know a lot more than most of what I still don't know anything though, so that's not good. I know more than wait a minute. Yeah, but I mean, all I know is what people told me. So I don't know what's real and what's not real. You know, but I appreciate you guys very much. And thank you for being here. If you got social media, tell everybody where they can get a hold of you. I'm on the space mainly. Just my name Jason T. Sands is my moniker. So Logan, I am at phenom.Earth. Just look it up and you'll see information about my app and a little bit about my background. Okay. And I've got it first hand fund. I'm trying to get further whistle blowers to come forward as well. Okay. James Fox did ask me to pass you something. He said, if you could put out a shout out to anybody that has information on the vahini stuff because he's found some new information and he needs to start corroborating. Okay, where do they get a hold of James? James Fox director, I think, I've got an Instagram. I believe so. And his ex-space is also a good way. Okay. All right. Beautiful. Well, thank you, gentlemen. Appreciate it. Thanks for being here. Thank you, Joe. Very good, Jason. All right. Bye, buddy.