Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Cheers. Hey, you see. Good to see you. I went through a whole series of different coffee machines that I tried out. I tried out one of them. That was this little thing that's like a tea dipper almost. Like for an individual cup of coffee, you put the grounds in this little thing. It's a little tiny press. OK. And yet you boil the water, put it in the coffee. And then you sit in there like it's tea. And then you press it. OK. And it makes like a French press. Ew. Yeah. Yeah. So then I went to an arrow press. I like that one a lot. What's an arrow press? I use that every day. So with an arrow press, I boil the water, grind the beans. And then I pour it into this glass tube. And the glass tube is a filter at the bottom of it. Like a mesh, like a steel or an aluminum. Some kind of metal mesh. And then that's what it looks like. And so you press down and it makes a cup of coffee real quick. And it's one cup. And so that's what I like. Because I was making coffee. Like I was doing French press for a while. I had a coffee machine. But the issue is that you're not supposed to really be drinking out of hot plastic. All that shit's plastic. There's plastic. The water goes into plastic. There's plastic here in plastic there. I'm trying to eliminate as much plastic in my life as possibly as possible as we can. I'll tell you too. I a couple times in my adult life splurged on some fucking lemon tiniens espresso. Yeah. Yeah. The grinds, the beans, every time you're going to wet. Those fucking things go sideways on you in a year. And then you're like, I've got to get fixed. And they're like, yeah, there's a shop. It's 90 minutes north of you. You drive the machine up there. You're just like, fuck this shit, man. So I went back. I just, I have an espresso. And you put the fucking pot in and whatever. But there's a company that makes one. I should shout them out. That makes one that's all steel. I think it's called simply good coffee. I follow them on Instagram. I haven't used their machine, but that's all steel. It's an all steel coffee machine. Okay. Which is what you want. But I've got it down to the AeroPress. The AeroPress to me, very simple. The minimal amount of like parts. It's just tube, the grinds. The coffee tastes pure. It's simple. I make one cup of coffee a day. Here is, here is what I miss. Because I will drink a lot of coffee if I'm able to. Here's what I miss about like a traditional Mr. Coffee pot of coffee. You drive. You said it. It starts doing it in the morning. You wake up. It's already going. You know, I get two cups hot in the morning. I put it in the fridge. And then in the afternoon, when I start feeling sluggish, I got two cold cups. And it's just a nice. It's so you just want volume. I love volume. Then make a French press. It'll taste better. This right here. But then you got to make it every time. You got to do one cup of wine. You don't have a job. Ha ha ha ha. Lazy motherfucker. You don't even have a job. You literally talk shit for a living. And you're like, oh, making coffee so hard. Someone had a skin of fucking buffalo just to stay warm in the winter. Yeah. Just to stay alive. They had to shred the skin off of it with a stone knife, and they had to pull it and stretch it and tear it and put animal brains on it to make sure that it's softened up and salt it down. Guess what? If you would have said to that guy, hey, we got to think of Mr. Buffalo. It'll just do it real fast. He would have been like, OK, this sucks. He would be fucking sick. It is beef. Oh, bro. Mr. Buffalo is the shit. Yeah. He'd get fat and lazy. Yeah. So true. But yeah, I just, I like to make more than one cup at once. So that thing that airship is so easy. You talk about making it hard. This right here, this is an all metal French press. No plastic parts at all. It's the fucking easiest thing in the world, dude. So this can make a four pot, though. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. I would do that. And this is not expensive. It was just a steel French press. This is the best tasting coffee you're ever going to get because it's got all the oils from the beans, man. Like the real coffee dorks. You know, there's something happens in the filter. Yeah. So in the filter, yes, you remove the grinds. Yes. But also you remove some of the flavor. Yes. Just a touch. Yeah. It's funny, man. When I, when I was still involved with the, with the shits, sandwich shop, one of the things I learned that I never knew because you had to take a test to get a food hand, large license and all the shit was, um, I didn't know that food started breaking down the moment you cut it. I didn't know that because I was getting into at the time, meal prep and shit. Like if I cut, if I cut up, if I chop the tomatoes now, if I chop the carrots now, the cucumbers now, it'll be way easier to throw a salad together every day. And it'll make me eat the good thing because I'll be, it'll be fast. And then I learned, no, as soon as you cut something, it starts to break down. Is this just vegetables? I think it's mainly vegetables. I don't think a raw meat is fine or whatever, but the vegetables. That makes sense because the insides expose the air. But it's got to be the same principle with coffee beans, I would think, right? Like once in a round, that's a good question. Yeah, I think people like to grind them right before they, I always grind them right before I make the coffee, which is easy. I will grind them. It's a one step, one button. I press it, it takes 13 seconds. I count it, it goes. Nah, nah, nah. 13 seconds is the exact amount of beans that I want for one strong, I like a strong cup of coffee, one strong cup of coffee, with that arrow pressed thing. But it's the same thing with a French press. You take it, you just get a determined amount and you can dial the knob on the grinder. It's so easy. Grinders are so simple. So listen, all you do is you take that ground coffee after it comes into the little cup, you pour it into the bottom of the fucking French press, and then you pour the hot water in. Done. Yeah. That's it. And then you wait one minute and then you push this fucking plunger down and you drink the best coffee in the world. And it doesn't have any plastic and it doesn't have any bullshit. And there's no moving parts. Yes. There's nothing. It's just that thing. Yes. And if the grinder breaks, you get another fucking grinder. Okay, and grinders don't break. I've never had a grinder break. But you got to boil the water first, correct? Oh my God, are you okay? Are you going to be okay? You got to turn the knob on the stove. You're going to be okay? What the fuck is wrong with this guy? I hit a button on the boil. This is so ridiculous. He's like, whoa, I can't be the water. I got to boil it. Dude, I get out of bed. Get an automatic kettle. You get a kettle. Okay. Because there's literally I have one that has a setting that says French press on it. It's a steel kettle. Okay. And it works all electronically. So it's temporary regulated temperature. And it beeps when it's done. The press 200 degrees. And then a press start and it goes, Okay. Dude, do you know when that happens? I pour the water onto the beans. Well, now we're talking. Now we're talking. An electric kettle. I'm thinking I got to put a fucking pot on the stove. That's even easier water. That's even easier water. You fucking lades. It shakes too long. It shakes too long. Dude, I get out of the lades. It's not lasing. It's not lasing. It's not lasing. It's not lasing. I swear, so lasing. I wake up. With the dread of humanity in my fucking brain, I'm just like I need a cup of coffee immediately to just start today and just clear the head. And the longer that takes, the longer I got to sit in that wake up anxiety. I understand. Oh, so, but now we're talking. You know what I'm going to get? I'm going to get a boiling pot that you can set a timer on. Yeah, they're easy. They're electronic kettles. They sell them on. And they have like settings for tea, settings for this, settings for hot cocoa. You know, it's like five or six different settings or something like that, depending on the model. All right. They're fucking so easy, dude. You sold them. My little, yeah. And it's the best coffee. It tastes, and I don't have to think, I got to hold one of these really nice machines and it can make an espresso, can make your coffee, can make a latte. It's got a little fucking foam thing that I've never used once. Did they ever never even thought about using it? Never even thought about steaming milk in my fucking house. Never. But I always was thinking, I'm just, it's all plastic. Every time I'd filled up the water thing, like this is all plastic, everything's plastic. Do you know what I saw, though, that maybe want to get the thing again with the cream steamer? Because I don't put cream in, so I don't have any use for it. Black coffee, right? Black coffee, you know. Oh, man. Always, yeah. Yeah. Tony shits on it. Of course he does. Tony needs a fucking umbrella in his coffee. He's got a seat, he's a umbrella by lapel. A cookie with a hand. He holds it with one pinkie out. He's like, hey, Jesus coffee. He gets, I got a drink of black, he goes, yeah, you fucking hate condiments. I was like, what do you want? I like the taste of coffee. Yeah. I genuinely like black coffee. You know what I saw, though, that maybe want to get the foam steamer was not for foam. You know, Alton Brown, I love Alton Brown. He did a video where he made this thing with eggs and he used the foam steamer to like foam the eggs up. And I was like, this looks fun. I want to get it just for that, just to do the thing with the eggs. But then he got a, so you're lazy when it comes to making coffee, but you go away. I'll wait for some foam eggs. I'll cook. You like the steamer. I like the cook. I'll cook. There it is right here. Oh, wow. Wow. Wow. He said this is like apparently incredible. He eats like two eggs, little cheese. Interesting. Interesting. And so you whisk it up like that and then you add the foam and the foam cooks it. Is that always cooking it with the foam? It cooks the eggs with the foam. So what is in the foam? Is it just hot water? That's it? Yep. Okay. So this hot water from the steam is cooking his eggs. That's the egg cooking. Look at that. Look at that. Is he eating? Oh, he just eats eggs. Fucks wrong with you. He cracks some fucking eggs. Fry some eggs. What's the problem? You don't think that looks good? So it doesn't look as good as sunny side-up eggs. Fows looking at it. I was like, fuck those foam eggs. Oh, I want a real egg. Could you imagine dunking toast in those foam eggs? No, because I don't even eat toast. Come on. Toast once in a while. Occasionally. You know what I get with um, um, I'm not sure. Um, steak tartar. I like those little toast points. Oh, yeah. Have you ever get some steak tartar? Oh, yeah. Toast points? A J-Carver? You ever go to J-Carver? Oh, yeah. Of course. Yeah. Yeah. What's your favorite spot in Austin to get a meal? Like, is it? It's impossible to say. There's so many good spots. There's so many good spots. Austin is crazy. There's a amount of great restaurants. Like, really high-end restaurants. I've eaten steak at every fucking restaurant in town. And I kind of think the best one is Jeffries. Jeffries is. I still haven't gone. I gotta go. It's perfection. It's perfect. They're all great. Like, I've never had a bad steak at J-Carvers. I've never had a bad steak at, uh, 80-V's. They're all great. But there's something about whatever Jeffries is doing. I think they got rated like the number two steakhouse in the country. Something crazy like that. I gotta go to Jeffries. I've been dragging my ass. I love J-Carver. I love J-Carver's amazing. You know, amazing. Their steak is different. Jeffries steak, you know, like J-Carver's steak is, uh, he's using one of those Argentine grills. So it's all live-fire over what delicious flavor. Yeah. Yeah. But man, I'm just like another, another level. Like, whatever Jeffries is doing, like fuck. I go, I love Gary, the bartender at Eddie V's. And he makes killer martinis. I love the going and get him martini. Straight bar. Shrimp cocktail. Beautiful bar. And, uh, and some steak. But I love, I gotta tell you it's the same owners as J-Carver. I actually think I like the steak at Red Ash a little bit better than J-Carver. How? There's just something different about it. I don't know what the difference in the prep is, but just the steak. And then also having the option of all the Italian foods that you can get with the steak. Yeah. Red Ash is phenomenal too. Yeah. They have another place called the Kimberly. That's, that place is phenomenal too. And really is very good. Yeah. There's too many good restaurants. You have a, an abundance of choices here. It took, it took a minute because when I first moved back, because I was here in 2000 for a year, when I first moved back, you know, I was in New York for so long. I forgot like Austin is more of a destination city. You have to kind of find the places. And Tommy Pope was like, dude, give me your phone. And he went into my Google Maps and he bookmarked 10 spots. And he was like, get this here, get this there, get this here. And every spot I was like, okay. Now we're, now we're rocking and rolling. It was great. Yeah. Imagine back in the day before the internet, you couldn't just Google like what's the best steakhouse in Austin. You couldn't, I mean, that's kind of an amazing thing now. You're going to be told about a restaurant, right? Yeah. Yeah. What's, what's, I do that in cities. When I'm on the road, I'll look up what's the best Italian sandwich in the city. Yeah. Sometimes it's right. Sometimes it's like, you know, the most popular touristy place. Exactly. Sometimes it's just a place that paid for publicity. So they're getting on these lists. And it's not accurate. But when you find it, it's great. The internet is a great tool to help find these places. Like you said, it used to just be word of mouth. You used to say, what's good? And now you're depending on some guys opinion, which is not always the best. But yeah, but there's some certain places. It's like, people are your own little Cisco and Ebert for movies. But it's for restaurants. Like, you've got to find a fact guy who loves food. That guy's going to tell you where the best spots are. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know who knows everything. There's like East Coast places, though, that you're just never going to get anywhere else other than the East Coast. There's certain like kind of small Italian restaurants in particular. Like, there's this place I used to go to when I lived in New Rochelle, Frank and John's. I think it was Frankie and Johnny's. I think that's what was called. Okay. In New Rochelle, it's Italian place. It was so fucking insane. It was so insane. They made it a movie about that. Well, there was a movie called Frankie and Johnny without Pacino. And I think it's about that restaurant. I think he works at that restaurant. Really? Yeah. I think it's got a lot of restaurants. Right? But it's called 90% sure it was in New Rochelle. Because that's where I lived. I lived in New Rochelle. If it wasn't in New Rochelle, it was in the surrounding areas. Like maybe Mount Vernon or something like that. But oh my God, dude. It was so good. When I got my first development deal, my manager thought that I had a gambling problem. But it was really just because I was eating steak and lobster every night. Go, where's all your money? He's like, what are you doing? He's spending so much money. Do you have a gambling problem? And I was like, no, I'm eating steak and lobster every night. I've been poor my whole life. I'm fucking eating like a king. Dude. Until this shit runs out, I don't even know if it's gonna last, but I'm riding this bitch right into the rocks. My favorite thing about when I finally got to a point of some financial stability with this crazy career that you go through for a long time without knowing what's next. But my favorite thing was when I could go, I can eat whatever I want now. Like that was a huge moment to me. That's one of the biggest, Brian Callins said that to me once. He goes, the most because other than obviously taking care of your family and mortgage and all that stuff, after life necessity, the big change, the big change is being able to go to a restaurant and order whatever you want and not think about it. Not worry about the bill. And if you can do that, you have real freedom. Like that's like the first big leap. And then everything after that is like these little things. It's great. Oh, look, I live in a nice apartment. Oh, look, I have a nice car. Oh, look, I've got the shoes that I wanted. Oh, look, that's all fun. It's nice. But the weight that's lifted off of you when you don't have to worry about your bills, that's number one. Yeah. That's the big one. That's the giant leap. That's the between the two buildings. Like, I don't know if it's gonna work out to weep. Bump. Yeah. Okay. And I'm gonna be okay. Yeah. But kind of successful I have, but I can't feed myself now with no fears. Dude, I actually might have said this to you the last time I was here. I don't remember. But it's the most profound moment for me in practicing gratitude for my life. I swear to God, it's the supermarket. When I check out at the supermarket, I try to remind myself, you just pulled whatever you wanted off the shelf to fill your cart, and you didn't have to worry about, can I pay for this or not? We're checking out and you're paying for your groceries and it costs what are you going to work. I was like, people, there are people that don't have this man. Remember this. This is a ton of people. Here's the question though. Do you think that there's value in not having that when you're young and then developing that sort of drive and ambition and desire to earn money and get something to be. Because you know what it's like to be poor. Yes. Or do you think the world would be a far better place if instead of people having to concentrate on necessities like food and shelter? Society reaches a point where that is a given and no one ever has to worry about food and shelter. And now it's all about what do you want to pursue and how much energy you put into it. Or do you think that you have to have that struggle? I think, look, I don't think that that struggle and the transition out of that struggle is ever bad for anybody. I think it builds your spirit and it builds your who you are. That said, the other version of it, I don't know because it's just not a thing that we have here. It's something that people have ever experienced here. And I don't even know if they really experience it anywhere else. I mean, I think there's like forms of socialism, but they all evolve oppression. They all involve government overreach. Any real socialist system always involves like serious restrictions on what you can and can't do. I will tell you this and this might be a byproduct of the culture we live in because we don't have it. I will say I, there is a noticeable difference to me between people I am friendly with that grew up with money and people that I know that grew up that didn't have it. Right, but is that because of our society? That's my question. Yeah. This is the question that I have. Like is it necessary that that has to be your struggle in order to develop the kind of discipline that you need to be successful in life? Or is it just our society is fucked up and that desperation that we're putting into people, you're just making the motivation different. Like you're enforcing the idea of greed because people become selfish because no one was looking out for them. They have a chip on their shoulder all that shit. Well you don't necessarily have to have that to have interest in pursuing something to the best of your abilities. Yeah, it's a tough thing to define. It really is. I think there's bonuses to both. But I also think too in the social society thing, hey, isn't it great if you can go, hey man, I'm a waiter and I'm able to live a normal life and buy a house and be normal, you know, whatever. Yeah, but that's not socialist. That's just though. We're fucked in terms of like the amount people earn versus what you can buy versus like the 1950s. The 1950s, you know, the way a person can make a living and feed an entire family off of one paycheck. It was way easier. Yeah, it was a lot easier. Yeah, well, it always makes me laugh because one of my favorite TV shows of all time is all in the family. Right. And the whole thing with all in the family was supposed to be that they were kind of struggling. Like Archie was a cab driver and they didn't have a lot of money. Whatever. You look at that fucking house. They lived it. Like that would be 10.3 million dollars. They're living pretty fucking good. It's a nice house. Right. It's all clean and nice and size. It's got two floors. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So it's a tough, it's a tough thing. But as far as the society we live in personally, I think it's better to have known what nothing is and then go to appreciating what you do have. I don't know because I've never grown up any other way. But I wonder if you have a conscientious parents and you're a young kid and you know your dad just sits you down and tells you, you can be whatever you want but you're going to have to fucking put in the work. Like there's only one way out of this thing and nobody rides for free. And if you do ride for free you're going to be depressed. Yeah. Because somebody gives you everything that you have. Those are the people that are the most aimless. The rich kids that I've met that have no, like they've had money their entire life. They, their parents just give them a trust fund so they don't have to work and they're worth like a ton of money. They're all sad. Right. They're all sad. And then they have they're all super insecure. They're all, they all act real weird. Yeah. I know one or two people that had trust funds grew up like that but still work their asses off because again you're saying it's what the parents are saying. You know, I think it's part of that right is what the parents are still in. Yeah. There's all this talk now of Nepo babies and all that stuff. I was good friends years ago with Eden, Eden Brolin. She's Josh Brolin's daughter. And she was very close with her dad. I remember, I remember she was in my house one day in LA and she's like, I'm not supposed to tell anybody my dad's going to be Thanos in the Marvel movies. And I was like, that's fucking crazy, right? So like, but she, she worked for every fucking thing. She, I became friends with her because she was a hostess at the stand in New York. Like she always had regular jobs. She plays in a band now. She does some acting, but she is not in a situation where her dad put her wherever. And I think it's because they're very close, but I think it was because she was just raising away where he's like, you're going to earn your shit and, you know, and you're going to do your thing. And she's an amazing person. Like there was none of that, none of that my dad's famous and I'm comfortable arrogance. But he's a cool guy. He's a very normal guy. And never met him. He's a very nice guy. Very, very smart and very normal. Like you can hang out with the talk of jokes around. He's like, he's very present. Yeah. And there's, there's a lot of people like that that you think of, you know, you think of actors as all being these fucking aloof weirdos who live in this bizarre liberal, like progressive leftist bubble and a lot of them are. There's, there's a giant number that are, but man, there's a ton of like really solid, cool people that are actors. Yeah. Cool as fuck. He seems awesome. So cool. He got, actually got me the short shirt shot up to him. That's awesome. I said nice, sharpening. So he hooked it up. I'd love to meet him. He's great. He's great. There's a lot of those guys that are really great. Woody House is fucking great. I was just going to say, I was just going to say, I'd be kind. I'd be kind. Friendly with Woody and his wife through Tony. He's so nice. He's the fucking bat. They're both amazing. Yeah. They're like, he's, he's so, so normal. So cool man. Yeah. Like, so cool and present as zero ego. He's just always chill and hanging out. Always like super friendly and nice to everybody. Woody's so nice. He, he, he said a thing to me. The first time I ever hung out with him, he came to kill Tony and, and we were drinking after the show. We had a great time. And at the end of the night, he just goes. And Tony had plugged my special at the beginning of the show. or whatever. And at the end of the night. And I mean, we had a few. We were in mitzies. We were all kind of just getting into that. Swain around. You know. And I was like, it was great to meet you man. And he goes, he goes, yeah, man's fun tonight. And he goes, I'm going to watch your special. And I go, thanks man. And he goes, I never promised you a rose garden. And I was like, yeah, that's the name. And he's like, I'm going to want. I'm like, this fucking guy remembered the name of my special from a plug five hours ago. And I was like, that's fucking awesome man. That's great. What a fucking. This is a good dude. Yeah. What an awesome dude. Yeah, they exist, Matt. You know, there's a lot of them out there. It'd be shocked. Matt Damon and Ben Affleck, very cool guys. Like talk to them on and off here. I've talked to Matt before. I actually randomly ran into Matt Damon a few years back in Italy at a restaurant where he was seated under a picture of him. So I had already met him before at the UFC. And then we were in Italy. I was with my family and he was with his family. And he sat down. We were sitting down and we were right across. I go, oh, look at that picture. Matt Damon. And then literally Matt Damon walks in and sits right under the picture of Matt Damon. Like, oh, hey, Matt. He's like, hey, what are you doing here? It gave me big hug. And obviously, but this is so meta. Jiver See, so strange. To like look at a photo of a guy on the wall and go, oh, I know him. Yeah. That's Matt Damon. And then he comes in and sits right there. Right after you say it. It's so funny. What the odds. That's so funny. What are the odds? Jiver See, uh, Jiver See Auto Focus, the Bob Crane movie. Yes. Look right, can you put a crazy movie. I love that movie. That movie's crazy. Do you think the guy killed him is bunny? Yes. I do. I do. It seems like it. I do. I think so. But that's when they show how he would get laid on the road. Crazy. He would wait for the reruns of Hogan Tiro's to be on TV and then he'd sit in front of the television. He knew when they were on. And there's that scene where he tells the bartender and he goes, could you put on channel 22, whatever. She puts it on and he's sitting under it and then the hot chick comes up and she goes, oh, my God, is that you? And he goes, oh, how embarrassing. I'm going to do it. Oh, back then you got to think Hogan Tiro's first of all. How much has society changed and how much more sensitive have people gotten when you think that Hogan Tiro's was a show about a Nazi concentration camp and it was a comedy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It was a comedy about prisoners of war that were captured by the Nazis. Yeah. And they made like they had like lovable Nazis. Bumbling, buddies. Nobody died. The show was on for like five years. Nobody died. No. How many seasons did Hogan Tiro's go? In 68 episodes, six seasons. God. There. I don't think he had been so sick seasons and no one died. They didn't kill anybody. Yeah. How many people died on Hogan Tiro's run that through our AI sponsor perplexity. Yeah. How many people died during World War II in a Nazi prison? Not a one. Not a one. Nobody got tortured in six years in 148 episodes. Yes. Yeah. It's so insane. Do you think they get into a little bit of this in the movie, but they play it down? But do you think there was a lot of pushback? Do you think there was like the, they were like, what are you fucking crazy? We can't make this show. This is nuts. Or was it just that? In the movie was their pushback? I don't remember. There's a little bit where he's like, it's kind of crazy. Almost nobody dies on screen or as a plot event in Hogan Tiro's. It was a broad. Pushback, I don't remember. There's a little bit where he's like, it's kind of crazy. Almost nobody dies on screen or as a plot event in Hogan's Heroes, it was a broad comedy and the regular hero's Hogan, clink, heroes, clink, Colonel clink, Schultz, the fucking Nazi guard, he's a hero. And the prisoners survived the series. The notable fictional death of Major Wolfgang Hoshdeter, who was reportedly killed during an allied bombing raid in the Commandant Dies at Dawn, the title's misleading, Colonel clink is not killed. So the practical answer is one named, reoccurring character with occasional unnamed wartime casualties implied rather than shown. Yeah. Who's a nobody died? Obviously. That's, clink was like, remember I see nothing? He saw nothing. He was always like, I gotta get out of here. I see nothing. Like they're all plotting fucking, devious things to try to get back to the guards. And he was like, I see nothing. It's like having a show where the clan connects people. And then the clan has like kind of fun. The black guys are like, breakdancing, the clans having a good time with them. Yeah. The closest I've ever seen to it is Tarantino and Django when he makes the clan seeing funny. When they're all kind of dumb. Do you remember that scene? I don't remember that scene unfortunately. There's a scene with the clan and they're, I think Jonah Hill has a cameo in it. And they're all kind of dumb. And it's like funny dialogue with the clan. You're like, I don't know how he just pulled this off, but he did. The scene with the bag is what they're trying to talk about. Like my wife made mine. Oh, yeah. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Well, my point was that if you go back to that year, like what year was Hogan's year? Was it the 70s? 65 to 71 is when I'm... 65 to 71. Okay. Being on television was a very new thing. Oh, yeah. Very new thing. A sitcom star was a very new thing. It was only at the most, what, two decades old? How old is the honeymooners? What year was that? Honeymooners are the early 50s, I believe. Right? I think. And it was a spin off of the Gleason variety hour, whatever the fuck that was called. Yeah. Just sketch they did. 55? Yeah, it's only on TV for a year. What? Yeah. What year did start? Because originally aired from 55 to 56. Wow. That's the thing. The honeymooners are something one season? So I have both honeymooners box sets, because I love the show. I have nine episodes. 39 episodes in one season. That's a lot. The main box set is called the classic 39, because that's all the episodes that weren't sketches on the show or anything. He did 39 episodes, and he was like, we did it. It's done. It's like, nobody does that now. Right. Seinfeld did it, and Ricky Gervais does it. He does three seasons, and he goes, that's it. They did 39, and it was a massive success, and they were like, you have to do more of these. And he's like, no, we did it. We have nothing left to say. Really? Yeah. And then they did reunion shows in ship, but like, that was it. That's wild. That's wild. He went on to do all kinds of other shit, though. He went, he was in the hustler in 62. He played a serious role in a so-to-fast. Yeah. He was like the only guy that's ever been in a movie about a pool player. That was a real pool player. Like, he could fucking play. Like, you watch him play in the movie. Like, oh, okay. That's a real pool player. Like, the way he strokes the ball. He strokes the ball like a pro. He could run like, I think he ran like 75 balls in straight pool. It might be 100. But like, 100 balls is like the number. If you could run 100 balls in straight pool, people are like, that guy's legit. He's, he can run 100 balls. Yeah. You know, and he could do that. Gleason was an incredible team. That's interesting. Kind of interesting about the show. The, the sketches were over 35 minutes or more. And the writers felt restricted by the half hour format. Wow. So that partially had something that also had a contract issue too. So they felt restricted, but because they didn't have enough, they had a one more time to, it said it was too slapstick and fast paced according to TV guide. Huh. Look at this. He had $7 million left on his contract in 1956, which is crazy money. The excellence of the material could not be maintained. I had too much fondness for the show to cheapen it. Wow. I mean, that is baller shit back there. Like that is not something people were doing back there. Or he's, he just got lazy because you're so much money. He was like, yeah, he had it out. The CBS was going to give him a three year contract for what would have been $132 million today. He was going to get close to like a million dollars in episode. Wow. He's crazy. A million in episode back then. It was close today. No, no, no, no. Like what today is. Oh, what today is. I forget where it was on here, but. But even that's like kind of unheard of when Seinfeld, when it was announced, they were all going to get a million in episode. I remember that was like groundbreaking. It was like, this has never been done before. Right. Whatever. This guy was offered the equivalent of that back in 56. And said now, I'm good. I probably already had so much money. And he was drunk all the time. Yeah. That guy drank all the time. Yeah. He was so fun. Did you ever watch his final interview? Yes. Yes. Yeah. He's in the tracksuit. Just changed smoking. Oh, yeah. Didn't give a fuck. Yeah. Tracksuit trains. Wow. He's making $839,000. Now the equivalent. Right. He had to pay for production costs. It says, oh, that's different. Yeah. Oh, okay. Art Kinding, Carney received $3,500 a week, which is $42,000 a week now. Audre Meadows, $2,000 a week. Wow. Women got fucked over back then. No, but Jackie Gleason Enterprises is running the show. So I mean, yeah. He fucked her over. It's what I'm saying. Oh, she got two. Art Cardi got fucking almost twice as much as her. God damn. She was his wife. Yeah. She got residuals. What? Yeah. Reportedly only cast member to receive residuals when the regular broadcast. Oh, because they had a change that shit later. Yeah. That's where those strikes and the writer's union and the sag, all that stuff, but he plays a part. Because I got residuals for news radio. And they're not what you think they are. Like people think it's going to change the life you never have to work again. That's only for the people like Jerry Seinfeld that own the show. Yeah. The regular people that get residuals, it's nice. It's a good thing. But it makes sense. They're showing the fucking show over and over and over again. It's still your work. Yeah. It does make sense. You're reselling it. So it's not the original deal that you had to put it on NBC for one hour. Now it's like a thing where you're going to sell it again. And so all the actors get paid again. It makes sense. Dude, I've told you this before. I'm going to tell you again. So it's documented. And I know you're not that interested. But you need the fucking key backing, dude. You're fucking great on that show. That is not easy. I, in my opinion, multi cam sitcom, despite it being the easiest job in show businesses far as payment time versus reward. It is the hardest type of acting because it is an acting where you have to land jokes and gags and you have to make it convincing. That is very, very, very hard to do. You are so fucking good on that show. And I watched news radio all the time still. I told you last time I was here. It got me through. It was one of the things it got me through COVID was doing news radio in front of back. You need to keep that. That's very nice of you. Thank you very much. But I think your idea of what's very hard to do and my idea was very hard to do or two totally different things. Because acting on a sitcom is easiest fuck. OK. It's so, it's so full and harder. You know what? You know, this is Joe D'Rosa in the green room with the mothership. You know what? How many times do you have to say that? I call it the green room. You're all fucking. I'll go after you did it. You walk funny. You look diseased. It's just that stuff. It's fucking easy. If you're a comic, it's easy. If you're used to doing stand up in front of a live audience, that's a lot harder. And then the acting, they give you, especially if you're working with great people. You know, I was doing scenes with Dave Foley and Maura Tierney. And all those, they were amazing. The cast was incredible. Kathy, excuse me, Vicki Lewis and Danny Dick, Candy Alexander. But I will say the route. They were incredible. I will say this to you, though. The fact that what you just said, it's easy is why I think you should be doing it. I think you are a natural fucking actor. And I think you're, I've just pretend, dude. It doesn't matter. Listen, it's not, I've never done Daniel Day Lewis acting. That's like the real act. Val Kilmer acting. Right. In tombstone. That's real act. I think you could. I don't know how to do it. Well, that's interesting. That's just another life. I've had another life. I love movies. I fucking love movies. You know what's a great show? It's a great show. It's called Lucky. It's on Apple. It's a, but what is that lady's name with the big guys? Yeah, I'm not gonna accept this. She's really beautiful, but very unusual looking. What is her name again? Anna Taylor Joy, is that her name? Like so. She was in the Queen's Gambit. She fucking killed it in the Queen's Gambit. On ya. On ya. Don't show them the witch, right? Did she in that too? I think that was her first movie was the witch. I didn't watch the witch. No one in my family will watch it with me. I want to watch it. I'm a giant Robert Eggers fan. I think he fucking murdered Noss Farado. I think it was the best vampire movie by far of all time. Noss Farado was dope. The lighthouse was dope. It seemed the werewolf. The werewolf trailer that's coming out? Okay. Don't you okay, Meeves? I have. I have. Don't you okay, Meeves? Son of a bitch. Here's what I will say. What the fuck are you gonna say? I love Robert Eggers. I'm not knocking it. But it's the fourth movie he's released. We're in the trailer. I see black and white footage and a lot of people twitching. Oh my God. What do you need? That's what I'm looking for. I'm like, all right. I just come on bro. I don't know if it's gonna be different. This looks phenomenal. Yeah, it's it's phenomenal. Of course he's twitching. He's turning into a werewolf. There's fuckers wrong with you, bro. There's no world where it'll be a bad movie. No world doesn't exist. That guy knocks it out of the park. A plus every movie. The worst. The Northman. Have you seen that? I did. Fuck. You didn't love that? I didn't love that. Get out of this room. No, go home. You stop. Go home. You're everybody about your special. He's son of a bitch. How could you not like the Northman? I want it more battles. Oh, it was perfection. A plus. You know what took me out of the Northman? You know what took me out of the Northman? What? You being a pussy? No. Take it easy. Fuck. No. I'll tell you what took me out of it. The cold kid been having full plastic surgery in 1650 or whatever. It was taking me out of it. It was fucking it. Let me see what you look like back down. On your tail, I'm joyous in this movie too. Is she? She's in the Northman? Of course she is. She rules. I think Edgar does great work. Edgar is excuse me. That was great work. Oh, dude. He's the best. I think he's my favorite director of all time. Next to Tarantino. Tarantino's always going to be number one. But this guy's, because I feel like there's levels to movies and I think Tarantino's. He's the undeniable peak of the mountain and then everything else is pretty dope. Of course, he's got some murder. He's got some killers. Of course. But what if those guys have a few lemons? Well, I mean, you're gonna have some lemons when you went. I mean, Scorsese's output is incredibly high and it's like, of course, you're going to have a few duds. Well, this is one of the reasons why Tarantino's the goat is because he figured out how I have no lemons. Other than death proof, which Tony loves, we are you about it all the time. So I don't see plastic surgery in the cold kid. They showed her for a second. Yeah, it's so good. I think she's in the trailer a lot. That was a good idea. Let me see Nicole Kidbin and that was a long movie. That was a long time ago this movie, right? That's probably the Northman pre-COVID, I think. I think so. I think it's like 2017 or 18. Does that say Jamie? I'm amazed with Robert Eggers that he gets wide release theatrical releases with the types of movies he does. I think it's because they sell. They fuck it, sell dude. I mean, they're so good. They're so good. People love them and they go to see them. I mean, that's really that simple. It's where it was in Jamie. Four years ago. Oh, really? That was only four years ago. Oh, sure. It's pretty crazy. I thought it was so cool. I thought it was so cool. I thought it was so cool. I'm see if you could find a photo of Nicole Kidbin from that. And I'm obviously not saying the movie's bad because Nicole Kidbin had plastic surgery, but it did. It does take me out of it when I see somebody doing a period piece with, see, that doesn't look like plastic surgery to me. She looks totally normal. Maybe it's just because I remember. Maybe you just wanted to have plastic surgery because you're a hater. I'm not shitting on the coke. She's gonna be a little bit of a hater. She looks perfect. She's got a, yeah. What are you saying? It works. It's a little work. It's a little work. I don't see work, dude. I see a beautiful face. You son of a bitch. Fuck as normal. Don't you go. So down there when she's with Anya Taylor Joy. Right there. That's her right there. So that, that looks a little fillery. Unfortunately, that look I think is gone away though. I think ladies are realizing that nobody likes it. No. The filler face. Did you see a trailer for this thing? The Narrow Manster? No. So what's this? The nerds are super pumped. This is like the story where like the Matrix. The Matrix came out of this. So I had to take me a TV show actually. It's not even a movie. Wait, how do you mean the Matrix came out of it? Like the ideas of like the jacking in and stuff like that. Yes, who wrote that book? I'd top my head from 1984. William Gibson. William Gibson. Yeah, this is supposed to be a movie that people were concerned was like impossible to try or a book rather that people were concerned with it impossible to translate into a film correctly. OK. I don't know why because I haven't read the book, but I've read that argument like there's no way you're ever going to really need to go with it. I'm just jacked in and now he's like in some new space, which I don't think I haven't read it either. I don't know. It's no spoiler alert or anything. I don't know much about it, but people are very pumped that they've attempted this and it looks cool. But wait a second. Did the Matrix just take all of its ideas from this? No, here. I'll all find out what I mean when I said that. OK. Lucky. Watch this so lucky. It's on Apple TV. It's only as seven episodes and it's only going to be one season, I think. I just started watching the shards, which I'm feeling. The term cyberspace came out of that book and then there you go, a consensual hallucination experience daily by billions of authorizer topics. The Matrix actually itself, I think, came out of there. Ooh. Well, that's common. That's common. He was ahead of his time. He figured it out. So now this is a weird thing. OK. And this is a thing you notice with these directors that break through and do an amazing first movie and then it's kind of followed by a lot of hoham stuff. You mean the Matrix? Yeah. Well, the Wakowski's, the Matrix was this cultural phenomenon. It changed everything and blah, blah, blah, blah. Their movies after that, except for maybe V for Vendetta, none of them really ever lived up to that. So now we're seeing this. And I'm like, well, did they just get all the great ideas for the Matrix from this other thing? And then they made a great movie. And then that's why they were never able to hit that again. Every Matrix sequel is terrible. They're literally jacking in the same exact way through the back of the head. Yeah. It's the same thing. And they're saying the term the Matrix came out of the, that's crazy. I'm like, I thought they made that up like that. You know, they got sued too, because some lady wrote, I think it was a graphic novel. It might have been a short story or graphic novel. I forget what it was. But she wrote a story and brought it to them, apparently. Well, she also said she wrote the Terminator for both of them. So is she just a cooc? That's a cooc. The manuscript titled the third eye from 1980s. And she, yeah, I saw this story. I remember when, yeah. Let me, let me tell you why she's a cooc. Harlan story? Well, because he mentioned the Terminator. Harlan Ellison wrote an episode of The Outer Limons called Demon with the Glass Hand. Harlan Ellison sued James Cameron when the Terminator came out. And he goes, that's my fucking story. I did it on The Outer Limits in the 60s. And Harlan Ellison got paid. And they were like, yeah, it's actually kind of the same thing. So this lady did not write the Terminator in the 80s. Well, it could be multiple influences. But it could be multiple inspirations, right? It could be. The worst one is, and I'm a fan of it. Because if Leslie just, we're not accusing anyone of realizing it. But we're saying if someone was going to plagiarize, why wouldn't they plagiarize for multiple sources? You can't just say, just because he stole a giant chunk of it from that one episode of a show. It doesn't mean that he didn't steal a bunch of other stuff. And I'm not saying anybody's stolen. Right, right. I don't think James Cameron stole it. God damn it. I don't think he saw it. I think he saw it. He might not have even seen it. There's a lot of parallel thinking when it comes to this concept of AI and robots being like people. It's in battle-starchalactical. Sure. You know, I mean, it's like there's a lot of that. where people become robots. It's in the original Alien movie, 1979, remember? There's a fucking artificial intelligence that is their guy that they don't know as a robot until it has a, I think they beat it to death. I think how do they find out that it's a robot? It's, I think they kill it. They knock its head off. And that's how they find out it's a robot. Blanket on the act. It's, it's, it's, um, oh God. The guy's a great actor. He's one of my favorites, and I'm blanket on his name. So this is 79 that they did that. Right. So that's the Terminator. Like these concepts have been around for a long time. The concepts of artificial intelligence taking over. I think it was more the plot line of this, this robot comes back. Oh, in time? It was something like that. Oh, and I don't think James Cameron stole it. Because there's no other evidence of him ever swiping something. But I do think like we all do this thing where we see something. We don't remember if it goes into the subconscious. And maybe you go, I got a great idea and you're not realizing, oh, actually, that's a thing I saw when I was 10. He's pretty intensely creative. Like an original. I don't, I don't imagine that he would do that. Oh, and I haven't hoped that. I don't think so. But Harlan Ellison did win the, the case. Interesting. Um, but I know how much you got paid. How much did Harlan Ellison get for that? The lawsuit, did they disclose it? Or did they pay him just a shot? Oh, fuck up. Well, Ellison is, I mean, he is everybody's, everybody's a little sci-fi. He's their favorite sci-fi guy. Really? He is a guy. Bold statement. He's the guy. Ellison is the guy. You, you should read up on Harlan Ellison. You would love. Probably should. There's not enough time to consume all the things. Yeah. There's so many things to consume. Yeah. Despite ended out of court settlement. There you go. Rather than a court ruling on what, so they just paid him to shoot the fuck up. So they probably gave him a, that check. Yeah, there it is. Soldier and demon with the glass hand. Involved combatants from a future war arriving in the president, including a relentless futuristic soldier sent to kill. Ellison argued that the Terminator borrowed this course set up. Commentators often mention his outer limits episode demon with the glass hand, but Ellison himself reportedly, uh, said his principal claim concerned soldier, not that episode. So it seemed like it wasn't maybe there was more than one thing. Hmm. Either way, um, you could, you know, it's like every werewolf movie is a guy gets bit by a werewolf. Sure. You know what I mean? Sure. You could say no one can make a werewolf movie anymore because of the wolf man because you're you're all stealing from the wolf man. Well, I think the difference is that's where with mythology. Right. That's true versus, you know what I mean? That's true. Yeah, of course. I mean, that's, yeah, but bad example. The son of an original story, but you would love Harlan Ellison because he was just, I'm sure my favorite story is he talked about when he was in college and he goes my, my literary professor said I had no talent. So I got expelled because I punched him in the throat. He's a maniac. Oh, man. Yeah. How many bad teachers have ruined the kids future? They tell them they have no talent. Yeah. How many? It's nuts. So many. There's so many stories like that. So many stories of some shitty teacher. It's nuts. Did you have, when you were getting into, well, well, how old were you when you said I'm going to go do comedy? I'm not going to do any of the shit that I studied in school. I'm going to actually. Well, I barely studied in school. I only went to school because I didn't want to be a loser. Right. I went to UMass Boston like the continuing education program. So I didn't have to take my SATs. I only went for three years. I was wasting my time. And the whole time I was doing it, I was fighting. And that was my primary concern. That was what I was thinking about. And I was teaching at Boston University. Oh, you mean like ever-made fighting? Okay. Okay. Okay. Gotcha. And that was my concern. I really was the, but you tell people, you know, what do you do? Oh, I'm a Taekwondo fighter. Fucking loser. You fucking loser. You fucking loser. I've told it to me. I would not tell people that I did. I'm going to school. I'm going to UMass Boston. That was literally, that's what I was doing. Oh my God. That's so fucking fun. I do. Four-time state Taekwondo champion for all of the country. I didn't know that. Yeah. I knew you had fighting in your background. Yeah, I knew you were champ and stuff. That was really good when I was young at Taekwondo. That was really good. What made you switch gears from that to go into comedy? Well, first of all, there's no future in it. There was no future. I tried out for the Olympics in 88. I made it to the Nationals. I won the States and I went made to Nationals. I made to the third fight in the Nationals and how lost. That was in Miami in 88. And then I realized like I wasn't as enthusiastic about it anymore. Oh, yeah, you got extra cigarettes. Thank you. Look at that. Here. I knew you might want some. I'm not sure for everybody. Yeah, yeah. And then I was also getting brain damage. And I was very aware of that. I would lie in bed at night after sparring. And my head would be ringing. Just thought of the robbing. Just boom, boom. Jesus Christ. I was like, I'm doing this for free. There's no money in this. I'm not making any money. Holy shit. Yeah. I was sparring a lot, especially kickboxing sparring. I was getting hit a lot. It was a lot of kickboxing wars. And it was just not worth it. It was just not. And I was realizing like I got to get out before I become that guy at the gym. Because there were some guys that I had met. And then I'd watch them deteriorate a little. During the time that I knew them, and I was training with them, I watched their personalities change. I watched them get slower. I could see their movement was compromised. Because they got brain damage. They've been knocked out a few times. And I was realizing like, oh, this is a real problem. And no one seems to be thinking about it. Everyone's pretending it doesn't exist because they just want to be a tough guy. And they just want to fight and win. It becomes the thing you do. And the thing you do is that the only thing you know. And if that thing is bowling, then you bowl every night. If that thing is golf, then you golf every day. If that thing is fighting, you're fighting all the time. And it was by the time I was also realizing, there's no future in this. I'm not going to ever have any money. I'm always going to be poor. I'm always going to be wondering where my next paycheck is coming from. This is no money in this. And there was no UFC back then. And I got talked to him to do and stand up on my friends. And that's literally how it started. This episode is brought to you by Black Rifle Coffee. The only coffee we drink here at the JRE studios. America's 250th birthday celebration may be over for some brands, but not for Black Rifle Coffee. They've celebrated America since they're founding in 2014 and continue supporting the communities that make America strong. Last year, they eliminated $34 million in veterans medical debt that's real relief to families who serve our nation. And this year, they're doing it again, aiming to eliminate even more. Beyond financial support, Black Rifle lives its mission. Every month, they send their employees to support initiatives by the boot campaign, folds of honor, and others, giving back to veterans, first responders, and their families. Every bag, box, or can directly supports that mission. You can grab killer hosts like just black. That's my favorite, Spirit of 76 or the extra caffeinated wake in the neighbors at Walmart. Your local Black Rifle coffee shop, or if you're in Texas, at H.E.B., veteran founded American roasted, Black Rifle Coffee is America's coffee. And then that was it. I mean, you moved fairly fast, right? Through stand up. Well, see, I did half hour comedy hour, MTV half hour comedy hour. I was like five years in, five years in the stand up. And then I got on the television show, Hardball. The show I did with Jim Brewer. Yeah. Did that flew out here, or flew out to California rather. And that got canceled after six episodes. And then I got news radio right away. So I only auditioned for two shows ever. Wow. Hardball and news radio. And I got bold of them. It was the luckiest streak of all time. No acting, I took a couple of acting classes that I had to take when Disney gave me the money. The first development deal that said, do you know how to act? I'm like, I don't know. No, why are you guys giving me money? It made no sense. They just wanted to put me on a sitcom. And you know, this was in the 90s when sitcoms was like, Roseanne and Seinfeld. It was a gold mine. If you could find a personality that you thought was someone who would click on a sitcom that people would want to watch, you know, every Tuesday night or whatever it was, they were there willing to pay you a lot of money. And then all of a sudden, I was out in LA, but it was never a desire of mine. So because it was not a desire of mine, I didn't get nervous. I didn't get nervous during auditions. I was not a thing where I was like, those could change my life. This could get it was like, what am I doing here? What is this? What am I doing here? It's, you're good at it. That's what your fucking doing there, man. It's not hard, dude. It's again, it's not real acting. It's not, you know, Marlon Brando. It's just, you're just pretending that this thing is happening in the newsroom. It's not hard. It's fucking easy. I mean, the meantime, I'm doing a jujitsu. I was still sparring back then. So I'd go to the jet center and kickbox and it's spar. And so I'd go to work. I'm like, this is so easy. This is so easy. We can't compare to stand up and kickboxing. And did you know this? When you said you were noticing damage happening because of your head throbbing and ringing with him, did you notice any other effects or did you cut it off before any effects could actually, you know, like, actual things that were affecting you? No, I didn't notice anything like I was compromised or I couldn't think well or I was forgetting things. It wasn't like that. I think I cut it off before I got that bad. But I definitely got some brain damage, 100%. And I think it plays a part of my impulsiveness. In my, I like scary things. I like things that make me nervous. I like things that are really hard to do. And I think it might be part of that. And that I got rattled a bunch of times in my formative years. Yeah. It's because from 15 to 21, who knows how many times I got hit in that? It's a lot. We're very different in that way. You're a guy that I think very much likes the conquering the challenge, you know? Well, it keeps me sane. That's what keeps me sane. I think you make the voluntary things that you engage in that are way more difficult than the rest of your life. It makes the rest of your life easier. Because these hard things that you do voluntarily, voluntary adversity, force yourself to do hard things all the time. So then when other things that are seemingly hard come up, you're like, ah, this ain't shit compared to a cold plunge. So, this ain't shit. I just did a workout, a hypoxia workout. And so it's that I have a box in my studio that goes to, it takes all the air out. So it puts you at the equivalent of 15,000 feet above sea level. And you do this interval training. So you do sprints on the air-dine machine. You get off of that and you do these kettlebell, cleans and presses or swings. And you get off of that and then you do the sled. And you push the sled or you do backwards on the. You get off of that and you do these kettlebell cleans and presses or swings and you get off of that And then you do the sled and you push the sled or you do backwards on the sled and it's got varying resistance And you do them in these 50 second 40 second and then 30 second sprints So like everything else is easy. God, I can't I admire it. I admire the shit out of it. Well, it's just for me I think everybody should do something hard. It keeps it keeps me saying for me. I need it I don't know, you know, I'm not other people. I don't I don't Pretend to know how they feel but I know how I feel if I don't exercise regularly I have more anxiety. I don't feel comfortable. I don't feel good. I'm more irritable. I don't like it I don't like that feeling when I am like when I work out really hard and I do the things that I'm supposed to do I feel great. I feel friendly. I'm feel happy. I feel light. I feel like life is easy Yeah, it's it's a thing. I'm not I'm not blown smoke. It's a thing. I've noticed about you You're you're very I would even say happy go lucky kind of guy like you're you're very friendly You're always in a very good mood. I'm very rarely seeing you and I see you frequently now at the club very rarely seeing you come in where you're like Fuck like I don't think ever to be honest with you And it's I guess everything you're saying like it It's a choice to feel like that that that don't do you any good unless you're trying to do something with that Fuck this if let's let's you've got some shit you have to get done That's hard and you want to have this attitude where you're gonna attack it like fuck this like regular life Like why why why why upset why why you're not in Gaza? What are you doing? You're not you're not in Ukraine. How are you gonna fucking bunker? What are you talking about yeah, what are you bitching about yeah? You live in an easy life in America in your rich right like what how dare I be upset? Sure how dare I sure imagine sure with the the fortune the luck that I've had in this life help me being pissed off at things That's why it doesn't bother me and people talk shit about me. They're like okay Like talk that shit you have fun You could teach remember when YouTube was doing those master classes where like a guy would sit down It like Steve Martin would be like I'm gonna teach you how to do right comedy or whatever and David Mamet did one on writing or whatever You could do a master class on YouTube in how to let the shit roll off your back Because I am astounded at how much it does not bother you when people are releasing clips and talking ness and bullet it's all bullshit whatever and you're just like yeah Not yourself out yeah, you can't stop people from having an opinion There's always gonna be people that have an opinion and then in this market of hot takes There's always gonna be people and their opinion is Negative opinions are more valuable in terms of the commodity of attention attacking someone being you know calling someone out It's more valuable in this commodity. Yes, and then there's people that have legitimate differing opinions of me And they you know they don't like this and they don't like that And all the guy said this or they don't like this person that I had on What am I supposed to do address all of it even think about it? I police myself as much as I can believe me if I fuck something up I'm mad at me more than anybody's mad at me right so that way I get it out on my own I don't need a lot of external validation. I don't need any. I'm not interested in that I'm interested in doing the best I can and I hope people like it and that's it I Wait The little shit gets me man. I know it does I get like you need an outlet Joe DeRosa You need a physical outlet to calm your mind. Yes. That's you need you get a trainer Just hire a trainer. We talked about this. We have been talking about it get a trainer Yeah, because you're not gonna do it on your own get someone who you show up three times a week and They put you through the paces and a smart trainer will do it nice and slow So the first few workouts and won't even be that hard you leave there. You'll feel like energized You won't feel exhausted you'll feel like all right. I did a little something feel good and then he's like okay Where there's a process you know we're gonna we're gonna keep ramping this up slowly But surely but you're never gonna be like oh my god I can't fucking move. I went to my fucking trainer. He's killing me my back is killing I can't get off the couch No, no, no, no good trainer is gonna look at you Ask you how what even doing was last time you worked out how often you do? Okay, let's start here and they'll start you off with some simple body weight stuff They'll put you through some different mobility Exercise is different stuff to just get them get the joints lubed up get everything moving and then build your body up nice and slow Yeah, my boy Chuck You know Chuck Mexican OT's dad Chuck. Yes, he chuck right when you and I talked about you when you were like you should get a trainer Chuck said to me Unprompted he goes Joe. Let me train with you dude and take him up on yeah, and he goes he goes I'll come to your apartment Go come to your part. Yeah, yeah, take him up on it. He knows what he's doing and he said everything you just said he goes We're gonna go slow. It's not gonna be this overwhelming thing because I get overwhelmed easily obviously and I was like Chuck It's gonna be too much and I'm gonna start and he goes we're not gonna do that we're gonna take it really slow Let me just come to your place whatever and so I think I'm gonna start doing it with them because I just need to If you go to the wrong trainer There's some trainers out there that are me heads or they don't really know what they're doing and they'll beat you down and they're like Fuck push it today like no no no no no you can't push it when someone doesn't work out When someone doesn't work out you go nice and slow nice and easy and then you slowly build up to the point We could push it right you don't take a fucking Prius and you drive it around the racetrack sideways right? It's not designed for that the That suspension is gonna fall off the wheels are gonna there's no traction you got no tires Right you're gonna have to build up everything yeah, and then once it gets built up then you can push it So once you get in look at jelly roll jelly roll lost literally almost 300 pounds Which is crazy? Now he's running on the treadmill He did six miles when we came in to do a podcast. We're all working out together And he's fucking running on the treadmill while we're talking we're talking he said he can breathe He can talk and he's running in a good clip gotten the sauna with me did the whole thing When I first met him he's 500 pounds. Yeah, yeah, could barely make it up to the stairs to the comedy club He couldn't couldn't walk up the stairs now He's fit now. He's healthy. He runs all the time. Yeah, so it's just a process of building to get to that place like He did that show Makana has this benefit every year and we went to the benefit and He performed at the benefit and he's on stage and we were backstage watching it and so we're like in the me and Tony and his girl My wife were in the corner watching this jelly gets off stage and there's a railing like a ramp to get off He grabs the railing and hops over it and lands on the other side I go dude. Do you know what you just did? I go you used to be 500 pounds Yeah, and now you just jumped over that railing like a cat. That's why it was amazing. That's why it was so happy He's like this crazy. Oh, it's crazy look what you've done That's why that's what you have to do You have to and it took him years and that's how you have to do it It has to be slowly but sure but along the way you'll feel better every step of the way It's not amount it's not about breaking your body down. It's about slowly introducing movement and some physical exercise and then building upon that ten push-ups in a day Then the next day you try 12 and then a week later you're doing 15 and then two weeks after that Maybe you can do 20 in a row or three weeks a month two months whatever it is You've everybody's got their own timing body weight squats very simple start with ten no big deal Get to 90 degrees pack up just just enough just to get the blood moving Walking is fucking great. You know, it's really great walking with a weighted vest not that hard to do put a 20 pound vest on 25 pound vest on a walk-run block. Yeah, it's fucking great for you Yeah, there's a lot of different things that you could do that don't crush you and then You're just gonna feel a little better. You'll have a little bit of more, you know, vitality more blood flow and Then you build upon that. That's the key. I was building slow I was doing three days a week and it was getting better and better and better and then and end of the summer hit August hit I started going on the road again and All of a sudden starts to taper off because you're like now I got a fly on this day When I'm usually doing my thing and never and I got lazy and I got to get back into it I gotta get back into it But the good thing is this with what you're saying with the slow build when I start again I'm able to start where I stopped. I'm able to start there again You know what I mean right rather than where you began exactly. That's great. Yeah, that's listen man It's all about momentum discipline is very important But really momentum makes discipline a lot easier You know, it's like you say oh, you've got really good discipline like Sorta I got I got started and once you get started It's more about momentum than it is about discipline right and then it's also about writing things down If you just write it down you have to do it right you write it down and make a check that way instead of like keeping this thing in my head Oh, I'm just gonna figure out my own workout. I'll do this. I'll do that. No I have a whiteboard I write down on the whiteboard. This is what we're doing and then you just do it Yeah, I had a list of my phone these are your exercise 20 reps of each of these and I just kept adding Yeah exercise. I don't know a good app But I'm sure there's some out there that a really good workout app that'll vary your workout every day Based upon your level based upon like you know how much experience you have I try it's there can the apps get confusing I try to couple of them There's got to be a good one out there. I just don't know what they are It's a lot of questions that I'm like I don't fucking know Man, that's because they're trying to make it good. They're gonna try to make an app that you know Gives you what you need, but yeah exercise apps Again, there's there's good ones. I'm sure but exercise apps kind of became like dating apps where there's a million that are all saying We're gonna change your life in three days and you're like nothing most important is it's a real good trainer is more important Because he can correct your form in real time tell you why don't do it like that You're gonna hurt your back don't do it like this putting too much pressure on this and that and you know balanced Whatever it is he can get you to do it correctly which is more important than anything When especially once you start actually lifting weights, you know, Pavel Tatsuline who's the He's the guy who really brought kettlebells to popularity in America's Russian cat and Great system of training and but one of the things that he said that really stuck with me said strength is a skill And you just think of strength as a skill Okay, so like when you're working on your skills like like kettlebell cleans and presses you shouldn't be exhausted You should do He does instead of doing it to failure, you know like a lot of people like to work to fail like imagine you can clean and press 50 pounds 10 times until you like really exhausted and on the 10th time you're like kind of cooked Don't do 10 you do five right just do five and then wait a long time wait like five minutes Rest up completely and then do another five Do it that way that's interesting because that way you're always fresh and you're you're working on skill You're still getting the same amount of repetitions, but you're not torturing your tissue You're not taxing your system You're learning it and you're not a taking any shortcuts you're not moving weird You know like leading into something in a weird way you're gonna hurt yourself because you're all out of line You're doing everything with correct form because you're not exhausted Yeah, but you're still getting the same amount of work in the rest time is interesting because I always thought well it like I was doing two different types of push-ups. I was doing the fucking 45 finger spread Down hold up whatever and I could get through 20 of those initially I couldn't and then when I was able to get through 20 I was like holy shit and then I was doing a different push-up with the arms back like this and Those when I got to that I'd hit 10 and I'd be like fuck and Then I'd sit for a minute and then I a minute would go about it But like you got to do the other 10 because if you know if you wait too long I always thought waiting too long was a bad thing, but you're saying no actually rest five minutes Take a breath. There's nothing wrong with it as long as you have the time to do the same amount of reps You just want to get enough work in so your body forces adaptation It doesn't have to be all too failure now again Depends on what we're trying to do right if you're trying to build up muscular endurance Then yeah, you go to failure It depends on what you're trying to do if you're just trying to get stronger That's a different thing and then you know obviously I do different kinds of workouts like the workout I did today This it's all exhaustion stuff. It's all sprinting. It's not like the kettlebell stuff This is all high altitude and it's all like maximum intensity on the airdine bike Maximum intensity on the sled maximum intensity on the kettlebell cleans You're beating yourself up because you're only doing it for 50 seconds and then or 60 seconds 40 seconds and then 30 seconds So it's like I do a bunch of different kinds of exercises But when I would do like strength stuff. I don't ever do it to failure Can you do is there a thing like like some people go the hundred push-ups a day whatever? That's their thing I always wondered well Is it the same if you do a hundred push-ups just throughout the day? 100% 100% 100% 100% If you start at nine and finish at three farmers don't lift hay to failure, right? They pick up a bell of hay they chuck it under the pile They go back to get another one they pick up a bell of hay they chuck it on the pile to go back to get another one They push wheel barrel they fucking hammer a post down They do a bunch of different things they do it all throughout the day But they're never doing anything where they're just very rarely at least where they're lying flat on their back breathing They think they're gonna have a fucking heart attack They never have that okay never get to the point where they're dropping the bell. Hey because their arms are shaking and they're like one more rep But yet they get ridiculously fucking strong Right why because of all the work it doesn't have to be work to failure and in our mind We think oh you have to go to failure in order to get stronger Right again, we're talking about very specific things getting stronger using kettlebells Especially but you could do dumbbells and other things as well if you're now if you're doing something else like if you're trying to get maximum amount of Bench press you're trying to like win a competition or maximum amount of channups you can do Then it's a different thing. We're talking about a different thing But if you're just talking about overall building strength for your body the most important thing is volume I think okay, and it's if you can like I said, I think this Principle that Pavel Tutsilene has is a really good one that instead of doing 10 if you do 10 to failure do five Wait a while do five again, and I think it lessens the opportunity to get injured You're you're much less likely to get injured doing it that way I'm very rarely injured from working out very rare from just kettlebell stuff like very rarely right all right All right You're inspiring me to hop back in and and start doing it again. I gotta I've really just get a somebody to help you You know get Mexican OT's dad. Yeah, get him to help you. Yeah. He knows what he's doing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, that dude's fucking jack Yeah, that's that's perfect guy and he's the weight what he said is the right like he knows what he's doing That's why he's the guy to get you do it nice and slow and just build you up and also he's fun School to hang out with yeah, that you like that too. You don't want to be an annoying trainer. It's always asking you to post about him on Instagram Yeah Man, yeah, do you post I got an energy drink. I'm trying to promote. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You get those DM's Dang Yeah, all right, I'm back. There you go. You're back. I'm back in baby I read the craziest thing today, and I need to find out it was true I sent you the thing that were Nick Fuentes was talking about Jamie So Apparently there was this plot where Iran was trying to kill Trump remember when he was supposed to get in the Air Force one that Caught her gave him and then instead he flew in the old Air Force one Okay, well, they're saying that he actually didn't even go in the old Air Force one that they snuck him out on a truck Okay, like some fucking Cargo truck, okay, and then put him in another kind of plane and flew him out of there And then they put the press in Air Force one because they were think they were apparently worried They were gonna target Air Force one as well. So imagine Trump put the press on Air Force one They were thinking about possibly targeting them. Holy shit He hit an airport catering container and was taken to a military jet for a secret flight out of the country After the NATO summit last month, and this is being reported by the New York Times The thing is though. I think they put the press on Air Force one So if they flew him out was because they were worried they were gonna try to take down Air Force one and they take the press They just take the press off and they know that I know that you're right Games, it's that really normal Exactly and if the press dies so sad You just get more pride That's fucking wild if that's true that is so wild that he didn't even tell them hey guys We're not really gonna get on this plane no one's getting on this plane you guys get out of here Go take American Airlines home No, he's like hop on it safe. Yeah, it's Air Force one guys might gift to you take Air Force one Enjoy it. There's food out there sandwiches on there. Enjoy yourself. Is that absolutely what happened? As reporters on the older plane were not told the mr. Trump had not flown with them from Turkey to an air basin Britain Making them unwitting participants in the ruse and leaving them along with some White House staff members to serve as Unknowing decoys Holy shit. They arrived in Britain. You was secretly moved back to the older version of Air Force one Bro Jesus Christ those press people were signing up for something they didn't know They didn't know what they were signing up for Yes, and they didn't tell them at all that when you want to know like who's more important? You were the president. That's when you find out. Yeah, they just throw you on Air Force one Trump cocktail It's like boom all of a sudden you turn into fucking proton. It's like fucking good fellas when he's telling Karen to go go go Go down the dress No, okay Hairhand, holy shit that is fucking wild. Is that crazy that is fucking wild. Yeah, crazy. Yeah, are they are they is there? Has there been backlash or they are they? Or jamae are they saying anything? Who's saying the press I would imagine they're a little perturbed That would perturb me Jesus Christ That's so crazy. Holy shit. Imagine if it blew up. It's like I should have been there I wanted to be there with them when they died There heroes He would probably talk shit about them. Oh my god. That is funny. Maybe they had written nice of things about me I've told them. Oh my god Did you I just watched them I just watched Michael Michael Jackson movie. How was it? Look, it's the first part of his life up to bad. They don't get into any of the crazy shit They're saying they're making a sequel that they might get into the some of the crazy shit, but it was it was fun I'm a big Michael Jackson I was fun to watch but I started reading up on Michael Jackson afterwards because I was like it just it was very nostalgic to watch Do you know this when he died? He was pronounced dead at Neverland Ranch and they lied to the press and said that he was at a hospital already and pronounced dead Because they had to get the body out of Neverland Ranch and they knew if he couldn't they pronounced him dead It never land ranch. They wouldn't be able to get the fucking body out of the goddamn house Why because they said the press would leak it and the clamoring of fans and whatever else would literally have blocked them from getting the fuck From transporting the body so they had to lie and say he's dead already But he's at this hospital and it was a decoy because that's how fucking famous he was they were like We can't drive his dead body from this location to another or we're never gonna get it there Steel the body I want to get a finger. Yeah, something we kind of finger Yeah, but of garden clippers something trust steel and Here's another crazy thing because I know you've talked about the Michael Jackson Like the conspiracies around his death death on the show before there's another crazy thing. I didn't know He owned, you know, he had that vast music catalog that he bought right of move music publishing Right on the Beatles Beatles Eminem. He bought Eminem Eminem made fun of him in a video and he bought Eminem's fucking catalog is a fuck you The most Pimp move ever I'm gonna buy all your fucking use gangster. Yeah. Yeah, right So He owns this catalog, right? It's it's it's I think he he might have owned Dylan. It was crazy that the the rights to the music that he owns nuts right he's with Sony Sony wants the publishing back on all these artists and he owns it and When he did his last album he had to take out a loan against the record company of 200 million dollars to do the album because he didn't have a lot of money left and they said you got to put up collateral and He goes alright. I'm gonna put up a portion of the catalog as collateral and then he before he died He goes they're not promoting my album and because they're not promoting my album. It's not selling And then everybody close to him said it was a ruse they didn't promote the album on purpose So that he would lose the fucking catalog because he wouldn't be able to pay the loan back and then right after that he died Really fucked up. That's the business. He was in. Yeah, you buy people shit. They fuck you over. That's how it works Yeah, yeah, it's mom man. Well, it's dark playing awards You playing war if they blow up Air Force one you got to go hey, maybe we shouldn't have fucking killed the leader Dermadon this is how it works This is the game we're in this is the business we chose Ins And he's in the business of fucking over his enemies They decided he was there enemy they fucked him over the doctor that administered the drug that killed him is out of jail already Two years and they're like no Sky was just a full guy Well, you know the thing about the doctor is He was asking the doctor to do that the doctor shouldn't have done that Is not only the doctor killed him on purpose like he wanted to get an esitize I think he was so crazy that he couldn't sleep and he was so out of his fucking mind And he was probably on a bunch of stuff he probably wasn't just on propof all if you're willing to take propof all to go to sleep What else do you take it right you're taking some other things? Yeah, right the doctor the one thing that he said that I found Very fascinating was that he said that Michael had been chemically castrated when he was young to maintain his voice I've heard that. Yeah, and it makes sense. It completely makes sense if you look at his body It makes sense His body looks like it's devoid of testosterone. Yes. It has no testosterone. He's very thin if you look at his brothers They're all thick. They're all like big dudes. Yeah, Jermaine. They're all like men. They look like men like thick men Yeah, he looks thin and he looks very different than them. That's not normal. Yeah, that's not normal That is that's not even normal if you don't work out and he was a dancer So he was incredibly athletic right so in all the working out that he did he should have been supple I mean he was obviously he could move so good. I mean he was his movement was incredible Did you ever see that Bob Fosse movie that apparently he got all those moves from the one? Well, okay, so which the many series that Sam Rockwell was in or Jazz there was a movie now before that along earlier and It's Bob Fosse doing all the dance moves that Michael Jackson did I know what movie you're talking about. It's him and like a little kid Dessert and do it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean it's literally all of Michael Jackson's signature dance moves come from this one movie watch this Watch how he moves. Yep So there's this he's doing this, but then he also moon walks like look at this Like all this this is Michael Jackson. Wow. I mean 100% yeah, wow Look at this the kick in the point with the toes and putting it down the movement Yeah, yeah I mean it's it's literally every movie does look at that that that point with the kick in the toes Even the outfit it's a 1974 movie the little prince. Yeah, little prince rather even the outfit with the fedora bro, you know literally he he mirrored his movements It is incredible that Bob Fosse had the stamina and ability To keep dancing like that for his entire life until he dropped that because if you watch the Sam Rockwell mini series Fosse and Virden which is an amazing mini series that guy Bro, he was I mean it was intake. That's all it was he'd wake up. He's pop and fucking pills speed boom boom boom Coke booze cigarettes all day long chain smoking chain smoking smoke with Smith chains with drunk through the whole fucking day pop and pills doing Coke and the fact that he could still stand and not just stand choreograph broadway shows for hours and Be that agile whenever is that's insane to me because he loved it. It's insane. That's the thing find the thing you love Find that thing and you will have the energy to pursue it It's really it but but aren't you aren't you a little maze that that his intake of substance could not would not hinder it It's kind of crazy, you know, but I mean we've seen that before Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I hear you there's there's British people that have Un-unreal tolerances like Shane with with booze. It's unreal. Yeah, when you see him pound 16 Bud lights and not a slur Not a stammer. It's worth nothing doesn't miss a beat Puts the sunglasses on it starts getting crazy like we do protect our parks and he'll have a stack of empties at the end you know like that is insane. You should be dead. You should literally be dead my favorite chain story ever Ever I don't mean to tell his story But this is my favorite chain story ever and I was the other day. I go dude. You have to do that on tires It's so funny. He said he ate chicken fingers And he felt sick and he goes to the doctor because he's like I think I have food poisoning or something Like something's wrong, right? So yes, he goes the doctor goes You know, he's asking all the questions how much do you do this? Whatever he goes how many drinks do you have in a week and Shane said he took a beat and he's like I'm gonna be honest for once and he goes 80 He's so crazy Oh, that's so crazy. He said the doctor starts laughing. He goes no, come on man seriously and he goes 80 and the doctor goes It's not the chicken fingers You drink 80 drinks a week, right? And I go what happened he goes I went home I threw up I was fine the next day. It was the chicken fingers We were at we were at Chappelle's summer camp thing the ranch thing and we're hanging out and I'm about to go on Shango's come on. I have a drink have a drink. I go dude. I already had two man like I gotta go on dude I got to be cool. I gotta be careful like he goes having a drink dude. You'll be fine. I go Shane. I don't want to I don't want to be tipsy He goes what number drink is that for you? I go three he goes I've had 17 Bud lights I have another And I doesn't want to be alone in drunk land He wants you to be there with him in happy drunk. He's a happy drunk though the best. I love him He's so fun. He's such a fun dude He's such such a unique person. He's very different than anybody I've ever met. He's like you would think by look by You hear him you think like he's similar to someone you know, but he's not yeah Unique person. He's very different than anybody I've ever met. He's like you would think by look by you know You hear him tell you you think like he's similar to someone you know, but he's not no different dude fucking smarter shit too knows a fuckload about history loves history loves it man loves history and and yeah, he's a very unique specimen he's and as you said a very fun drink. I was just out of the beach with him and And he was on the beach all day and I was at the house I called it early and I was just kind of chilling out inside with McCusker And Tommy watching a movie We're just chilling and Shane came back from the beach and he was all fucking tuned up from white claws wherever he was drinking And I was laying on this love seat in the room watching the movie and he just kept coming up to me and he's kept tickling me You're awesome. You're fun. It's just he's so fun man. Yeah. He's he's life of the party Him and Joey Diaz in a room together with everybody else is like oh my god You got two enormous personalities life set the party in the room together Diaz kills me He's the best man. He's he's out here all the time now I know yeah I mean he's getting a place here at the end of the month and he's gonna do a residency So he's gonna do like two weeks a month. He's gonna be here. That's awesome. That's fucking incredible It's incredible. He's the best man. He's the fucking best. It's it's so fun having an hour. I was doing the last time He was here. I was doing my monthly my and friend show at the mothership and And he was the first the first comic was on or whatever and he goes he's like Joe Could I go up on your show and I go of course? And he went up and it was just seeing the pop from the audience and just I was like man This fucking great dude. It's fucking fun having him around. We're very lucky Yeah, we're very lucky. We got an amazing group of people around us. Yeah all the time. It's a lot of fun And he said the funny is fucking thing We were talking about like diet and exercise and lifestyle change You know and ah cove it. I was doing too much of this or that it And I go when was your big change man? He goes you know a fucking dad was as Today in a fucking resurrection We know what he goes Fuck in January six to fucking resurrection. We go to me in the answer He goes fuck it was called I don't give a fuck He used to call kabib no my men off collar beep The fucking collar beep guy You know it's part of his charm fucking up people's names. Oh my god. He's so funny the best dude man He lives right near where my parents live in Jersey and I Was like dude man when I go see my folks I'm gonna I'm gonna get in the car and drive up and hang out with you for a night because it'll be such a great break from just being with my mom and dad and He's just the piece the best man. He's just got a truly big hearted dude I was really worried once he moved to New Jersey. We'd never get him out here because I went with him We went out to eat New Jersey and he's the king of New Jersey. I'm like fuck everywhere we go Joey Yeah, cheer yelling his name went to the restaurant everybody knows them this like immediately everybody's like Running over to take care of us. Joey's here. Joey's here. I'm like. Oh, he's the king of New Jersey He's never gonna leave. He's never gonna leave. He loves it here But there wasn't enough comedy there for him. No, what it wasn't enough comics and one thing that I always say is that we don't exist in a vacuum We always exist with each other comics in particular you you can't really Do comedy by yourself you can but you can't do it at your best You need other people doing it around you you need to see it You need to around it the hang To the talking about bits in the green room is so huge Like a son has given me two killer taglines after like seeing seeing a bit and saying what about this my oh my god That's perfect yeah, like those things like we're always like tuning each other shit up or reminding each other of a bit I remember like I remember Tony's bits better than Tony does sometimes right I got to tell him how a bit goes He's like oh my god, I forgot that I might do go do that go do that right now And you went up and did it right then and murdered that's great. I like you forgot if you got the bit. Yeah, it's a it's a very it's a very It's a very individualized sport in the sense of golf where you're playing like you're always playing against yourself But it's a very communal sport in the sense that you're not playing necessarily in a literal sense with the team like like a sketch group would But you're playing with the team. You know what? I mean yeah team is is in the green room the team you're playing with the team in the sense that your buddy is on before you Your buddy is on after you you're all doing sets together and and the game is I gotta play my best game Because I've got to follow the guy that just said a good game And yeah, the guy after me to have a good game so I can't fuck up his game Yes, and it's it's a very interesting dynamic of team versus Individual play this also just the atmosphere elevates you and I noticed that for sure about the comedy store in the glory days And the glory days like 2014 to 2019 when we left oh There was so much activity there. There was so many guys that were going up there so much good comedy That you would just get elevated just being around it like it raised your own personal bar like what your high watermark was and it just you know You're around like guys a really tight acts and it just it really helps helps everybody It's just it's so important to be around other great comics, you know, and that's why these hubs like New York is so great for that LA and now Austin it's like these hubs are so important because you really we go on the road on the weekends Right that was the thing about the store, but on Tuesday and Wednesday were some of the best nights Because on Tuesday and Wednesday it would be Jasselneck Diaz fucking Greg Fitzsimons Dom Ira Over and over a murder's row The sun burr would pop in and maybe Chris Rock was in town. It was like god damn these nights were insane They were so good. I'll tell you The the reason I moved to Austin and the thing that continues to be the greatest Challenge for me here in a in a good way in a constructive way Because people say all the time to me online and shit they'll be like oh you you moved to Austin to for kill Tony I'm like I didn't fuck him with Dossa because I New Tony and I were friends and I had done the show I didn't become kind of a part of that show until after I lived here because Tony started to put me on and we started to have fun And then it grew from there you and I were were buddies, but like we're much tighter as pals now than we were Loma around you all the time exactly. Yeah um So I moved here Primarily for Well number one. I love Austin and I always and I used to live here And I always want to go back and once you could do comedy here It was like a reason to go back right and you could work The other reason was I was Was like I did New York. I did LA. I won a new challenge and there's a new scene now and all that stuff But the thing that puts me on my toes the most And still does is this is the best place for young comics To be able to pursue comedy because they can actually live here. They can afford it New York has become unaffordable LA has become unaffordable A young comic can come here can live Like a human being and pursue their dream And those are the guys that keep me on my turn because you're like dude It doesn't matter if I'm the only guy on this lineup that has done TV or whatever You got five people going up that are fucking swinging for the fences Because when you're young you really are like I got to fucking prove myself You're following even if it's four unknown people they're doing their A Shit they are trying to kill as hard as humanly possible And you're like all right, I guess this I got I got a fucking bring it You know what I mean? There's that and it's also their enthusiasm for it You know and and the thing about Austin is we have a real system at the club that actually develops talent Yes, like we have two nights of open mic nights and we have a real talent coordinator Adam really watches everyone He watches the open mic nights. He gives people advice. He gets them spots. He helps them He gets them on showcase nights. He puts them on he gives them sets gives them feedback and then they get to work all around town There's five other fucking clubs on the same street man. It's crazy dude. You can walk from your place to sunset to the creek to Vulcan black rabbit to Vulcan and Then if you don't mind walking 20 minutes. You can be at Roscoe's East Austin. It's fucking nuts man. It's crazy. And then there's also capsity Which is on the other side of town. It's fucking awesome. Yeah, it's amazing here. Yeah, and you know There's so many young people that have moved here now and then the kill Tony that thing the kill Tony thing is so huge because It's first of all you have one minute You have no room for virtue signaling no room for fucking Claptor shut the fuck up just where's the jokes come come with the jokes and then no one takes it anybody no one's taking them so seriously Everybody's getting cracked on everyone's cracking on everybody. It's very fun. Yeah, it's a fun environment And it's just emphasizing funny. What is funny what makes people laugh? Yeah, and there's a bunch of different styles that do it You know there's a bunch of Different weirdos that go up every week and most of them have no chance But there's some gems that's the thing about having like a true meritocracy Where it all that matters is if you're funny It's it doesn't matter what you look like. It doesn't matter what your background is There's I mean kill Tony is like one of the most diverse lineups You're ever gonna see for all the people to think that Tony's a Nazi. It's kind of hilarious trans people disabled people You know people from all walks alive home literal homeless people have gone stage Started a career because of kill Tony Yeah, literally homeless while they're doing it sleeping in a car and the next thing you know they have a career Yeah, yeah, it's it's it's a truly amazing thing It's you know we just did he just did MSG and I was there and did the show and then and then paddled with Jimmy Carr to tell You know crazy that is that kill Tony sells out Madison Square Garden two nights in a row crazy when I First did it with him we did it in the fucking the belly room Yep at the store and the only people in the audience were like comics There was nobody in the audience. There was like 10 other people maybe dude. I remember Excuse me. I was down here to do so I was when I still lived in New York I was down here to do South by Southwest and Tony hit me up and he goes buddy. Are you in town Monday? I go. Yeah, he goes. He does voice Yeah, he goes buddy. He goes come do kill Tony right? I go okay. I See them in years, you know And the last I saw him I did it in the belly room. Maybe the main where I don't you know whatever But it was at the county sir Dude, I walked into the fucking Vulcan because it was before mothership open. I walked into the Vulcan It was like fucking Thunderdome dude. It was two levels people go like you could feel the excitement Dude, I walked in the green room Tony goes there he is. I go What the fuck is going on? What is going on? I go is it like this every week? He goes it sells out in one minute I go do these people fly and he's like yeah, I was like dude It's broken our ticket our ticket service multiple times Where it's just the the overwhelming demand the people that are trying to get tickets versus tickets that are available is so crazy It crashes the system. That's nuts. We had to like revamp the system multiple times just to deal with the kill Tony sales That's fucking nuts It's not well, it's just because it's so good. It's that simple and if you've gone you want to go again It's so fun. It's it's that moment. It was like in it. Remember casino when Pesci Goes out to Vegas for the first time and didn't arrow goes and this is whatever Sharon Stone's character's name is And then Pesci looks at Sharon Stone. He goes only shit ace. What the fuck you've been doing out here It was that yeah, it was like I saw that crap that crowd was Sharon Stone. Yeah, and Tony was the near-head I go what the fuck you've been doing that here, but the Vulcan really opened up our eyes to the fact that we needed a club and What happened was No one had done any stand up at all for months and then Tony and I did the Houston improv Which was great. It was a lot of fun. We did a weekend. It was in the middle of the COVID It was in July and everyone was scared and I did it and it was a lot of fun I hadn't done stand up in months. It was so much fun But then I started thinking what if I get COVID and give it to one of my fucking guests and kill them It was back when people were really worried. Yeah, yeah I was gonna kill you sure I was like oh no because I have like these people that come in some of them are older Yeah, you know, and I had this lady on who's a scientist and she was older and I was like what if I gave her a COVID and killed her Yeah, cuz that was back in the debt that was also but people were really convinced that you could be asymptomatic and still spread it Which turned out really what was going on was there was a lot of false positives for the PCR to 80 plus percent false positives, right? and so I Said let me just take time off. I don't want to do that. I don't know It feels totally responsible just because I would want to get my comedy fix Let me just ride this out and then we wound up moving to Texas and by the time we moved to Texas it was around November and Dave and I were doing these outdoor shows remember that stops right? Yeah, we're doing shows and stops Which was a lot of fun, but everybody had be tested people out of weight and line You know, it was like it was a big deal and a few people tested positive. We had to kick them out then The Vulcan just started doing shows fuck your tests was just go back to where it was and this is in November and Ron White went up and he hadn't gone up in like eight months and done any stand-up in eight months and he went on stage And the audience went fucking berserk they went berserk like people were standing up and he murdered I mean Ron White just laid it down for 15 minutes I'm sure and then he grabs me by the shoulders off stage goes whatever the fuck we have to do We're gonna keep doing this he goes you got to open up that club And I was like alright, okay, we're gonna open amazing and that was when I decided Mike that's it We're gonna open up a club and then I immediately started looking at real estate immediately tried to find a place Wow, I didn't know that I didn't know that that's how the hole That was it Ron White grabbing me because Ron White is why I moved in the first place So I knew Ron moved here in 2018 and you know me and Ron were talking about the phone He was like I'd love it here and you know He's telling me how great Austin was and everything else was locked down I was like look if I moved to Austin if no one's doing stand-up again ever at least I can hang out with Ron Like sure it'll be a comic that I can hang out with and and live in a place where it's like more relaxed and it's easier to get around Sure, you don't have to wear a mask everywhere It was like it was at least it was more chill here Yeah, even if we never do stand-up again and so him doing that and just grabbing me and saying we're gonna We got a fuck do this whatever the fuck we have to do. That's what he said like who's just on fire coming off stage Just on fire and just grab my shoulders and I was like, okay, we're doing it That's fucking great and that's when I do because I was always we were talking about it We should open up a club where and I looked at a bunch of different places But they kind of sucked and they were trying to fuck me They were asking way too much money for these places like during the in the beginning stages of the pandemic when everyone was moving here For California everyone got crazy with real estate. They got really nutt. Oh, it was it was batshit They got really delusional the prices went up like a hundred percent in a lot of places Yeah, I'm going through it now because I bought a condo here and I'm trying to sell the condo and buy a house and it's Very tricky now because the market has shifted so much and values this way too many condos for sale way too many I'm worried that I'm gonna end up buying this house and not be able to get rid of this goddamn condo. You'll have to keep the condo I Don't have any need for it. I'm like I don't know what I would do with it You know, but I also don't want to live in this condo anymore because originally that's where he takes catchy women Women I think they're gonna run the thing might rob you because I know you you did last sketchy go Take it to the condo have a house where it's like calm and peaceful a little bit off the track Get a little yard, you know get some peace and quiet and take it through a con the kind of shows Why is there only an air mattress in here? How come you only have four pairs on underwear? Yeah, it's not a bad. It's not a bad point. You make a few people my condo I'm coming here. This is a mistake Yeah, this address away once you have people showing up at your house like oh no It's um, it's oh Wait, you were just oh you're you're talking about starting the club. Oh, oh what's so weird? Is it's it's an odd like kind of full circle moment, but when I lived here in 2000 your club was the original Alamo yeah and the Alamo draft house at that time was the only movie theater ever in the country That served food and alcohol during a movie and I Remember that being a place that I went to frequently because I thought it was so amazing that you could get food during a movie and The kinds of movies they played I loved and then on top of it I would I always saw that as the reason that I loved Austin it was sort of just a it was just sort of a A symbol of why I loved Austin the concept of it all and it's so weird now that I've moved back after all these years That that's where the mothership is and now that's my symbol for living in Austin and and being a part of this club and and that club Be getting all these other places that we get to perform in the scene and all that stuff It's a very weird like kind of full circle thing. I didn't realize until right now as we were talking about We need to have a birthday party for the building The building turns a hundred next year. Oh Yeah, we have to have a birthday party for the building. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You absolutely should. Yeah. Yeah. We should do something Lot of history in that building. Well, you know cool shit. You could feel it I felt it when when you never got to be here when it was bare bones But when it was bare bones when it was just the movie theater before we did all the renovations and Raise the ceiling or lower the ceiling and raise the floor and change it and made the tunnel and all the the structure that we put in place When we first got in there like you could feel it It would feel it like baked into the walls mean Steve very Vaughn performed there What was it before the alimony? It was a bunch of different things. So at one point time It was like a punk rock club. Wow, so like black flag performed there Like who's this chili peppers and 80s chili peppers 86 So so that's why all of those Punk flyers are in this green room the green room is all Fliers from people that performed at the club their shows. I didn't know that. Yeah, I thought it was just a cool like decor thing Yeah, that's pretty cool that too, but it's also look at he's got the sock over his cock Rob butthole right in our stage. Yeah, yeah Yeah, all those things on the wall all those different people Willie Nelson all those different people performed there That was their their flyer for the show that they did when they were at the club. There's so many bands on that wall Well, like yeah, I love that band. I love that whole surface. This is yeah, it's tons So it was a punk rock band. I was a punk rock club was a rock and roll club. It was a pool hall for a while It was a newbie movie theater Yeah, amazing. Yeah, and then obviously it became the alimony and then the alma went under I Think before the pandemic it went under and then it was available You know like a year and I looked at it. I was like It's like too much work and and then That was from what year 74 Wow, so that's fat man. Yep. That's what it used to look like Fuck man. I mean it looks different obviously, but it doesn't look that different like you looks a lot more narrow Yeah, it's what I don't understand like what what happened I wonder if it was two rooms back then. I don't know it looks different It looks very different in terms of the like that looks more like it right Oh different one. Yeah, um, yeah, the middle one looks like it Yeah, pull the ritzes. It was us, but the middle one looks more like it go back to that again. Yeah, that looks more like the dimensions Fuck man We fit 250 people in the the big room But I think we could fit a lot more if we have seating like the comedy works in Denver Which I think is the best seat? That's what it looked like when we first got there We first got there. It looked like that and we walked in and we were like holy shit The stage was really high obviously because it was like movie theater sure and the seating was at an angle a very sharp angle like a movie theater And so we had to raise the floor up So it was flat in the center and there's just a slight raise in the back and then we kept those two balconies go back up to that picture Right there those two balconies that we have obviously we have the green or balcony and then the VIP balcony Which is such a dope thing to have yeah Because it's always the always friends that come by that want to want to come by and see the show and you'll always have 40 seats You know you could always get 40 people up there Those balconies fit 40 people totally yeah, holy shit. That's crazy. We always can stuff plenty of people back back up in there That's fucking wow. I had no idea the building was as old as you just said it was Yeah, I had no idea all that other shit was 19 27 Is this still the main room or is this little boy? Those Kansas cities. Oh, okay, sir similar looking but you know we we tried to figure out how to do it Do we do it just like like initially we thought well, maybe we should do it Just like this like have seating like movie theater seating and then we're like no We should probably like raise the floor up and make it flat in the front. It would make more sense You know and then we had to figure out like what to do with the stage and then Louie gave me some really good advice We were gonna keep the ceiling the way it was And Louie was like how can you lower it and I was like I think we could lower it like and still get some view out of the balcony So we had to figure out how to lower the ceiling just enough so and it made a difference And then he said lower the ceiling in the little boy too and we did that And then we also made the stage smaller in the little boy. This is all Louie's advice and he was dead on I was like tell me what you think I left listen to everybody everybody got to say in what to do You know what to have like Brian Simpson it was his idea to have the Le lights in the green room the light that shows you someone's got the light in the big room Something's got a lot the light in the little room and then I think it was Tony's idea to put the timers one of the other Maybe it was Tony for the lights Brian for the timer. I forget but everybody had a little piece of the like I think it was Brian's idea to have monitors Like everybody got to say in how it's done. That's what it looked like when you when we first walked in now What does it look like now? I never go into the front And now go to go to what it looks like now It looks like the final image of the mothership similar and now it's been redone obviously It looks similar enough that you can see Oh, yeah, you see the bones. Yeah. Yeah. I mean it's essentially it was set up perfectly for two rooms There's no pictures of the the UFO That's kind of crazy. So we have a big UFO as you walk in. Yeah. Yeah. There it is. That's the UFO And it has a projector so the UFO is a projector and up on the screen it projects all the people that are coming soon That's been amazing. We've been open for three years now and It's been the most fun thing that I've ever been a part of Tilarious dude. I've walked under that projector a thousand times and I never I realized or the UFO I mean, and I never realized it was projecting shit Yeah, it's a projector. Yeah, it's so funny. Yeah, we just wanted to want to make it cool Well, and it's also I think it's a fire extinguisher. I think the center of it is a fire I think we had to have one so we put it in the center of the UFO That's same that same time I was talking about during South by Southwest and When I did kill Tony That it was me at Adam Ray were on panel and in the next day Eric Invited us over to see the club. It wasn't done yet You know, but he walked us in. I remember him walking me through little boy and being like What are we gonna do this? And I remember he goes you're gonna play here and I go I fucking hope so Alright, I hope so, but yeah, it was it was wild seeing it like you know in the construction phase and Whatever and then seeing the final product and remembering like oh, I remember he told me they were gonna change that It's been really fun. Yeah Yeah, I mean and you know it's it's you know It's it's I think few people are in a position to have created a club that can operate the way a club Ideally should operate and you're one of those people and you made it work Which is we have to do it not to make money? Yeah, like my goal in the beginning was just break even that was the goal like let's just break even so the idea is everybody gets paid What they're supposed to get paid Particularly the comics get that's what everybody's here to see they're not They're by drinks in an empty room. They're there to see the comics so the comics should get the most money Yeah, that's you know what I used to always think when I'd go to other club that blick this is crazy Like yeah, but I would always tell comedians be nice to club owners because you don't want to be one Like you don't you don't want to be right the guy that has to run these fucking yeah Places and deal with these maniacs that come in and especially some of the nuttier ones on the road You know like you imagine if you had to run the funny bone and Columbus a while Fucking fucking animals to show up. Just miss their flights They're fucking they do ecstasy the night before they can't read Yeah, yeah, it's 830 the headliner's not there. Yeah He's trying to score Coke. Yeah, it's it's I I I I always I always said that to as I was I would never want to be in a position where I have to deal with Comps from that side of it. Especially comics coming up. There's like most established comedians Once you've been doing it a long time. You have a career. You're like you're reliable You know You know I'm saying like if you book You know Fill in the blank. Yeah, you know Whoever it is is like national headliner. They're gonna show up. Yeah. Yeah, well also to like the the profile And correct me if I'm wrong, but the profile that you were able to bring to the club Probably helped you circumvent Some of the horseshit that club owners in Idaho have to deal with with agents and all that shit where it's like Hey, man. Sorry. There's an improv there. So We can't take our guy out of the improv or whatever and now you're There's a whole other battle now that you have to do. Well, there's that if you pay people more they'll go to your place Think it found out yeah, it pisses off the other clubs, but look that's not my fault like I this is I am a comedian I Made a living doing this for a long time and I know the value of the comedian I know the value of the comic the comic should be getting most of the money. Yeah, you know I don't deserve most of the money We can make money. Well, we're gonna make money on 20% of the ticket sales and the liquor and all that jazz Well, make plenty of money right like this is not be greedy This is make an awesome environment right and that's what we wanted to do So the goal was never to make money so most people when they start a business their goals to try to make money Yeah, and this was a conscious decision to just not lose money. Yeah, just make it cool It's it's again. You're yeah, you're you're their goals to try to make money. Yeah. And this was a conscious decision to just not lose money. Yeah. Just make it cool. It's it's again, you're, yeah, you're, you were, you were in a, in a very advantageous position to, to make it the right way. And it's also like I kind of had to do it that way because I had the resources and it's like, look, you're supposed to do the right thing. This was, this is the thing you should do. But what would you like someone with that has your kind of money to do? I would like someone to make an awesome club for comics. Like you're, you're a comic, you know how important it is. Make, make, make the fucking the best creative environment welcoming everybody, pump everybody up. Yeah. That's what you should do. Dude, it's, it's funny because I always say, if you're, if, and you did this as a comic, right, I always say with them with a movie star, right? Somebody who's got, you know, real movie star bank. I'm just like, man, why the fuck don't more of these guys that have endless cash start creating film situations that they want to be a part of. Not, I don't mean like we're going to do the next blockbuster thing or, or we've got a franchise or whatever. It's like, why don't you take 10 million bucks and make the fucking art fucking movie with all of your friends that you always want to make because who cares? You will break even. You will break even at the, at the very least, I never, ever, ever understood why more people in that position don't do it. I don't get it because rock stars do it all the time. Rock stars start a little label and they start putting on other bands that they love and they do passion projects because they want to work with their friends. I've never, maybe not never, but it's very rare that you ever see a movie star do that. And I'm like, why not do it for, for years. American Psycho was the big one, the British and Ellis novel. Why haven't they made a accurate adaptation? Well, the studios don't want to touch it because it's too violent. It's like somebody with $500 million who's a movie star fucking go, I'm going to do it. And I'm going to do it the way it's supposed to be done. And it's going to work because that's what people want to see and fuck it, man. Like I just, I don't get it. Do you think that the Christian Bale version was not accurate? I like the Christian Bale version a lot, but it is not the book. The book is fucking dark. It's brutal. Yeah. They're shitting that book. I was reading that book and I was like, Bretta Stidelles has murdered somebody. They're details in here. I was like, I don't understand how you would know this. Like, there's one of the darkest scenes in that book is when he goes to get rid of the body and the real estate guy sees him in the room because they're selling the apartment. Yeah. And so he realized the real estate guys already got in rid of the body. Yeah. And they look at each other and he just leaves. Yeah. And you're like, Oh, God. Yeah. And there was, by the way, I was just joking about Bretti. So I don't think he's murdered somebody. I feel like we have to say that for it's very important to clarify. Yeah. Yeah. I was just joking. Just humor. But, but the thing the book did and they cut up, they cut a major scene out of the movie. It's the one extra scene on the on the blue ray. And I don't understand why they deleted it. But there's a scene in the movie where his friend says they're at the club at the beginning. And his friend goes, I'm out of here. And the guy climbs up like these like rafters or whatever and crawls into like a fan vent in the club. And you never see him ever again. And that's the part in the book that makes you go, is this all in this fucking guy's head? What he just described happening is nuts. And this guy is now gone and nobody knows where he is. And I'm like, that's such a key scene. And they cut it out of the movie. And so whatever, they're remaking it now again. Oh, they are. Yeah. I'm just going to be American Psycho. I think maybe Adam driver is connected to it. I think maybe good at that. He's got a lot of psycho behind his eyes. But the shards is the new Bretti Stenell's adaptation on on Fox. What is it? It's his last novel. And it's a it's a it's a fictional autobiography where he the main character is him as a teenager. And there's a serial killer loose. And all these murders are happening. They're targeting teenagers. These brutal fucking murders. And there's a cult happening that's reminiscent of the Manson cult. And then he's also coming of age and realizing he's gay. And like as he's trying to deal with the fact that this murder thing is happening. And he thinks he knows who it is. And it's a wild story. But they're and he's he co-created it with Ryan Murphy, the TV show, the adaptation. It's really fucking good so far. Really. So it's a period piece. Yeah. It takes place in like 83 or 84. You know, I could tell the Ferrari. Yeah. Old Ferrari. Oh, wow. But it's one of the adaptations where I was like, I feel like they're really capturing a lot of what's actually in the book. Because less than zero was a cool movie, but it's not the book rules of attractions, a great movie. And that's he said that was the closest thing he that anybody had gotten to. The books are one of his book. American Psycho would be very hard to capture the darkness of it because you also are capturing this guy's internal dialogue. You know, which is some of it. Yeah. It's dark. So what would you do? Would you have a guy narrate the internal dialogue? You're missing something. Well, they did that with bail. He narrates the entire thing. I know, but you're missing something there. It's very funny. You had to mean because I think instead of hearing it, when you're reading the internal dialogue, you understand that there's no, you don't hear the voices. Right. You know, I mean, like this guy's got some fucking creepy shit going on in his head. I mean, yeah, he's a fucking so. Yeah. It's like go, bad thing murder. Yeah. It's like you get into his head in this way that I don't think you ever do in a movie. Like you're in his head when you're reading it because you're imagining it all happening in his head. You're imagining how he's viewing like the real estate scene. Like he's locking eyes this real estate guy. There's this is a creepiness to it that's like, he plays the best scene acting wise, in my opinion, in that movie is when, when they're comparing the business cards on their, like, they're like one up at each other. Look at mine, man. It's bone white and whatever. And Christian Bale starts sweating and he gets like horse. He's like, it's nice. It's nice. Because it's this fucking pissing contest where he's the best business card. And he's so upset that he doesn't have the best business card. Yeah. Did he wants to kill that guy? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. I'm listening to this podcast about Luigi, the guy murdered the healthcare executive. It's a very, very interesting podcast. You know, it details how they caught him, the whole deal. But one of the things they brought up was one of the first things they thought of after that guy got assassinated was, was probably somebody worked with. Really? Yeah. They had to find out whether or not someone had some sort of a grudge, someone got recently fired when, you know, because when people get murdered like that, you oftentimes think it could be a co-worker. I have a core former co-worker. I have a question for you about Luigi. I'm glad you brought it up. I'm so sorry. I have to pee really bad. I want you to go pee really I'm going to pee really fast. I'll be a question question about Luigi. Hit up to my fucking manager does it. It's everybody doesn't. It's really fucking annoying. Sorry, Joe. More annoying than boiling your own coffee. No, nothing's more annoying than that. The um, turning on the stove, filling the pot. When does it end? When does it end? What were we to hear? Luigi. Yeah. This is what I wanted to ask you because there. Jamie has a theory. Well, they were all the people. There were all the people, you know, that Luigi sparked that whole debate about justified violence or whatever, which I thought was bullshit. Um, but everybody that was raw, raw, and Luigi going, he's a hero and how many people is this healthcare guy killed all that bullshit? I wonder now what everybody's saying about the fact that Luigi is doing the insanity play. And it's like, well, he didn't really stick to his fucking, I mean, if that's was this thing, and he was going to be the big crusader for him. He's just playing the legal system. I mean, that's the smart move. Play the insanity. Well, it's the smart move. If you're not, some might be accurate. But also is it the smart move you're trying to, I know it's the smart move. I'm saying if you're going to go out there and go, I did this because it was justice and whatever. And then go way actually next I was a little crazy. But here's the point. If you did shoot a man who had nothing to do with you because you thought it was justice because he was a healthcare executive, I don't know how he picked that guy. I don't know the details of what that guy has done. It was, it was he particularly bad. He was killed. I think he was a CEO. No, he was, he was, it was, it was definitely targeted that this man is, this man is responsible for decisions made. What's the CEO, Jamie of United healthcare? Is that what he was? So, um, if you think that you should go murder somebody like that, that you should, you're probably mentally ill. If you think that that, that kind of violence is justified. The problem that a lot of young people are having right now and a lot of people that agree with, you know, what Luigi did and they celebrated it is because everyone knows that the system is rigged and no one is doing anything to change it. And this is what drives people fucking crazy. If you get health insurance and their whole business model is to deny as many claims as possible, even if they know that your claims are justified because they want to make money. So they're really in the making money business and they're pretending they're in the, we're going to take care of you and give you insurance business. Yes. So they're not really in that business. Yes. They're in the business of making the most amount of money. If they can fuck 10% of the people over or 20% of the people over, that's 20% more money. And that's how they look at it. And that drives everyone nuts and rightly so. And they don't fucking correct that. People don't have a whole lot of options as to how to lash out and how to get back. And especially if like, let's say it's your wife, let's say your wife gets injured or gets a disease or something and they can treat her and they deny the claim. Or maybe she needs a surgery, some crazy surgery and they deny the claim and it bank ups you and she dies. You want to murder somebody and it makes sense because you're paying for this fucking insurance all this time thinking that you're insured if something goes wrong. The whole reason why you give the money. You don't give the money for freebies. It's not for no reason. It's not because you like them. You want you to die in healthcare to have a yacht. No, you give them the money because it's supposed to be an agreement. I agree with that completely. I have no beef with the concept behind his motivations for hatred of a healthcare CEO. I have no problem with that. My question is, is it does it take away from does it take away from the people that were row rowing him for him to now go? Oh, I was just crazy. Sorry. I don't think it does. Do you know what I mean? I don't think it does. No, it's trying to not go to jail and a lot of those people think you shouldn't go to jail. I don't think you should be able to be walking up to people in the fucking street and murdering them. Right. But I can understand where your anger comes from. I get it. I really do. And there's a thing about capitalism. Right. There's a thing about corporations in particular that are you're beholden to your shareholders. You have to make more money every quarter. That alone, that motivational loan, it motivates sociopathic behavior. The people that are going to be the most successful are the ones who are going to be the most ruthless and they're going to squeeze the most money possible without crushing the company's reputation. And that's their goal. And in the healthcare market, the problem is like, what are your options? There's no one amazing option where they always take care of everybody. And they're real. It's ethical capitalism. They're just trying to look, we make plenty of money, giving people real insurance and really taking care of them and really paying for it. And so let's make less money, but let's make everybody healthier. Nobody does that. No, no. So your options, if you have to get insurance, are very limited. You're just giving money to psychos. So which psycho gets my money? Which psycho that doesn't give a fuck about me or my family or anybody I love if they get hurt or sick every year, every year that I don't do a writing gig on a TV show, which is not every year. I don't do it frequently. I do it sometimes. But every year I don't do a writing gig on a TV show or I don't act enough to clear sag insurance. I have to make a decision. Is this worth $600 a month for fucking health insurance? Is it? I don't know. I don't know that it is. Especially now with just imagine how angry you would be if you paid all that money and then you broke your ankle or something like that. And they denied you. Yeah, you know, like what? Yeah. And this is why people cheer about this. Lead you guy. There are a ton of stories of people who had treatable illnesses and they were denied coverage. They had surgeries. They could have been done to save them. They were denied coverage. There's a ton of stories like that. It's a dirty fucking game. It's a dirty thing. And it's not. It's not the game. They're pretending it is. They're pretending the game is we're going to help care. Take care of you. You're going to have a a safety net. So you pay a little bit of money and hopefully nothing happens. You never need us. And that's our gamble. Our gamble is if you do need us, you're going to get more value out of it than you put into it. Yeah. And they don't want that. Health insurance has become like the protection plan at Best Buy when you buy a TV. You want the two year protection plan in case any? No, I don't fucking know because no, I'm in some places have a good protection plan though. They're just giving you a new TV. Health care is not even that. It's not even that. It's worse. That's worse than Best Buy. I don't know why everybody just went, well some places have a good protection plan. They do. Some places you should bring them to the computer to give you a brand new one. This thinks sucks. You broke. Yeah. Okay. Hold on. I file out this felt felt this form. We'll get you another one. Every time I've tried to utilize it, I bring it in and they go, oh, well, actually. Oh, really? Yeah, this doesn't. Yeah, the screens crack. That's not really part of it. You probably broke a fuck. Probably did something stupid. They make it do. They make it. I probably throw it across the room and fit of rage because I had to boil water in the morning. But you know, it's it's it's it's a dire. You know, when when the namis mark when the neman mark is gang thing was happening where those kids were running to name Marcus and stealing shit, which again, I don't think is an okay thing to do. But you know, like my mom, I remember was being like, can you believe these kids? I go, mom, they just told an entire generation of kids. They'll never own land. Right. They're fucking hopeless. Yeah, they're hopeless. Like what do you what where does your head even go? Where did you go? I have a in my act. I have a line. It's it's not even a joke. I just go where the Gen Z's and they clap and I go, you'll never own land. And it gets a huge laugh because it's so true. That crazy. And it's like it's fucked up. And then they hear that private equity companies are buying up houses. So that could lease them out. And so they own all the houses. What? And the parking lots. Yeah, they're buying up all the fucking parking lots. You can't park anywhere for free or for cheap. You know, it's fucking crazy, man. It's we we are living in a rent to live culture anymore. Well, it's just about it's again, what we're talking about in about maximizing the amount of money you could squeeze out of people. And that's their business. And it doesn't have to be like that. But it does have to be like that. If you're public, it's almost like we're better off with a bunch of private corporations. And if you're private, you could do whatever you want. Like there's private court. Like, look, you could decide I'm going to do, you know, I'm going to give X amount of my profits to this. I'm going to give the Y to that. I'm going to I'm going to do whatever I want because it's my money. But as soon as you have shareholders, as soon as you take that IPO money, baby, that's a big windfall though. You got all this money. All this stock, all this capital has been invested in your business. Your business is going to grow and the business does grow. So do you fucking problem? Yes. They've ruined shareholders have ruined. I don't know what's saying shareholders inherently are evil, but the board of directors and shareholders and all that shit, they have ruined everything. They've ruined everything. It's like everybody goes, why the last three Star Wars movie suck? Kathleen Kennedy came out and said, we were met with demands by the shareholders to rush the fucking sequels out and we couldn't make the movies we wanted to make. So that's that's not an agent if they do that at a gym camera. You can't do that. I can't brush that guy. You're actually rushed avatar. Fuck you. Fuck you. That movie takes up forever to make. That's why it's awesome. There's certain things that you can't do just for money. And health care should be one of them. It should be one of them. Well, you know what? And I don't say this to ball wash you in anyway, but you just said it 10 minutes ago about the club. And for all the criticisms of people can level at you, whatever the fuck they want to say, whatever. It's like, hey man, here's a guy I know that has a lot of money that started something that helps other people in the industry he works in and said, I'm not worried about making money. I'm worried about breaking even and I want the people that I'm working at my club to benefit. You actually did it. You actually did the thing that we're complaining that other people don't do. You actually did the thing where you said, I am not going to try to turn massive profits off of this club. What I'm going to try to do is create an environment where people can make what they deserve to make. That's fucking pretty awesome and pretty crazy. Well, the thing is anybody could do that that's successful already. Yeah. You could all choose to run a business that way. And a lot of people do. I'm not new unique in that way. There's a lot of like really ethical like moral happy people. Sure. And you make a happier environment too. That's the other thing. Like the environment, the club is very happy. Everybody gets paid really well. Everybody's making money. The waitresses, waiters are all making money. Everybody's happy. Yeah. That's beautiful. You go to a place where people are happy to be there. That's what you want. You don't want to go to a place where you're making maximum profits and everybody is in hell. And that's a lot of people that work in corporations, right? You're working way more hours than you should. You never see your kids. You're constantly fucking stressed out. Your court is all through the roof. You're about to have a fucking heart attack. But you bought a house in the Hamptons. Yeah. Look at that. I got a $15 million house overlooking the bay. How about that? You fucking win. I got the new Ferrari. You want to see it. Yeah. And meanwhile, you're dying. Yeah. Right. But that's that's the environment of just chasing money. I think you can make plenty of money. I mean, obviously, I'm in an unusual situation. But I think most business owners that do well, once you're doing well, what is enough? Like it's a, make it, just make it better for everybody. What's enough? What's enough money? What's enough? You know, if you're running a corporation, is it really good to cut back on the ingredients and fuck people over. I was seeing this thing about powdered sugar. Some guy went to a grocery store. He took all these bags of two pound bags of powdered sugar and he weighed them. They're like 1.3 pounds, 1.2 pounds, 1.27. They're fucking you. You're telling me that's not on purpose. Your machines are so off that it doesn't know what two pounds are. But this is this mentality of just squeeze the most. Squeeze the most. I don't think you have to do that. I think if your business is successful, just it should be like, you're good. You're good. Let's like keep it keep the ball rolling. Keep it good. Don't try to just keep making the most money possible every quarter. And that's what they do in corporations because they have to. If you don't, you're a bad CEO. You'll get kicked out. Like, hey, good news, guys. We made the same amount of money this month as we did last month. Like, what? This guy sucks. Yeah. It's got fucking sucks. Where's my return? Yeah. You know, I'll be fucking, we're going to vote them out. Yeah. And then you get a forward meeting together and people playing and you have to do that. That's their job. Yeah. Ideally, what should happen is you say, hey, guys, we made more money this month than we did last month. But the reason we made more money is because we made a better product that brought it even more customers. And it was beneficial to everybody. Right. And it's not that it's not we squeezed the same amount of customers out of more money. Yeah. Yeah. It's the fucking potato chip thing. Well, the other thing that you know, these avocado oil scandal that's right now. So all these people that are buying things made with avocado oil that they think, oh, this is going to be super healthy. Turns out a lot of these corporations are fucking you over and they're using seed oils and fucking safflower oil and rape seed oil. All these different oils and they're pretending that it's yeah, coconut or it's avocado oil. I watched a thing about food where they talked about, by the way, what I meant by the potato chip thing was when you, we were just talking about this in the lobby before we started recording when you buy a bag of potato chips now and it's half full. And it's all air. And of course the excuse is, well, no, that's so protection chips and just get the fuck out of here. Fuck off. I'm gonna get my chips. Yeah. Don't crush the chips. You fucking idiot. Yeah. Maybe pack the chips and ship them properly. No, no, we can't do that. Have you ever had those Vandy chips? No, it's Vandy. Oh, their chips made with beef tallow. Okay. The just cooked in beef tallow is just beef tallow and salt and potato chips are the best potato chips you've ever eaten in your fucking life. Where do you get them? You can buy them online. I buy them online. Yeah. A lot of these are so legit, dude. If I want potato chips, oh, they're so good. And you don't overeat them. It's crazy. Like when it's real food, you eat enough. Yeah. You know, especially they're like soaked in beef tallow. They're so rich and fat. Yeah. It's actually probably good for you. Yeah. Yeah. That's that's the thing. Most of these quality food products that we want to buy and enjoy now, you have to buy them online. You can't get them in fucking stores. You get them in some stores. But the problem is they get bought out. You know, so say a company comes along and you're making something that has like really healthy ingredients and people really get into it and then Pepsi buys you or something. Exactly. Some some fucking Kellogg's buys you when they turn it into something that's just close enough. They changed the ingredients, make it cheaper. Did that happen with? Is it rouse R A O's? Rales. The sauce rails. Yeah. Yeah. Rales got bought by, I think like whoever makes Ragu or whatever, the best goal or some shit. Rales made a great talk. Is it still legit or is it they fuck with the ingredients now? I don't I never thought there was any jarred sauce that was awesome. Like, you know, they always have Steve Sharipas when he had his? No. You know, Steve Sharipas? Yes, a Pranos. Do you know Steve? Did you know for? No, I work for him when he was the booker at the Riviera in Vegas. I remember that before he got on the Sopranos before he ever did any acting. That's the way. Yeah. I was friends with him long fucking time ago. He's the best. I love that guy. He is the best. So he had an amazing sauce. It was, I forget the name of it, but it was all organic. And it was, you know, like really super top shelf ingredients. Okay. Fucking delicious. Okay. Such a good sauce. But it was too much of a pain. He asked for him to keep the business rolling and he got rid of it. I'm like, God damn, dude, that's that sucks. So I think he had a problem keeping up with demand too because it was like, he came on the podcast and talked about it. And then he eventually just bailed on the business. Look, man, it's one of the reasons I left my sandwich shop was because I felt like operating in New York was too hard of a thing. And we had to keep the four years, five years, whatever, then I did it. We had to keep kind of upping prices and whatever. And it wasn't because it was not agreed. It was out of there is no way that we stand a chance to turn a profit unless you keep up with what the demand and the economy of New York City is. And I just got to a point where I was like, you know, man, it's just not what I thought it could be. You wanted to be fine. You want to just be fine. Yeah. And that was it. And it was, I wish them well, but there's still going. But it was just for me, I was like, I just can't like this isn't, you know, so that what happens is with a lot of these companies that get bought up, it's the Steve Sherrypa thing where it's like, hey, man, I'd love to keep doing this at the quality. I'm doing it. And at the, at the, you know, the tick that which we're moving at or whatever. And then somebody comes along like Pepsi and goes, we'll buy out for 50 million. And you probably go, you know what? My ship just came and take the fucking, I don't know. You know, I can't, you know, so I don't blame people for selling to a big corporation. It's kind of the position you're left in. You know, this mom and pop thing is going away. You know, COVID put a big dent in that. Oh, destroy it. To destroy it. In terms of like small restaurants, I know so many of them that went under in LA, I think at one point in time, LA lost 70% of its restaurants. It's that it's the, the meat monopoly thing is is brutal. You know what, like what happened with prices and meats and because they saw like, oh, actually, we can say that there's a demand and low, low product availability and all this and just charge everybody this much more. But there also is a demand and there also is low product. I mean, there's also the reality of the marketplace. Yeah. Well, that, what I think it is, is there's the reality of the problem and then, and some people are affected by that very genuinely, but then there's a lot of people that go, there's a chance for us to capitalize and squeeze and that sucks. That sucks. Yep. That's the thing. And, you know, once you escape the world of need and you're in a world of decisions based on what you enjoy doing, then you could choose to do a business where you do it. However, you want to do it and don't worry about it. Right. You know, because you're not doing it for money, you're doing it because it's a cool thing. Right. And ideally, that's what we would all like to do. Yeah. Ideally. It's not obviously difficult to achieve, but if you can get there, that's the way to do it. It's just that everybody has this thing about chasing the fucking whatever number it is, whether it's a number in your bank account or the address that you're living in or the car that you're driving, everyone's always chasing the new thing. There's a new thing to justify why you're pumping all of your energy into a business. You know, yeah, it's it's it's the unfortunate other side of capitalism. Yeah, this is why it's capitalism. Fucking great. It's way better than everything else. Well, that's just that I agree with, but we're just talking about it. Yeah, it's got flaws and the flaws are human nature. That's the flaws. Is there a way? Do you think is there a way to have the free market with capitalism, but actually have some sort of regulation. So these problems that we're talking about can occur? Or is it just you have to take the go with the bad and that's all there is to I mean, this should definitely be regulations without a doubt. But I think too much regulations, then you stifle business and that's what California has over over regulated because the government is just too huge of a business there. I think at one point in time California during the pandemic, they lost a bunch of people, like a bunch of people moved out, but they doubled the size of government. They just keep adding more government and more like that's where they create jobs. They create jobs through government and just keep adding adding programs, adding government and then you just keep siphoning off tax money and then it's a slush fund. And there's a whole economy based on it and those people are the people that are in charge of running the city and they don't want to let it go because that's how everybody's getting paid and nothing's getting done and the fucking homeless crisis never gets any better and the streets never get clean the schools never get fucking funded correctly. But yet they keep in growing their fucking business, the business of being a fucking person in government. Yeah, it's in the schools never get fucking funded correctly. But yet they keep in growing their fucking business, the business of being a fucking person in government. Yeah, it's, I, I, one of the things I learned when I worked for the, because when I lived here in 2000, I worked for the Senate, during the legislative session, it was the 76th legislative session, I think. I was a media reporter for the, for the Senate media department. But one of the things I learned was how low a senator's salary is versus what they actually make in a year because of donations and whatever the fuck else. And I was like, of course, these people don't want to ever step down from the sea. This is the fucking, this is a, this is a fucking joy ride right now. Yeah. And once you're in that position, now you got a problem because now it's like, well, who's actually in there to do something versus who's in there to keep the job? And if you want to keep the job, keep the constituents happy. Well, how do you do that? Well, then you start compromising things and Kate, and you learn how to be a bullshark. Oh, yeah. You learn how to say the things they want you to say. That's why people support ridiculous positions because they fucking lick their finger and find out which way the wind's blowing. And that's the way my constituents want. So that's how I feel. Yep. You know, I think God's non-binary, like whatever. They just start talking. Yeah. They start saying things. You're like, why are you saying this? This makes no sense. They're saying it because they think it's going to help them and get them to win. Who keeps talking? Yeah, man. And nobody wants the job. That's the other thing. No, but no really successful person who would really be good at it, want the job. It's too much work. It's a hassle. You're also dealing with insane corruption. Once you get in there, try untangling all the fucking webs that have been spun for decades. And when they're moving money to this and moving money to that. And you got to pay a little of this and you got to pay a little of that. Yeah. Did you ever see Charlie Wilson's war? Tom Hanks movie? No. It's great. You'd love it. Mike Nichols directed it. Tom Hanks and I Philip Seymour Hoffman. My favorite Philip Seymour Hoffman. Really? Performance ever. It's a fucking awesome movie. But it's about how when we were sending arms and funding the F. Gannies when Russia was attacking Afghanistan. And he's in there to do a good thing. He's like, these people are getting fucking taken over. The Russians are coming in, blah, blah, blah, blah. And he does all this good thing. He gets all this funding to them. He helps them. The Afghanistan starts shooting the Russian copters out of the fucking air and all this shit. And he's like, this is great. And then all of a sudden, the powers that be are like, we're cutting the funding. And he's like, what are you talking about? We just help these people liberate themselves. We can't cut the funding now. We have to rebuild. And they're like, yeah, we're not rebuilding. We're not spending any more money in this. And the end of the movie is Philip Seymour Hoffman telling Tom Hanks that he doesn't say the name, but he says the fucking looneys are in the handhouse. He's talking about Ben Lott and it's now taking over. I've cast it and this is going to go real fucking sideways on us. And it's just such a great encapsulation of that's how it works. That's how it works. They do a good thing and then all of a sudden it creates an even bigger fucking problem than they've ever anticipated because of funding. It's also why were they doing it in the first place? Why the fuck are they funding the Muja Hadin? And that's how Ben Lott and turned against us. Right. That's what it was all about. He realized how dirty our fucking politics are and what we're doing when doing regime change in other countries and proxy wars and all the insane shit that we've been involved with forever. It's fucked up. The way it's portrayed in the movie is the Russians are attacking these people. It's going to be this genocide. It's blah, blah, blah, blah. That's how it's framed in the movie. In real life, you know, I know there's always multiple sides. Both sides. I mean, there's probably a lot to that too. But it's just one of those things where I brought it up because you said who would ever want this job and I watched that movie and thought that I was like, who would want the fucking job of this guy? Right. And he thinks he's doing the right thing and then it just blows up in their faces. I hope that good people come along and want the job. That's a joke. But for the most part, they're swimming in a sea of cycles. Right. Well, the question is if a good person does come along, can they stay pure or is the system just built in a way where it's like, no, there's no way to do this. I was acquitted to the Hollywood thing. It's like, in my opinion, there's no way to become or to a very hard thing to become a massive movie star and maintain your morality and your ethics and whatever. You're playing in a system that is so fucking foul and so dirty and whatever. That's why we're like, it's so rare to meet a Woody Harrell Center. Right. That was a genuine person. And nine out of 10 of those guys, they don't fucking live there. They go somewhere else and they dip in, they do it, they get the fuck out again. So I always wonder, like, is there a, we always say like, if only a decent man would come along and lead us or take this seat and this office. Is it possible to even remain pure at that point? I don't know. Or is it just, hey, this is how it works. This is all there is to it and you either play this game or you will be phased out and that's it. You know? Well, the Hollywood game is interesting because you have to have the same political opinions of them. Yeah. If you don't, any variation whatsoever. If you're like, hey, maybe we shouldn't take this weird experimental vaccine. Your cast out of the kingdom, like you have to be full compliance, full compliance to whatever ideology that they have because they're completely in control. They get to choose whether or not you work. The beautiful thing about comedy and music is another version of that, but less so I think is that you just make what you make. if people like it, they come see you real simple real simple. You get a chance. Everybody gets a chance. Everybody gets a chance to open Mike Knight. Everybody gets a chance. If someone says, hey, Joe, you're really funny. You want to open for me on the road. Also, oh my God, I'm on the road. Everybody gets a chance. And the thing about the movie business is it's not that way. Like you could be a really talented actor and you never get cast in something. You know, maybe they don't align with the way you think. Maybe you didn't kiss their ass enough when you went in for the audition. Maybe you don't have a good agent, whatever it is. You might not ever work. Yeah, there's a great, what is it called? It's the documentary. I think it's just called Frank. It's the documentary about Frank Stallone. So that's Dr. Stallone's brother. And Frank Stallone is an immensely talented guy. And he sort of got reduced to, he does stuff, he works. And he seems like a happy guy. But there was a big part of Frank Stallone where he kind of got reduced to the punch line of like, Sly's brother. Yeah, exactly. I mean, I was Charlie Murphy. I was just saying about Eddie. They talk in the documentary, Frank Stallone, they go, everybody's like, how did this guy not become bigger? He's so fucking talented. He was a musician. He's a great actor. He's this. And they say in the middle of the day, dude, it doesn't just happen. You have to have a team of people operating around you that make it fucking happen. It's not just dumb luck. It's not just, oh, he's good. If you don't have the people strategically, let's put it that buying you through the system, right? It doesn't fucking happen. It just doesn't happen. It's like, look at when people get nominated, that the process of getting nominated for an Emmy. It's like you get the consideration vote. And then I would see it when I was living in LA. And then people would do these PR campaigns just based on the consideration. Oh, yeah, those billboards for your consideration. Yeah, you'd see them everywhere. Then you get nominated. And then that's a whole other thing. That's why I thought it was such bullshit when, and I'm a big fan. I'm not knocking the guy. But like when the whole thing happened with like the year that Brendan Fraser won for the whale was the same year. The kid that played short round one for everything everywhere all at once. Do you remember that year at the Oscars? And they both, it was like, it's the year of the comebacks at the Oscars. And they're up there going, I thought I was done. And here I am. It's like, you fucking had a campaign. But this cost millions of dollars to get you here. This is not some underdog story. This was orchestrated. That's how it works. It's crazy. It's crazy. Nobody's like, yeah, I was driving a cab that almost like I nominated. I won. That's how fucking works. That's bad shit. Yeah. Well, it's a bad shit business. It's it's it's the worst and best business of all time. Yeah. It gets us to get to do what we want to do. Sorry, but it doesn't stand up. This is better now. Yeah. It's like stand up in podcasts. It's such an easier pathway. Yeah. That was the old pathway. You had to be a part of that. I was I was talking to Tony about it after MSG. We're at the after party. Tony, I love this one of the things I love about it. He gets you have a few drinks and it's a real love fest. He's like, he's like, buddy, we're doing it, man. We're doing it. They told us no and we're fucking doing it. And I go, Tony, here's what's wild. I go the mainstream of entertainment could become the for lack of a better term. Wokeest whatever that whole thing could come back of PC culture and whatever. And they could tell any one of us or all of us, you guys are out. There's no way you're going to get anything on streamers or anything anymore. And we'd all still be fine because we all said we found another lane. So fuck it. It doesn't matter. It's a bigger lane to way bigger. It's way bigger way bigger. Yeah. Because it's authentic. Yeah. It's real. And it's not curated. Yeah. So it's simple people. People want. You would could send a missile to destroy YouTube. They would. Meanwhile, let's come up with some of the fucking greatest talents like that guy who made obsession. Came straight out of YouTube. Yeah. Dude, I got to wrap this up. Oh, okay. You're special. Speaking of which, yeah. Joe. I never promised you a rose garden available right now on Netflix. On Netflix. We're filming. We shot this in Phoenixville, Pennsylvania. It was on my YouTube Netflix scooped it up. It's still on my YouTube. But please go watch it on Netflix. And I hope you all enjoy it. And then my podcast, Violin horrendous, is now out. YMH Network. Nice. And at Joe DeRosa comedy on YouTube is where you can find it. So please listen. And I hope you watch the special. I'm enjoying it. Thank you for having me. My first brother. I love you. Love you, buddy. Love you. Bye, friend.