It's an order to have you back. Your try-dens have been on display on this podcast for almost 200 episodes since you were here the first time. And I'm a huge fan of you and your work and your artwork. So thanks for being back. OK, well, thank you. On the first podcast that we did, we talked a lot about the wildlife stuff we did, the jackass, the wild boys, all that stuff. Kind of like you're rise to fame, so to speak. But we didn't really cover your childhood and your early life in Cuba and your family and all that stuff. So I want to talk about that a little bit today. Well, my memory goes back to the age of four. I remember telling people, tell me, you're four years old. As far as wildlife and Cuba, I would go in the backyard, look on a crab hole. I would put my arm in there and grab a huge land crab by the elbow and I would try to pull him out and the crab would actually drag me. And then my dad would come find me, grab my back feet and pull me out of a, pull me back and we pull the crab bar out of the hole. So I used to hand catch crabs at the age of four like that. So I was already getting into picking up lizards and to wildlife. I used to watch movies like Sea Hunt and Cuba when I was a kid. That's the fact my dad was cool. We were living in Cuba. The whole communism thing came in there. Cash will took over. How long, so when you were a kid growing up with your parents, how long did you guys live under Batista before that whole Cuban revolution? What year were you born? I was born in 1954, 54, okay. So the Cuba Revolution came in 1959. So I was just a kid. I mean, when I was a kid, I didn't think about Batista or any of that. That just, children don't think about any of that. They're just life was normal for us. I noticed changes once a catch will took over. Like the properties, the ranch we used to go play in, like we had a national forest, all of a sudden it became, we couldn't go there no more. The government confiscated it. And all the properties were taken. And a lot of bad things were happening. I had no clue what was going on, but at the meantime, my dad joined up with the CIA to fight against Castro. And later on, he got infiltrated into Cuba. You know, what was that prop? What happened to him when he got recruited by the CIA? What was specifically going on with your dad? What was he doing? Well, life was being uprooted. I mean, I was a kid, so I'm not, you know, I don't pay an attention, but the adults saw that we were losing our freedom in Cuba. You know, money was being confiscated, property, just huge changes and very, you know, like no respect for law, he was just doing whatever they wanted to do. And you know, a hard line coming to his dictatorship was taking effect. What did your parents do for work? My dad was a salesman. My mother came, he was a salesman for precarty. Oh, no way. Yeah. My mother came from a very wealthy family in Cuba. Their, her great grandfather was like four minister, minister exterior for Cuba. He was in all these minister of education. He was all those in Cuba one time or another. He's a big time politician. He owned 54,000 acres and, and Pinaldorillo. It was my favorite place when I was a little kid, the co-play in Cuba. They had horses, air, they had mountains, forests, deer everywhere, beautiful property. He also had a beach house. He had a big house in Havana. So he's very well known politician. To this day, if you go to the ranch, the entrance says, a Cien da Cortina. So since he was such a unknown figure in Cuba, even though the Castro James still kept his name on the ranch, really. And that was, so that was your grandfather. Great grandfather. Your mother is grandfather. Oh, wow. So what part of Cuba were you guys living in, living in again in Havana? You were in Havana, okay. But the ranch is in Pinaldorillo, which is the western end of Cuba, the organ mountains, the whole entire range. What was there? And to this day, to a risk go to Cuba, that's where they go to his go visit, a place is one of the natural wonders of Cuba. It was a beautiful property. They got mountains and river to go through caves. They got lights in there. So it's like a spectacular place to go see. So when you were growing up with your dad, like what kind of, you were always just like roaming around, looking for wildlife, swimming in the ocean, fishing, we're doing that kind of stuff. And Cuba, I went on a couple of fishing trips on my dad. My dad liked nature, but you know, he had a family to worry about things. My dad was also on the Olympic athlete. He had represented Cuba and rowing. Rowing is very popular in Cuba. So his team won like a bronze medal in London, I believe in 1948 Olympics. Oh wow. They him and his brother is a brother-in-law and several of those guys, they all came and they won, and they didn't win a gold medal, but they got a bronze medal. But they were like champions in Cuba, very famous. That's a lot of newspaper articles about them. So he's very much to be an athlete. He also played football for University of Anna, American football. Oh, okay. These played the American universities. They always got slaughtered by the American teams. That's what my mother told me. The Cuban team didn't stand a chance in football against like Georgia Tech and universities like that, they played against. Right. They were getting annihilated, supposedly there, but it would get drunk before the game. Is that you to take all the pain? Those are the stories I heard anyways. Oh, that's hilarious. So he was working for, he was a big salesman for Bacardi. So when cash are took over, what happened with Bacardi? Well, they left Cuba. Yeah, they moved over here. They opened up Bacardi room in Puerto Rico. I think it was their base, but they had people in Miami and everything. So, but they were friends of the family. One time they sent me to a boarding school and it was Bacardi family that paid for it. No, shit. Where was that at? Tampa, Tampa, Florida. What's up? Yeah, that's cool that you live in and everything. That thought it was good for me to stay in a school like that. You know, that's where my mother had a real hard time because when my father was captured, he was executed. Well, we're jumping a little far ahead. Yeah, we jumping a little ahead. So your father went from working from Bacardi, obviously the revolution, the Castro's rebels like scoured the land and Cuba and basically took over all the businesses. Well, communism, under communism, you're not allowed to own private property. You're not allowed to have wealth. You're not allowed to have money. You're not allowed to do, you know, you all have to be equally poor. That is their method. That's what people in this country not being educated what communism really is. Most of these young kids have no idea what communism is. They read a few books and they think they have an attitude that ship on the shoulder, whatever it is. And they've been taught to communism is good. No, communism is not good for anybody. It's evil. And usually they'll take people who are unqualified to do a job and take the qualified one of them having to do something that he's not meant to do. They rearrange everything. And you Cubans, I mean, the people with former Cubans, like you or Cuban born people like yourself who were part of that revolution or the people that are the most outspoken about that. They're the... Well, if you're a Cuban and you believe in communism, you can stay in Cuba. Right. I mean, that's perfectly normal. That's what I would say. So that's an interesting thing too. When Castro took over Cuba, he never mentioned communism once. But it was Cheguavara who was with him, who was a Marxist, is that what it was? Yeah, Cheguavara was a Marxist. And his brother, Raul, was a Marxist. Castro supposedly an opportunist. I mean, he's a crooked guy. I'll be trying this to you. I'll be trying this to you. I'll be trying this to you. And so he tied up with the Soviet Union and to get protection from the United States. Right. That was much later. That came much later. So I'm curious about your father, though. So like in just let's say in the beginning part of the revolution, right after it happened in 59, what was like your, you guys all stayed in Cuba, obviously? You survived the revolution. I was in Cuba. Well, we thought the revolution. I was a kid and all the propaganda was out there. I thought it was a really cool guy. Right. People were a lot of Americans. Oh yeah, no, the people going down the street. Hey, Phil's coming down from the mountains. He's great. What do you mean? Who are they in all of the ladies and the nannies? Everybody's excited about Phil. I had no idea. I thought it was a great guy to my mother. When I kept saying, when's that coming home, my mother turned around and told me he's not coming home. That was me and my three sister. She told us that. And she goes, that was not a good guy. You know, he said he just, he killed your father. That was like, so I went from thinking it was a good guy to all of a sudden shock. And your mom just, you asked your mom randomly one day when's dad coming home and she, that's how she dropped it on you. Yeah. Well, time was coming by. She had to tell us sooner or later. Because we have no notion of time. My mother was arrested also. She was locked up. They caught her when they arrested my dad to arrested her. There were several women arrested, but the killing government did not kill the women. And later on, I think the US negotiated their release kind of like the big people. Right. They did a deal like that. But the CIA guys, like my dad and the other men who were captured that day, including the head, CIA guy in Cuba, Saudi, Marine, they were all tried and a kangaroo court. You know, the people cracking jokes and throwing little paper balls around and laughing and everything's like a big party. And then they're all executed the next thing. So, so your dad was recruited by CIA right after the revolution. And how was he, he was obviously recruited in Cuba. And what specifically do you know what he was doing for them? Or like he was he's a... And filtration team. He was a team that guys are like, Felix Rodriguez, they were gonna be an Eskim, where I, Felix told me a story years later. But he went, actually he went to, they were training in Nicaragua at the time. That's the CIA took them to. They can, okay, that's what I, that's, I mean, of course, I'm okay, I'm not aware of any of that. This is, I found out this later on, his years went by my mother told me some more stories before she died. So your dad went with Felix to Nicaragua to train. They were down there, all the CIA guys, they were all part of the same team. Okay. Then later on he meets Surin, Marine, and Surin, Marine, and Biden to go into Havana and Havana was the hotbed. You know, and that's what the Castro soldiers were thick everywhere. And they were searching houses one afternoon, and somebody ran out of one house and ran into house where they were, where they were all hiding. And then also then walked in to recognize Surin, Marine, and they go, we got the big fish in there. Also, everybody got surrounded to play, everybody got arrested. So they caught them accidentally, but either way, I mean, it was a hotbed. This is Daisy for the big pigs, couple of days. Oh, really? So it's all going down at the same time. So a couple of days later, I believe that's a big pig's invasion. They're all executed. The six guys in Fire and Squad. A lot of people were killed in Cuba in the Fire and Squad in those days. It was nonstop. Years later, Castro even put his own top guys in Fire and Squad. He executed no more in general, which he executed his two top guys, the LaGuardia brothers, both of them. So he killed a Bronthus. Neither they killed them or they put on a prison, we're gonna come out of life. So he got, he clean house. All the people were top dogs in there. Most communist dictators do that. They killed the top breasts. So how old were you when you guys found out that Castro executed your father? It was five years old. You were five years old. God. But after that, we were able to go to Miami. So right after that, you went to Miami. Sometime after my mother got released, we were able to get out because I was a military age. Military age guys were not allowed to leave. They had to join the Cuban military. So we got out. My mother came back to bury my father and she almost never got out. She had to go to her grandfather's political rival who was a communist and asked him to help her get out. Cuba and any help to get out of Cuba. And the grandfather went way back. Political rivals, but they knew each other. Right. So they still went to dinners and stuff and had cocktail party. Yeah, yeah. They were rivals, but they had cocktail parties together. Whatever. So when you got out, where did your sisters come with you? Come to us with you. All of us came here where kids, my mother was like, you know, they, no money or anything. They took everything. So we were political refugees. And did you, I'm sorry to interrupt. Did your dad know Rick Prado? No, because Rick's way younger. Yeah, I would have been my age. Yeah, I could have been five or six years old at the time. But yeah, a new Felix. Felix was friends with Felix because they trained in Nicaragua. Right, right. Felix liked my dad a lot. He came by to visit my mom. Sometime before she died. Oh, yeah. Yeah. He came by the house and all that. Did you ever talk to Felix? Yes. When did you first meet Felix? I met him a few times that I was at a Miami eating and restaurant and he approached me and he goes, I'm Felix and he introduced himself to me. And we talked, I was doing a TV show not too long ago when I ran into him on a TV show. I was talking about sharks and he was talking about Cuba and politics, you know, both on a topic. And we were in Spanish TV or both guests that day. And then I saw him in a whole minute's Felix. And I started talking to him. He's getting older. I could tell, you know, it's got a lot of years on him now. Did you have any calls? I mean, what did you tell you a lot of things about your father that you didn't know? Not as much to me. He said to a friend of mine, there was a, they used to go to my friend's house and he told him that he really admired my father. That's how he told one of the people he had admired the most. So I mean, I never, anybody say anything bad about my father, you know, good or bad. I never heard anybody. He was a very likable, very popular guy. Right. Plus, being an athlete, you know, famous athlete in Cuba at the time. But new generation doesn't know anything about that. This is all in the past. There's a new people coming up, you know, the history has been erased in many cases. I got into, I was always interested in the wildlife. But once I got into Florida, the person I told me, the venomous snakes in Florida, so be careful. When you're howled, I was six years old, six years old. In Miami, and my friends had a wrench. And later on, when I was a young teenager, they were taking me to the ranch with them. They're the families of friends from families from Cuba. And in that wrench, I came a contact with alligators, venomous snakes, things like that. But by time levels in high school, I was already bit by rattlesnake. I was already hand-catching, large alligators. And, and I was picking up, of course, venomous snakes left and right, I was diving, spearfishing, and all that. Did you start going to, did you go to school when you're in Miami? I went to school in Miami Elementary School. Okay. And then for high school, I went to private school for junior high. And then for high school, I went to Gainesville High, Gainesville Florida. And that exposed me to a lot of the woods, a lot of venomous snakes. That's where I got bit by venomous snake with her and alligators. I would go after school, walk around the edge of lakes, see alligators sneak up and dive on them and hand catch them. So I was already hand-catching, large alligators. I was wig lifting, I was there, state champion, wig lifter in high school. Wow. Yeah, you were jacked back in the day, man. Yeah, we were always. We could find some pictures of him, like old school, many, pewig photos. You were, you were ripped. Walking around wearing a speedo. Yeah, yeah. I did all that. The alligator stuff, once I learned techniques, is more about knowing and understanding the alligator than strength, how to interact with an alligator. Right. And a lot of how to hold your breath a long time, you know, different techniques, you pick up over the years for diving, spearfishing. Mm-hmm. I spend a lot of time. Look at that one on the left. Dude, you're like, you're like Zeus. How old were you there? My 40s. Right about, 44, 45. I got, yeah, that was probably some of them best years. Really. I'm a 40s. That's when I started doing more of the TV stuff. Yeah. I learned more about the sharks and alligators. I started interacting. Before that, I did a lot of, notice I got a spirit in my hand. I did a lot of commercial spearfishing. Mm-hmm. So let's go back real quick to when you were in high school in Gainesville, you said? Yes. And you were just like, there was a lot of wildlife around there, a lot of woods and a lot of lakes and a lot of, obviously, the golf is there. Yes. What were you doing when you were in high school? Like, you obviously went to school, but so just, you spent all your spare time just hunting and fishing and catching alligators. That kind of stuff. I would do things like, OK, tell my friends, I'm going to skip school, drop me off in the woods over here and pick me up in three days. Now, be out in the woods by myself, you know, eating, whatever I caught, surviving after drinking water right out of the swamp. I was doing, this is 17 years old. I was doing stupid stuff like that. You didn't know anybody else doing the same shit you were doing. You just want to go do it by yourself. I did it by myself. And later on, I talked friends of mine to come out with me. So I would go with some friends sometimes and do it. By that time, I wasn't by myself. And we go out and camp out and all that. Later on, my friends bring a tent, sleeping bags, things that didn't bring the first time. What was it that made you want to go do that? It's been three days in the wilderness, just hunting and catching and eating whatever you caught and being alone. And was there, there was no fear of anything? What were you like? I was attracted to that. Look, I didn't like fast cars. I don't like baseball. I didn't care for football. I didn't care for any of that. I cared for, I wanted to live off the land. I wanted to live like Tarzan, like the Native Americans, off the land hunting and fishing. And I used to watch sea hunt going on the water. So I got into spear fishing a lot where I made a living spear fishing for many years. That put me in contact with sharks. And one of my first shark in contrast was in the Bahamas. I had a shark, I'd bite a fin off my foot when I was 18 years old before I even saw the shark. The only thing I've ever seen in my life at that time was in their shark. How did you get to the Bahamas when you're 18? There was this boat captain. I had a man who used to lots of fish in the Bahamas back then it was legal. As long as you're 12 miles offshore. So my uncle said, hey, you want to go to the Bahamas and get your job in this boat? And I was like, sure, I want to go out there. So I wanted to dive. So I'd be picking up traps all day long. But I was looking at a water. I just couldn't wait to get in there. But we were working like crazy, the work was brutal. We were off to trapping as brutal. And these are Cuban guys are like, move it. Your slow work hard. They were yelling at you all day long like that. Were you allowed to spear them or gig them? No, you were in the Bahamas. I mean, they so hook them and put them in. But we weren't divers. The guys that went with were trappers. They were not divers. OK. So what are they to put crab traps down there? And they just put lots of traps. And they pull them in with a winch all day long. And you stack them, clean them, and bait them, and put them back again. I was exhausted every day. But the guy goes, OK, I went in a group or tonight. And they go, many go in the water and spear a grouper. So we're going to eat it tonight. So I jumped in, shot a grouper. And a shark came from behind me. And bit next thing you know, I thought it was one of the guys who's playing a joke on me. Wait a minute. Because the finkin flying right off my foot, I turn around, I saw a blur of a shark at a leaving at a million miles an hour. The fin floated. I let go of the group I just speared. Let go of that. The grouper took off the spear and all went into the bottom, went into a cave. They threw a rope over the front of the boat. One of the guys saw him hit me. So I climbed up the rope, right up the highest side of the boat, and got in there. And they put a small boat in the water. They picked up the fin. It was a floating fin. And they could see the jagged, or all the, he had missed my toes by that much. You could see the entire cut. Oh my god. With a shark of bit on my fin. What kind of shark was it, you know? I'm not sure if it was a thing. I think it might have been a lemon. I could remember seeing a yellowish color. So it could have been a lemon shark. It was so fast. I didn't know my shark very well at that time. I don't have any experience with him. Wow. 18 years old was your first shark. And then the guy, the cat then asked me, can you go back and get the spear gun? And back then I was like, you know, it's kind of scared. But as, you know, with those guys, you can't show, you know, you gotta be much all the way. So I jumped in, went down, swendown, looking everywhere, way, pull a group rod, went to a surface, and he goes, can you get another one? I couldn't shoot another fish. Every time I was gonna aim at a fish, I looked this way, I looked that way. I couldn't. Now years later, little that I know, I'd be hand feeding the sharks and riding them. Right. I got bit. Gosh. That was my fin. Later on in my life, I got bit by four different types of shark. I got bit by make all my finger while hand feeding. I got bit by Korean re-sharking my leg. And I got bit by a nurse shark in this leg, and I got bit by lemon and my fingers. Right. So I took some shark bites. So when you're 18, you're working for the commercial fishing company, you're catching lobsters. What, how long did you work for this company, commercial fishing in the Bahamas? That was just in the summer, just during the summers. Well, it's summer month. I was about 36 days one time, and I went one more time out, and I was out like 20-something days, and I never went out again. Mm. Wasn't for you. No, then later on, I got my own lobster license, and I would swim under the bridges and the keys. Cash lobsters and go sell them. I had a, all you needed was a $50 license. I could catch as many lobster as I wanted. And so, but the lobsters were, you know, hard to get and hard to find. I didn't have a boat of swimming around with a dive flag. And, you know, and there was a lot of current down there. So I would get a slight tide. You'd make the best of it. But half a time, be kicking against the current, and swimming down and grabbing lobster, and put them in a bag. So it was brutal work. At the end of the day, we'd just pull into the fish house. He's a payer and cash right there. Just put your lobster, it's a great life. Put your lobster's on a scale, and they pay you and cash. And you were, and you were how old doing this? Dad, I was in early 20s. Early 20s. But I'd tend to win that. And that's just how you made all your money. It was just doing that. I did that for a while, and later on, I got into some more people. You know, when I got into heavy doing it in the commercial spear fishing, I had one guy, we used to go down there catching up fish every day, pay for dinner, the hotel room, and go do it the next day all over again. But later on, I met some people in the Keys who were doing it more professional. We go out on trips, make more money, catch large amount of lobster with boats, people in you where we were going, and to be able to harvest more fish. Like long lines? No, no, spear fishing. All spear fishing. We would do the Goliath. Like I'm in one trip, we came back. I think we made like $1,400 with a Goliath group or each, you know, had to be paid for the gas. We paid for the food, paid for everything, and a third part for the boat. We divided up, you know, that's a good paycheck. Other days, I make $400, $500. This is a long time ago. So it was more money back then. We would spear grouper, snapper, hogfish. Also did tropicals for a while, and in lobster season, I would do lobsters, but whatever we found that had enough of worth money, we should, including the sharks. Really? I used to shoot the sharks before I started making the movies. Once I... What kind of sharks did you shoot? Most, the most. Well, we shot down there was lemon, bowl, and great hammerhead. God. Occasionally we would shoot a, you know, a great, even, re-shark and black tip. And were you, were hunting the sharks? They would just show up looking for your fish, and then you would just say... They were, but we would all, they got it from me. First thing we do, we shoot a bear, and we shoot a tight with a stringer. Like our guy would drop you off in the middle of the ocean, and pick you up later, or you'd have to swim a couple miles toward a boat with a boat with a anchor, and work your way that way. So we would be dragging fish with us, and when the shark would show up, we'd pop it, and we saw the shark. We used to sell the fins, sell the meat, cut the jaws out, put the pictures of the shark, hang up the jaws on the wall, we did all that. Then later on, we just wanted to start making money from being in the water interacting with sharks. That was more profit than that than killing the shark. So the shark was more available to us alive. So at that time, I was like, hey, they're killing too many sharks. At that time, we would have a hard time finding them. So it wasn't, you could spearfish all day long without ever seeing a shark. Sharks are being, then everybody got into commercial loglining for sharks, and they got depleted. It was really hard to find sharks. They were getting wiped out. What year roughly did commercial loglining for sharks start to kick up? It's, I would be probably 30 years ago, I would say, I'm trying to keep, okay, I wasn't, it's like the early 90s. My 40s, I would be in my 40s. Yeah, I would say early 90s and all that. They started picking up. Once they started protecting certain types of shark, like they put a ban on catching sandbar shark. Once a sandbar shark was protected, the commercial guys, there was no reason for to go longlining for shark anymore. You couldn't make any money. What is that shark? What kind of shark? Is that a make up? That's a make up. Yeah, that's not my shark. That's Mark the shark's make up. Okay. I came over with a scientist, Dr. Castro, to look at the shark. And so he got a picture with me. You know, he showed us. Where did he catch that? Miami. Oh Miami, okay. He's not allowed to get him anymore, but he's got permits. He's still out there catching sharks. Is he really? Oh yeah, yeah, he should bring him on the show. He won. Yeah, he's bombastic and he'll talk about it. Oh, is he? That's a big ass make up. Yeah. Yeah, it's, I think it was 10 feet. I remember. I've encountered makeups that big in Louisiana. I matter if I got for shark week, I was riding a big makeup. Anything bigger than that one is riding it. Yeah. I'm still hand feeding it and riding everything. I did a, a lot of stuff with makeups. I really like that. I like the makeups are good shark to work with very dangerous, but the open ocean sharks will come at you quicker because it's less food out there. Right. It's like a desert. Yeah, so it's more aggressive. Yeah. Which is, it's perfect. That's a make-or-shark. A lot of baby make-or. I was a, that was no, it's a make-or-carved out of bronze. Oh, you carved it? Yeah, it's, yeah, it's bronze. Whoa. You can't click on it. That's okay. Look at that, Manny. That's a bronze. I'm a, I'm an artist. So I sculpted that. That's, that's awesome. That's incredible. That weighs about 85 pounds. It's hollow, but it's so 85 pounds. But it looks like a real make-or- It looks exactly like a real make-or-it looks like, it looks like one of those taxidermy ones. Yeah, yeah. No, but I did a, by hand, I did a hammerhead and I did alligator and I did a go-life grouper. So runs. So when you started doing this commercial spear fishing in like your early 20s, what, what was it that made you, did you just like have this inner sort of desire to push the limits farther than anybody else? Like, did you feel like that was kind of what you were destined to do? Like you wanted to kind of outdo everybody else, dive deeper than everybody else, find like catch these fish like more primitively than anybody else was. Like what was it in you that made you? At first, I wanted to make a living, instead of jobs that I didn't like, I wanted a spear fish for living. Is that a one-how-a-a job? I like the idea of going out there to challenge of catching fish. Then later on, I was always attracted to catching fish instead of with a spear with my hands. And I had fantasies of catching sharks with my hands. So later on, that'll happen. Just like catching alligators by hand. In high school, I was catching alligators by hand. But I'm saying like, what was it in you that made you have this desire to do this? Like what made you want to push all these limits and do all these things that nobody else has ever done? I wanted to do what my fantasies were when I was a child. I wanted to do what Tarzan did in movies. It wasn't real. I wanted to do it for real. And I said, I may not be the deepest dive in the world or the best spear fish in the world. But when I came to hand fishing and all the stuff, yeah, I took off with that. Well, people wouldn't think of that. They wouldn't cross your mind to try to do, to catch a jungle eye at or to catch a shark with their hands and things like that. It all started kicking into me. As the more I learned, I started. to try to do, to catch a jangle-eye-eth or to catch a shark with their hands and things like that, that all started kicking into me. As the more I learned, I started studying them and looking at them and I would pick up. I can get close to them. I can do this. I start seeing ideas like that. By catching a bear a kudu with a knife, I saw how close a bear a kudu came to me. And it's telling me, pull out your knife and get one. And I did. But I literally hit him in my hands first. So I said, if I can touch him, as you're attacking the fish, I hit him my hand. If I can touch him, I can get one with a knife. And I stuck and it grabbed him by the neck real quick. That's the only kudu ever caught with a knife. Evolve it a slit. The kudu probably bit me right here. I had him right here like this. Yeah, bear kudu are terrifying fish. Even when I'm diving into spear fishing, I'm almost more afraid of bear kudu than I've seen a shark. Do you feel the same way? No, I'm not. I mean, you're not afraid of any. I'm not afraid of a shark. I shot a lot of bear kudu to feed the sharks and for me to eat. But I've shot so many kudu that I can never count them. Big one, small ones. And type in mani-pewig after bear kudu and see it, find some of the photos. But like, I know a lot of people have been hurt by bear kudu as well. Yeah, they're there and they get humongous. They get bigger than some sharks too. Now the biggest kudu I've ever read about was long six feet, nine inches. And so walk me through how you caught that bear kudu like what was going on. There was a spear fishing competition. Oh, Mayor, they invited me there. I was they sponsored me so that went up there. And it was in North Carolina. They went out of banks. So the bunch of groups are there. So I wasn't I wasn't participating. I was just hanging out. So I could go with any crew I wanted that day. And I went with Edics a lot of them, at least PEDA. These are a doctor and an engineer, both of them are fanatical spear fishermen from Cuba. And they're very classy guys. But but you look out of you couldn't believe how good these guys can dive. But they go to all these competitions. So those guys were in the water diving. They're, you know, they're getting the fish I need for the competition. free diving or scuba diving free diving. It's all free diving. So it's in deep water. They're going probably halfway down wherever it's 150 to the bottom. And the guy in the boat says, many can you get me a spadefish or a sheep that is, you know, I want to take a home to eat the, the meat and the boat asking, it's no problem. So I took the pulse here, cheap. The spadefish swim like mid water. So I went down shot a spadefish. And no time there were like 20 barracuras on top attacking me. And they were biting at the, at the spadefish. It really, it ridder bite my hands. And I was literally pushing them away. I couldn't keep them off of me. So it occurred to me to pull the knife out, stick it. So I stuck with a knife and grabbed it by the gills immediately. When I stabbed them, he bit harder on the piece of fish. And that gave me the break to grab them real quick. Have not he go to turn on me. Then I brought them back, a bull shark came up. He wanted to eat it. But I wanted a picture with that kuda that never caught one with a knife. I'm not going to catch another one. So I want to boat it and get a picture with it. So I wouldn't let the bull shark have it. So what did you do to get the bull shark done? Not to eat it. I pulled away, pulled away from him, charged him. I got aggressive with the charge, the bull shark. When you're being attacked by shark, if you show aggression, that's usually a good way to save you most of the time. Not always. It'll work. You want to stay safe from sharks. There's nothing better than trust in the Lord I got because there are his creatures. He said me from them many times. Let's put it this way. How did you know that? How did you know to charge him? You had you been in that situation before? This episode of the podcast is brought to you by Express VPN. When you use the bathroom, you always close the door behind you, right? You don't want some random passerby looking at you. So why would you let people look in on you when you go online? Using the internet without Express VPN is like using the bathroom and not shutting the door. Did you know that internet service providers like AT&T and Verizon know every single website you visit? And what's worse is they sell this information to add companies and tech giants who will use that data to target you. Express VPN puts a stop to all of this. It creates a secure encrypted tunnel between you and your device and the internet so that your online activity can't be seen by anyone. I personally love using Express VPN because Netflix only gives you a small fraction of their entire content library, depending on where you're located. But with Express VPN, you can access 100% of their content library, giving you access to thousands of more shows. And the best part is using Express VPN is as easy as closing the bathroom door. All you gotta do is fire up the app, press one button, and you're protected. Express VPN is the world's number one rated VPN by tech radar, the verge, and countless others. So if you're like me and you think your online activity is your business, secure yourself by visiting ExpressVPN.com forward slash Danny today. Use my link and get an extra three months for free. It's ExpressVPN.com forward slash Danny. It's linked below now back to the show. Yeah, you got to fight back. Whereas if you run from them, I did that experiment. I saw a shark. Okay. I'm going to swim as fast as I can to both to get away, right? Uh huh. I turn around. The shark was on me immediately. I did it again. He attacked me again. So I figured out, okay, if I go after him, he runs you the way. But if you start panicking trying to get away, he attacks if he's hungry. Well, like when you're free diving, you'll go down. And as you're coming up for air, sometimes you look down and you see a shark following you because you see things you're running away from him and you really need to get up for air. But it looks like you're on the run. So you're acting like prey. Right. He is a predator, predator attacks prey. If you act like a predator, you scare him away because he thinks you're going to shark's attacking each other. He thinks you're going to take a chunk out of him. Like a bull shark would get attacked by a large great hammerhead, for example. Right. So he's going to have a short aggression. His natural instinct is to run from you. So you can bluff him. Wow. Doesn't always work. You were able to scare the bull shark away and you got that bear cut in the boat. I've had to fight off bull sharks a million times in my life. It was a spear fisherman. And also I used to create shark feeding friends. He's for, you know, to interact for, for the shows and stuff. So you can probably, there's videos on YouTube of spear fisherman literally chumming up bull sharks and then chasing the bull sharks to shoot cobia off of their backs. And it is like a, I think that's a thing people do still on the east coast where because these giant bull sharks, he's like 12, 15 foot long bull sharks will just be cruising. And there'll be these huge cobia that just swim like alongside them. They attract the shark by pulling the rubber bands on their speargun and popping them. Then the bull shark thinks you're shooting fish. He runs up or they take a plastic bottle and make a sound with it. A crackling sound. So when he comes up, the guys will go. That one on the very right top right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They, uh, those are falling a tiger. See, they also follow the rays. See, but what happens is everyone's so wild, the shark is actually very hungry. That's that that, that, that, so there's video that there's cobia actually swimming on top of the bull sharks. And they should they, they, they followed from behind when they shoot on sometimes the shark will turn around and attack. I know divers have been demolished by doing that by bull shark after they shoot the cobia, the shark turns around and said it went after cobia was after the diver. And tears in the part seems like a bad idea. It, it's a great, these guys are gutsy. It's a great adventure. It's not so weird to catch a fish, but it's a bad idea. Was you going to get killed sooner or later? Right. So have you ever done this? No, but I've done other things. I shot, I shot, I shot fish when I running out of bait. I shoot fish right there to attract the sharks and everything. I, I've done everything you can imagine, you know, to, to attract the look at this. Look at this. There we go. See. Yeah, full screen. This if you can't see it. Yeah, there's bull sharks to see everywhere there. So look, they're surrounded by bull sharks. Yeah, well, a lot of guys got hurt doing that. They may get away with no, no, no, they, there's like a hundred bull sharks all around them. Yeah, they're looking for cobia following one of them. There's your cold. So there's cobia right there. Yep. See, shoots the cobia, no sharks are chasing him. Well, sometimes the shark is not hungry. He's, he's got to be hungry for that to happen. If that shark wanted to, couldn't he just turn around and eat that cobia? He'd they do sometimes. Sometimes they'll eat the cobia or the times they'll eat the, I'm saying like before that shoot it, before like, even if the, no, let it look, see, there's a bull shark on your attack right there. See how the guy's going to turn them off? No, no, rewind that by like 30 seconds. Yeah, yeah, he knew what he was doing. Okay. All right, let's see what's going on. Shot the cobia. He's swimming back to the surface. He gets a bull shark attack. Okay. See, oh, he just pointed the thing out of the, if he, if he turned around, try to get the boat that bull shark would have killed them. They're getting fired. Oh, God. See, yeah, look at that. See how they, they're under attack and there's blood everywhere and everything. Okay. Get out of the water. Get out. Now, what, where does like a bull shark rank on like as far as like dangerous sharks? Probably the world's most dangerous shark. Why is that? Okay. This is how clear the water is and imagine being attacked like that. And you're in the inter coastal with zero visibility. You won't see him coming. Right. They go up river. They go in the beaches and they attack people. He's a coastal shark and he's got a holosha stemper on top of that. He is a man killer man eater and he's got a holosha stemper and his bite is lethal. The teeth are razor sharp. You can shave your arms with them and they can, they can bite three times harder than a great white shark. Three times harder. Yeah, they're smaller, but they're deadlier. So, so how would you compare? How is that their, their bite is harder than a great white? But why isn't a great white? So if you were, if you were hypothetically, we put you in a swimming pool with a great white in a bull shark, how would the great white be, or how would the bull shark be deadlier? Because it would just be more aggressive to eat you. There's more than a minute water. They're, they're very shy, but they're very explosive in their attacks. And great whites are picky eaters. The bull is not as picky. Oh, okay. Like a tiger usually eats a person because he's not as picky eater. He's, died at very rare it, but a tiger shark doesn't have a bad temper. New it is a great white, like a bull shark does. Okay, bull shark in lemons have bad tempers. They have high levels of testosterone. If, if you spear him and he's on the end of line, he'll come after you. If you're catching on rod and reel and get into water with him, usually he'll come after you. Yeah, these guys are still shooting these cobia surrounded by these bull sharks. That might be different days put together. But yeah, a lot of guys have been bit doing that. So this is just normal for when you were spear fishing, doing these competitions, it was just normal to see these bull sharks. You just kind of be a guy to know you cognitive for a while. There's a lot of bull shark out there right now. For many years, there was no sharks. The, the commercial longlining have decimated them. And it was hardly any sharks around. So, you know, so they pass all the conservation laws. Now they're back. What year did they pass those conversation? I'm not sure. They came a little bit little. You know, understand I was out of commercial spear fisher for quite a while. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They started. No, they, they, one species after another started being stopped. You know, you want a lot to kill the, the dusky one fin makele, a oil shark, great way shark is protected. That's what is more and more now right now. So, of course, when you protect something, they come back, the glide group of us hunted to oblivion. Now it's coming back. You start seeing more and more of the sharks are everywhere. There's a this balance out there. You know, it won't sound well. A good shark tournament. The balance things out might get good idea. Yeah. I like the spearing because you could target the type of shark they need to be targeted. Yeah. Instead of the real rare species, you don't want to catch it on by catch. So, my idea was, you know, spearing tournament. That's my idea. Nobody, nobody's ever going to agree with me. But right, to go out and, and have a tournament, let the guy shoot soil sharks every so often to kind of like, level out the fish in shark population to a balance. Because it's, it's, if you talk to divers and fishermen, they can't get efficient about half of the time. So, is it a, do you think there's a problem with there being, you said there's way too many sharks out there right now? And then people see them everywhere. Do you think there's a problem with there being too many sharks? If you're like a biologist, he says, well, to help the ocean is full dangerous sharks. But if you're just a human being, what's going to water? It's a bad idea. You know, it's, it's a balance because, depends how you look at it. You know, the health of the ocean is a dangerous ocean. But I believe that, you know, God gave us a right to fish, hunt and, you know, grow crops, harvest food, harvest lumber, whatever we need from your earth provides. So, we're not, we don't worship the sharks. The shark, you know, they're in the ocean, but we're caretakers, but they're like, oh, it belongs to them. They're the gods of the sea. No, they're not. There's, there's a God that made them, but they're not the gods of the sea. Many pigs that got of the sea. No, no, no, no. If there's any human that's closest to Poseidon, it's you. Keep it humble. I'm, I believe in Jesus Christ is my Lord and Savior. And I keep it, I keep it up that, does this creation, does this ocean? So, his creation has been my adventure. He kept me alive because he can let those animals tear you apart to keep me humble. They're once in a while you get things like this. Oh, yeah, show, show it, hold it up on this side. Man, he's got the, the permaciacor. This is a rattlesink bite. That's the second rattlesink bite. I got, I got bitten high school on this thumb. I came out okay from that one. This is a Western down and back in Texas. And that was a bad bite. Yeah, we're going to, I want to get to that. I want to stay on the sharks for a little bit though. I got bit by sharks. I got bit by now to get in the back. Can my good from that one? I came out good from everything except maybe this one. I got gored by a board in this form too. There's more and more stories popping up every day about people being attacked by sharks. It seems like it's, I don't know. Like it's hard to understand to really know if it's just the media blowing shit out of proportion or if this stuff happens all the time. It's increasing. It's increasing because it's more sharks out there and is more people in the water. So when you put a lot of people with a lot of sharks in the water, you're going to get more incidents. Wildlife is making a comeback around the world in many places and there is a lot of wildlife attacking people. As far as bears, tigers, lions, things like that. Do you know any like the numbers as far as like shark population is now compared to like 30 years ago? A whole lot more. A whole lot more. A whole lot more. Not worldwide. U.S. waters. Now worldwide, yeah, we talk about tiger population as grown in India for example. Leopards in Africa? Yeah, it's growing tremendously. Mountlines in North America, yeah, including Florida. Yeah, they're increasing. Bears are increasing. A few places wildlife sort of wildlife is very endangered. You know, so much in tiger is in trouble. You know, a few species like that. Gorillas are thriving. Lowland gorilla. Mount gorilla, maybe not so. But the lowland, this part's in a Congo with this hundreds, a couple hundred thousand of them. And why are these animals like why is there a population growing so fast? Protection loss and I also believe this end time God might be multiplying the animals for the end time. But they're going to attack people. Can you explain your belief in that? The pale the pale rider and the Bible kills one fourth world's population through war, hunger, disease, pestilence, and by the beast of the earth, wild animals. The pale rider. It's a symbol of death. This is a fortune. That's a biblical thing. So apart from all the know about wildlife, I believe the Bible word for word. And so it's fitting in the pattern. You got more wildlife, more attacks, the wolf populations are growing around the world. And it's more now do I like wildlife? Yeah, I'm a fanatic about all I'm fascinated with bears, sharks, alligators, all kinds of fish, all kinds of wildlife, but I'm a fanatic of all that. But I'm aware that these attacks have been increasing more and more like the snakes kill a hundred thousand a hundred thousand people a year. Then a messnakes, they secure a lot less than that. It's just it's growing. How many people do sharks kill a year? Do you know? Not as many as like maybe maybe crocodiles and all that. They don't really know. Oh, that's great white shark population is booming researchers say. This is posted literally last month. Okay, the result a little bit. The result of that is it's real simple. You can't kill seals, which is what they eat and you can't kill them. So we've made this world this design. Well, it's a great way shark haven right there. A summer begins and people spend more time in the ocean. Researchers are on the verge of learning more about the mysterious apex predators. That's something to me the surface on the research ship, the Atlantic, any Atlantic Ocean 12 miles off the coast of the Carolina group of scientists. I've been studying and tracking great white sharks. We're seeing an ocean that's teeming with life. Like we haven't haven't seen since the 40s or 50s. Chris Fisher founder of the research organization, Oserch told CBS News. Oserch has been studying and tagging great whites for the last decade and that time Fisher has observed an increase in the number of white sharks. Okay. Wow. So you believe me now? Oh yeah. I never doubted you. Okay. When I was doing my spear fishing, I never once encountered a tiger shark on the Atlantic. Not one time. Now the guy see them all the time. They had been wiped out. There were no tiger sharks left and the 50s are were. But after that gone. Now when I found my first tigers, we were 100 miles into Gulf of Mexico with a 500 pounds of kuda ripping them apart. Our after hour after hour, we had a couple hundred sharks around us before the tigers finally showed up. Those were my first tigers and I was hands on how are you coming them up with what? Barracuda Barracuda. We went out there with spirit kuda after kuda after kuda after kuda. Every kuda is spirit potential can bite you. But that was like normal every day. Especially filming the sharks. You got to feed them. Or then I come. So you know, you don't buy bait. They like fresh. So they get fresh food. You got to get it right there. We were spirit Barracuda feed them. When I went to Hawaii, they brought me fresh skipjack tuna. And that's what I fed the tigers over there. So you were saying a minute ago, we kind of got up track, but you were saying that the sound of pop in the bands on a spear gun attracts the sharks now because sharks how how recent is that? Sharks are very smart. They learn. Yeah. They they certain places where they know when the fish are pulling up of the boat and they drop anchor and he's going to start fishing. They pull up because they know he's going to catch fish. You're going to steal them. Sharks are not stupid. They're smart. Alligators are not stupid. They're smart. But Florida, we have alligator attacks and shark attacks. There, I know in US waters are big because they're protected. Now if you go to maybe South China Sea, they might be getting exterminated over there. And I sure like the China is just about wiped out the Chinese tiger. Really? Yeah. They have been sure in tiger, which is borders Russia because that's really a Russian Russian protect it. There, there have been two 10 12 foot tiger sharks that have been caught right off the beach right here in the last week. Yeah. 20 years ago, you won here. That was unheard of. Right. The tigers are back. Have you, let's pull up that video that guy in Egypt who got eaten by the tiger shark. Now I told you some of the phone. I was like freaked out when I saw this because I have I already pulled a tablet for you. I have never heard other than like open ocean shipwrecks with like, you know, way out in the middle of the ocean where like the oceanic white tips will devour and eat the people because there's nothing else to eat. It's like a desert out there. But I've never heard of a story of somebody near the beach getting fully devoured by a shark. I got hurt. Like obviously you hear the bites. Well, there was a girl killed in shallow water in the Bahamas in front of her parents by three tiger sharks, eight in front of her family recently. There's no video of it, but they killed her. The parents saw it. Three of them. Three tiger shark gang up on the daughter. Hogg Island. Right there with the hogs of the swimming. Yeah. Oh, yeah. The shallow water shows inner swimming. What? And they got her there. There's a lot of, there's a tiger beach in the Bahamas. There's a lot of tigers here. And they, you know, when they seem to hungry, they're not docile. They can pick up speed and they're devastating predators. Do you think there's a little watch this? Oh, yeah, full screen that video. And the red sea, the red sea has, when you're off the shore, just a little distance, it drops to incredible depth. Oh, really? So you could be on the beach and you can see an oceanic white tip. Because you swim a hundred feet from shore in some places and it drops thousands of feet. So you have these ocean sharks, a commander. There were three attacks in the red sea, not too long ago by Mako shark and oceanic white tip. The Mako they caught them later on with human remains on his belly. And because you go off, there were divers, you go off the reef, you know, hundred feet or so when you're ready and the middle of the ocean because it's so the pelagic sharks can visit you right there with the red sea as tigers, make goals and oceanic white tips. Yeah, I think this was like the third tiger shark, fatality in like the last two years off of the same beach in Egypt. Yeah, it's that what's going on is not full screening. What the frick. There you go. There it goes right there. Not full screening. That's okay. It doesn't matter because we're not going to see it anyways. So what is the shark doing to him right there? Removing cutting up to pieces. There we go. This body the next day screaming. It's getting for health. It might have been a leg off already. There's this horrible. There he goes. Look at understand that. He's attacking like this. A turtle. He's barely moving. Okay. A tiger shark's teeth. Look. Okay, you can pause it. A tiger shark's teeth look like this. They aim this way. And then they also aim the other way. So what it does is designed for cutting turtle shells in half. So he saw us back and forth. They can slide through bones and everything like this. That's what a teeth saw is not just like a giant saw one after another goes like this. So he does this. And then he'll they'll he'll keep sawing till they cut a piece of turtle shell to eat the sea turtles. So it's a tiger shark is is designed. It's a devastating predator. Yeah. And I guess this was a this was actually a pregnant from what I read. This was a pregnant female. That was like roaming around. They had footage of the shark actually on Twitter swimming like around the docks very slowly. And they saw it like up to an hour before this happens. Looking for food. Sometimes you know they don't find fish to lead to person. So what do you do? What what would you do in this situation? Well, if you were this kid out there, though, go into water. It was clear water, which it is out there. Don't wonder water without a mask, snorkeling fins and bring a shark. Billy with you to push a shark off to discourage his attack. Mm-hmm. You know, make him go somewhere else. Fight him, something to fight him with. But if you don't have any of that, like if you're just swimming with no God, no fins, no, no, no, no, but I'm saying if you already are, what the hell do you do? Nothing. You can't do anything about it. That guy, no, he's sitting duck. You can't do anything about it. That's in, you know, pray. Pray to the God that he changes the sense of sharks on a miracle, only a miracle, and save him at that time. What about like if hypothetically, you're in that situation, do you try to charge it? Do you try to swim towards it? What do you try to do? Well, grab its skills. Have these in shallow water and you can run up to it and see him, you can kick him when he comes near your son. I got the water's like this deep. But if you you're overhead and everything, you come from below, you don't know where he's coming from. You don't have a mask on. You have no idea. You're sitting in the blind. You're sitting duck. You're totally helpless. But a skilled diver like those guys are hunting the cobas or myself, whatever you can fight him off. I've had to fight off sharks many, many times on the attacks. I mean, super intense attacks. If you're on the beach watching this, I was too comfortable out there doing this kind of stuff. Way, way, way too, on my life. It was like a second nature to me to be in a middle of a shark feeding frenzy. It's like being in a party. It was just enjoy every minute of it. But that's part of it too though, because you're so calm. The sharks don't sense any sort of fuel. If you get excited, sometimes it back away, it can affect them in different ways. But the whole idea was for me to get the sharks fired up, so they will come in aggressively to get foodish. They're often at distance. You're not getting anything. So you want the sharks on you. Now, that does what puts everybody who's ever working with with you and severe danger. People start to get scared too. People, if you have people with you, they're not scared. They'll be right there with you. There are people that are like that kind of stuff and they'll stay right there. Not everybody was willing to do that. But I give people a false sense of security when I was walking about that. Steve was saying whenever there were in his in the water with you, he wasn't as scared because you were there. He felt protected. He wouldn't pay attention. It's a false sense of security, but it works. at that. He's more comfortable there. I put him in bad stuff on a surfboard with a bunch of sharks biting fish around the surfboard. Did it you tell me that he wanted him or Chris Pontius? They wanted to be trolled through Boca Grande and a tarpon suit. They told, they did all, I'm trying to remember everything. They come up with a bunch of ideas that I didn't do all of the ideas they had. I noticed one thing we did troll Chris through a pack of killer whales in Alaska, which is probably the worst thing ever. Everybody thinks killer whales are just no no killer whales are dangerous. They're dangerous. The thing about I can bluff a shark. I can defend myself. You believe most of those guys can buy killer whales or after you, then you're going to be able to do anything. I've never heard of the killer whale attacking the human being of you. Well, and and C-World won kill three people. Right. Yeah. That one murdered three people because of what they fucking did to it. They put it in prison. What about if a killer whale in the ocean decides it doesn't like you or feels like it doesn't have any laws. He doesn't have a rule book. Okay. Unnets about some other people. Where does that? He could just like any animal. Listen, a horse can come up and kick him by you. Right. Okay. A dog will bite you sometimes. Sometimes they won't kill a whale's. They have different personalities. Don't they like, they kill great whites. They know how they're smart. They know how to kill everything out there. Just, you know, like, if I'm going to catch a fish strategically, you figure it out how to do it. They strategically figure, okay, that whale's bigger than the nurse, but we're going to gang up on it. We're going to attack it this way. They figure out how to to do their, their hunt and how to get it. Yeah. So when you were, oh, yeah, and they beat themselves too, they literally fricking swim up on the beach and eat, eat seals and stuff. Look at that. God. Yeah, those things are crazy. The wild world is dangerous place. You swam with orcas, right? Yeah. In Alaska. Walk me through that day and what you were doing and what made you decide to jump off the boat. Or what? What would you orcas? We're making a show. We need action. I had the, we're doing wild boys. And we went out whale watching. So I put on my suit. They go, okay, there's a part of killer whales coming this way. I'm totally captain. Okay. They're heading that way. Take your boat, pull up a front, drop me off and their path. So, so they'll intercept me. And that's how we did that. And they came to roll close to me. The water's very dirty. So I get only see them and they were very, very close to me. What visibility was like, what? Four or five feet. I don't think I could see you. Wow. That's the dirty. It was. But I could see the fins and all that coming up. And then finally, a tool in the approach. And I could see the black and white on them real close to me like that. They stare at me up close. And that's the gate of me. But like I do, just bite you. That's it. Any turn to. They just grab on you and just drag you down. But when you're adrenaline's running or doing a show, it's like the pressure is on. Let's make, make things happen. You know, you want to do the best of what you're. Any thing to help, they just grab on you and just drag you out. But when your adrenaline's running or doing a show, it's like the pressure is on, let's make things happen. You know, you want to do the best of where you want your job to be the best. What was going through your head when those orcas were something right towards you? Were you scared? Were you comfortable? Were you just full of adrenaline? I wasn't as full of adrenaline, but I shouldn't be comfortable. I shouldn't do that again. But at that time, the water's very dirty. People didn't later on in clear water, but I didn't dirty water. And some people think everything, nothing is fine. You feel like for a while, okay, we're okay, we're fine. They didn't hurt anybody. We're fine. Keep going. Okay, we got what we wanted to just get out of here. It's enough is enough. Oh, what is that? An orc attack in a human sea world. Yeah. Jeez. Yeah, that's brutal, man. See, everything's okay one minute. You don't know what a killer will think sometimes. That's an intelligent animal. Every animal, every alligator, when we haven't talked much about alligators, I spend many years among the alligators daytime, nighttime, diving through them at all hours, everything big ones, small ones, hand catching, riding, levitating, tonne of gimbal ability to your name. Well, let's let's go into that. I want to watch that video of you with the makeos real quick. Okay, let's uh, that's one of the tabs where he's a, that's that's the one right there. So what were you guys doing this day? Who this was filming for? We're looking, we're on the middle, the Pacific Ocean. Full screen. This one, I think, yeah, in a full and a Pacific Ocean. And all the time you're asking me to talk about, I don't want to talk about it until it happens. I don't know what's going to happen. This is off the coast of California. Yeah, see, that's that's uh, yeah, that's a make or right there. But you see, I hand feed and I put my hand underneath them and I lift up on them. Okay, that's a small or make. We have six makeles and three blue sharks that day. So you guys are chumming up Barracuda and yeah, they actually come in here, but what really does it see that fish right there? Yeah, I'm going to take my knife and work it, right? See what I'm doing right there? That's what makes it happen. That's what draws the sharks in. Okay, the the knife is a secret for all that. That's a small makele. So yeah, that was the first one that showed up and you guys are just you guys are literally surrounded by a chum tornado. I, I grabbed this one or another one and then I flip a big one on his back. This one, I, I lit him out of the water and I show him to everybody. It is the fastest shark in the world. The makeo. Yes, so you don't want to move fast. So you want to let him get comfortable like right there. You want him to go slow. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, you just you just got to take it easy and don't move fast. Let him come around you. You don't want to scare him. Uh, this one bites the, the float. They get, they get feisty. Uh, makeles very dangerous, but see this makeles never going to see another human being again. He lives in the middle of the ocean. Right. Right. So I like working with him because people say, well, man, you're, you're working these, these sharks around the beach, you know, these, the blues and makeles are not coming to shore. I've worked coastal sharks before, but it's been a long time and I won't, I won't work them again. If I do sharks again, it'll be open ocean. That way, they don't, whatever I do with them, they don't learn. They don't pick up custom. They want to tack people on the beach. Stay out in the ocean. So people are safe. You don't want them getting comfortable with humans too. Oh, yeah, you put them on its back. Wow. You're feeding this little makele and he's just shredding this fish right out of your hands. That is wild. So yeah, that's the fear, right? That's the fear when you interact with all these sharks all the time and you're swimming with them and spear fishing with them all the time. They get used to human beings. They're not afraid anymore. If you're spear fishing, you're worse off because your busy struggling with the fish when the shark comes from behind and gets you the sharks and the tag from behind when you don't see look at that thing. Was that like a 10 footer? Probably about eight. It's a nice size makele. Always exaggerating under sure. We're not sure in a size, but it's a it's a probably about 300 pounds. They're very heavy. A lot of heavy and they look their dense. They're very muscular. Were you ever close to being bit that day or the day like try to bite you? One blue shark almost bit the producer. A blue shark almost bit me an astemic. There's a scene in there where I'm pushing off a blue shark off my stomach as I'm feeding a makele and the blue comes in to bite both at the same time. Okay. What is that? What is that? Blue shark? Yeah. We have three blue sharks. What is the store with blue sharks? They're deadly. As deadly as makeos. They're different. They're both them very dangerous. But a blue shark of you off from your hand, he'll take it. Go here. Are you gonna bite this? Just come up and he'll grab it. Yeah, they're weird. Look at that. I'm hand feeding them right there. So you did this with Steve O and those guys too. We did not this part. But I did with them is I did I put them on a surfboard one time in the Gulf of Mexico. We put a bunch of fish around and we had about 25 silky sharks and eight huge tusksies showed up. I had them there. I also had them with a makele and hammerhead and makele. I put them with a hammerhead and makele and and Louisiana. Also, the two in Louisiana and also put them before with a lemon shark and shallow water swimming around them. So I've had them about three different times with good, good sharks of the make almost bit his leg off. That was a classic. Is that when you got bit by the lemon shark? No, I got bit by lemon shark when we used to dive on in front of the boat. Oh, okay. At what point were you riding those great hammerheads? That was a set one day and I looked at a footage and said, I can ride these things and people said, you're not, no, you're not going to build it. They're not going to let you do that. And I went out planning on doing it and I did it. Where were you? And the keys and the keys. So after that, I just rode plenty of hammerheads. He doesn't have a bad temper. I discovered that. I rode a boat shark and I rode a short distance. And when I let go of a boat shark, we're not going to have to make everything you had. Really? I had to fight them off. I pointed you off. It's right off. My kicking him, punching him, everything you can imagine. You didn't have a spear gun or anything or knife or anything? No. That time, because we had a, we had pole spears for getting bait. But we were, you know, a lot of times we'd drop everything and we were in there with our hands, but we were getting bait. We had some stingrays that we had a kill down there and they devoured stingrays in no time. A bunch of bulls were showed up. They devoured at a water very dirty tune. And I went down and I caught a ride in one of them. It was a huge one. And I knew that not to, not to stay on that very long, very short rider he's going to come and get something on the lemon. All right. He'll come back and get you. Can you find a footage of him riding the hammerheads? Because that, that footage is wild. Because the hammerheads are interesting too. Would you, like the hammerheads, they never bite humans. Do they? The lumbar attack of human on the beach. I've never heard of a hammerhead. Yeah, hammerhead will attack. They will. Yeah. Yeah. All right. So we wanted to, we were just looking at, we were trying to find the footage you ride in the hammerhead, but you rode a Mako. So this is footage of you. I'm catching, catching, catching, catching a Mako. Your hand catching a Mako shark. Holy shit. Take a front of the first. It shows you how I grab them at first. So if you want rewind, like a little bit, maybe a minute. Okay, look at that thing. How big is that Mako shark right there? That Mako is above, I say five and a half feet, about a hundred and something pounds. This is a very strong shark. It looks much bigger than five and a half feet. It might be. It might be. It's very, uh, understand a very dense. It could be on an 80 pounds. See, I, I eat my hands on them. Yeah. Because there he goes. He's like, what the fuck is happening? Yeah. So this is how you hand catch a Mako shark. He's not trying to bite you at all. If you give them the chance, you will. Manny, that is the most insane thing I've ever seen. People that are just listening, Manny is hugging this six foot Mako shark. And the thing is swimming full speed and Manny is not letting go of it. I'm gonna let go when I, when I get back, I told a guy, I'm gonna end up back at the boat. If I didn't have camera with me or something, I needed to eat. We were to kept them and settle in. I'm gonna let them, there's a producer right now is mouse open. Yeah, I'm gonna let them go. But I would, uh, I would try to keep them. But you know, we got the footage. You know that Mako state was the rest of the day. Did he really after you did that to him? He hung out the rest of the day. All the Mako state was. I'm like, Manny, come back. I want seconds. No, they don't, they don't really care. This is another one to show that they kept getting bigger ones and bigger ones. That's a blue, the blues are kind of goofy looking. I like little torpedoes. Yeah, yeah, they are. You know, this is a weird looking shark is the thrasher shark. They're kind of goofy look. I've never seen one. They can hit you with a tail. That's what they do. Yeah, they have a massive tail. This is a classic shark though. This is like for fishermen when it's hooked to jump 20 feet in the air, landing the boat, bite the fishermen. The Mako. Oh yeah, they'll jump right into the boat. Yeah, there's, uh, there's that girl. What's her name? Ocean Ramsey. I think she rides great whites. Like she should be like holding onto this great white riding in Mexico. And I think it's in Hawaii. And oh, that's in Hawaii. There's great whites in Hawaii, really? Yeah, they think that some of those sharks, if they're well fed and all that, they're not hungry. You can put your whole family on there. You know, they're not going to do any of their videos on Instagram or absurd. She is swimming and like like kissing these 20 foot tiger sharks on the mouth, like on the nose. And they're like, they're all there's a lot of people doing that right now. I wasn't Hawaii messing with them 20 something years ago before they were. And she picked up where Jimmy Hall left off and everything, those guys. But I was out, I opened the door for the fighters. Click that top one. So you can't do this unless you know for a fact that shark is well fed, right? Like you don't, you don't. They, they show the docile side. I would fire the sharks up. So I did a different right, right. But still to ride a great white, they, you can ride one tomorrow. If you get the wrong one the wrong time, it might not come out as well. So they have like, they have like different personalities. Well, this shark has not been aggressive. It's not been hungry. It's none of that. He's just cruising. Yeah. She dies down and she grabs his great white by the dorsal fin. At that point, if you want to kill you, he can. Oh my God. At that point, that's like, he's us. At that point, it's like riding a whale shark. How big is that thing, man? I think the biggest one ever taken was 19 and a half feet and Cuba. It was long line when they were unknown for the liver. Sharks are depleted back in 1945. Completely. The ocean was wiped out. Then they came back. Then they pleaded again and now they're back again. So it's always been depending on the harvesting. There's been a bunch of tiger sharks attacking people in I think in the Hawaii recently. There was that you saw the video, the tiger shark attacking the guy in the kayak. Yeah. The thing just like torpedoes and grabs his kayak. Why in the old days, they've always had shark attacks here. They have a higher tiger shark population than other areas. They don't have bull sharks in Hawaii to compete with them. This is it. Yeah. But that's crazy for a tiger shark to do that to a kayak. Look at this. They, you just had a full screen. See, when that shark is acting like that, I've had them before where they attacked the Olua. You know the boat. They attacked the cameraman. See, if you jump in with that shark at that moment, it may not be a docile. It may be a, if you, if you, that shark sneaks up on you, it's not going to be, it's not going to be pretty. Right. See the speed of where she comes. You got to know people who know who to play with. Who not to write. There was that. There was a, I told you in another story recently. There was this film crew that was out off one of one of the, one of the outer islands off of Oahu. And they were like scouting for a film shoot or whatever. And they had out one of those inflatable motor. What does it call? What are the inflatable boats called? But the motors on them? Oh, yeah. Um, sorry. Yeah, the zodiac. There were an zodiac and a tiger shark bit the zodiac, like a bunch of times. The thing was deflating. So they had to like haul ass back to shore. They're like 300 yards or something off the beach. So they had to like take the zodiac full speed back to the beach. They got back just in time. But the, the tiger followed them all the way back to the beach. These tiger sharks, the animals, they have behaviors that humans, beings have never seen before. When people think they know everything, they don't know anything. They're going to do something you've never seen until before. They seem hungrier than they've ever been though. They seem like they're fucking with us more and more. Well, if there's more sharks, they're going to wipe out their food supply. Right. Right. And you know, it's just like normal. So there's more. The more sharks there are, the less fish there are to go around. Something like that. In Brazil, there was people of the slaughterhouse. So he's throw all the littorts from the cows into the ocean and the bullshirts are coming in. They shut down the slaughterhouse. So the sharks move them to the beach and start attacking people. So that's that's another result of that. We've always fed animals. Just in the last few years, people say, Oh, it's bad to feed you all. But men have for hundreds of years of fed wild animals. We've always have. Right. We've fed bears. We've fed alligators. We've fed deer. Everything is out there. Then in my lifetime, I saw an oil. So that's a bad idea. It became like a political thing. Illegal to feed animals is bad. They're getting accustomed to this accustomed to that. Back in the days, that's like, yeah, people went to Yellowstone to feed the bears. They went to the geese to feed the kid here. And the Everglie's National Park in Fadialligators. That was normal behavior for humans to do. It's a political thing because everybody is so against killing the sharks. Like, don't fuck with the sharks. Before they wanted to kill them all, it's that's politics. Now they didn't want to kill them. When everybody was killing them when I was trying to film them. I say, guys, I told my friends, you know, we're going to fish don't kill them over here, but they're trying to get footage. You know, if they're dead, we can't film them. You know, right. Yeah, we need more. I need, I need sharks, you know, to, you know, it's like, go get them somewhere else, you know, the my mentality at Nudd. I'd find a honey hole. Okay, leave this bottle on for me. And let me go and work this area over. I can find them because we'd go at time after time. We couldn't find them. And I was an expert at drawing in sharks. There's a shark 10 miles away. You're coming up. You couldn't find them. And I'm an expert. I was the best shark chummer on the planet. Right. I mean, I'm stupid of many things, but I was good at that. So if the president of the United States came to you, if a president, Joe Biden said, Manny, Pwig, I want you to be in charge of all of the fisheries around the world. You're in charge of conservation of all the sea life. What would you make the rules for shark sharks? I would do the smartest thing to do. You know, I don't want any species going extinct. I would divide them up according to numbers and say, we can take this. We can't take this so many of this so many of and I would encourage like harpooning so people don't get the wrong type of shark. Spirit fishing and harpooning. Spirit fishing harpooning. You can hardly exactly what you want. Target exactly what you want. A lot of people, you know, I'm not going to go against rotten real guys and everything, but you know, some of the sharks they catch on the letter, and go they're going to die anyways. They ran into death anyways. But you know, you kill one shark and everyone's born to take a place. None of the species that I know have people made extinct. We didn't make the hammerhead quakes. We didn't make the lemon quakes stink. The bulls are not extinct. The great whites didn't go extinct. Matter of fact, they come back. So we haven't hunted species in Florida into extinction. The only thing we ran into extinction, Florida was a black wolf. They grew wolf in the red wolf. We wiped those out. Now we got here with these. Now we got here in Florida. Now we got here with these. But our bear is still here and good numbers. Lots of them are Florida panthers coming back, which is a Florida mountain lion. That's what it is. It's the animals of widespread over North America, including Florida. But everything else, yeah, the the boys were probably at the Spaniards of 500 years ago. The boys. Yeah, they're good. The hogs. They're good because that's what a panther eats. If you get rid of them, the panther's going to eat the farmer's cow. They're going to eat the deer. The hunters are going to get pissed off at him. Is it killing all the deer? Right. So don't wipe out the wars. I don't want the panthers extinct. You know, they don't wipe them out. I see everything as renewable resource in a game animal. If you cut a tree, another tree will grow. But you don't abuse anything. But you can harvest so many pounds of fish, so many pounds of this. Food. The ocean is not a natural park. You know, God made us so we could catch fish and eat, you know, I have my views. This planet is not overpopulated. We can have dense populations in one place like Miami, maybe it's a lot of people there. But overall, the entire planet, we're not overpopulated. You know, that's fallacy. We have a lot of wildlife. We have a lot of good land. A lot of this planet produces a lot of food and properly managed. We got room for double what we have and for what we have as far as human beings. I was reading something recently. There was like a study or there was a statistic that if you you took all the human beings on earth, shoulder or shoulder, you could fit them all inside the city of Los Angeles. That's how few humans there are. Yeah, you take nine billion. Yeah, you can. A population of dropped the last 10 years or so. We're losing people. Yeah. It's a lot to do with like the plastics and shit. So we drink this, the water out of cans, not plastic, but the phthalates and the plastics and the chemicals. It's a lot. It's a culture. You know, people not having kids. Yeah. And some people, yeah, they're bent on the worse. You know, probably in Russia, Ukraine is about a quarter million dead people both sides are easy. You know, so yeah, that's a lot of people that would have been alive. It wasn't for the war. You know, you get a war people by you know, that tiger shark that killed that guy. That was a Russian guy. And there was a footage of him when he was right before he got eaten by that tiger shark. I guess he was paddling around in a kayak like 10 minutes before that. And he was talking shit about Ukrainians. And then he gets eaten by a tiger shark. Yeah, you know, people in no reality, I don't know. I respect human life. I'm a Christian. I do animals. You can kill him for food. I don't believe in abusing animals torturing or anything. But yeah, hunting for food, growing cows for food is fine, growing crops, harvesting lumber. It'll slow down the fires, trees will grow back. Recycling a forest makes everything humans are not just damaging. When you clear land, let's say for cattle in Florida, that brings more grass. When you got more grass, you got more deer, more hogs. And you got more panther, more bobcat. When you have a very aversion force, it has less wildlife. We go in the ocean. We sink a wreck. That's fish coming live there. Right. So a lot of what we do helps out. We dig a canal. This is a drought, the fish go in a canal. Have not a lot of fish would have died. So not everything, the deer does more deer around the farm than in the middle of the forest because the farm has got sources of food. Right. So for every deer we had in North America now, we got 30 more than in a time when the European settlers first got here. Right. A couple of engineers grown 30 times over. For every one day, we got 30 now. That's so much deer we have because the woods and farm, woods and farm, woods and farm. Yeah. One of the biggest, one of the most controversial topics surrounding this debate is the Amazon rainforest in like down in Brazil and in the Amazon. It's a bunch of blowing. When I was a little boy, you know, I can go back. The Amazon was going to be gone in 10 years. So it's completely destroyed or recording and burning it like you could see from outer space. I was like, I was, oh wow, they're going to wipe out the Amazon. That's terrible. They're going to be no animals. They're going to do this is me. Back then when you were 10. Yeah. Now, the Amazon is the same. If anything is bigger, there's animals like crazy. Look up, Pantanol is there's every 10 feet is a Jaguar. Now they say, well, they wipe out all the Cayman. So the Jaguars started tagging the cows and they shot the Jaguars. Now the Cayman are back. The Jaguars are laying off the cows, mostly in eating the Cayman in a Pantanol. But the Jaguars have you seen the footage? Just like this, they're like 20 feet away from the guys. No. Oh, yeah. Look at my phone every day. So there's my buddy Paul Rosalie. He wrote that mother of Godbook. He moved down to the Amazon like when he was like in his late teens and he started living down there. And he's been like following what's been going on. And it's crazy how many more roads there are now 20 years later and how many people are coming in like they're the Chinese and the whoa, are coming in and contracting all the locals there to cut down all the trees and sell them off. Well, they're going on Indian land. That land belong to, you know, if you own a ranch, it's your ranch. If the Indians have a plot of land, you know, that's that's your ranch. You know, private property. Yeah, they're just stepping on well, they're bringing the Chinese is coming in and kicking in again. They're going to wreck the place. But yeah, they're, but all those roads, because what a jungle will grow over that and 10 minutes you will leave it alone. Right. The wildlife will come back. Right, but they're now going to be clear. Well, they sooner or later something will happen to leave it alone. If you care for it will happen like the our species will get wiped out. Have you clear a forest at a Ganyan is on when the grass rust will grow all the animals of the forest will be there eating that. So when you, yeah, in Florida, when you burn a field, you burn it down, you go back three, six months and all the deer and hogs are there. They're eating a new grass growing. So the forest has to be recycled. So when you do that in certain parts of the Amazon, they get burned, they get cut down. When it starts to grow back, that's where the animals go. The pure, pure virgin forest doesn't support the much wildlife. And Russia, yeah, it doesn't. They go toward the people are in Russia when they start to cut in down all the trees of salt. Oh, wow, they're destroying the tiger forest. There's more grass. The stag population exploded. So then the wolf population went up to 200,000 because that was so much stag. Wow. In other words, if there's a lot of fish out there, you're going to get a lot of sharks. If there's a lot of hogs in the woods, you're going to get panthers. You know, it's an area of the lot of fish in game. You're going to get alligators, the animals or the deer. If you have a cornfield and a little forest, all the deer are going to be there. And they're going to grow bigger eating that corn. Right. So whatever will, like the native Americans to live the east, they didn't have to go into woods to get a deer. They grew corn. So they had to do is wait on the edge of the cornfield with bone arrow and they could get all the deer they wanted. Right. If there's ever going to come there, that's nobody ever thought about. But that's typical. If it's like that now, it was like that back then, nothing has changed. Right. That's interesting. People have a lot of fallacy about everything, about the wildlife and what to do about it and how to manage it and this and that, they go from extreme to extreme. They go from exterminate everything to over-protect everything. They don't seem to do things properly. The way it should be done over the years, taking a lot of interest and that kind of stuff has I've been watching it all my life and I kept track. When I was a kid, there were 8,000 polar bears. I was into it back then. I looked it up. Now there's between 30 50,000. When I was a kid by time as a high school, the leopard population in Africa sub-Saharan was about 50,000. They were getting wiped out for the skins. Now there's about 700,000 leopards. The tiger population was down to 2000, unless you went to 3000 overnight one year in India. The jalotiger, when I was a kid around, completely extinct. So a few areas, they were completely annihilated. But other areas, grizzly bear populations, 120,000 worldwide, including 6,000 in Japan. Most people don't know that. There's 6,000 grizzlies living in Japan. Whoa. Does anybody talk about it? No. There's a... Are people worried about grizzlies being endangered? They were back then. The Mexican grizzly was wiped out. When I was a kid, there were still some there. I kept track of that. A lot of different species like that. Mexican wolf, I think, it was completely wiped out. They tried to bring it back. And jaguars in North America, there's a few in Arizona. They used to be in Texas. There's no came in up there in some of these areas. There's a few alligators. But they're eating cattle, so the ranchers shot them all. So there's none except a few in Arizona. They're crossing the border from Mexico. Mount Lina's found from Canada to Argentina. Patagonia, southern Argentina. Through the Amazon deserts, every type of terrain you can find. They're mountains, lowlands, everything. Wow. Yeah. It's crazy how much different information you can find. When you try to search for this kind of stuff, it's just like it's really hard to find the information. You've got to go to all over the place. You've got to go to the old information from the old days, so they don't change it. And go to the archives. Because somebody will grab the book and rearrange it. Right. So I go back to what I knew back then. I'm a history fanatic. Most people don't know that. But I like to read a history. I like to read my Bible, a firm believer in Jesus Christ. Definitely. We're supposed to manage the fisheries, the forest, food and all that. Not that the story, not the wipe it out or not to treat it like a god, where you can't. Some people want to make the entire ocean to a national park. It's like, what are we going to eat? Do they really? Some people do. They want to save everything. They think the humans are a scourge of the earth and they need to get rid of the world population and get rid of people because they're bad. As a Christian, I don't believe that. But people don't. I can see that perspective for sure. We are kind of like a cancer on the earth. We're just eating up the earth. Our history, look at what we've done. The way we devour everything. We're simple. We're simple. We're killing each other. In our mind, we do wild animals. We're killing each other. We have people need to respect other people, respect life in general. But no, wildlife is a renewable resource. And certain areas need to be protected. Other areas need to be open and back and forth. But there's nothing wrong with raising cattle. There's nothing wrong with growing rice. There's nothing wrong with fishing. I used to commercial fish myself. We sold the fish. Back then, everybody all meat is bad for you. But it's eating fish. They're complaining, they're eating all the fish. Before they're delicious, nobody likes fish. Everybody wanted beef. And they started telling beef is bad for you. They became a little thing. You got to eat fish. It's healthy. So they get in the next day. No. Everybody, the commercial guys, one of the ocean, then they arrive at the sea and everybody will. You guys said, they stopped eating beef, they start eating fish. Now they're complaining about it. You know, see the insanity of the whole thing. Yeah, it really is insanity. Do people really eat barracuda? Yeah. How many people? Because I'm not, I was cubed. It's just a Cuban thing. I've eaten a lot of barracuda in my time. It's one of my favorite fish that it tastes good. It's really good fish. But what about sigma terra poisoning? That's the problem. Now why do they have sigma terra and what is sigma terra poison? See, what there is a toxin plus up the past up the food chain. It starts a little fish eating it off the coral. And then a barracuda, the older the fish gets the bigger he is and older, the more that toxin accumulates. When he has too much of the toxin in his body, it becomes poisonous to human consumption. It doesn't hurt the fish. He looks perfectly fine. But if you eat it, you'll get real sick. And why the barracuda is having? It ain't just barracuda. It's a grouper, snapper, emberjack, kingfish. They all have it. They're any big predatory fish and the tropics can have it. It's called tropical fish poisoning. It grows in the tropics. The other north, the less likely you get to a terra, unless a barracuda swam from the bottom. And the tropics can have it. It's called tropical fish poisoning. It grows in the tropics. The other north, the less likely you get to a taro, let's say Barracuda swam from the Bahamas to North Carolina. Right. Right. We say it could happen. And then somebody caught a nater or their nigos sick as all get out, but they're up in that area. None of that grows there. So it's less likely they'll get it there. But eat it, you own risk. But it seems like people associate sigatero with Barracuda's more than anything. It's like it's politics. It's just a rotation. Yeah. A lot of people never got it from Barracuda. They got it from a grouper. I never got it from a Barracuda. I got it from a grouper. Oh, really? Yeah. What is it like when you have it? What were your symptoms? Diarrhea nonstop. Things that are cold feel hot. It affects your nerves. It's really messed up. It takes a long time to get over it. How long? It could be years to finally get over it. And if you eat another fish, there's a little bit on it. You get their symptoms right back. Really? So you got to stay lay off a fish for a long, long time. I was eating freshwater fish for a very long time. What is Barracuda tastes like? It tastes like a compared to snook. Really good, huh? Better than Kingfish. Oh, way better. That's wild. No, it's a great fish. In certain places like in Central America, I talked to them people. see what's here. I never heard of that. They ate all of Barracuda's they caught. There are places of people eat them and they never they don't know. See what terrorism grow everywhere. It's only in certain areas that it. So if you catch one like the Carolina's or in Florida, a small one, you should be fine. You should be fine. You should be. But you know, I'm not responsible for it. Right. You don't condone it. Right. I don't know. You're gonna do that. I just don't. Like I tell people, you want to swim a shark. It's a great idea. But they're dangerous. They bite you. You know, I'm giving you the heads up warning. Well, you told me it was fine. No, no, I'm telling you right now swimming alligators or sharks is deadly. Picking a venomous snakes is deadly. All that free diving for spear fishing. You can black out. You can get attacked by sharks. Sharks are not misunderstood. Put this in your head. It's a very dangerous predatory animal. You know, it makes it the sea unsafe. Simple as that. To a light shark. Yeah. I think they're magnificent, whatever. But they are dangerous. And same thing with alligators. They're magnificent. All that. But they're dangerous. Now alligators are very well managed in Florida. They're not protected. They are protected unless you're your license. When season comes around, you get attacked, you get your license. You can hunt it. So they don't really just squat in a little bit of truck with them. You know, you got to have follow the rules and regulations, which is orchestrated to protect the alligator as a natural resource and a game animal in Florida. You know, his big money and gator hunting and gator farming and the whole nine yards is a valuable resource. But he's also very dangerous resource. The alligators, four and a years ago, when the French naturalist came to Florida, he couldn't cross St. John's River in a canoe without getting attacked by alligators. The attack the Indians and broad daylight, the very aggressive, very dangerous. At the 400 years of people shooting them, they tend to shy away from people. When I was a kid, alligators didn't attack people. You could read in a book. They don't attack people. As soon as they were protected and their numbers started to come back and it started getting more abundant, attacks started happening left and right. So alligators do attack people. Look at the history. They did. It just when they came back, they started doing it again. So then they started hunting again to slow down the attacks. But for a while, they were attacking people left and right. Now they got a nuisance control that if he's in the city, he's in your swimming pool. When you're canal and you're backyard, whatever, they remove him. Before he attacks somebody, kills your dog or your kid, or you, you know, just last month somebody got the the bar by an alligator arm ripped off. I saw that this video on it. Yeah, there's all kinds of people getting attacked all the time. I've been attacked a bunch of times by gators. I spent I spent more time in the early days with the alligators than even the sharks. Really? My, I encountered sharks. It started working hunting sharks at 25 in my 40s to start interacting with sharks. But I was hand catching alligators in high school all the way into until, you know, the later years. Now what is your process? If you're, you know, one weekend you feel the urge to go catch an alligator in the wild and some lake in Florida, how was the process in going about catching a gator by hand? Well, back in a day, I would dive on him. I had somebody hold the light on him. I come running and dive on him. I'm talking at night. Tack on hold on. I wish any wish we could suicide attack. Basically, now I levitate the alligator. I back away from grab him back away from him. And when he tires a little bit, then I take him down. So you only at night though? No, I do. And I can do it in a day, time underwater now I can go get an alligator underwater. Okay. Any time I want, do I do it nowadays? Not really. I haven't done it since a TV shows avoided it. I'm an artist. You know, already lost the finger to to a rattlesink. I got bit by an alligator on the back. The good lord told me enough is enough. So I'm down a canal. I got ambushed. So I got bit by rattlesink. I got bit by an alligator and caught by hog all within a couple years towards the end of my time doing all this kind of stuff. It's sometimes okay. The lord does something keep you humble. It slowed down. I got a family now. So right, you know, I got more responsibilities. I do I focus more on my artwork. Right. Pull up one of those videos of many levitating a giant alligator. We said the canal monster. I think I think there might not be a monster. It's one of my biggest. I have a tab pulled up for the canal monster, I believe. I got the two biggest gators. One is in North Florida. And this one is in South Florida. Okay. Can you just involve a little bit of volume? Yeah, he's already gone under. So I'm going to go. Okay. So you are just this this canal is full hydro on the bottom. Yeah, I've seen him from the from the van. I encounter him twice. on the surface. Yeah. I like the voice over it. Is he really arching his back? Yeah. This thing is literally something right towards you. Right. But if he's going to attack you, he's not going to just be chilling on the surface like that. Is he he's going under now? Oh, now he's going under. As he seeks a little surface, I dive over to the bottom. Get below him and grab him by the shin. Oh my God. This stops you attack. But now I have a dinosaur on my hands. Just grabbed him by his like his neck fat. You're a skin of his neck. The shells have barrels away. I think I want 15 footer. 13 plus. They haven't seen a 15 foot alligator. I think in Florida. Oh, really? The record is 14 foot and a half around there. Not much bigger than that. So if you move forward, uh, it's going to be a, he's going to run him out of there, but I'm still killing time. But he goes into a hydraulic and I love it. They didn't want more time all the way to the surface. Oh, wow. Yeah. Just move it, move it, uh, a little bit. So he's hiding in like a little cove right now and like the mangroves. Yeah. No, he's going to, I'm going to, he's going to go. I'm going to, I can't get to him. So I'm going to try to get him out of there. I can't even, I can pick up an alligator by the scoot just when he's so big. I can't. Oh my God. And he's not even doing anything. Even though you're fucking with it, me just laying there. Yeah. I like it as that big are great to work with and very deadly. We bite you. He will crush everything in your body. I think we'll kill a horse or a cow. That'll kill a whole, a whole, a whole, a whole cow in the water. And now we get to that big one. Oh, he's trying to escape. He's trying to run away. Yeah. I'm going to run him out of there. So yeah, I'll pick up things and go live. I'll pick him up once or two or three times and no more. Because then he'll, he'll attack you. Still trying to escape on the very bottom. Well, no, he goes into the hydrilla. Now I got to go find them into hydrilla. He's like, man, he please just leave me alone, bro. Just trying to get nap. How long can they hold their breath for the whole day? One that big forever. How long? How was that? How are they going to hold their breath? A big one like that. That's incredible. Are there any other animals that can hold their breath for that long? Spirm whale. Oh, yeah, whales, obviously. Yeah. They go one hour on the bottom of my mouth deep to find squid. Look at this. You just got him right out of the hydrilla. See, when I put the head straight up, he goes into the tonic immobility, just like a shark. So when you put his head vertically like that, he's like sort of in a trance. Yeah, he gets it for a few seconds. He's out of it. But see, once I hit the surface, he exploded right. But you can see the size of him as you spawn around him. Oh, my God. But I've done this so many times. Well, he was I had so much time with the alligators. Now he's gone. No, he's still, he's cruising. Yeah, producers running. He's got the camera on him right now. He's chasing him looking at him. Do you think that your mouth or my toe, a toe quit? They don't know no more. Leave him back off. Right. Right. Right. He's past now. Good thing. What? I'm saying are humans more vulnerable in the water with a gator or like right next to the shore in the water, probably because I'm sure you can jump back or do something. You sort of, you're more clumsy in the water. The alligator is very agile in the water. Mm hmm. You know, he can catch fish underwater. He's super fast. But they can run extremely fast. Can't they short? No, just a short burst from here to here. Just a short burst. He's not going to catch you. Have you seen him coming down road out here? Just run the other way. He's not going to catch really everyone. I've always heard that like if you run in zig zags, like they can't make sharp turns. Just run straight. If you're behind a tree or something or a post, you could behind them. He's got to get around it. So you can always get around it. And he can't get around it. You know, let me hear. He's got to attack this way. He's got a back way. So you can get on this site. So you're going to be around the post all day long. Okay. Like a telephone pole, he can't get you. No, have you, have you used your brain? He can't bite you. Right. If you could be a hand to telephone pole, it goes this way. You go this way. Right, right, right, right. He can't get you. And what happened when you actually got bit by one? I felt like somebody hitting a baseball back across baseball bat across my back. I was swimming down a canal and I was looking for a fish or a hand catch. I already love a day to couple of alligators that day. And I got lazy. They didn't look behind me. It's supposed to look behind you in case you want to sneak it up on you. And sure enough, one came behind me and bit me on the back. I felt like a bomb went off on my back. He didn't get a good grip on me. If you had got a hold of my arm, he would have ripped it off. But he kind of like slipped away from a wet suit pulled away with him. And he put 12 scratches on my back and a bruce here. He didn't get a good grip on me. And I was able to get away from him. And I came up pretty good from that one. I went after him, chased him off. Are you charged him? Yeah, come right after him. He did that. Yeah, I grabbed him by the neck and all that and went with him to the bottom. And then he took off lights. Well, in order to turn around over, so he doesn't come after me again. And then I was able to get on the airboat and I said, if I could get an airboat, you know, kick up on it on the side, I might be okay when I pulled my wits back. They took a picture. Okay, it's not that bad. But I said, I got to get in and put bleach on it and everything's out. Cause they can infect you. Yeah. And but when I saw it wasn't that bad, it came out very good out of it. There's poor some some liquor on it. You were good. Yeah, it came out very good for that one. But Lord, now what about crocodiles? What's the difference between crocodiles and have your fuck with the crocodile before crocodiles are faster. But they don't have the endurance of an alligator. That's what I know about them. The alligators, a guy from an official wallet told me a long time ago, when they used to capture them for tagging and all that, the alligators fight twice as hard. Really? That's fascinating. I know in like, uh, Costa Rica, the Crocs are a big problem. Even when you surf near the river mouse, like they, they'd chill out there. It's the same Crocs we have here. I've never seen a croc here. Um, they're here. I've seen them. Really? Oh, God. Not on the beaches though. I've seen them underwater and key logo, the mangroves, a flamingo. It's a good place to see them. Okay. Uh, yeah, they're all over. That's a turkey point. Keep the skein. Coral Gables. Yeah, yeah. There's a lot of them in like around Coral Gables and I'll let Miami and the canals. Right. And this game bay, you know, Florida bay, all that area has got all the keys. Right. Big pineapple. This crocodile's all through there. Right. They just can't handle. They swam over from Cuba. So it's invasive. Listen, everything's invasive. Everything is. Yeah. Yeah. They either we brought them or they came on Rome. Right. Yodis came on Rome, manatees came on Rome and crocodiles came on Rome. They all came from Cuba. Yeah. And they're in the what a coincidence. They found in Saflorda, Cuba and Jamaica. What does that tell you in Haiti? Right. American Crocs and in Costa Rica and both sides of Pacific. So, but it's the same crocodile. The acutus American crocodiles. It's a very big crocodile by way. What is, uh, are there a lot of deadly snakes in Florida like rattlesnakes and stuff like that? The big, where is the biggest population of man killer snakes? And Florida or into the US in general? Probably California's got a lot of rattlesnakes. Really? They got the southern Pacific rattlesnake. I've played with those before. That thing bites you. You're going to be bleeding out of your eyes, nose, and ears. And everything that dissolves your brain is horrific. Now, those are in California. Yeah. So in Pacific rattlesnake. Now when in Florida, we had the biggest rattlesnake. The eastern diamondback. It's dangerous rattlesnake. It's found here. We have the cotton mouth and we have the coral snake and we have the pig meat rattlesnake. The smallest, the biggest. And then in North Florida, you get a few copper heads and timber rattlesnakes, which is a Cambraic in North Florida, but a South Florida is only four species. Okay. Two types of rattlesnakes, coral snake and uh, cotton mouth and water markets and it's the same animal. Yeah. Those things are swimming around the lakes and stuff. Yeah. Now if a cotton mouth bites you, it'll rot your way. A rattlesnake. If you get bit by eastern diamondback, you don't go to hospital, you're going to buy simple as that. You get bit by any venomous snake. Just go to the hospital. What? Like if you don't buy, you may lose a hand and arm or who knows what? So a cotton mouth, if you give it by a cotton mouth, there's no saving you. Yeah. Go to the hospital. Go to the hospital. You could potentially be saved. Yeah. Yeah. It'll save you survival. You may get permanent damage. Is there any snake that if it bites you, there's no chance, even if you do go to the hospital. If you have everything right there ready to go, you'll survive. But if you get bit by a cobra in the jungles of India, you don't have anything to save it, you're going to die. Our coral snake, it'll kill you unless you get any venom or get an respirator because it paralyzes your lungs. Coral snake is like, same venom as like a cobra. What kind of snake did you get bit by when you lost your finger? Uh, western diamondback, which is like the second biggest rattlesnake. And you were big. Where was that, Texas? Texas. What was going through your mind when that run that rattlesnake bit you? Uh, when that rattlesnake bit me, I said, I messed up. Um, calm, but I was like, it's like depressing. Okay, the trip is over. All the plans you had are over. Uh, you're in big trouble. Right. If you look at the video, when it's on, uh, when it shows me getting bit real wild there, it shows me getting bit. Yeah, I looked real calm on moment. Right. Let's take up my hand. I told producer, hey, got me. And he goes, you're kidding. No, I kind of like, I didn't want to tell him, but, you know, I gotta tell him, I was like embarrassed to tell him that he got me. You know, that's it. Right there. That's the one. Yeah. It was very into the snake, uh, the snake filled the entire frame and as he reaches into pin, it's head. He got me. See it was so lightning fast. It was so powerful that everything just went crazy. And I could see Manny did get control of it, but my heart was racing and I was really hoping that he hadn't been bit, but I couldn't really tell. He had no clue. I saw Manny's hand reached in and grabbed this. You can see it. See it. Oh, no, I missed it. Well, you had that little camera in there. Yeah. Turn the volume up a little bit. Really hoping that he hadn't been bit, but I couldn't really tell. So I saw Manny's hand reached in and grabbed the snake by the head. Oh, snake just started moving and twisting and it was such a powerful animal. And I knew that Manny was in trouble. I just didn't want to believe it. Oh, my God. Okay, here's the snake and bring it up. And instead I heard him say, I got hit with just my heart snake. It's my stomach. When we came upon the snake to get that guy, I spoke mentally simultaneously. He's got a great beard. I mean, he never misses a click. So as I watched him, his methods in his techniques, I knew he was going to get able to get it done. So as he went for the grab, the snake was so huge. He got the grab perfect. I mean, the snake's head was this big and the grab was perfect, but the snake was so good. It wasn't perfect. I needed to be closer. In his hand and actually sunk the fang into one finger and into his hand. See right there. Oh, yeah. There'll be a fight for his life because the snake was just giant and the venom amount will dishuge. I mean, it had to pump everything it had into it. And he calmly looks me in the eye and says, you got me. You're smiling. And a chill ran down my spine. It was like being kicked in the chest. And I knew what Manny was in for. He was in serious trouble. And we are a long way from a hospital. We're 50, 60 miles from the hospital. You got that? Yeah. From that moment on, I knew it was critical that what is that sound? Or he's going to die. I mean, this wasn't a little snake bite that when you're go hunting or just out walking around and get you, you know, because that's just a quick strike and the amount of venom is just enough to kill like a small rat or a rabbit. This was a huge fang viper that injected everything he had in the man. Give me the time asking the snake, tons. Once we realize what had happened or make the sun, the entire crew was getting many for the hospital, as quickly as possible. Every second counts. The guy, let's get going. Come on. Fuck, I need you to pick up all of that. So what was going on right here with your hand? How did it feel? The pain is a unbearable pain. Just like, you know, you want to shoot yourself a pain so bad. So you're immediately after that, you're rinsing your hand with water. They're all getting you to the car and it's just unbearable pain in your hand. A unbearable pain. Then go to the hospital and then the pain that lasted for months and months, just wouldn't go away. So right away, what did you do? You'd do you, you'd hit a ton of get around your arm or what did you do? No, that's supposed to do anything. Really? I put a cool chicken on it, but not even supposed to do that. You're supposed to leave it alone. No, it's supposed to leave it alone. No, no, turn it, no, turn it, it will rot you out even more. Really? Yeah. So you just let it rot. You just set the letter, roll into your body, confide it. And how long was the car right back to the hospital? They did it pretty fast. They were going 110 miles an hour. They did, uh, I feel like 70 miles away, but they got me there and like, I don't know, real quick. Oh my God. It was about 45 minutes or an hour before they started getting the venom and venom in the probably about an hour of a sitting around. Come on. Could you imagine having to get to the emergency room? Like, oh, yeah, sure. Take a number, wait in line. Yeah, they were like real relaxed to the hospital guys. I need about 55 gallon drum of venti venom like now. I'm going to be dead in like 15 minutes. We needed to hurry up. So they went in there to put anti venom in you and and then then what happened after that? Then I stayed there for several days, four days, buck took me into a house. I was in a house. I couldn't get an airplane and go home. I was so much pain. So two weeks later, I went home and I'm a building lost on me cleaning my finger and he saw finger. He said, you need to go to a hospital. It took me to the hospital. Then the, the doctor said, you got to take the finger off. It's running away. How long after was it? Probably about a month. It was running away. So it was just all black where you're, where you got there. Yeah. You could take them off if you want. Yeah. That's my ears hurting. No, it's okay. We could take them off. So you went to the hospital. Yeah. And what was that? What do they do? The same day you went in? The api jacket? No, no, no. When I went to the api jacket, they, they kept me over and they looked closer. They kept, they kept me overnight and they amputated the, uh, the finger and they, I told the doctor, we'll do this quick as you can. So I can get over this, you know, and I said, he goes, well, I can take the whole bone out and make it look better. No, I don't care. How was the hand more efficient? I don't care what it looks like. He goes, if the finger does survive, it's going to be like a hook. You're going to get in a traffic accident when you're driving. So to make your hand more useful, you got to take it off. So that was it. And how long did the pain last after the amputated it? When I lived at a large alligator, I was already missing the finger. Wow. But was like the sharp pain there for a look for a while after the amputation? After month after month, I forgot how long it was. It was just a never ending been a hand was swollen forever. It was swollen in mourning and tried to stretch it. The pain was unbearable. It was just like I couldn't pick up a cup of coffee and it would fall out of my hand and it had a hand was so weak. Lord, no more of that. You were tired. You were officially retired from catching snakes and alligators and sharks. And you're just focusing on your art now. Focusing my heart sticking with that. That's a gift that God gave me. It was an art. I was an artist since I was a little boy. I was always in school. I had terrible grades except for art class. I was always in a more one student in the art class. So I was in the art while animals. That's what I like. I wasn't into sports. You know, basketball, baseball or anything. I mean, it's great. I like it. Athletes are great and all that. I'm happy for them. But it was never my thing. And I didn't do it. The wild, the sea and the forest was always my thing. Now, do you ever just like, do you ever just like want to go out and just catch a fish on a rod and reel like traditionally? Or is that just too far for you? Sometimes like I go out with my friends sometimes, getting to lap your knife from the airboat, throwing a trident at them. And that's like, okay, we go out and have a great time with the guys. Catch a bunch of to lap. You take them home, filet, and you need fresh fish. That's more like my idea hunting nowadays. I don't want to get big fish anymore. I want to get medium sized fish. Just stuff to take home to eat. My idea before was the action for the video. But I've done so much of it that one, I'm not going to do any more. I'm not going to top it up. I've already done pretty much. So I've done it. Everybody's out there messing with the sharks and everything right now. But I was doing that 20 something years ago. So I was ahead of the game and all that. Now, I mean, and God bless them all. They're all into it now. But it's, yeah, it's a dangerous thing. And but everybody wants to, but the, because so many people doing it, it's kind of like you want to do what nobody else is doing. At the time I was doing it, nobody was really into that kind of to the point that I was doing it. What made you want to specifically design these tridents? Like what is the tactical advantage of having a trident? These three pronged for people that don't know what it is. Once you grab that trident, you just made me for me and show, and I'm pulled up so you can see it. This is a trident. This is one of my specialties or work that I do. I make this out of 316 stainless. These were done to catch fish to hunt. The first trident I designed, big one was so hunt wild boar. Because when you throw it, instead of one point, you got three points coming out. And that's like that giant one on the wall back there. That you'd be, that's for catching a wild boar. Wild boar alligators. Yeah, that one's probably got alligators before. That one's heavy as shit. I can barely hold that thing. Well, use a void momentum for hunter. I caught alligators by hand. But when we took out, you know, I guided, take out alligator hunters. These guys, okay, they want to get an alligator trophy gate or whatever. They can use a gun or they can use a trident on private land. And a lot of them would use the trident. They would mount the gator, pack the meat, take down the skin or meet home with them. And then a lot of times they bought the trident. Yeah, no, when you hit a gator with a trident like that, or like this, do you have to aim for a specific part of their head? No, if you hit them in the head, it'll bounce off. Oh, you can't hit them in that. No, and the body to to hold them. And then you got to cut the vertebrae here with a knife or a next. So when you hit them in the body with the trident, you like in the back or something? Yeah, it's got a rope on it and you hold it. You listen and they just off. No, they don't take off with a trident. They take off with a harpoon tip and then you got to follow them for a while. When you don't try it and they stay in the same place and they just spin around and twist it, uh, they don't maneuver well. It does it quicker. Okay. And they tried in actually the harpoon doesn't they use doesn't actually kill them. They tried and does. So after you hit them with the trident, they twist around and they tire out and then you have to jump on them and you have to, well, pull them out and have the guy, uh, you know, this is a guy's hunting. He wants to go on a primitive hunt. He could have used his rifle. He can use a born arrow against his trident. We left the option for him to do what we want to do a primitive hunt with a trident. And you know, a lot of times they do. But I like medieval stuff. I like history, I like ancient weapons. I mean, tridents are used for fishing. That was original for the before. But the Roman gladiators decided to use them on each other. So you see that in the arena, gladiators are fighting each other with these things, which is, you know, it's a horrible thing to do, but to attack another human being, you know, having each other. So for entertainment, going out, you know, right. I guess some people still like that kind of stuff. They haven't changed. There was a gladiator event and they were fighting each other. I don't want to see it. No. I'm at that point in my life. No, I'm not interested in seeing two people go out of this. Right. You know, that's ancient Roman mentality. No. So once I hit the gator with the say hypothetically, if I'm going to go try this and I hit the gator where that needs twisting around, how do I go in there and like actually like you pull him and his life, you pull them and use it. Usually I have an extra, a trident, an extra harpoon stick in the other one in. It's a process and then pull them out. And then another, it's like three tools and then I hatch it to hit them in the back of the head. I'll show also make but I have a harpoon that you can once he's there, you stick the harpoon to double secure. I'm this will usually hold them. Okay. But in case he goes, if you hit him in the back, if you hit him on the side, the skin closes in around this. So it doesn't come out. You hit him in the back, it can come out the same hole because the skin in the back doesn't contract. It stays the same. So it can pull out sometimes out of the middle of the back. But the trident they hit the side here. Once you get off the scoots, the skin will wrap around this and it'll hold it. He won't come out. Wow. As soon as you have to surgically move it out of there. So that's the reason this is bard. It's really the ketchup fish. So when you catch an alligator, you're catching, you know, a large fish. You know, it would probably, if you're in the shallow, you could probably throw it out of shark or bear could. Well, that might be too wide for a bear kudos. I'm not gonna work for a fat bear kudos. Yeah, it bends. Anything will work on anything that other one, that little one over there that will work on a bear kudos. But like if I hit something like that with a shark or whatever, I'm afraid it would take off and I would have to dive in after it and go get the fucking. No, no, you put a see this hole back here. Something like that with a shark or whatever. I'm afraid it would take off and I would have to dive in after it and go get the fucking I Try to know. No, no, you put a see this whole back here That's for a rope. Oh, okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You put a strong rope and you just tie that to something Yeah, exactly and that's yeah, you tie that to it depends where you're gonna get yeah I mean if you're in a flat seat and get a shark with this no problem He hit him from the boat. Yeah, it'll and you put a buoy on it. Yeah, he's not going over you're gonna get him right now But if he gets off you got a line and everything on it Mm-hmm, so you pull you try to back up, you know, this is pretty strong, you know I mean yeah, I think this is hard. Yeah, it's industrial strength. Yeah, industrial this is three this one here is three quarter stick Solid stainless. It's got a tail that goes to here. This is a crunched Smashed in here all this I do it. I think this up by hand but hand hand handle grinder That's how I do all that and you make these to order for people like if they hit you up and you know Yeah, I can get them efficient try them Which is more like when you got over there or this one does a little tool that I'm making So they pick they tell me what they want and we'll take care of it How long can you hold your breath? I use to do five and a half minutes 535 to be exact now I haven't done it a long time, so I seriously doubt it. I'm gonna hold my breath that long How long you go right now Not much longer all I haven't trained for it, you know How do you do it hold your breath longer you train a little bit, but a lot of this technique is Preparing when you're out of shape. You got to prepare better when you're in good shape. You can get there quicker You know as your deep slow breathing, but that's what also gets you to pass out on the water and die But like how would you like before you out in like a Spearfishing competition like free diving competition and a tournament or something like that How would you actually prepare to do that to hold your breath longer? Well you exercise you train you go Do underwater laps you do sitting still, you know people spot in you you hold your breath as long as you can without moving You do your breathing exercises and everything and then I had a method I do when I was gonna be on the water a long time 40 breaths 40 breaths first deep slow breaths now what can happen? You can black out on the water and die So It's a deadly game How do you black out you don't you run the water to swim around your relax your final soon? You don't know what happened next. I know you're being your pool of a rescue You and you what are you doing? And you don't remember what happened Total blackout does that reality does the blackout happen only when they get to the point where you're like really close to being out of breath No The brain doesn't tell you how much oxygen you have they don't let you know much carbon dioxide So you've been exhaling and breathing fast You could be out of oxygen. You don't know so when you run out the brain doesn't let you know You think you got plenty air and you don't have any you don't have any more oxygen left You fooled your brain and does that happen from just holding your breath too much and doing too much free diving from Does mainly from the deep breathing from the deep breathing from the deep breathing from your breathing fast breathing hyperventilating before you go down You deep breathing hyperventilate to get rid of the carbon it's seed to be able to relax on the water You got to have get rid of your carbon dioxide That's what makes you when you want to breathe is not that you're out of oxygen as you have too much carbon Oxide on your blood So the trick as you fool the brain then you can stay down as long as you want till you die Have you ever blacked out free diving? Yes, I have And a swimming pool and a swimming pool. Yeah, yeah, yeah The girl was training for free diving pull me up And I asked her I asked her what are you doing? You're disturbing my routine and you guys know you blacked out you're completely out So how will watch her she watching it were training a simple Is it our team at the time Is work on Mark and Megan she was Mark's girlfriend She was free diving champion Megan free diving free diving champion. Oh, yeah for the US at that time She all the record for male and female at the time After you blacked out what did you do did you did you just like take a break for a while or here? Did you go right back in just grab a hand start diving again? Oh next day. I was diving again You only think I was more cautious because I've made sure you have somebody want to close If you're close to black out and you don't black out you get like a dizziness and that's a samba When you black out you won't get that you pull all the way you'll never get that warning But I shot that no warning at all you just black out But if you came close and you survived your wool you could feel there was a dizziness Mmm So that that's that's like I did that too many times Diving by myself going down a hundred and something feed to shoot fish Free diving waiting on the bottom to shoot a fish. I would go 110 feet of water and lay on a bottom for like 40 seconds I had 110 feet. Yeah, just lay on the bottom down there. I would start counting at the time myself when I was on the bottom And then I swim back up so all by myself So it's no way it's on your weight belt If I had a Speed on I would use four pounds because I was very lean back then if I had a wet suit on depending on the thickness I would put more weight depending on the thickness of the wetsuit. I could swim 400 feet on the water So you could go 100 feet dive down 200 feet and 200 feet back no the swimming both ways that's when you go down you don't kick it's only halfway fall You only kick on the way up Right because you're funding against the weight the weight belt once you put over the weight once you break 30 feet You should be able to free fall and then you just line yourself in the deeper you go as your lungs compress You speed up down and you keep clearing is there how to well? I can't get air into my ears And I got to stop I blew near drum doing that How deep how deep were you when you blew your drum man? I could have been a hundred and eighty feet or 200 feet there was a marker 220 I could see it. I was trying to get to it and The watch only marked to 165 after that a quick marking That was engaged so I kept going after that and boom So like a fire cracker going off in my head you lose your equilibrium and shit when that happens But I got up so quick before I lost my equilibrium I aimed in shock for the surface a million miles. Can you hurt yourself doing that Yeah, well, I mean when you go home you blow your nose air comes out of your ear And I blew another one with a power head too. So I blow them both of my I blow them both of my ear drums Blue them with a power head. Yeah, it just blew up next to you. I fired it. We're not in a water into concussion Oh my gosh, I thought the air drum. That's insane man Well, man, thanks for doing this. I really appreciate it. This is uh I thank you for the Trident and bringing this t-shirts and all the photos We'll do something in the future and you know get some other clients here I would love to get you here again, man. I I'm a huge fan of what you do in your artwork especially where people that are like watching and listening Where can they find some of your stuff or how can they contact you if they want to get a try-to enter show your knives to hold your knife up many pewig on Instagram Just contact you message. Yeah, it was a picture of me holding a shark jaw. I got my face in it. Yep I blow shark jaw just many pewy just contact me. Let me know We're injured. I got t-shirts. Hell yeah. I got a knife. So I got necklaces What kinds of goodies Look at that tiger shark teeth great. That's a great white tooth right there great white and also have Fish hooks. Oh, that's big too Why is our fish hooks? That's incredible man. Yeah, I make crosses too. I got oh Yeah, my cross and you carve custom custom shit into them like people's names or yeah Kind of custom messaging them. They can custom their name on there. That's beautiful. This one here's got 316 is 3 16 stainless right? 316 is also yeah famous versus yep. Yep. You know John 3 16. That's cool Awesome, man. Well, thanks again. I very much appreciate it. I'll link your Instagram below people to contact you and We'll get you back here. Tell some more stories definitely cool. Bye world. Thank you