nobody knows. Alright, we're live, John Ronson, how are you? Thanks for doing this, man. John, glad I can't tell you the number of people who said you should do Joe Rogan. The number of people who said, oh, God Joe Rogan's talking about Bohemian Grover. Rogan's talking about psychopaths. You have to come on. Well, I'm friends with Alex Jones and Alex Jones told me many, many, many years ago that they're burning effigies in Bohemian Grover. They're worshiping, Molek, the Owl God. Well, I went to Bohemian Grover with Alex Jones. Oh, that's just about. That's like going to Disneyland with Mickey Mouse. Yeah. It was kind of my idea. I sometimes feel like the kind of like, I mean, this isn't strictly speaking true, but I kind of sometimes feel a little bit like Alex Jones is Simon Cowell because this is like way back in the mid to late 90s when he was like really famous in Austin, but kind of not that well known outside. Right. With this producer, John Sargent, basically we noticed something which was that a lot of people on the fringes, Islamic fundamentalists and neo-Nazis and militia people were all had this one thing in common, which is they were all conspiracy theorists. They all believed in the evil power of Beauderberg and Bohemian Grover. So I thought it'd be good to try and infiltrate those places. But I didn't want to infiltrate Bohemian Grover alone because frankly I was scared. So we met Alex Jones when he was rebuilding David Kuresh's church at Waco and he said kind of gone, oh, he was rebuilding David Kuresh's church. Yeah, that was the first time I met Alex Jones. I went there with Randy Weaver. I became friends with the Weaver family. Who were the Weaver's again? They're Ruby Ridge, you know. Yeah, the company washer. Yes, the San Francisco. So I got really friendly with Randy's daughter Rachel and then I went with Randy to Waco. And Alex told that was just kind of crazy about Waco. And I was like, who the fuck is that? What year was this? This was about 1998 maybe. That's when I met him. Yeah, yeah, I met him in 1998. Yeah. He was amazing. I mean, I could tell like I drove through Austin with him. I like he went to buy a new suit because he was like, you know, giving a big talk at Waco. And like everybody in the, everybody in the clothing store was like excited because Alex Jones had walked in. So I knew it was like a big deal in the neighborhood. But then I wanted somebody to sneak into Pee me and grow with. And I asked David Ike first. I said, can we go to Pee me and grow? But he was like, no, that's where the transform sells back. It's giant lizards. Oh, did he tell you that for real? Yeah, he said that's really good. Yeah, he said that's where they transformed themselves back into. He's kind of abandoned all that, hasn't he? Yeah, he gets mad if you bring it up. It does. Yeah, which you can't. You can't get mad, man. You made a lot of speeches saying that people transformed the lizards. Yeah, you got to own up to that shit. Got to hope you said there's exact words. I mean, this is going back a long time. He said what he certainly strongly implied that he believed that it was a behaving growth that they transformed the search. Well, I think you're in the clear because he gave many, many interviews where he talked about that. That was a big, what was kind of in the early days of the internet when you can get away with saying stupid shit like that. And you didn't have a bunch of people on Reddit that immediately could debunk your Twitter or Facebook where they just knew something that you didn't know. And like, what the fuck are you talking about? Yeah, they transformed the lizards. Yeah, they're the f**k out here, dude. Well, one of his big, like, piece of evidence that Bohemian Grove was where the Transformer House Interlizards was because of this woman called Cathy O'Brien who said that she was a kidnapped sex slave. And that she would be like, let loose into the gardens of the White House. George Bush Sr. would like hunt her. And that was like his sex game. And so she wrote this book about this called, it was called The Traisis of Democracy. It was called The Transformation of America. And she said it was at Bohemian Grove. She was a kidnapped sex slave at Bohemian Grove. And that's where it all happened. And she was like, and Bohemian Grove was all based around this river and the Russian river. And so that's where the Bohemian Grove room is first started with with Cathy O'Brien. That's hilarious. Yeah. And so I thought like it can't be true that like George Bush and Henry Kissinger all go to this club and on the Saturday night, they all put on robes and have a mock human sacrifice in front of a giant stone owl. I thought, I can't be true. So I found up David I could have said, do you want to come with me? He's like, no. And then I thought, well remember that crazy? You know, I'm going that at Waker. Alex Jones, maybe we should ask him. So I called up Alex Jones and I said to you, if I'm sure to get into Bohemian Grove. And he was like, yeah, I'm going to get a camera. We'll get a camera, we'll get a camera, we'll get a camera, we'll get a face as devil worshippers and we'll confront them going about that globalist, devil worshipping evil. So that was the video, he made a video about this. So you were involved in that. Yeah. I was in this video. Okay, now I remember you. Okay. I remember you in that. It was a long time ago. A long time ago. We all went now. We all went to Bohemian Grove. It was me and my producer and the cameraman and then Alex and Alex's wife Violet and his friend Mike. There was that six of us and we were like strange bedfellas. Because I just thought, oh, this will be fun. And Alex and Alex was like, you know, well at one point I said to Alex, like, have you got like a contingency plan? Like if we managed to get in and like your, you know, your uncovered, have you got a contingency plan? And Alex said, yes. And I said, what is it? He said, I'll say to them, don't get any closer. And I'm like, that's your contingency plan. Don't get any. That's like a threat. I don't know how it's going. Yep. So his, he was just going to scare them. Yeah, he's going to get closer. That's it. Get any closer. That was Alex's plan. How did he think that for a head? No, shit. That's a problem. He had this, but he really did put on robes. Yeah. They really do have like a bundle of sticks that's supposed to represent a human being and they carried it out there and light it on fire. I saw it all with my own eyes. But do they say that it represents a human being? Well, no, what they say is that it represents dough care, like all the troubles in the world. All these men of wealth and power have all these troubles in the world. I got to say it was white people problems for those real first world problems. Yeah. One percent are first world problems. Yeah, exactly. We, you know, funny as that though, all the rich people have paid in the us for two weeks. Yeah. You guys have so much stress. We need to burn a fake person. I think you feel better. Right. You guys just, it's so heartbeat of billionaire. How do you do it? How do you run the world? I tell it was weird though. So Alex, Alex is plan. And this is how we were going to get him. We were going to rent a boat and like sail it along the river and then get out and then climb up the mountain and get down the other side and I get in that way. I was thinking, this is an ill-conceived plan. And then we met this local lawyer called Rick. He was like this preppy lawyer who lived in the town, Montu Rio, Occidental. And Rick had been an infiltrated beaming in grove just because like everybody in the town wants to know what's going on in beaming grove. So we met Rick to get some tips on how to break in. And Alex told Rick his plan and Rick said, look, if you're going that way, you're going to get yourself killed. And Alex wrote down. This was my favorite one of my favorite bits of the whole weekend. Alex wrote down on his notepad. And then he was like, oh, I'm going in that way, that's killed. And I'm so proud. So Rick said, what you need to do is go to Eddie Bower and get yourself some preppy clothes and just walk up the drive, just walk up the drive. That's a smart move. Yeah. So Alex was like really torn because part of him, he admitted this to me afterwards. And I was worried that like in the wicker man, me and Rick had all these other people that we've met all part of this kind of elaborate plan to lure Alex into the forest. So like he would be the exact advisor. Oh, that's so rich. Yeah. It had crossed his mind. So the upshot was that Alex and Mike decided to go inseparately to me and Rick. Oh, yeah. So he didn't trust you that much. No, he didn't trust you. I mean, they didn't have Wikipedia back then. They couldn't just Google or anything, right? Couldn't Google me. Did he know of your work? Did he know who you were? Not really. I wasn't particularly well-known back then. I wasn't really well-known. Is it safe to say that Alex Jones helped launch you? We kind of helped launch each other. That night. And so you guys went in there and Alex gave me this on VHS tape, by the way, back in 99 or whatever the hell you guys actually made a tape out of it. Yeah. Well, Alex and I did this thing. I did a special in Austin. My first DVD, I filmed in Austin and Alex and I dressed up as the bushes. I was George Bush, Jr. and he was senior. And we ran around the state capital with like these bush masks on. I've seen that video. Did Alex have a big bullhole saying that they were all like Satanist bloveless? At one point in time, definitely. But I don't know if that made it into the video. We actually sang a song. There's actually a song. I don't know if we've ever played the song. It's so ridiculous. Alex Jones wrote a song about like the elite. And it was on the video. It was on the video. And we're all like dancing around to Alex's Jones song. And this is 99. A 99 or maybe two. There it is. Yeah. I know. What does he say? They'll put the headphones on. He wouldn't say the lies and distant from me. Put it back to the beginning so we can hear. Oh, that's me doing bongets. We sure as hell don't live ladies and gentlemen from the belly of the beach, crossing to the lies and distant fromation. No compromise. One day closer to victory. It's Joe Rogan, baby. Oh, shit. I broke the mask. Yeah. Yeah. This is a song. I'm a molar kid friend. Oh, my God. So this is all this is the same time. Yeah. You know, I feel like I nurture Alex as interested in mollock by suggesting that he didn't grow. Yeah. For the location. I was wearing a style project t-shirt. Do you remember style project? Styleproject.com. No problem. It's the belly. That's Alex Joe and Sagan. He wrote it all too, by the way. I had nothing to do with this. Oh, my God. It's so stupid. And the 666 of Bush's head. Oh. Yeah. So this is the only time I ever met Alex. So that weekend in... That's your one time you've ever met him. And wake up. You know, wake up first. And then that I lost touch with him after that. He re-canned... He liked me again actually after I wrote the Manisto ghost. Like he didn't like me after I wrote my book, then, which includes all the stuff about sneaking into beaming grove. Because he thought I was too much of a debunker of beaming grove. But then when I wrote the Manisto ghost, he liked me again because he felt that I was like... Oh. ...kind of like a bit of a... The Manisto ghost is kind of like a conspiracy book. Right. Yeah. So how much different is it than that... Shall we keep going with this behind me and grove? Yeah. Yeah. I could go with this more to say. Okay. So Alex and Mike decided to go and fire the undergrowth. Like I saw them... So they went in through the bushes? They went in through the bushes. And there was a lot of poison okra. Oh. I wouldn't be able to fire... You guys just walked in. Yeah. Me and Rick, the lawyer, this kind of preppy lawyer. Oh, totally the funniest thing that I've missed out of this story was... It was the night before we were going to infiltrate. Alex and Mike decided to practice being preppy. And so they were walking down. They walked off the door like the corridor. I said they're motorobed. I'm talking in a kind of a feminine way about microprocessors. Like, you know, I think I just... And nanotechnology is the future. And now they've done preface dark. Yeah. Oh. So... And then so then they went in through the undergrowth. And me and Rick, the lawyer, went up the drive. Actually with our producer John Sargens. And just as Rick said, you know, we gave the security guard to kind of eye rule the world to type wave. Just just preppy. And we were in. Act like you know. That's what I used to say. Yeah. When I used to rob things, I used to say just act like you know. I was like, you know what you're doing. Yeah. So... Yeah, we walked in. I know it was this bank. My memory was like, there's this big bank of telephones. This was like before cell phones. Well, I guess there were cell phones. But... Very few, right? Yeah, very few. There was a big bank of telephones. All these camps, it was like a giant redwood forest. And then there were all these little camps everywhere. And all the camps, sure enough, had weird, like almost definitely kind of milieu. Like little red, I remember one of the camps was called like devilized or something. And there was like little red eyes poking out of the thing. It was like a Halloween type. Right. And then some of the camps had like grand pianos and hot tubs. And there were all these old men, all of whom you know, Mr. Burns. There were all been in the little trucks going up and down. And... Like golf cards? Yeah, sort of more like posh pickup trucks. Oh, okay. Like the kind of stuff you'd get like at Universal Studio to all of something. And then we saw... And there's like all this owl stuff everywhere. Now the reason, love, some conspiracy things get really annoyed with what I'm about to say. Because everybody really loves the idea that like they're worshipping mollock, the giant devil owl. But the reason why I saw it's like I could tell they're all these like owl sculptures everywhere is because like it's an owl sanctuary. Like there's little cabins with like stuffed owls in there. Like an owl sanctuary. So... Well, wait a minute. There's an owl sanctuary like they actually take care of owls. And there's all like an owl preservation area. Like this is a place where owls nest. Oh, owls. Oh, owls. Okay. So this is a place... Well, that was... If you were worshipping an owl guard, though, wouldn't that be a cool place to make your sanctuary? Where the owl's actually nest? I'd be like... Guess so. Unless you can't totally deep back it there. Mr. Ronson. Well, that's true. And although wouldn't like if you're worshipping a giant owl, God, wouldn't all the regular sized owls be like false gods? I mean, I'm... Baskings. Maybe. Or... You know... I don't know. I feel like a great monkey god. And the monkeys lived around with a great monkey god. You feel like they worship the monkey. Yeah, like they live in the owl's worship. And the owl's worship. And the owl's worship. Molek. Okay, I'm with you on that. Still nonetheless, the minions. Be it in this remarkable man. I can tell you about children. So we were wondering about May and Rec. And we saw this giant owl of everybody's legend. It's funny, I remember thinking it was stone. But then a few years later somebody else infiltrated Beemie and Grofus and magazine. And said it's not stone. It's like plaster of Paris or wood or something. But I'm sure they're right. You guys were far away from it. I remember just going all the way up to it. So it was very secure. And in the security guard, like when you walked down, there was one guy sitting in a little hut. And he didn't ask anything. Didn't ask anything. You just were like a joy and joy. Even if there was something. And where is Bohemian Grofus in what state? It's in Northern California. It's next to this little town called Occidental. There's like a no-thru road and then you go up the road. Is that a north of San Francisco? Yeah, north of Napa in Northern Napa. Okay. And I remember seeing Alex and Mike. And I said, hey, Alex and Mike. Hey, yeah, they walk past me. They said, keep walking. This hour was everywhere. It's come. I said the chase. This hour was everywhere. This hour was everywhere. I was Mike said this hour was everywhere. Did they see out? I mean, they're talking about like hour hours or. Well, I think at this point, Mike was convinced that every time they saw an hour, it was like, you know, it was my luck. Oh, Jesus fucking Christ. Yeah. So what were you thinking at this point? You think what the fuck I got myself into hanging out with these guys? They're going to ruin my whole investigation. Well, no, I mean, I was nervous because, you know, the close you can get to this microphone the better because we don't have our heads heads. Okay, so yeah, I was kind of nervous. But I sort of thought it was kind of fun. I felt safe with Rick Deloia. I felt like nothing bad would happen to me because he looked so rich and prepping. And that's like every horror movie where things go bad. You hanging out with Rick Deloia. Yeah. I thought I'd be fine with Rick Deloia. Yeah. But so then the bell rings like gets to dusk. And there's a ringing of the bell. And if all these old men like drift down to this little pond, and they'd all sit on like grass one side of the pond. And Alex and Michael there, like a few rows behind us. And there's the giant owl on the other side of the pond. And I remember actually this moment, which I thought was really weird, was this old man comes up to me. I mean, like this is like nearly 20 years ago. So I don't remember like all of the details. But this old man came up to me and said something like, like I was way younger than everybody else there. And this guy says to me, it's your first time. And I said, yeah, I said, oh, you're going to love it. Burn him, burn him. And I did the sort of impression of what was about to happen in the pageant. And there was this look of like real fucking intensity on this guy's face. And at that moment, I thought to myself, like there's Alex and Mike, like a few rows behind me, convinced that this is like evidence that the global elite are blood drinking Satanists. And then there's all these like men of wealth and power who are really fucking into it all themselves. And they might be into it in a different way to the way Alex and Michael into it, but they're fucking into it. And I thought I'm the only sane person in this entire fucking redwood with what about Rich the lawyer and Rick, where they're only sane people. I wonder if a tennis dropped off in that place once they invented Viagra. You know, because like rich old dudes, they couldn't get it up. It's not a lot to do. You get bored. Yeah, it was a weird way to spend some of vacation. I didn't see any like famous people, but at one point we passed this display cabinet and there were the names of the guests on the display cabinet. And I'm a scene Dick Cheney's name. Oh yeah, for sure. That's probably gets his extra hearts. Yeah. Have you ever, there's a photo of, I think it's Ronald Reagan Ed Bull heen-yen Grove. Yeah, it might be so nice. Yeah. Yeah. So pull that up, Jamie, because it's a crazy photo. So this has been like a weird spot where these guys have gone for decades. Well, since I guess since like the railroad came through San Francisco, like like, you know, the turn of the 20th century. I think that's pretty much when it started. Who the fuck started this the other is? There is Nixon, there's Reagan. Who started this thing and look at the big redwood behind on some majestic tree. Yeah. Okay. What I heard, and as I said, it's been like 20 years since I've, you know, thought about this stuff too much because once I put it in there, I kind of forgot about it. But but the story I heard was that when the railroad was coming through San Francisco or the rich white Republicans, and unlike Buildable, this is a very Republican club. Thought, you know, fuck there goes the neighborhood. You know, we're going to lose our elite status. We need to set up a private club for ourselves. So they set up the Bohemian Club in San Francisco and then Bohemian Grove in, you know, a couple of hours north. So then this, this ritual starts. This, you see, the man wearing later hoes and appears in like a stage cut out of the giant redwood. And he's got like leaves all over his later hoes and it's like leaf covered later hoes. And he starts singing this like song and the symphonies there, like the San Francisco symphonies. Well, there's a video of it. Pull a video of Alex Jones at Bohemian Grove because Alex, Alex was a few rows behind us and he was filming it all. Like with a camera that toppled over 45 degrees. And it is, it is bag. And yeah, he filmed the whole thing. Yeah, he did it like on a sneak tip. Yeah. Did he film as early as like, like the pre-show later hoes and I don't know. I don't know. I'm sure. Right. I don't know Alex. Yeah. I don't Alex. He filmed everything out. I'm seeing you in fine just some dude in a row in front of a giant fucking owl. Yeah. It's toppled over sideways. Yeah. Yeah. So I'm full screen maybe we'll get a bit of a look at it. I'm a few rows in from. Yeah. So then this happens. All these men in robes and herds all descend in front of the giant owl. There you go. I think. Okay. And they have this ritual where this papier machee effigy, like comes over on the pond in a gondola. And they say to it, you know, we shall burn ye tonight, uh, dulkeh. And then the voice is dulkeh, because ye shall not burn me. And then they go, year after year, dot this owl. Year after year in this happy grave, we burn the, um, and then they lift it up and throw in the fire and the, and the effigy goes, that makes noises. Yeah. Ah. Do they have like a speaker system or something? Yes. And I'm just going to speak as, and there's a, what you can't see in the video, is that there's an orchestra to your left. I've been diagnosed with the guy in the leaf covered later. Hosen's gone at this juncture, but he was on, he was like basically sitting on the giant redwood. He's getting sodomized by Nixon and Dick Cheney. Yeah. Ronald Reagan's coaching him. There's probably about a thousand people in that crowd, the other side of the pond. Wow. When the fireworks go off, you get like a glimpse of how many people there are. There's probably a thousand people. Wow. Now, what are the requirements? Like how do you get in there? You get invited. I met Harry Shearer who got invited. Harry Shearer from the Simpsons, the voice. Yes. He was the only person who'd been to be him and Grove, who was willing to like talk about it to me, like after we left. Wow. And he said he was invited to these were his words. He said he was invited to do the place up. Like the word, and I choose that. And he said he was kind of a decular. But he agreed with my interpretation of it, which is basically that it's not evidence that the secret rules of the world are actually Satanists who do actual human sacrifice, which is basically the way Alex was spinning it. But it's this kind of weird, overblown pageant. What I think is really interesting, and I think this is where Skull and Bones comes into it, is that there is this weird kind of public activity amongst the elites to create these ancient ceremonies for themselves. And none of them are actually ancient. They're all like, under two years old at the most. But they do that for a reason, right? They want to create this kind of messonic, ritualistic, you know, milieu for themselves. And I think there's a weird psychology going on there. Because I mean, you and me, we wouldn't. Well, I mean, I wouldn't. You wouldn't. No, I wouldn't. Yeah. But I might. You have to be really fucked up to do it. I have to be under the influence of a lot of different things. But the idea behind it, I guess, is that you get closer. If you're all doing this ridiculous shit together, that somehow another through tradition or through ritual that you bond. And maybe it gives you a kind of mandate to be in an elite. I sometimes wonder whether like it's Skull and Bones too. It's not just about bonding, but it's also about creating this kind of specialness for yourself. Right. Right. Right. Yeah. That gives you a sort of, you know, doesn't make you feel so insecure about the idea that you're a global eliteist who's ruling the world. What's the thing about Skull and Bones as well? They were saying that part of the ritual, they do like really humiliating shit to each other. And they film it so that they always have this. And it's the title of this. Yeah. Maybe. Yeah. Yeah. I'll actually. I've heard that, but I don't know if that's true. But I've heard that. Well, young Jamie was saying that Tom Cruise might be leaving Scientology. Is there any evidence to support this? I don't know. I'll look at it. But Star Magazine does. Well, that's about as good as I guess about it. Yeah, because going clear has a lot of power. I think it can be in the movement. Well, it certainly did. I mean, it exposed. But what it all deals with, I think, with this Bohemian Grove thing and is this sort of cultish mindset, these weird sort of mindsets where they engage and otherwise preposterous rituals that to the outsider like to us. Like we're watching this owl god and a fucking bundle of sticks and burn the. Yeah. This is so fucking stupid. But to those people, it represents this thing that they've kind of agreed to do this goofy shit together. And there's some weird power in that. Yeah, I agree with that. It's definitely that for a reason. Well, it exists in so many different cultures. That's the weirdest part about it. It's like you go back to like the Aztecs and the Maya. Like they would, when they would make these human sacrifices, they would wear these crazy outfits and plumed head dresses. And it was all this like it. It's like it's cool in the Isis. Yeah, sure. But it's bizarre that the out when people start wearing outfits and engaging in rituals. You know, that's a weird aspect of human behavior that seems to be really prevalent. It's like it's not like an isolated instance where there's only this, you know, like if you go to Africa and you see like, or Asia or you see like these people that have those things that extend their neck, those little bars, those women put like, God, what are they doing? Well, it's very isolated. It's only like one group of people that do it or the women that put the plates, the siri women that put the plates in their lips. Like, what the fuck is that? Yeah, but it doesn't catch on. It doesn't go anywhere else. Like bizarre ritual, but it's only isolated this one, very specific area. But rituals themselves like really wacky dresses and the weird things that people do, it's so common. It's almost like every culture has them. And the people involved, by the way, when my book then came out, the Bahimien Club made a statement. I remember about my book. Well, this, they said something along the lines of despite John Ronson's objectionable chest person, we appreciate the fact that he's putting a less kind of sensation list spin on what he saw than what Alex Jones did. And so they kind of appreciated the fact that I was, I was being less historical about it than Alex. And they said, you know, it's overblown. It's an overblown pageant, but it couldn't be more innocent or something along those lines. They're very connected to a squire, man. By the way, it could definitely be more innocent. I mean, look, the Mickey Mouse parade at Disneyland is also an overblown pageant. And that could not be more innocent. It's not, that's really literally as innocent as things get. Yeah. But, you mean, Grove could be way more innocent. You're, you're burning someone like you're saying, I burn the, and then you have screams that play out over a loudspeaker. That's not innocent. That's wacky as fuck. Like it's hard to just, just stating the facts. It would be really hard to soften that up. Yeah. You know, like saying that you have an over sensationalized version of it, like, well, that's not possible. Like it's really sensational. Oh, they're saying that I definitely had some chuck. This is why Min Alex fell out. Because I felt what we saw was bizarre enough without having to put a spin on it. What was out of spin? Alex's spin was practically that, you know, it's possible that they were killing an actual baby. I mean, Alex, I can't let the fell into that. But he went a long way. Oh, and it wasn't pretty said. One pretty said to me, yeah, we overheard these two old men like when we were walking down the road. I mean, it's true that Min Alex was like separate to this, but he said at one point we overheard these two old men going, yeah, we're going to get them elected. And I thought, like, I don't know that Alex didn't hear that, but that's a bit fucking convenient. I thought that's exactly the thing Alex would want to hear it be he and you and Grover. Who knows what that conversation was about. He'd taste something out of context like that. It could have been a total complete joke. Yeah, it could have been elected to like the local shrub. to hear it behaving in growth. Who knows what that conversation with the body takes something out of context like that? It could have been a total complete joke. Yeah, it could have been elected to let the local shrine has taken a bit anything. Yeah. When the boys tell us, who knows what the fuck they were talking about? Yeah. Alex is one of those jump-to-conclusion confirmation bias characters that oftentimes has some really fascinating information. And as much as I admire that Alex, I mean, I mean, to put a friend. He's a good friend. He said, he's an extraordinary broadcast. It's crazy. He's crazy. He's my friend. I'll tell you right now. He's out of his fucking mind. But he's right a lot of the time. I mean, one of the best pieces of work that Alex did was 911 the road to tyranny. And in that, he exposed some stuff from news broadcast that was really shocking about the use of agent provocateurs to which I always thought was utter horseshit. And then it turns out not only is it not horseshit, but it's standard operational procedures been proven with this Occupy Wall Street crowd. They infiltrated the Occupy Wall Street group and did all kinds of crazy shit in the park. We're trying to get people to join them and then arrest them. And what the agent provocateurs did during the WTO protest is they had these peaceful protests. And they would come in, dressed up, and like all black. And they had military-issue boots. And they were smashing windows and breaking things. And then they gave an excuse for the cops to come in and close down the protest. Well, they literally set up a no protest zone where people couldn't go to work with WTO badges. They had a WTO badge with us aligned through it, like saying no WTO. They were literally telling them they couldn't go to work with that on, because they no pro, like a fucking pin, like, which is completely against everything that's country is supposed to stand for, right? And so these people were, you know, these agent provocateurs were working for the government. And they literally came in to try to break up a peaceful protest by turning it violent. And then they were all held up in this one house. And Alex documented it all, not with his own news footage and his own reporting spin, but basically just using actual news stories and different coverages by different local news stations and showed like what the fuck actually went on. These people were all released. These guys were all held up in a building somewhere and they negotiated their release. Someone did somehow. Okay. And, you know, at first I was really super skeptical because I was like, that sounds like nonsense. But then you, the more you peel away, the more you realize, well, this is something that they've always done. It's like a standard prison. Like if you've got a bunch of people that are protesting and they're ruining your elite globalist fun, like the best way to do it if they're being peaceful is to have people that pretend to be amongst them and start smashing things. Then you have an excuse to come in and arrest everybody. And that's what they do. So he had a really fascinating video on that, showing evidence of that being used before. That there's a bunch of tactics in a place that's not simply as innocent as that law enforcement is set up to enforce laws and to preserve peace. It's not, it's not. They do a bunch of creepy shit. And, you know, that's unfortunate. But that's when you start talking about conspiracy theory, well, that seems to be conspiracy fact. You know, it just seems to be something that's standard operational procedure when they can get away with it. What I'm hoping is that with all this wicky leek shit and all this Edward Snowden stuff and all the new details that have been revealed about the NSA and what we know now about security and the internet and the cloud and everything can be hacked, everything can be compromised. I'm hoping that all goes away because I'm hoping that it just can be way too transparent. But, you know, I don't know. But Alex Jones thinks that what they're trying to do is get down to 500,000 people. He's got this idea in a sec. Do you live in 500,000 people? These really grandiose things he says like that. Do you think he really believes them or do you think he's like, like, would, you know, he's trying to make something that's so huge that everyone's gonna like draw themselves towards him? He's not a liar. He might go further with things than I would. You know, he might not have rational conclusions. He might approach things with confirmation bias. But when you spend five hours a day on the fucking radio or whatever he does, just going over wacky theories and selling gold, gold and bonds and dried foods, they got dried food, keep the dried food in your basement. You know, it's, after a while, I think you lose your fucking mind. You know, if you work at a strip club, you get sick of hookers. You get sick of working with strippers. You know, if you're selling drugs all day, the last thing you wanna do is take drugs. I think Alex is like inundated with conspiracy. It's like it's overwhelmed. You know, you probably can't see the forest for the trees. It's just saw chaos to him. It's all everybody's in on it. It's all the globe relief. People are turning to reptiles, left and right, burner towels, babies, whatever they can. I don't know, man. I don't, I mean, you'd have to ask, I love the guy though. He's a great guy. I love hanging out with him. He's a lot of fun. We got on better again as I said after the minister, it goes came out because he really liked that book. And then he had me on his show. And then like all of his listeners said, I was a chill for the new world or do they have a chill too? Sometimes they say that. Depends, depends on what I say. When I was talking about chemtrails, then they got really mad at me. Joe Rogan's a chill. I debocked chemtrails. Okay. Didn't even debock. I just fucking science. I mean, it's like real simple science behind what happens when a jet engine passes through condensation in the atmosphere. It's like it's been, they've known about it for fucking ever. It's idea that they're spraying clouds like what the fuck, man. And that they're controlling you with these clouds. But when I did this sci-fi show, we talked about it. And you know, I brought in aviation specialists. And I talked to different scientists. And I talked to a bunch of different people about it. And you know, what we decided to print, or we decided to show on the television show. Unfortunately, you're dealing with 44 minutes of TV for an hour, you know, you got a bunch of different commercials. So you kind of, you don't spend, I think, to really debunk something like that, you'd have to kind of like spend a long time with it and actually show people. Like actually get a jet up in the air and film it and show how this plane is actually leaving these clouds because it's passing through haze. Wouldn't be too hard to do if you had a really good budget, but we didn't have a really good budget. And it wouldn't be that entertaining. You know, we had to make it like short little snippets, which is like a real issue when you're dealing with any of those debunking shows, is that they also have to be entertaining. And they also have to fit within a format where they have to break every five minutes wherever this for commercials. What is it? What is it? What are the fuck they do? You know, they're constantly having commercials. So it's like you have to have these little tiny chunks of information and it's really just entertainment more than anything. See, I don't see myself as a debunker because I think, you know, what I saw it behave in growth, for instance, was really, it was odd. There was a kind of intensity there, which I believe is very different to why Alex felt was going on, but it was still odd. Yeah. Deniably odd, right? I mean, it is odd. Yeah. Yeah. Unritual success for a reason. And what reason is that, though? I mean, I don't know if it's certain, but I would say it's this idea. You know, we love to, this is a bit of a non-secreter, but my most recent book is this book about public shaming. Yes. So you've been publicly shamed. And what I've noticed happens on Twitter is we will reduce somebody to a label or reduce somebody to the worst tweet that they ever wrote. We'll demonize them and then we'll dehumanize them because we've just destroyed somebody. I would only feel bad about destroying them so we call them like a sociopath or something. It's this whole mental trick we play on ourselves. Like what's a cognitive dissonance? This idea that we're good people, but we've just destroyed somebody. So how do we make sense of that? Or we just say, or whatever sociopath or something? So it's all about labeling and reducing and demonizing and destroying people that we don't like. And it's also about having an excuse to be a real asshole. Like all you have to do is find a reason while you can unleash your fury on people. And it's a free shot. It's a free shot because of John Ronson says something fucked up. There is a million people that could find out about that and they don't know you at all. And so they have a lot of people who are have a free shot. They've never met you. They're never gonna meet you. They live in another part of the planet and they could just be fucking fucked that guy. They could just start typing a bunch of shit. And it's this weird thing going on where everybody's kid themselves into believing that you can lead a good ethical life. Like I can lead a good ethical life, but some bad phraseology and a tweet or something could be a clue to our secrets in an evil. Yeah, what you're really on. What you're really like. Yeah. And I just wonder whether there's some kind of connection between, it's about, you know, between that and about the rituals that you find at places like Behemoth Grove. And maybe the connection is that it's all about tricking yourself into believing that you can do evil shit. So like when you give yourself like a ritual at skull and bones or Behemoth Grove, that makes you feel, oh, I'm separate and different and better. And that gives me a mandate through all the world. I can inflict this cottage and other people because I'm different to them and better than them. And maybe on Twitter we do the same thing and I've had little ways which is like, oh, well, you know, we're better than that person because that person just misused their privilege or that person just, you know, showed their true inner evil. It's all about kind of, it's all about setting yourself apart from people so that you can behave in ways that hurt other people and you don't have to feel bad about it. Maybe that's the connection. Well, people have a tendency to pile on. It's always been the case. That's the reason why you see like, when riots break out, that sort of exploits that type of pile on behavior. People will do things in large groups of chaotic moments like a large groups of chaos rather that they would never do with an individual. You know, as far as like assaulting people or, I mean, there's been instances where gangs of people beat up and kill people and the people that were involved almost didn't feel responsible because they were one of many that stomp somebody or kick somebody or went over somebody. The snowflake doesn't need to feel responsible for the avalanche. Yeah, exactly. That's a great way of putting it. And I think diffusion of responsibility is a real issue with human beings when it comes to large numbers. And anytime there's large numbers, they don't feel responsible for any repercussions if there was only two people in the world and two people in the world they had somehow another invented Twitter and they were communicating with each other. And one guy said something questionable and the other guy quoted him and said, John Ronson is a piece of shit. Here's proof, fuck this guy, let's shame him. What's this let's, it's only you. You know, there's no one there. But what you're trying to do is they're appealing to the bully instinct of people. to just pile on and I'm torn because sometimes I think publicly shaming people is a good thing. Like it's a way. It's a way. If it's actual social justice, it's actual right and wrongs. But the problem is I think these days were in this really bad situation where people have decided to not differentiate between a serious transgression and an unserious, transgression. So some nice liberal person who tells a joke that comes out badly is treated with a similar level of ferocity. It's like a racist cop from the McKinney Texas video. Well, most that's a very good way of putting it. I think most people are not living life even. They're going through life with a deficit and they started out with this deficit by having a bunch of fucking shitty experiences when they were children, they're shitty parents and bad time in school and maybe they've been picked on and maybe they're job sucks or maybe they have unfulfilled sexual expectations. Whatever the fuck it is. Most people are going into any situation with a headwind or a tailwind, I guess it is, when someone's something behind you, tailwind. Tailwind, right? Headwind is your drive. But there's push behind them. They like accelerates their reaction to anything and they're almost looking for something that they can blame their bad feeling on. They're almost looking for a target to unleash all their existential angst and frustration and life, all their unfulfilled expectations, all of it is on John Ronson's shitty tweet. And I wish he stopped using these issues. I'm sorry, I'll just do it. Every time he's a fuck, someone else. What's his he tweet? But I have experienced it before. I have experienced it, but I found it adorable. How would retweet people and stuff when they did it to me? Well, I always liked it. I noticed because after my public shaming book came out, obviously, there was a lot of pushback and a lot of people went for me. And I always really liked it when people went for me in a kind of ridiculous way. Because I could retweet that one and it would make me look good. And it was one of my favorite ones was, all these people started like going for me and one person wrote, and I wasn't, I just stayed completely silent and one person wrote, why isn't John Ronson applying to any of us? And somebody asked her out, because John Ronson only replies to men. And I'm not fuck, is that me? Yeah, honestly, like I'm so proud of something. What were they upset at you for? Wow, okay, well in that particular instance, it all started with just in Sako. I wrote, there's a chapter in my book that defends just in Sako, who's the eight tweet woman. Do you remember that? On the plane. Listen, that lady is probably on Xanax and wine and she said something that she thought was funny. That would be funny if she was your friend. I would be funny if she, well, she was my friend and she sent that to me in a text message, I would fucking laugh. Yeah. I'm going to Africa, I don't get A's, LOL, just kidding, I'm white. Yeah. And then the worst thing is that she gets on the plane too. And finally, yeah, she gets on the plane, turns off her phone while she's asleep, is like just told to shreds by like 16 hours. Yeah, hundreds of thousands of people. And one of the most like extraordinary things about it is that her inability to explain herself became part of the hilarity. That was the tail weight. Like, oh my God, we know something she doesn't. One person tweeted, we're about to watch this just in Sako, bitch, get fired in real time before she even knows she's being fired. And I just kind of think of anything more unjust than that. So I wrote this really passionate, you know, pilemic defending her, I think, that we had gone crazy, we'd lost our minds. And this was the most in judicial thing that we could possibly think of. Yeah. And a lot of people, you can imagine kind of really objected to that. Of course. Yeah, so I think because they have the green light to object, I mean, it's not that you're not saying something reasonable. I thought it was sort of the most important stores I ever did because like for 30 years, I've been writing about abuses of power. Like in the psychopath test, the abuses of power in the pharmaceutical industry or, you know, the worst excesses of psychiatry or psychopaths or whatever, the people abusing their power over there. And whenever I like gave talks about that, I'd like everyone would love it, you know, people would love it. And then I wrote this news story, this new book, where I say, you know what, the people abusing our power now, they're there us. It's like we've suddenly got all this new power on Twitter and social media, and we're massively abusing it. And the pushback is ferocious. Well, because the pushback is from the very people who enjoy abusing this power. Yeah. I've been talking about this for a while. And I think that what's going on now with people and the internet and this new found ability to communicate that we find ourselves in, this new found situation we find ourselves in, where anyone instantaneously can comment on virtually anything that happens in the world. And if what you say resonates or offends, they can become a hot button. And it just like gets all these ants just fine, the sugar, they just dive on it and they just swarm. And it's almost like a mindless thing because I think that what we're experienced is an adolescent stage of a new level of communication that human beings are experiencing. Yeah. I think that this new level of communication is starting off with the ability to just tweet at each other, and it's going to eventually go into some weird virtual reality place. That's, and let's people fillet. You know my friend, I call it. Yeah, a couple of years ago my friend Adam Curtis is exactly what his flip phones live in the desert cut your own wood in the forest. Yeah, basically. My friend Adam Curtis said to me, who you'd love, by the way, if you don't know his stuff. No, don't. Oh God, you'd love him. He made the power of nightmares and the century of the self, this great duck BBC dog. Oh, I was saying that. I've seen the century themselves. Yeah. Anyway, Adam said to me one time that, you know, he thinks that the internet or definitely social media is going to be like one of those John Carpenter movies from the 80s where everybody's yelling at each other and everyone's like killing each other. And eventually everyone flees to somewhere safer like the suburbs. And maybe that's what I'm saying. And you know, I know it's myself flinging a bit from social media. I have a feeling. I was looking at it. Yeah. I never, a long time ago, like maybe 10 years ago or so, I would argue with people online all the time. And then I realized what an enormous waste of time and is also I realized that I'm not picking the people that I communicate with as opposed to the way you do it in real life. And one of the things that I would do in real life is I would avoid anybody that starts arguments in a shitty all the time. People were insulting and shitty. I would argue with them. I would avoid them. But on the internet, I would like engage these people. And I'm like, I'll get you. Yeah, you fucking loser. But you realize after a while, oh, this is a new thing. And I'm applying to it like the same strategy that I would apply to a heckler at a comedy club. And you really can't. This is a totally new thing. And no one knows how to do it yet. It's we don't have the benefit of hindsight to be able to step, you know, we're talking like 2000, you know, 2001. We didn't have the benefit of stepping back and saying, well, this has been going on for a long time. And now we understand how to deal with people. But back then we didn't. And I waste a lot of time. That's a fun. But wasted a lot of time. And also you get emotionally charged up and invested in these people that in real life, you probably wouldn't want to hang out with them. But probably not the nicest folks to be with. Yeah, oh, maybe they are. And I'm just the internet is turning us into, you know, these unempathetic psychopathic figures. I mean, maybe from at minute or left, that'd be sweet. Well, you wouldn't know them, first of all, based on their tweets, because a tweet is one of the worst representations of you. Yeah. It has to be kind of extreme. 140 characters. I mean, sometimes it can be poignant, sometimes it can be funny. But like to sum you up from, first of all, to sum you up by your writing is difficult enough as it is when you're writing chapters and paragraphs, without any back and forth. It's hard because I don't think we are just who we are as an individual. I think we are who we are based on who we're interacting with and how that works out. Like that's who you really are. That's one of the things that's so important about choosing your friends. Cause your friends aren't just someone you enjoy. They kind of help define you. And when you have a bunch of really good friends and you communicate with them well and you get a lot out of it, it changes who you are. You become a better person. You can become a better person or a really good relationship. And you can become an awful person in a bad relationship. You know, I've been in bad relationships before. Right? And like me, I'm like, this person hates me. I don't even like me anymore. Like what the fuck is going on? And it's because we like to think ourselves is completely autonomous. But I don't think that's real. I don't think there's anybody that's really autonomous. I think we all need human beings. And we all cherish human interaction. As much as you want privacy, you don't want it all the time. I mean, if you had to choose between no privacy or no people, I would take no privacy every time. I like people. People are great. You know, I don't want to be bothered all the time. And that's when people think the woods seem like a great idea. I'm just going to go unibomber and just fucking living the woods. No, you don't want to do that. Like we literally are a super organism. We are not like one individual experiencing the universe solely on our own. We're all constantly interacting with each other. Which I think is part of the reason by social media, public shaimings, is so fucking traumatizing to somebody on the receiving end of the year. Because there's nothing to be to be ejected from society, to be told you not as good as everybody else to get out. It's like deeply traumatizing. But then the people doing the shaming, they don't want to think that. They don't want to think that. They've just potentially done something intensely traumatizing to another human being. That mangled up somebody's mental health. So they just think, oh, I'm sure they're fine. You're sure they're fine. That person would just try to make sure they're fine. You know, there's a guy who used to add it, Gorka, who reviewed my book in one of the papers, who basically said, oh, Jonathan, so sweet. It's fine. If you're a man being publicly shamed, it's fine. It's no big deal. They're just fine. And I was looking at this, I was thinking, oh, I've gone around the world, mainly people. They're not fucking fine. Is that whether you want to carry on doing it or not? You have to accept they are not fine. People, well, a few weeks after that guy wrote that review, some guy in Israel had been falsely accused of being racist, committed suicide. They're not fine. It's like you can carry on doing it if you want, but it's a really severe fucking punishment. Well, this mob mentality has existed throughout history. I mean, when you go back to the punishing of the witches and Salem or what they do in Africa, have you ever seen these witchcraft accusation, things in Africa where one person will tell someone that someone's a witch and then everybody else and the tribe believes it and they're burning people a lot? There's a really disturbing videos, but it's like this pile on where I think part of what's going on is there's a real fear of that same thing could happen to them. And so they lash out that one person with real commitment so that they're in that area part of the group. They're in that group. Yes, they're safe for that day. Yeah. It's not only handled destroying one person at night, but I noticed with just 10 sake, one person at night tweeted, somebody HIV positive should rape this bitch and then we'll find out if her skin color protects her from AIDS. And you know how many people went after that person? No one. It's like we were two. Everyone was too excited about destroying just need to simultaneously destroy somebody who was inappropriately destroying just needs. And that person got a fucking total free person. Imagine the mindset of someone to think that the best way to respond to someone's inappropriate joke is to rape them and give them an incurable deadly disease. And just in, and it feels totally justified doing it. And just in was a sleep out of fucking play. And everyone knew that. And that's why everyone loved it so much. Well, didn't she write a bunch of other ridiculous tweets? Like, she was trying to be funny. Twitter. Yeah. I had a sex dream about an autistic kid last night. I don't know what's something about. You know, it's just stupid shit. I read she's fun to drink with. Yeah. Well, I had a couple of drinks. She wasn't fun the first time because she was a fucking crash. Oh, my God. That it just took a few weeks later. It probably took years off of her life. Oh, Jesus. Porgestive. The second time was she OK? Better the second time. And it took her a year. It was a year. She was basically a year to recover. Yeah. She was basically fucked and in the wilderness for a year. You know, I noticed that show to my book came out. One of the pushbacks was like, well, you know, just in soccer's fine now, you know, she was only like unemployed and you know, deeply traumatized for a year. And I'm like, for one fucking joke that lies naturally. A year. You know? Oh, my God. Yeah. That joke was representative of the hardest part of my year. Yeah. It's OK. This is what we fucking do. And it's such a lie. It's like, well, all of these fucking mismappos do all these amatous sloths of social media thinking that we can spot somebody's true inner evil through a little bit of phrase, the oddity. That's what happened to Trevin Noah. And it just happens over and over and over. And it's what was Amy Schumer. And it just happens over and over again. Well, Amy Schumer and Trevor know, though, they're standups and especially Amy. Amy doesn't give a fuck. Like, you can't bet she gives a bit more of a fuck than I just think everybody who's at the receiving end of that, it does. But it gives her an up first of all, she doesn't ever say anything that is indefensible. Because she's very smart. And also, I think, as a comic, everything that she says that's ridiculous, if you want a debater on like why or not, I mean, she plays the role of a dumb person saying ridiculous shit all the time. Like that's part of like a persona that she'll adopt and abandon on stage. She'll adopt it and abandon it. And you know going in, that's what she's doing. It's a part of being entertaining. It's like, Richard Pryor doing the dopey white guy voice. Do I think he's really a dopey white guy now? He was like, hey, my mom, she's a great old girl. No, he's doing the fucking character of a dopey person. It's easy to mock. That's the same thing that Amy does when she might not change her voice. But when she says ridiculous shit, she's clearly being a comic and doing it as an art form. You know, so she can go through a few times under your podcast, by the way. And she hasn't done it in a little while, right? But she's got her show. I haven't talked to her on forever. She's busy as fuck. She's got that movie coming out. But she's very smart. Yeah. She's very smart. So she would welcome any opportunity to defend anything like that. She doesn't take herself ridiculously seriously or anything like that. She's a very smart girl. But I think that's a really woman. One want to call me a boy. I think there's a serious change going on in the way that human beings act towards each other. Do you like it? No, I think it's really bad. It's stressful. Who would have thought that the public is shaming part? Yeah. I mean, what I do like is the fact that there's a leveling of the playing field and social justice. It's obviously that side of things I really like. But the problem is that, I think the problem, I'll tell you all this, I would college and London in the 80s. And sometimes I fail with social media and with the social justice movement. It's like the worst fucker who used to hang around the student union now gets to decide everything. Right. And it's partly because of like the 140-character Twitter thing. So basically, in the student union in the 1980s, we all cared about social justice. But it's like the most unforgiving extreme fucker is now the one who's actually setting the agenda. And not only setting the agenda on social media, but because the mainstream media is so enthought social media and doesn't want to get hurt. So it goes along with it. It's kind of creating an entire society of surveillance society. And colleges are where people first start exercising that muscle. And it's the most rabid version of this issue today. It's one of the reasons why a lot of comedians won't perform in colleges anymore. Jerry Seinfeld just got a hard time from a bunch of people because he said that colleges are too politically correct. And Chris Rock is saying the same thing. And I stopped doing colleges a long fucking time ago for the very same reason. Yeah. Well, I did a college once. And this is a perfect example of it. But this is a guy, this example is perfect because this is before the internet. And this was a guy that I actually talked to face to face. Like someone said, you know, like I would do colleges and I'd fly into these towns. And you know, they're bored. So like I tell my jokes. And then sometimes I do like Q&A with them. You know, just for fun. Because it's a fun way to like you, the kids get to ask questions and you get to fuck around and come up with things on the fly. And some guy said, do you know any joke jokes or something like all of those signs? Right. And I said, I don't remember anyone. I go out and I remember this one. Two Jews walking to a bar. They buy it. Like it's the end of the joke. It's stupid. It's terrible. That joke, a guy came up to me after the show and said that joke you did about Jews is very offensive. I said, what's offensive about it that Jews are That joke a guy came up to me after the show and said that joke you did about juices very offensive I Said what's offensive about it that Jews are successful at business What's offensive that I use the word Jew to Jews walking to a bar that they went to a bar What parts offensive are you just looking to be offended? Or you actually offended and he was flabbergasted? He didn't know what to say because he was a fucking 19 year old kid and he thought he had his he was an awkward Associated a socially awkward person and he thought this is my opportunity to be right Yeah, and he just I'm offended like and there's all these kids supporting each other Yes, you do have the right to be offended They're all fucking dumbest shit and they don't have any life experience and they really they don't have a nuanced view of the world Yeah, and they're exercising this new muscle this new muscle of learning how to call someone on their bullshit man on the patriarchy on the cis cis gendered male heteronormative bullshit that you see every day and they're like finding this this opportunity expresses rich and then eventually Hopefully they'll settle in and hopefully they'll sort of like as time goes on They have more experience they'll sort of realize how ridiculous that were you know when they were younger But it's like a natural inclination to like you know you fucked up and you know you've done wrong thing So when you see it another people call it to this one kid that said this to me I mean that was the extent of our conversation. I said that's ridiculous. I go It's not offensive. I go I'm first of all I don't tell I'm not racist and if I told the racist joke it has to be really good You know and then and he goes we should never tell racist joke. Oh, that's not true I go if you tell if you make me laugh with a really funny racist joke I'm thankful because you made me laugh I don't think you think that everything you say is a fucking sworn statement an Affidavit that you're getting giving in court. I assume that when you're doing the art of stand-up comedy You're going to say things you don't really mean because they're funnier than what you really mean And that's part of the art form just like when you listen to a song You know Bob Marley didn't really shoot the sheriff, okay? Probably didn't shoot anybody and it's like it's it's it's part of the art It's making shit up and when you take that away because people are going to be offended Well, then you remove almost every movie that's ever been made you remove almost every book that's ever been written You take away almost every stand-up comedian set and you just get you you fucking nerf the shit out of the world and everybody's boring Yeah, and that's not the answer. It's not the answer. I think this is I'm a nessus older reason why I I'm so happy to have done the Justin Sacco story in my book Because and I had so much pushback and each time I get pushback. I feel more more happy that I did it like I remember gave a talk in Norwich one of the first talks I gave was in Norwich England and somebody in the Q&A somebody said to me something called out are you a racist? And I was like because I defended Justin and it's like you know so for 30 years I'm writing about a piece of power and the first time I say we are the ones abusing our power somebody I was out are you a racist and then Let's try to feel it. Well, isn't that one person is aren't you just dealing with really Simple thinking that's just not a nuanced objective Well thought out view of a human being what they're doing is looking for an opportunity to call you out on something Yeah, looking for an opportunity to shame you and that's what I the problem I have with all this social justice warrior Bullshit that's going on the world is it's man you it's manufacturing a lot of hate and it's man manifesting itself in a very angry way where What what should be people that are pro gay rights pro chance gender rights pro gay marriage pro Peace pro choice pro love pro left wing Ideology, you know, there's like do Unto others as you out have them do on to you this whole idea of like creating a more peaceful world and the way they're gonna do it is By ruining everybody who doesn't agree with them and shitting all over them and insulting them Yeah, I'm not distinguishing between what's actual social justice and what's a kind of cathartic alternative to social justice Like the destruction of justice didn't the destruction of Justin doesn't do any good for anybody No, she wasn't even intending to be racist. She was trying to make a liberal she's trying to be like car She's gonna be like tray park room that stone right. This is and someone's going after a cop that shot a kid With a fake pistol or anything, you know, this is yeah Exactly, and this is the real problem and the inability to distinguish between that serious Nionian and the unceres transgression and what is creating is a kind of surveillance society Is creating a kind of stars he where everybody's more fearful everyone scared to say things The great thing about social media was how it gave a voice to voiceless people and now People are fleeing social media because they realize in that the smartest way to survive is to go back to being voiceless See, I don't think that's true. I don't think they are fleeing I think they're jumping on droves. I think some people are jumping off But I think that what you said the great thing about it is it gives a voice to people. It's also the terrible thing about it but I think what this is is As I said before is this is like this adolescent stage of communication We're reaching this new level of interaction where we can interact with each other instantaneously And that's just never by the way Tesla predicted this To Tesla predicted smartphones a hundred years ago and I tweeted this quote today that somebody sent my way absolutely fascinating It was not just a quote. It was a a A piece that Tesla had written in life in 1920s Amazing where he predicted smartphones like literally described a modern smartphone scrolling down like what where his actual words Like no, no, it's not below that. You actually read it When wireless is perfectly applied the whole earth will be converted into a huge brain which in fact it is All things being particles of a real and rhythmic whole we shall be able to communicate with one another instantly Irrespective of distance not only this but through television And telephony like phones we shall be able to hear one another as perfectly as though we were face-to-face Despite intervening distances of Thousands of miles and the instruments through which we shall be able to do this will do this do his will Be oh do his will huh To do hey, oh do be amazing will be amazingly Simple compared with our present telephone a man will be able to carry one in his vest pocket Holy shit fuck that is unbelievable Fucking unbelievable when you read that paragraph you think to yourself. Oh my god, you know When we have that world for ourselves What an amazing world it will be a world of curiosity Will be a world of like understanding strangers of nuance of context And so we have the world and we completely throw away curiosity We throw away nuance we throw away context and what we have instead is condemnation Well with dummies, but not with everybody with a lot of people look I'm way more informed now that I ever would have been if I had grown up in the 1960s Like if I grown up in the 1960s and I was a 47 year old man in 1967. I wouldn't know Jack shit I'd be at ape. I mean that is true, but I do fear you know I mean I do fear that you know Maybe there's two types of people in the world those people who favor humans over ideology And those people who favor ideology over humans and right now the ideologues are winning I'm so you know, I don't think they are I think no I just think they're making more noise and I think that it's it's really a matter of who those Ideological people are surrounding themselves with I think they can be swayed into a more understanding nature We can decide this is what somebody wrote about my book which I really agreed with Somebody right you know, we can decide who to listen to yeah Just in Sako the problem was that the bullies won like everyone was too scared to defend just in nobody defended Just in that night. She said you you brave bastard look at you. Yeah. Well a woman called Helen Lewis who writes for the new statesman wrote a review of my public shaming book. She said that she tried to defend just in at night She wrote I'm not sure the joke was intended to be racist and straight away Yeah, and straight away she got this fury of well, you're just a privilege bitch too So she said to her to shame she shut up and that's what happened at night like everybody shut up And it wasn't just on social media like the mainstream media all got involved It was like you know and that became like the dominant narrative about Justin Sako was actually Yeah, a racist and and anybody who tried to stick up for her just got got screamed down Well, um almost any defending her Indefending her I would say she's probably a little racist Which you can't really think like that that it's okay to say that if you're not a little racist but In cracking that joke and saying something like that which is uncert unquestionably a racist joke Just kidding. I'm white lol right that's fucking racist. You know, she's got stress. I don't know if it's to me It's like a bad random human saga. I mean random humans and short people so people got no reason to live Like we also said I love it. Yeah, is that tongue and cheek as well? Yeah, this type of cheek because he sings look at those mountains Look at those trees look at that bum over there man. He's down on his knees You know so what land did even would do is that he he will acknowledge his own privilege and then do a kind of grotesque Extreme version of it for comedy. He does that and sort people who does it in our level a and I think that's exactly what just In soccer was doing in that joke. She was acknowledging her own privilege and then Mocking it by doing kind of grotesque version of it And the only difference between just in and around in human was that just didn't look just wasn't any fucking good at it right That's a good point. I see your point um It's it's hard to argue that it couldn't possibly offend people But the idea that she knew she was broadcasting it to all those people that were offended I think people just don't understand what the fuck is going on Say things online that you know what went the New York Times extracted my book and if fact check it the New York Times Foned up just in and said to her Like so before you got on the plane We used to prize that like you didn't get any replies because while she was like You know all happened after she turned off a phone and fell asleep And she said I had 170 Twitter followers nobody ever replied So she was using it like as she's like yelling into an empty room. Yeah, I don't know It actually probably got unreasonably cocky because of that exactly. Yeah, and she got on a plane It's so she's probably on Xanax in drinking which is what a lot of people do when they get on planes That's like a fucking this lady was explaining to me that that's she was like like she was bragging about it Like you made glass of wine of Xanax and I don't give a fuck about anything She was it was hilarious. She was just talking I was like I wonder how many people take Xanax and get on planes and apparently Talking to people that take Xanax it's super common They get anxiety and they're gonna get on a long plane and also sleeping pills people take all sleep when pills and get on planes You know speaking of Xanax. Oh, oh is When all of this was happening to me like when the New York Times You know extract came out and and it was just so noisy. It's one of my noisiest stories I've been the book about it was incredibly noisy and I went to the studio to do this video Like talking about my book and the woman on before me Was a doctor and she was doing a video about her book and She said what she book about and I said public shaming. She's old. Did you read the piece in the New York Times about Justin Sacco and I said I wrote it and she said oh wow God you must be so happy and I said actually I'm not happy and she said why aren't you happy and I said because everyone's just so much noise And then she said so what do you want? and I said Xanax She said Pardon wrote me a prescription for like 60 Xanax of which by the way I've had one and a half. I don't abuse Miss Anna Xbath. Oh fuck. It's easy to get medication It's very easy to get medication in the United States. You go to the right doctors meaning go to any doctor Yeah, did you want the fuck do you take it? I took like I took like a half. It was like Maybe feel a bit I was no longer anxious I felt groggy and I know it's a way out what would I rather feel groggy or anxious welcome to America. That's our dilemma groggy anxious caffeinated or on out of all but then I thought God like when she said to me what do you want Like all I could think of to say was Xanax, but then did I miss like an amazing opportunity Like I don't know anything. I don't know anything, but you know whether like much like way better things than sound Exhited us. Um You like really in a painkillers. I guess but you'd have to like say that you're on pain I think the thing about Xanax is you could say you have anxiety and they'll give you a medication. Yeah, you know I know guys do what had to he went to a doctor to get prescription because he was a social justice warrior and He said a bunch of incorrect things and people attacked him and so he had to go to the doctor So he's freaked out like he got a taste of his own medicine But that fucker I saw him like six months later still shitting on people online like he didn't didn't learn From the hack on him like it's almost like they get caught up in this They get addicted to this drama of shitting on people of attacking people. Yeah, it's weird You know what since I mean I don't do it anymore. I do not pile in on anybody anymore Even people who deserve it. I tend not to pile in on anymore I tell you what worth it comes from the fact in my book the psych for me anyway my book the psychopath test I am really critical of like labeling culture. I'm really I'm critical of like the fact that the DSM is 886 pages long and as a mental disorder for everything and yes And most people I think agree with me that that's kind of it's like easy to agree with me about that But then on social media we do exactly the same thing. We label people right and yet So the very same people who agree with me about the kind of you know What's wrong with labeling culture in the world go home and do it themselves in social media? I've been really toying with this very strange idea lately I have this conversation with my good friend Duncan Tressel and we were we were talking about labels and and self definition and the sort of imprisonment of definition and I said well even words Like names for people like my name is Tom You know, fuck head, you know, whatever and it has Tom You know, you're a witmore and as a witmore, you know, you're you're supposed to stand for something in this world like that I think God damn it. You're a Rogan stiffen up boy They I think these ideas of Like having a name like a label like you're your Coca-Cola, you know, you're Jamie Vernon You know, there's this I think having instead of just being you Like having names even names themselves like me say oh well You know, what do you expect? It's that fucking John Ronson guy, you know like all of a sudden You can be boxed in and defined you're not just a human being who is sort of like Existing with these other human beings. You're a labeled human being. Yeah, and that label can be great You know, you can be the Dalai Lama or that label can be shit. You could be Donald Trump You know, and you're you're right now Donald Trump is an easy pile on. Yeah Everybody will jump on him. He said a bunch of racist things about Mexicans and much a dumb shit during his speech Announcing this is gonna be president. He's an easy pile on and he's also a guy that sort of embraces self definition He embraces his label so much so that he puts his label on the top of a building Trump towers This is the Trump casino on the Trump this and like it's a part of the definition I think any sort of definition like that like officer Professor, you know doctor, you know How about people that want like caused me was making people call him a doctor when he got an honorary doctorate? You know, I guess maybe you know secretly it was a big joke for him because he was drugging people You know allegedly New news right now. It's came out. He admitted to 2005 and court. I'll show you the article Oh, what this just happened. Oh, just just happened. Oh my goodness He admitted in a 2005 deposition that he obtained quailudes a sedative with the intent of giving them to women He wanted to have sex with according to records obtained by the Associated Press on Monday The admission was contained in records that were unsealed after the AP went to court to compel the release Cosby's attorneys had repeatedly sought to keep the record sealed arguing that they would be embarrassing This was a case that Cosby paid a woman off and then Because he had paid her off part of the deal Part of the arrangement was that the records should be sealed So they went to court and wow he's fucked now Every like three and a half been a drill or something that another thing I was reading this a big asset God what a monster. What's this statue of limitations and all of this stuff? It's a very good question. I think you can be well 2005. I can't imagine the statue of limitations is Well, if that's 2005 that's when he admitted it but when was the actual instance? That's monster shit. That's really that's dehumanizing shit. I think We can go that's a long conversation It's sort of semi related the definition of Bill Cosby because Bill Cosby is a sort of iconic individual and Bill Cosby as a Celebrity and because of that he was worshiped and treated like a celebrity and I think because of that worship He sort of had an expectation of worship and also an act This is total armchair Psychology from a dude who went to college for three years barely paid attention but the I think the expectation of that and the years and years of that much like being a spoiled child leads you to be a person who expects that from people and can even justify horrific behavior because you actually do think that you're better than someone the same way royalty does the same way You know people who Have like grown up their life a lot behemian grove again at a reason and a lot of ways. Yeah, I mean I think there's I think it's related in a way to the idea of labeling Labeling and you know, I just Well, you know, that's not a human being. That's a police officer officer Johnson You know, you refer to the judge as your honor You know, you can't go hey, man You know, I know you're reading off a book But don't lock me to fucking cage because I had a joint Order in the court. Whoa refer to him as your honor You know me like that all that stuff The fucking one they used to wear crazy wigs and outfits. What are they doing? They're well, they're separating themselves They're differentiating themselves and they're labeling though. They're putting themselves in a very distinctive position Labeling it's it's really one of the it's one of the worst things that's happening in this country at the moment They're in in the psychopath test. I write about how these kids Like as young as one and two Getting labeled bipolar Because everyone so in love with the checklists That a kid goes to CSI carches with the temper tantrum and and so it scores higher in the bipolar checklist So they then give an anti-psychotic medication at the edge of like literally one and two You know, that's how much labeling culture is out of control You know, it's a journalist the question I love asking most is why you know because I open stores You know why you have to go some more but with labeling culture including labeling culture on social media It's lie it closes doors labels closed doors questions open doors Well, they certainly define in like a very concrete way This is what I felt you know, I felt most out a step Lately with the whole Rachel dollar show thing Because when I heard that story, I just thought that is so Mysterious and complicated You want to and you know, maybe she's maybe she's Mentally ill or maybe she's not whatever's going on here This is like really fucking mysterious and interesting and I had like a thousand questions And so I went on Twitter Expecting that that would be Twitter's response to they'd have like a thousand questions Right, but no people read they're like ridiculing her or attacking her like yelling black face or whatever Oh, but there's plenty of people supporting her her position is being transracial Those are my favorite. Those people are adorable Right, but I just thought for fucking hell I can't You know what I thought I thought I've been the journalist for 30 years and I'm sick I don't know where to go with this, but I thought I'm really sick of like damaged people being other people's play things Either ideological play things or play things for mockery or whatever and obviously there's nothing wrong with comedy and sat down Mokri, I mean that's fine, but nonetheless so glad to the But nonetheless, I'm just sort of sick of cruelty Yeah of making other human beings up play things instead of you know for whatever reasons instead of like curiosity Well if it was as simple as play Play things like just just straight up mockery I would expect that you would get some clever humor out of it But it's hate there's a lot of anger and hate and this whole public shaming thing sort of goes along with that I mean there's some people that I follow that I don't agree with and but unfortunately I agree with their position on a lot of things like a marriage like you know Equality for all like There's so many different things that I agree with like extreme left-wing people on that it's really problematic because when some of them adopt this sort of social warrior Public shaming stance. I'm so torn because on one side. I want to go after them But on another side I agree with almost all of their positions On equality for women and equality for gay people and equality I mean there's so many of the positions that I have the exact same stance on but I don't have this stance on Public shaming where if I do my stance is public Humor, you know my my stance whether Chris Christie says he's gonna lock up everyone who smokes marijuana You know because marijuana so dangerous. I'm like Jesus Christ Do you have a fucking mirror in your house? You're morbidly obese and you're telling people that they can't have a substance that is never killed a single person ever Overbeing overweight is one of the major causes of premature death in the United States of America Having a heart attack is one of the major causes and having a heart attack is almost directly related in most people To being overweight. I mean, it's a huge issue and this fucking slob is on television Telling people that he's gonna stop marijuana because it's dangerous You know, he's stuff in hot dogs in his fat face like to me a guy like that has to be mocked because it's it's there And that's my job just like The fucking crocodile sees the wounded antelope and it gets too close to the water hole it can't help it It's got a snap at it. If I'm a comic Can you say something stupid like that and you are just as blatantly obvious target like that is a dangerous person in my in my opinion Because he's a person who could dictate policy. Well, yeah, he's a person that makes laws and he's a person that literally can lock people up in jail Yeah, he can get people's freedom taken away. Yeah, you're punching up and you're being funny and There's nothing you know, I'd be a real dope if I was gonna start being against things like that I guess you know what what my books against is the disproportionate punishment of people who don't deserve it Well, it's bullying. Yeah, it's piling on. Yeah, I mean, it it it it it it's it's also Having a lack of There's a lack of perspective that comes with a lot of these pile-on bullying things like the What was the woman's name again? Sacco? Just doing yeah, just the Rachel Dolezal thing first of all She handled herself very well on Matt Lauer Yeah, I should say by the way that me sort of saying all of that stuff on Twitter was right at the beginning before She'd said anything I was like say look we don't know anything about this woman, you know We don't know anything like everyone's jumping to conclusions nobody knows anything and I was just like us Screamed that for that and she had some other issues though that were exposed as time went on and one of them She's a plagiarist. Oh, yeah. Yeah, she plagiarized some art She was selling some art that she clearly plagiarized and she's just deceptive She lied about her background. She said she was born in a teepee like she's just not a truthful person and Sometimes when people don't enjoy their life. You know, I've met a lot of kids When I was young that you know came from really fucked up backgrounds And those are the ones that told like the really big lies And I think that a lot of those lies were because they didn't like their reality, you know, and that's they didn't they didn't ask to be born People like that, you know, there's a mystery right with people like that. You like so what happened? Right. Why do you feel that way? What's going on? Where's the virtual dollars? I like the minute this breaks on social media everyone's just like, you know, fucking racist shut the fuck up There's no questions Because she's appropriating disenfranchised segment of society has already been stolen from from white by white people, you know, and I had people tweeting me to say You know, you were white man. This isn't your story. You don't have a lot of opinion Because you weren't born with the right amount of melanin your skin. So your mind is not working right Well, they said this is your story. You can't come into this. This is because this isn't your story That's bullshit I when I felt it kind of was my story because I've for 30 years I've been writing about trouble people and I've come to conclusions about the way you should regard other people The human beings with sort of interesting curiosity and compassion not cold hard Judgement so that's where I came from in that story. It's also That you saying that it's not you're not allowed to have an opinion or it's not your story That is you what you're trying to do is you're trying to silence Anybody that doesn't agree with you everyone that is a human being that witnesses a story you witness some Public thing is taking place you were absolutely allowed your opinion And if you're not going to allow people to speak up about things and have opinions about things whether these opinions are informed or uninformed That's all going to be sorted out in the wash But to say it's not your position to talk well then you're publicly silencing people And you know exactly what that is the opposite of of course is democracy. Yes When I was reading people I went off social media after all of that because there was so much screaming And I was reading people basically saying okay, let's go to John Ronson into saying something outrageous And then we can get him is that what they said? Yeah I'd always say that though. You know why they'd say that is because the young have decided for some mystifying reason to create an incredibly stressful world for themselves I don't think they realize what they're doing but the the the ritual doll's all thing was To me it was a perfect example of how ludicrous human beings are how ridiculous our society is and how Like this woman is like first of all The NAACP was founded by white people. There's something a lot of people don't know and black folks weren't even allowed to hold office Until the 1970s. Well at the cotton club Yeah, in a lot of ways well it was actually founded by New York City intellectuals I believe I hope I'm not doing this wrong that They really it was in response to all the lynchings and you know they were like they were just they were compassionate intelligent Progressive people that were trying to figure out a way Past this horrible Situation that the world it found himself in post slavery where there was all this resentment and there was there was Lynch lynchings and this the chaos that is the south and you know I think we're still dealing with the reverberation the repercussions and the reverberations of it right now With this Confederate flag debate that's going on all throughout America now It's like America is just sort of kind of waking up to the fact that well fuck man A hundred or so years ago. You were allowed to own people. Yeah, you know and the people that wanted to be able to own people had a flag and These people put that flag on a car and drove it around on TV and we didn't think about it Yeah, you know and now we're thinking about it and You know the record by the way I was always disappointed when the juke so fast it was on TV that because of the flag no just because it wasn't as good as Wonder Woman, but I really love to see the kind of tension But what about Daisy Duke? Well wonder what was pretty fucking hot too. Yeah, I spent a lot of time with the Ku Klux Klan You know from my book there my I discovered this um Politically correct faction of the Ku Klux Klan in Arkansas. What? Yes Run by a guy called Tom Rob who decided that the Klan had a really bad image I think he was gonna do something about this recently. No, this is like the mid 90s It's about about it in my book. Then why is he back in the news? No, there's another group Another fact of the Ku Klux Klan that was allowing black people and they wanted to allow black people in oh Really, well, that is the kind of thing that Tom would have done in fact Tom was accused by other white supremacist of kissing a black baby And he had to kind of Oh really? Well that is the kind of thing that Tom would have done. In fact Tom was accused by other white supremacist of kissing a black baby. And he had to kind of deny it, he had to wish you a good night. I wish you a good night. Oh black baby. But I went to Tom's house and he directed so he banned, I went for his big annual convention and he banned like the robes and the hoods. Wow. There were a lot of where robes one day a year and there were a lot of bone across one day a year. Oh my god! Yeah. And it was the day that I turned up and there were all standing around this giant cross that is lying on the ground. And they couldn't remember because they were so rusty. They couldn't remember whether to soak it and then raise it or raise it and then soak it. Oh that is hilarious. And then Tom comes over and they go Tom we can't do with soak it and then raise it or raise it and then soak it. And Tom goes you soak it and then raise it. How the hell are you going to like soak it and say, okay, okay, okay, okay. And then Tom looks at me as if to say I am so sorry that my members are such idiots. Like Tom preferred me to the clown. Oh my god that is adorable. And then they had this knocking and his garden and they were all doing this kind of personality skills workshop. Like it all fill out these multiple choice like which strengths and weaknesses most apply to you. I always remember like one of the strengths the weaknesses was mixes easily. Which normally would be like a strength but if you're the clown it's going to be a weakness. And then another one was warrior. And one of theclassmen was like going well I don't consider being a warrior to be a weakness. And then like the person doing the test was like why are she being a warrior can be a weakness. And he thought it was warrior. And it was warrior. Oh god. Yeah. Who says warrior? Are you a warrior? The English. The English. The English. Yeah. I think it's an Englishman. I'm a warrior. Oh I see. Yeah. Well I could see someone saying I'm a warrior but I couldn't see it as a question. Are you a warrior? Yeah. I would think the question would be a little bit more straightforward like do you worry a lot. I've got to say it a kind of generic multiple choice question and answer thing. Warrior would be like an odd one to have in there. Are you a warrior? Yes sir. I'm a warrior for the warrior race. Well I'm not. I'm not. I'm a warrior. I don't know if we could without a warrior. Now what is the reason why they burn the cross? It's a cross. They call it a cross lighting not a cross burning. Oh no. It goes back to glass half full sort of a thing. I think it goes back to the Scottish I believe it's all to do with like I can't remember. They told me you know what it's like being a journalist like you know everything for short amount of time and then you move on to the next story. You write your story. I forget it all. I've got a terrible memory anywhere. That's like being a podcast or two. Right. We've talked about things you know we've done 667 episodes now. Yeah. So we got to do it. I'm not a 667. Yes. Who did you have? You missed 667. That's a good trouble. I just want to do a pretty fake evil. Fake evil. He's a great guy. Yeah. What do you play evil? One time I was on a road trip with the clan from Harrison, Arkansas to St. Paul in long journey like 17 hours. I was in a car for 17 hours with the clan. Whoa. At one point Tom turned to me the leader and he said can I ask you a question? And I said what? And he said do you think I'm weird? Wow. Yeah. And I was like I think you're in a transitional phase between weird and not weird. Oh, that's interesting. So you were playing like psychological. Yeah. Well, I was in a car with the game lab. But the same as a transitional period. Like what did you mean by that? Well, because he was trying to, you know, trying to do an image makeover. We were being more politically correct. It didn't really turn out. And did he feel that by people were inferior to white people? Did he really clearly feel that? Well, he would probably call himself like a white sap protest. But he wasn't actually. I mean, I've met white sap protest like Randy Weaver and if they're not nice to people then Tom was. Randy Weaver, who's a Ruby Ridge guy right here? Yeah. I'm really going to. I got a well with the weaver. It's got really well Rachel is daughter. And that story is a kind of a fucked up story, right? Like he was, they had a house alone, the woods and they were killed by snipers, right? Yeah, this is a really bad story. So they were, this is the first story I ever did where I feel like I kind of twisted it rounds that the people who would normally be the villains with the good guys. People would normally be the good guys with the villains. That was felt good about that. So basically they were family of like, you know, they believe in Bohemian Grove and Bildaberg and I, I, I, I, I tried to infiltrate Bildaberg one time by the way and got chased away by, by their henchmen. I don't know if this time to tell that story later. It was a plan time. Okay. So, so they moved to this cabin up in the woods on top of the mountain and Idaho, Ruby Creek and Randy would hang out at the local area nations with the family. That was his big undoing was that he would take the family up to area nations who were just, you know, were fucking nuts like violent skinhead nuts and Randy would take his family up there for like pic-bix and away days and so on. So, every nation's like pretty much every white supremacist, you know, group in America was heavily infiltrated by, by undercover officers and they saw Randy and saw his family and could tell that Randy was less crazy than the other people there. So they approached Randy and said, you want to become an undercover informant and Randy said, no. So then, I thought that was that but then they sent a guy to ask Randy to saw off a shotgun. So he's, so he said, okay, fine. So we sawed off a shotgun slightly below the legal limit. Like the guy pointed at him and said, no, saw it off there. So we sawed it off there and then they said, aha, we've got you. This was an undercover cop. You've now committed a firearms offense. You will go to jail unless you become an undercover informant for us. And Randy being a, being a twat, said, no, fuck off. And he kind of embarrassed the feds in front of his wife. And they said, look at those two guys over there. Guess what? They just asked me to do. And so Randy was like an idiot. And then he, he locks himself up in the cabin with his wife and kids and dog. And then, and so they surrounded the cabin, the, the ATF. And this one I'm feel like a year. They set up cameras in the trees and surrounded Randy's cabin. And one day, the, the, the ATF people got too close to the cabin and disturbed the dog. And the dog starts like barking and the dog chases the agents down the hill. And Randy's little boy who was, who was like 12 years old or something. Sammy chased the dog down the hill with a gun. Cause Randy like an idiot had armed his kids. And so they all run down to the bottom of the hill. And agents jumps out and shoots the dog. Kill as the dog. Sammy says, you killed my dog, you son of a bitch. He starts shooting wildly. And the agent shoots Sammy in his arm and basically shoot his arm nearly off. And Sammy yells, dad, I'm coming home dad and starts running up the hill. And the ATF agent just shoots Sammy in the back as he's running up the hill. Just sort of volley of gunfire. So Sammy's now dead. This story doesn't get any better, I should tell you. Sammy's now dead. Randy gets Sammy's body, puts him in the shed. And the next day, oh, one of Randy's friends is there. And there's a shoot out and one of the agents, I call Bill Duggan gets killed to us. And I've got two dead people, you've got a dead agent and you've got Sammy dead. The jury has always been out as to whether the agent was killed by Randy's friend or by friendly fire. So anyway, the next day, Randy goes outside. And an FBI sniper called Lon Horri at she shoots Randy and the shoulder. So Randy runs back in and Vicki Randy's wife is standing in the doorway holding a baby. And a sniper shoots Vicki through the head and kills her. And they pull Vicki's body into the cabin. And a siege starts like a 16 day siege or something. And at the road block down at the bottom, that's kind of where the militia movement started. Like all these local militia people all form at the bottom of the road block. And for days and then discover that Vicki's dead. And I mean, I've seen some amateur footage and it's just so sad. And I've become really good friends with Rachel, who's Randy's younger daughter, who's in the cabin full of that time. And in the end, the government admitted responsibility and paid each around these daughters a million dollars each. And they're killed, Randy. No, Randy's still alive. Yeah, Randy now goes to gun shows where you can have your photograph taken with Randy Weaver for five dollars. Oh, yeah. How much? Five dollars. He says himself quite short. It's bargain. Yeah. Historical figure. So that's so one of the people who visited Randy's cabin, I've used to Randy's cabin with Rachel. And another person who visited Randy's cabin was Timothy McVay. Whoa. Shortly before blowing up the mirror building in Oklahoma. Have you ever seen the conspiracy theories on that? About, yeah, I visited Elohim City, the place which you know about, right? The place where, you know, I know I've got a kind of reputation for being a debunker of conspiracies. And the reputation is kind of warranted in most cases. But I've got to say of all the things I investigated when I was doing a lot of stuff about conspiracies. The one where I thought this is a bit fucking fishy was Oklahoma City. Oh, it's most certainly fishy. What's most certainly fishy is the efficacy of that bomb. The bomb that they use, the fertilizer bomb, the blue half that building apart. When you talk to bomb experts, they go, that is like really, really unlikely. They said that the amount of damage that a bomb like that that's made out of fertilizer can do is nothing in comparison to what they have. nothing in comparison to what that building was like. And also that building looked like it had been blown out. Not, it had been blown in, but blown out, meaning that there was bombs planted inside the building. And then there was all these news reports. There was another one of Alex Jones's stories. There was all these news reports that he played these clips of where they were talking about FBI agents living bombs, unexploded bombs from the building. They were more than one bomb. And then they had this narrative that they blamed it on Timothy McVeigh. And what was the other guy's name? Terry Nichols. Terry Nichols, yeah. And that it was this fertilizer bomb. And remember, there's all this. It was looking for a guy from Iraq. And there was all this different stuff that was going on in the news right after it was over. But then they had settled on the story that he had done it. And they had done it all with this fertilizer bomb. But it's a weird one because I mean, I don't have an answer. And I don't even have a theory like who could have done it or how it was done or what would have been done. Look, all we know is someone blew up that fucking building. I mean, if it was just him and Terry Nichols, it was just Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols. That to me is no more crazy than it was a bunch of other people that planted bombs inside the building. It's all a heinous act of horror and murder. Yeah, the weird thing that we discovered when I was doing the Oklahoma story was this place called Elohim City. Have you heard of this place? So I visited Elohim City. This is like this kind of white separatist stroke supremacist compound in the Arkansas Oklahoma borders in the Ozarks. I will keep your spot. Yeah, I turned up and they ordered the River Dance for me. Yeah, I'd just been chased through Portugal by the buildable group. And I bonded with them over that. Like I told them that I'd just been chased by buildable. You would have built the world? Yeah, everyone, all of that crowd back then was the river, buildable. And I said, yeah, I've just been chased by the buildable group, which I was. I, in my book then when I was trying to infiltrate secret societies, I went to Portugal with Jim Tucker. He worked for this magazine called the spotlight, which was run by this kind of white separatist group called the Liberty Lobby in Washington D.C. Basically everybody kept telling me about this group called the buildable group that no one had heard of back then. Only only real niche aficionados had heard of buildable back then. And much in the same way that I kind of learned, I feel like I partly launched Alex Jones's career. I also feel like I partly gave the world buildable because I was the first mainstream writer to write about it. Because everyone was saying that there's a group called the buildable group and they secretly wrote the world from inside a secret room. And I said, if you ask big Jim Tucker, he'll tell you more. So I found up Jim Tucker. And he said, yes, true. They always meet once a year. The five star hotel with golfing facilities. That's where they wrote the world. And he said, you've caught me at a good time. I did a little less something out of like some space. I had an office of video should blinds. And he wore a trail bay. And he smoked like 80 a day. He said that he hadn't received him. Which made him sound even more like someone else. And he was still smoking. He died a couple of years ago. But he lasted a fuck of a lot longer than I had to put money on him. And I met him in March and I thought he'd be dead by May. But actually lasted about another 10 years. Wow. Yeah, he only died recently like a couple of years ago. And this was like 96. So Jim said, he said, yeah, I've discovered where they got a mate. The secret source has told me that they're meeting at the Cesar Park Hotel. And golfing was ordered, sent reports should go. And I'm going to fly over there. I apologize. And I'm going to send me American accent. I'm doing it. He's got to fly over there and climb up the drain pipes and get in and confront and let handed go about their covert wickedness. So I said, can I come? And he said, OK, as long as you lose the term core, we could not might be slightly exaggerating. You might put an English bill on there. But basically, I'm pretty sure he said he was going to climb up the cover. We can never say something. I can't wait to promise his wherever. I can't wait to tell they talk. So we flew there. So via Jim took a flew to Portugal and scouted around the Cesar Park Hotel. And we decided our cover story would be like he'd be like a salesman. But we didn't look anything like fucking salesman. I was like at early 30s, you know, skinny little Jewish guy. And he was like this big southern gentleman. So we looked like really fucking like a gay couple. Yeah, like gay couple. I could have been like his toy boy. I like we were like, Sculpting, I like trying to talk to waitress and stuff. This was the day before the buildable group was reportedly going to arrive at this hotel. And then we left. And we started getting, I looked at my rear view mirror and there was a car following me. And, and a chase ensued. And I went back to the streets. I mean, I say a chase. I was going 30 miles an hour. So, so we say, but I keep thinking, you know, I kept thinking, fuck, if I speed up, he's going to speed up. It's going to be like a fucking chase. So it was very obvious it was fine. He wasn't trying to be sneaky. No, well, I stopped the car and he stopped his car like behind me. So I thought I've got to say something to him. So I went over to the car and I like knocked on the window. And there's a guy in dark glasses in the car looking straight ahead. And I'm knocking on the window and he refuses to look at me. Like, obviously his orders were to follow, but don't engage. Like, I'm suddenly in a world where I am like big followed by somebody who's orders that are following not engaged. So I freaked the fuck out. So I get back in the car and I phone up. First I phone up my wife and I say I'm being followed by the buildable group. I'm fucking terrified and my wife goes, oh, you're loving it. And then I phone up the ship and have found out the British Embassy and I said I'm being followed by the buildable group. And then the one for the British Embassy goes, and then she goes, go on. And I'm like, I've just heard you take a shower. And then she says, what are you supposed to do? Do they know you're here? I mean, what are you doing here? And I said, I'm essentially a humorous journalist out of my depth. Can you phone what I also said to her to my shame? I didn't put this in my book. I wrote about all of this in my book then. What I didn't say, what I didn't put in my book was that I also said to her, I said I'm a humorous journalist out of my depth. I'm a bit like Louis Thru. And she's like, oh, like she said of him and not me. And I'm like, yeah, but actually Louis often cites me as an inspiration. I swear to God. This is like my last day on Earth. I'm about to be killed by the buildable group. And I'm very sorry, I'm telling the precious officer for the British Embassy in Portugal that Louis actually speaks highly of me. And then she says, she says, this is like the most startling thing that happened that day. She said, well, the good news is if you know you're being followed, they're probably just trying to intimidate you and intimidate you. And the dangerous ones would be those who don't know were following you. And I'm thinking first, how the fact is the press officer at the British Embassy know this. And hey, what if these people are the dangerous ones? And I just happen to be like naturally good at spotting them. Like I'm an anxious person. I will spot like I suffer from anxiety. Like I will spot if somebody's following me. Right? Right. Yeah. So anyway, so then she, when I go back to my hotel and the one for the British Embassy phones be back and says that she's spoken to the buildable group. And they've said that nobody is following me. Of course. Yeah. So I'm like he's behind the tree. Like I'm by the poor. I'm going, I am he's standing behind the tree. And he goes, well, just sit tight. I'm sure I'm sure I'm sure it's going to go like so I went down to the beach. Jim Tucker, throughout all of this, by the way, is loving it. He's loving every fucking second of this. It's his dream come true. Sure, right. I go down to the bit. I'm petrified. I want to like abandon the story. Like drive back to England from Portugal. So because I'm afraid I'm going to get like stopped at immigration. Yeah, pretty much you can get the ferry from Paris. So I think it's like a two day drive, but fuck it. So then I had a cameraman with me, David Barker because I was filming some of this for a documentary. He convinced me to like stick it out. So I went to the beach and then I came back to the hotel. And I swear to God, there's these two men in dark glasses sitting in the lobby of the hotel. And as soon as I walk in, they both grab brochures and start reading them. I'm like fuck. So I go up to Jim Tucker and I said there's these two men in the lobby and reading brochures and they're only pretending to read brochures. Jim says, how do you know? And I said, you can tell by that demeanor. And then later when Jim wrote all of this up for his conspiracy website, he let Shod's grab this conversation. And he said, I said to Rob, I said, how can you tell? I'm not some reply. You can tell them by that smell. I didn't say smell. I said to me either. What is a build a burger smell like? Yeah, like power. And they're hedgeman smell like badly paid power. So anyway, that was basically it. But the next day, we went back to the hotel and stood at the bottom and watched all of these people driving up the drive. Henry Kissinger, David Rockefeller, like all of this. Yeah, and they all really did turn up. Vernon Jordan, who was Bill Clinton's like, man behind, you know, like Bill Clinton's like, you know, man in the background. Lots of people in the background. Is there an official explanation for the builder burger group? Yeah, well, much later on, like after all of this happened, I managed to interview three members of the builder burger group, including the secretary general, and including one of their founding fathers, who is this British politician, who's still alive called Dennis Heley, who was a big labor politician in the 1970s. And he said, and I believe them, that builder burger was set up after the Second World War, because there was this big move against ideological politicians, like post hit. Now, we don't want any more hitlets. So let's kind of create this sort of globalist one world new world order. I mean, you know, the phrase new world order I think is true. I think they were trying to create like a one world government where business would be more important than politics, because business people are more trustworthy than ideological politicians. I think that that was their, that was their thesis back then. So it was kind of centrist almost kind of liberal in a way. Have you buy that John Ronson? I got a bridge to sell you in Portugal. Well, I think that that was where they came from, but of course what they didn't account for, or maybe did account for it and didn't give a shit, was their CEOs would be just as fucking evil and malicious and ideological in their own way as politicians. And so that's why build a book became this kind of more nefarious thing. Yeah, I think if there's ever going to be one antidote for power, it's information. It's being able to expose all the dealings and secret organizations like the Bilderbergs, or to a lesser, or a centable, he-me-and-grove type folks. I think the only thing that sort of mitigates that and diminishes that is everyone knowing about that. And more people know about the Bilderbergs now than ever before. The Bilderberg group is like something that people will say it. They don't really know a lot. Like I'll say it. I don't know much about it. I know that really important rich people meet and they discuss things and every single person that has ever been president has met. I said that actually to the secretary general of the Bilderberg group when I interviewed him, Skagomart and Taylor. I said, you know, you've got so many, like, up-and-coming politicians who end up being that president or prime minister. And he said, thank you. Like he took that as a compliment. Like in a way, good at starts spotting the next. And Dennis Healy said to me, look, the idea is... Yeah, starts spotting. And Dennis Healy said to me, the idea is to get these rising politicians and introduce them to the heads of business and hopefully influence them to be more sensible and more globalist and less nationalist. I think that's the core of the mouth. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's a network. I mean, no question. No question. No, all these places exist for a reason. I take a bit of credit. I think my book then was the first time Bilderberg. Like was ever discussed in kind of mainstream world. And then shortly after me, this journalist called Charlie Skalton, K. Belong, has another sort of mainstream writer for the Guardian. And he goes every year to Bilderberg now. And partly the result of him, and partly the result of me, suddenly Bilderberg is discussed in the mainstream world. But when I went to Bilderberg, and now that loads of people, like to turn up to protest, Bilderberg and so on, and they've even got a bit of a website now, I think. And they certainly admit existing now. And they didn't use to... They kind of have to, right? Yeah, it's an information thing. Yeah. So that's partly to do with them, and partly to a Charlie Skalton. Your book, them, you know, I'm very fascinated by extremists. And I'm very fascinated by... I'm very fascinated by the spectrum of human thinking and behavior. And that we're all kind of terrified of people that are on the far end, in one way or another. We're terrified of extreme lefties and we're terrified of extreme righties. You know, did you... Did you... Was anything really revealing or unusual about that journey of trying to write that? And in your own mind, did you try to... One of the things I try to do when I watch ISIS videos, or I watch like a radical fundamentalist Islamic guys talk, I try to imagine myself agreeing with them and being one of them and being happy to be one of them, that like, you know, there's some appeal and some draw to being extremely confident about what you're saying. Even if what you're saying is absolutely ridiculous, like stoning people for homosexuality. And you see all of that happening on social media, which I write about in the new book, where you see this kind of joy in approval, mutual approval. And that's what I think is a problem with Twitter. It's become like a sort of mutual approval machine that we surround ourselves people feel the same way we do. We approve each other. And that's such a great feeling. If everybody gets in the way and says, I don't agree with what you're doing here, you feel ferociously angry about them and you scream them out. So I think this kind of mutual approval that goes on in both on social media and also in extremist groups. Don't you think that people say things, a lot of the things they say, they say knowing that people are going to approve, so they tailor these things in a way that like, they lick their finger and put it up in the end, they catch the wind, like, ooh, the wind's going this way. I'm going to say something that puts me on the moral high ground. Yeah. I'm going to get a lot of re-tweets. Yeah. And it's, I think it's kind of damaging. I mean, you know, like you said before, you know, I come from a social justice world. So I believe in all the things that they believe in. I believe in gay marriage. I believe in all of those things. But at the same time, I feel kind of uncomfortable when I feel like there's a kind of ferocious conformity going. Yes. I have to say it like every time somebody dies, you have to. I remember when Robin Williams died, like I was doing a bit of, I was promoting some show I was doing or something I'd written. And I didn't know Robin Williams had died. And so I tweeted like something about some show I was doing. And I got like a kind of, you know, 50 people immediately tweeted me basically saying, how dare you promote something when, you know, we're also upset that Robin Williams has just died. Because I hadn't noticed of Robin Williams. And there's that kind of conformancy again, the kind of RIP conformancy. Right. So it does everybody has to do the RIP. And it's all good. It's all coming from a good place. It's all kind of in place that's teaching us how to care and teaching us how to level the... But that's not because how they know that you didn't know. Or how they know whether or not you knew. Well, I didn't know. But yeah, it really common. I mean, you can't be expected to be a breast of every single news story. Especially something like a suicide, something that comes in. It's not like something you have to pay attention to, like, you know, a military operation that we're all aware of. No, this is a random celebrity decides to take his life. How could you possibly be forced to know about that? And the problem is, you know, like on social media we say ourselves as non-conformist. But what this does is create a kind of a fearful conformist world where you have to say what everybody else is saying. Yeah. We're conforming to non-conformity. Yeah. It's like I would see people that were, you know, they dress like rebels. But they dress like the same rebels. They're typically unique. You know, you see someone who's got, you know, their hair's dyed pink and, you know, they don't give a fuck. Like everybody around you doesn't give a fuck. Like you're wearing a uniform. Yeah. Whether you know it or not, you look like someone's going to Catholic school. Like you might think that you are some sort of a rebel, but the real rebels are indistinguishable from everyone else. And the way they dress and the way they look, because they're just people. You know, there are no real rebels. Like, a real rebel is just someone who has their own opinion that may or may not go with the standard opinion that we're being supposed to, that we're supposed to absorb. Yeah. But the idea of conforming to non-conformity is so ironic, though. It's like the one thing that you are rallying against is the one thing that you don't even realize you are becoming. Yeah. And it's, you know, the negative byproducts of all of this are big. It makes people fearful. It makes people shut the fuck up. Yeah. And also what it is, it declares war on human nature. You know, this is the reason why I really wanted to write the public shaming book. Because I felt like war had been declared on human nature. Instead of trying to work out why people transgress, you know, in a sort of compassionate way, it's just, it just destroys people for transgressing. And if... People transgress. You know, in a sort of compassionate way, it's just it just destroys people for transgressing And everybody transgresses every human transgressors and When we so ferociously destroy the people for transgressing we're shutting off really significant realities about humans which is the fact that if we try to understand each other It would make the world more compassionate and we would understand why people transgressible Yeah, and I think that what we're talking about too is you're not talking about Rowing against someone who's committing horrible atrocities No, it's committing crimes against humanity torturing people murdering people You know, you're talking about differences of opinion. Yeah, I mean some people's transgressions are so serious It deserves to overwhelm them and they deserve to be defined by them and we're all like sort of in Commiserating and we're all sort of in agreement. We're all sort of bonding together on this like hey like as humans We we're not gonna tolerate this behavior because it's evil. Yeah. Yeah Yeah, yeah, but this is all a long way away from the question which was about kind of hanging out in it with extremist groups and so on I mean I discovered some things that I think people had known at the time I mean one was that they were all conspiracy theorists, you know, that was what united the Ku Klux Klan With the Islamic fundamentalist group. I hung out with called almuhad Jerome. I spent a year with this Islamic group called almuhad Jerome You spent a year with them. Yeah, I became like there Their chauffeur they said to me on the back of the head of the group said to me after a few months like I have let you into my life I've given you much. I want something in return So I was like what and he said can you drive me to office world? I need pencils. Yeah, what do you need to guys photo copying down like crush the private state of Israel so I've become like a so first up driving him everywhere and Yeah, that was awkward. Did you go home? Did you when you said you were them for a year? I know we only lived like a couple of miles up the road for me I know you would get up in the morning by honey, and we're gonna go hang out with him. Yeah The Islamic fundamental is to hang out with oh my he needs to buy some collection boxes for Hamas and he's a needs to be driven to the cash and carry now that's a very Scary organization this was pre 9 11. I mean all most of the stores. I've told them like today of for my book them which was pre 9 11 And so let's scary like people thought they were ridiculous like not that much should happen to that stage While I was there with them for the earth. I mean all you know now So many like suicide bombers and so on and so many journalists get killed. Yeah That's I mean that could have been you easily if you were dealing with a decade later Yes, or even a couple of I mean mama's done. You're pearl that was pretty early stages of the Iraq war Right yeah, two or three. So I was only what four years that was the first one man That was the first one they had the video. Yeah I remember watching that online against my own better judgment Has an old to do a oh you can never get past that one and what's crazy is the one that one had such an impact? And then I've seen a few of them since then and they didn't have nearly as much impact It's like slowly but surely you get numb to it You know the first because I've never watched any of these videos, but I was in Brooklyn and the taxi driver told me that he watches like all of them and I said I've never watched any of them and he said but I say the one you really shouldn't watch Daniel Pearl Yeah, I haven't watched anything so I don't know what he meant by that There was a lot of conspiracy theories revolving that one as well There was a lot of conspiracy theories that there was that he was killed by the CIA in order to Keep people out of there and justify our attacks on Islamic fundamentalist so that they had killed him because he was gonna reveal information about all sorts of different shit and there was like a whole video dedicated to Describing why these people were not Arabs and that their accent was wrong the their size was wrong They were built more like American military people Yeah, the conspiracy theories it's a weird thing. It's a good Experiences oh, I got chased away from Bill to pick. I can't speak into Bohemian Grove Yeah, I can space And there's also stuff like the operation north woods where the Joint Chiefs of Staff had signed that the paper is saying that they were gonna try to Fake attacks on American civilians. They were gonna arm Cuban friendlies and attack Guantanamo Bay All in order to get us to a war with Cuba. I mean so it's not like it hasn't been proposed or it hasn't been even Acted out like what happened in the Gulf of Tonkin I mean there are real real conspiracies that actually do happen Even in its own little way my book the minister goes kind of proves conspiracies it proves that They were trying to get your book. Sorry to interrupt you. What was the difference in your book and the movie? Okay, and the book I mean I never actually went Iraq the UN McGregor character that's kind of based on me goes to Iraq in the movie in real life I just hung around like military bases in America so for me and Thought brag at the end of the movie UN McGregor Managers to walk through a wall and I never managed to walk So that didn't have the movies cannon tongue in cheek. Yeah, the book's more serious the book the book starts off with the kind of Comedy of all of this crazy stuff they were trying out in the 70s and 80s Let's try and kill goats just by staring at them trying to learn how to be invisible which by the way after after after while they adapted They went from invisibility To trying to find a way of not being seen So I'm like that's you know as a like camouflage. No I have an onion interview this guy who is a military guy that was working on their remote viewing Yeah, who who was I would have probably met the sim for his name. Oh Google. Is that Dave? Yes, that's what it was Okay, and he went psychically spied the lot less months Not less months in determined that it was a dinosaur's ghost a dinosaur's ghost. Is that what he really said? Yeah, he's a character War yeah, who's showing pictures of his heart girlfriend Yeah, he was one of the main Ed James Joe McMonagall like all of these real life stories like Russian Waitover said Dude's bat and wayover said so I met him a remove you that You know if you're psychic spy until you're being a black-up military psychic spy isn't his glamorous as it sounds very stressful Stressful plus you've got me your black ops. You've got no light budget. You've got no you can't you don't you're not allowed to coffee Machine you have to bring your own coffee into work really yeah a couple of the remote viewers told me how annoyed they were That because they were black-up. They had to bring them own coffee into work Plus what does it actually mean to be a psychic spy working for the US military? What it actually means that like for 20 years you're going to some room at Fort Mead and try and be psychic It's kind of a shit job. Yeah, I interviewed another guy Forget his name, but we actually tried it out and we tried to remote view things Do they happen to be getting a look? No, there was me in this guy DJ Grothe who's a Yeah, he's kept it right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He's a debunker in his kept it He and I were on the same page Her like you know we came up with some random shapes We're supposed to envision this area and then we went to the area and he was trying to find hits and I'm like man I mean you're talking like angles and like you fuck any where you go that's man-made You're gonna find angles that are similar to this and you know we picked out a few colors that were you know Like super common you find those colors You get some really lucky hits But think about all the shit that we were wrong with and he's all about like it's just don't think too much Just you know let it come to you let it come. You're supposed to scribble shit down and yeah, it's so mind-blowingly dumb and The Ed Dames guy was telling me that they had actually had found oh sound I think was oh sound been loud He was saying Sorry for can't remember correctly because it was all nonsense to me at the time But they didn't go after him because they didn't want to win the war because they didn't want the war to end Because the people had a vested interest in keeping the war going and that was sort of his idea behind why this remote viewing wasn't successful Okay, but he was citing all these different instances where remote viewing was successful Yeah, I was like oh man. I'm not all that. Yeah. I remember one time. They were looking for Noriega General Noriega and the remote viewers were like called in to find Noriega I'm one of the remote viewers. It might have been Ed Dames actually one of the remote viewers psychically defined that Angela Lansbury knew when Noriega was oh that bitch. Yeah What I don't know what I don't know whether they actually ever asked Angela Lansbury order What I discovered though I if it had just been remote viewing I wouldn't have wanted to to have written them and state goats because I found the remote being thing a bit boring But then what I discovered just through asking people Was there was all this other shit going on like they were trying to Fast for a month trying to burst cloud just by pointing at them trying to kill goats just by staring at them and and That stuff was so fun to me and and then I discovered after like a year of of like interviewing These guys I discovered that like there was a line I mean a really crooked line But a line nonetheless between somebody's crazy and devising the 1970s and 80s and some of the kind of exotic interrogation techniques that were happening at Guantanamo Bay and Abigrae so in the book because some of the same people like there was a colonel called John Alexander Who was involved in like exotic You know sound blasting and all the non-lethal weapons and he's a guy should have on your show actually He's incredible guy So the minister it goats the book sort of starts funny and gets dark Whereas the movie kind of stayed funny and and kind of didn't go into the darkness in that way How much might they spend on that remote viewing thing? They're for a long 20 million dollars I think 20 million dollars was there any one piece of evidence of the good point to that Was like no ever so often like a unit would get sick of it like it was being run by the I don't know the the DA or You know the US Army or military intelligence and then they'd get sick of it and then they'd learn to film viewing Is that it names? Okay, that's not him No, that's not it dance. It's his website. Yeah, he's a older gentleman It ended up back with the CIA in 1995 The CIA's greatest weapon as the power to change your life forever Oh, so now you're using it like and look they have a live support gal. Look. She's pretty too Need live support calls pretty girl. Why don't they have an angry black guy who could beat your ass? Nope pretty white girl Is that funny? It's like welcoming. I'm smiling at you. I have beautiful eyes Do you need live support? Call me sugar? I'll show you how to find your dog. Here's something interesting. You know the guy the first guy who ran The most viewers back in the very early stages of a remote viewing was a guy called Sidney Gottlieb And he was the same guy who ran MK Ultra in the 50s like so all the kind of poisoning people Spacking people straight to the LSD going off to Cuba to try and assassinate Castro by pulling like a bomb in his cigar Or poisoning his wet suit. So all this really dark CIA shit that was happening in the 50s Was run by this guy Sidney Gottlieb and he was the same guy who run the remote viewers in the 70s. Oh, so that's kind of interesting That is interesting. Yeah. Well without a doubt. They've definitely experimented on people to try to find out whether or not they could control them That's 100 oh no question There's a south of Operation Qurata Chuck I became friends with Eric Olson whose father was Franco said who's the guy who purportedly was given LSD by the CIA and then jumped out of a window in New York Killed himself. Would you know that Ted Kazinski was a part of the Harvard studies on LSD already? Yeah, there was a German documentary called the net that sort of highlighted this And it was all about his participation in the LSD studies and how it pushed him off the rails Right and then he went fucking crazy and went went off to teach at Berkeley Saved all his money from teaching and then went to live the woods. Okay, and Can't keep it too. Didn't can he seek it is LSD. I do I do not know if that's the case. I mean he might have been but the Kazinski thing is pretty well documented that he was a part of those studies, right and You know, I mean I have a friend whose sister is out of her fucking mind she went on a couple LSD trips and took way too much and To this day it was like seven years ago to this day. She's all fucked up So it can happen especially if you have if you're mentally unstable to begin with and you get dosed and spiked You know, it's totally possible. I mean people that have a slippery grip on reality any really traumatic experience and any real Anything that's like super perturbing to your state of consciousness has the potential set you off the rails and Away that you might not be able to recover from me. It is possible. Yeah, and they did a lot of fucking It's part of LSD with people. I know it was worse shit than that There was this thing called art to choke where they were like experimenting and I believe this has all been verified They're experimenting and getting people hooked on heroin and then withdrawing the heroin and making them do cold turkey as a means of getting information I'll say them. Wow. Yeah, and that was like related to MK Ultra I mean yeah, you talked about consumption species being true MK Ultra is a conspiracy that was true Yeah, there's plenty of those are true. I mean look Especially when you're dealing with the cold war and this terrible Terrible thought that the Soviet Union was ready to drop bombs on your children any day of the week and that they're doing things like this And that you know the Nazis had been doing things like this and we know about the experiments that the Japanese It did and the rape of Nam King and the horrible things that the Nazis had done to the the prisoners of war I mean I'm weren't some American didn't MK Ultra Star or in the early days of MK Ultra some Americans were some American soldiers were kidnapped by The Koreans and then they were seen on TV like say we were announced America They were trying to work out like how the Koreans are and my memory is really sketchy on this But then they try to work out like how the Koreans have managed to brainwash these three American servicemen so easily and that was one of the reasons Why they started MK Ultra? I might be getting confused. Well, that's one of the reasons why I wanted to ask you about Your work with extremesis because I always wonder like is it appealing like when you're I mean obviously you're not A white supremacist or an Islamic fundamentalist or anything but when you're with them for a long period of time when you're embedded Is there any Draw is there any Somehow or another is there any pull towards like thinking and inclination? Is there an attraction to either ideology? You know not never to that ideology, but what I did always like like Throughout my right to Korea the times I'm at my happiest times where I think the story is really working is When something shifts in me like I spend so much time with conspiracy theorists And then suddenly I'm being chased by the builder group and I go fucking nuts and like I've become like paranoid And that's what I know like at the bottom of my brain I know that like what's happening to me is terrifying But the fact that I've gone through this really big change means it's going to be really fucking good piece of writing That happened in them and it happened in the psychopath test too actually there I became completely drunk with my psychopaths spotting powers like I went on a course To learn how to spot psychopaths and I got so drunk with my psychopaths spotting powers that I changed And let my friends were saying to me like you really changed Peter Strawn who wrote the screenplay for the most of it goats told me he was concerned about me Because I was so convinced I could spot psychopaths everywhere. What do you look for? Well, you know nuances of language The first half of my book psychopath test sort of teaches people how to spot psychopaths And then the second half becomes like a cautionary tale to not get so fucking drunk with your powers It turns you a little bit psychopathic but like nuances of language You know, there's like a 20 point checklist where it all comes from lack of empathy lack of remorse I went I started meeting like CEOs and and doing the psychopath checklist on them to see if it's true that you're more likely to find psychopaths at the top of the trees in the bottom I'll give you one example. Is that true? Yeah, I think that is true I think you're more likely to find psychopaths at the top of the tree than at the bottom because capitalism rewards psychopathic behavior Well isn't the definition to that a psychopath is someone that has power or is associate path to someone like there's some sort of You know the whole psychopaths. It's a lot of glory. Yeah, there's a lot of debate out there It's to a different psychiatrist and psychologists will use the terms like I mean the upshot is that I don't think there's any real difference Some people will say there's a difference Because they'll bring their own sort of analyses to the situation But but in general you're talking about a kind of a lack of empathy a neurological lack of empathy Whether it's neurological whether it's through childhood abuse. That's another big matter of debate amongst those people But but I give you a kind of classic example from the book. I went to meet this Haitian dictator called total constant in jail in upstate New York and met him a few times before but I met him in jail and He kept on saying to me I want people to like me like I really want people to like me kept on saying that to me So finally I said to him Isn't that a weakness like wanting people to like you? Isn't that a weakness? And he said no, no, it's not a weakness because if you can get people to like you You can manipulate them to do whatever you want them to do. Wow. Yeah, so I said So are you the sort of person who doesn't really feel like empathy and he said no, no empathy is a weakness So that's a well, that's clearly telltale But I've I've I guess you figured like fucking I'm in jail. It's what the kid other than I'm not getting out of here And also sometimes they're like like I said this would okay Gb spy I met one time Like I said, well, you were bully at school and he said yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. I was a bully. He said it was English He said I would like get out from behind the tree And I'd have it like my bag would have bricks in this and I'd hit somebody over the head Which is quite yeah, and I said he said, but I don't get the bullies. I don't get the bullies So I said and how did you feel about that and said I felt good And I said and how do you feel now like all these years later looking back on it How do you feel now? And he said I still feel good and I said so you're not the sort of person who feels empathy And he said you've really got to the nub of what kind of crank I am He said when a dog dies like one of my dogs dies. I feel incredibly upset I cry but the human beings that I've hurt and killed Don't feel anything. Whoa. Yeah So if you can get them being honest about their absence of empathy. I don't want to hear that I mean I do what I don't I mean I do but I don't want to know they're around man Yeah, something disturbing about someone who's just not willing to ever join the community You know they live amongst you and they're just trying to Yeah Literally pray. Yeah, we see the world in terms of predators and pray and it would be foolish not to exploit weaknesses Yeah, you know, I think there really are psychopaths out there. There were some people. Yeah, that's I think a lot of people The one thing I don't like About the sort of psychopaths part in world is that they're not interested to a large extent in what turn somebody that way Because they're just really interested in the idea that there's there's just another species out there There's just other species that aren't quite human They're looking human, but then it's kind of like Dave like in the lizard, right? There's people like they who've adopted human form, but they're not quite human But but I'm really interested. There's this other psychiatrist I'm at called James Gilligan who basically says all violence is an attempt to replace shame with self-esteem So these people were like so battered during their childhood So humiliated so abused that they try and regain some self-esteem by committing violence onto other people All violence. I don't like all I like statements that are so absolute. It is a big statement, right? But as a kind of humanist I like that because it's giving some humanity back to violent people it's saying You know this is you know it comes in a place of damage whereas the psychopaths will basically say no, no, they're just they're like another species. Oh, okay. Yeah, you know what? I think this honestly I think there's truth in both camps Well, I think there's certainly some people that are like that and there's some people that are violence just because they're angry It's stupidity or they angry at aggression or they just need some release in their life and they're Bent down with all sorts of stress and they can't handle it and they don't have an outlet Yeah, you know there's a lot of people that just they're lacking an outlet and I I'd liken them to overflowing batteries like a battery that like I think of a human body as Your human body is designed to exert a certain amount of effort to put forth a certain amount of energy during the day and Most people don't even remotely tap into their reserve of energy they sit down and their body You know just conform to their office chair and they're there all day At the end of the day they sit in their car or they sit on the bus with the train and they make their way home In which case they sit on a couch and they sit in front of the television and their body just is constantly storing up stress and It has this desire to exert energy and it's never met with What it needs and never it never has its needs fulfilled fulfilled and so then you're in your car and you're in traffic If someone cuts you off and you're like you fucking pay the shit you have this unbelievably angry response because your battery is essentially found There's an opening you know, it's like a Whole in a water balloon. You water just starts squirting out of it. It can't help it It's like so bent up with or pent up with pressure And if you instead of doing that to somebody in another car who can't hear you if you go home and you do it on social media Everybody hears you including that person and it can really damage someone. Yeah, well, there's certainly you keep coming back to that It's only because it's wrong. There's some books on what you're doing. It's on your mind for a while Hey, do you mind if I go no? That's a great end This was a great conversation. I really enjoyed it. I'm so glad that we did this because Like as I say for years people have like oh my god, you gotta go to go to a room I think we could have a hundred of these any time you're back Hey next time I'm back. We'll do it when are you back again? Come around LA It's not me soon. Yeah, my son's thinking about moving here. So if I do okay, great If he does I'm not gonna fucking Lee. I can't be on another city to my son. I hear you. Yeah, yeah So okay, well beautiful man. Well definitely either way one way or another when you're back in town Let's do this again. I really really enjoyed it. I've written and so your most recent book is so you've been publicly shamed And I'm sure it's available everywhere right like Amazon and all that jazz Bar to be local all that good stuff and John Ronson on Twitter J-O-N Is there a J-O-H-N that's pretending to be you know a bunch of evil shit that you're gonna get in trouble Actually, there's another John Ronson up to sit in mother's head to be me. I hope he's not shaming you We tried Is it really? Yeah Oh John Ronson ladies gentlemen. Thank you brother. Really appreciate it. There's a lot of fun. Hey, thanks Jamie