So it looks like we're finally going to get the details of Resugate like what was that It seemed manufactured at the time. It seemed fake It was confusing like where did this come from also that of nowhere? We all hate Russia and Trump is a Russian agent something that no one had ever said before and Then it just saturated the media and it was the only topic for a couple of years. Yes, and no one ever kind of went back to examine like how how do you create a story of nothing and then convince Wall Street Journal Washington Post New York Times to Write about it every day, and I think we're gonna find out now. Do you think? Well, great to be here Tucker. Yeah, I hope so You know, it's I get older my manners just to fabric this is like frostnicks and you know, it's like straight in It's like it's like the first question So why'd you burn the tapes? Why didn't you buy didn't you burn the tapes? Yeah, great to be your Tucker? Yes, I would I would go even a step further because the war right now Happening between Russia Ukraine and the West support of it actually was an extension of Russia gate Oh, thank you for saying that because part of one of the unintended consequences of Russia gate I'm intent. I think actually intended but unintended from our perspective because we were so focused on the Trump component Was how it was desensitized at the Democrat party to hate Russia? Be if you think about it Donald Trump was the worst villain ever in the history of the world according to the Democrat party So they needed to have an explanation as to how this guy won because of course it can't be the fact that they de-industrialized Wisconsin-Michigan Pennsylvania flooded the country the bunch of illegals and allowed opioids in the country There must be another reason so they tried Cambridge Analytica first Do you remember that was the first attempt? Yes, the Cambridge Analytica thing that it was Donald Trump's ability to get in the back end of Facebook That's why he won but that didn't really satisfy the Democrats and so simultaneously We know this because the Russian area came ex-Nihilo it came out of nowhere and That's the way it felt I was guys Confused and Tulsi is getting to the bottom of it I'm not gonna pretend to know all the details what she's working on and I've been cheering her on sending her text That's it just saying you go Tulsi you go because it's so wrong what happened to President Trump and so wrong what happened to our country But when you think about it, it desensitized the entire Democrat party to then have a very negative view of Russia even beyond a normative Western view of Russia as if Donald Trump is an attache of The Kremlin and if you hate Trump you therefore must also hate Putin and Russia so fast forward to Putin's invasion of Ukraine You had the entire Democrat party and the base of the Democrat party that used to be anti-war That used to be where the Ben and Jerry's guy was you had him on your show was great But the rank and file kind of had a subdued response at best to the financing of the Russian Ukrainian war largely because of Russia gate because so many Base members of the Democrat party and the activists were led to believe that Donald Trump only became president because of the assistance of the Kremlin so smart and kind of said one Paranthetical note that a lot of them were pro Russia when it was so correct because the Soviet Union was above all anti-Christian and Then when the country became orthodox again, it was easy to hate it again. Yes, and if you I mean you know this you helped lead the I don't want to see even anti-war just the skepticism from the West Viewpoint that why are we sending all this money to Ukraine is a good for us That used to be a left-wing thing that used to always be driven from the base of the Democrat party and From AOC to Elizabeth Warren to Bernie Sanders They were largely silent on the amount of money that we sent to Ukraine So why is it because? They started to love war no it's because Putin became an acceptable villain for the Democrat party Because they made the archetype of villain and other archetype of Putin and Trump to be kind of one in the same that all goes back to Russia gate it goes back to the lie of The dirty dossier it goes back to our how our intel agencies Were then used inwardly against us and that has really been the story the last 30 to 40 years and you deserve a lot of credit for covering this Which is our intel services are supposed to gather intelligence and defend the homeland and to keep us domestically safe But it turns out they're actually more about picking winners and losers in American elections and the fourth the will of pop popular sovereignty So I hope that we get to the bottom of this because we are still dealing with the The real world ramifications you have to wonder how many Ukrainians and Russians by the way because people are dying on both sides of this war that are made In the image of God are unnecessarily dead because of what our intel services did in 2016 and 2017 I Don't think that can be said enough. Thank you for saying it again that our position I've said the war itself. I mean, I think the Biden administration Provoked Russia into it by declaring that Ukraine was going part of NATO that that's my interpretation. I think it's true But even if you don't buy that We seamlessly moved from nowhere with Russia into an actual war with Russia and very few people said anything about it And I think the reason they didn't is because they had just spent the last three years Hearing about how Putin was the worst fact the world he was our main enemy and not the Chinese actually not the Indians not anybody out Know it was Russia so Do you expect that people will be held accountable for it? I sir. I hope so. I mean look Don't know what's in the details. I don't know what's in the documents. We kind of a little bit of a teaser We saw last week what Tulsi said she said there's more coming and basically what we learned last week for everyone that was Hopefully enjoying your summer not glued to your phone, you know non stop over the weekend We learned that Obama personally ordered an intel report Like hey, was it true that Russia was behind this election and from my understanding the report said no Russia was not behind the selection did not manipulate votes Trump was not elected because of Russia This is in December of 2016 and a private classified intel briefing that is now declassified thanks to Director National Intelligence Tulsi Gabbard what is even more chilling now Which goes back to Peter struck and Lisa page and James Comey is how the FBI and the CIA seem to be working on the same page The FBI was almost doing the domestic bidding of the CIA And you have to wonder how much of this Russia gate situation was the insurance policy that Peter struck famously put in his text messages Remember he was going back and forth with his you know with his lover Lisa page Where he was saying hey, don't worry. We have an insurance policy. You have to wonder what exactly was that and My contention is that that was the Russia gate situation that they had this dossier paid for by the Democrat party with Clinton funds to then illegally be able to spy on the Trump campaign as an extension of that create this entire narrative and You know part of what also needs to be said is how much of Trump one was stolen from president Trump and the mandate of the people because of Russia You know, it's very funny I was thinking about where was I and where were we as a country back in July of 2017 Six months into Trump's term back in Trump one we had Jeff Sessions basically completely sidelined because of his You know, I have to Huse myself and honestly an unnecessary recusal. I think that he never should have recused himself We had Bob Mueller, but let me just say that Whatever you think of what sessions did or why did it or whatever? I'm probably the only person willing to give him credit for you know a good faith mistake I think was office. It was things also great on crime by the way sessions was actually really good on violent crime But everyone in that British yeah beats up on Jeff sessions. I know Jeff sessions very well Jeff sessions is no liberal Jeff sessions is a really decent man Jeff sessions made a big mistake In my opinion by recusing himself, but he didn't do it to sabotage Trump He was the first senator to endorse Trump. He loved Trump. So whatever the whole thing was a tragedy, but my point is Wherever you stand on that it's separated the president from his attorney general and then Rod Rosenstein was running the entire DOJ You know me that that true Trump or Rod Rosenstein right so we had Rod Rosenstein pride of Baltimore right exactly as good as it gets So Trump was without a department of justice with his first term at this point basically gosh, we had Bob Mueller like lurching back under the surface like coming back from You know, they they brought him out of Retirement and he was kind of in a Biden state at that without remember his interview. You didn't know where he was or what was going on poor man Yeah, I just had a side note We're learning kind of how the modern technocratic Democrat Party works which is bring an old guy with a amazing biography by DC Standard it happens to have dementia. Yeah, I just put him in the chair and then all of these 30 something lawyers that went to Yale and Harvard Will do all the work to kind of how a technocratic state works But anyway think about where we were in Trump one which I think is really important and how we're in a profoundly better position We are today the first year of the Trump presidency and then year two or three were largely stolen by this whole Russia gate situation is that President Trump was constantly on defense He was constantly having to defend himself. He had Mueller looking into Manafort looking into Cohen looking into all of his close associates Which of course the report came out and showed no collusion and all stemming from a lie and that's the kicker So to answer your question. I hope people start to go to jail. We need purple ox We need handcuffs. We need mass arrests because you're not allowed to steal precious time of a presidency away From the American people that otherwise would have been spent on governing. You're such a good memory One of the advantages of and we did no premon this 31 no no no no no I'm impressed I'm impressed the recent threat of foreign wars has turned news coverage in this country away from what's happening in the United States And we're certainly part of that the downside unfortunately is that it plays into hands of the worst people The establishment don't want you focused on the United States because that's a threat to their control the more closely you look at what they're doing The more angrier you're going to get and they're getting rich off what's happening here The health of everyday Americans is one of the issues that we ignore more and more people seem exhausted anxious foggy overweight Testosterone tanking in men is one of the causes of that and there are a lot of others as well The medical system just shrugs this off and pushes of course more drugs But that doesn't solve the problem. It hasn't joy and blokes will their clinic delivers hand guided expert guided care for hormone health longevity cutting edge peptide therapy You don't have to leave your house to get any of it You pair that with their smart supplements which are fully personalized and over three billion combinations and you get actual results with no gimmicks at all Go to joy and blokes.com to get 20% off all their products and their therapies are also offering a free 15-minute health coach consultation for anyone who's got questions Start feeling like yourself again stronger sharper and built to last joy and blokes.com slash Tucker Root cause medicine the way health care really should be and I now I'm remembering everything you said and you're absolutely everything You said I think is correct. I also think it's just important to know that federal intel and law enforcement agencies are not allowed to form their own separate unaccountable government and run a fairs of state That's a nightmare scenario that puts you in a dictatorship. Yes totally insulated from the public I mean voters have no way to control that that's not a democracy that's a dictatorship and that's where we are and I just feel like it's important to expose that and to punish those responsible without a doubt and this is the This is now the big fight in front of Trump too and everyone knows it We ran on it. We set it and I think we're now going to get massive action in that direction from hopefully cash and Dan and Pambanbi and Todd Blanche the whole gang. They're focused on this And I think they're looking for the right place to strike which is who actually runs this government exactly The first term we were kind of under this very naive idea that the people run the government That's what I thought and then we were like well, it's the lobbyists and it's in your right. Yes The lobby it's a history it's like yeah, okay But so true Now but after I think seven or eight years and it's taken time We're finally back to where a lot of the Hillsdale crowd has been and Dr. Larry aren't has been to his great credit It's the administrative state and the intel agencies. Yes It's this fourth branch of government that the founders never created They never designed there was no intent for and that fourth branch of government is unaccountable Has unknown Biographies of people that are running it and they're therefore unlimited amounts of time There's no term limits. They're not elect and they're unelected There are and I don't want to put you in a couple situations You don't need to comment on this just brief aside, but we actually have Civilian control the control of elected leaders over those agencies The president of course, but also members of Congress. Mm-hmm. We have The Cuban intelligence boards to right and we have something called the Senate intel committee right and The person leading that I don't come you don't have to comment on that I think it's I think Tom Cotton's room is sinister people in the US government. It's a gear job Is to make sure the CIA doesn't form its own separate unaccountable government and yet he's all in on CIA Where his wife used to work like he is serving CIA and What about his constituents in Arkansas? What about the rest of us? Why isn't the guy in charge of keeping the CIA's behavior within constitutional Bounds accountable to the president I say it's why is he doing that? And I just find it in norm and I know that there are lots of good things about Tom Cotton He's a nice guy is very smart, but like what the hell What does no one say that and let me say this also? There is there are whispers that this next bill is going to be passed whatever Like perfunctory bill they have to pass is going to try to newter DNI is that they want to try to wall off CIA every cross wants The I wants Tulsi Gabbard Joe can and the other people of the director of the director after intelligence and that whole Apprettis which was created after not just hilarious because it was created by the worst people exactly and now it's actually a Center it's a central nervous system for us to look under the hood and they know it Right and so again, I don't know all the details of this I just someone texted me yesterday and they said hey We have to make sure that Tulsi does not get Basically, you know neutered in this whole process that it just kind of becomes a ceremony He's the one person you shouldn't doge. No In fact Tulsi and this is very important the intel agencies by far have the least Proportional civilian control versus careers. That's exactly what I has like three or four and Radcliffe is you know fighting for his life there And it's like who runs you know you have all these unknown amounts of people and What are they doing and it's a black box budget and I believe that all roads lead back to the intel agencies on all this stuff And so but Tulsi is now getting under the hood this revelation of Russia gate is massive Huge I know and god bless her for doing this and I know the president cares about it personally as he should Because how much of his life and his energy was Just spent defending against a fabrication not a fabrication of the Chinese Communist Party by the way Not a fabrication of our adversaries a fabrication of our own government That's what makes this so sinister is that our own government was turned against the duly elected president So here we are now in the year of our lord 2025 who's running the United States government Great question and president Trump. He is now the hunter. He was the hunted back in the first term I know what the grassroots want. I know what president Trump wants We need per box. We need arrests. We need accountability and if we do not smash the administrative state in the deep state in the coming six to 12 months Then we're actually not gonna we're not gonna bring this entire intelligence apparatus to heal We have to lance the boil because it's gone so out of control and I can tell you they are deeply fearful of this movement They know that we are aware they notice that they know that we are noticing things That we're seeing patterns that we know how powerfully intelligences have become And so that's why I think Russia get really matters is that it's a way to hold them accountable to see how Dark and honestly demonic their activities have become Yes, and hopefully an opportunity to fulfill a mandate that president Trump ran on and I still know believes to this day Which is to bring bring the deep state to hopefully smash it or the very least bring it back into balance and the deep state Is the intelligences. Well, that's the shadow government right? Yeah, it's not the de-state Look that's not the education If I go chime in so there's two types of deep state right there's the department education deep state They just they just slow things down. That's their only they leak and they delay Right, that's it. That's the deep state of the department of labor So they oh you're getting some sort of executive order We don't like we're gonna leak it to the wash and post or not gonna do you tell us who we're just gonna delay and we're gonna last Okay, fine. We can deal with leaking and delay The third of which though which the department of labor is not doing they're not configuring their agency against the sovereign No, right the private account anyone. No exactly So the the intel agencies in its you know in its inherited composition from Joe Biden And how it's been for the last 40 years leaking into laying though like that's child's play. Okay We're gonna go do dirty dossier's we're gonna spy we're gonna employ Feds we're gonna use special agents double agents. We're gonna use five eyes We're gonna rely on our foreign partners to spy on Americans domestically because we can't do that and they're they'll share the intelligence And so a lot of focus kind of goes on Let's just say the lazy slop of the people at the you know department of interior. Okay, fine We can clean that up god, you know, god bless the people that want to do that But if we do not focus the energy of this movement on the administrative state Then we're we're going to have elections in name only and I know the president understands this because he lived through a thwarted First term largely because of the intel agencies and what we would like to call the shadow government Trump with 97 charges against him all in yes We still don't know what happened on July 13th, and we certainly don't have Butler. That's exactly why don't we know that? Do you know I don't I don't know and I know that we have the right We could not have better people In those positions at the top like you know damn bongino. Well, I could speak very high for his integrity. Oh, I love Dan Yeah, and so I'm gonna They need to act on this. Yeah, and I have no I don't have much more to say than that But I don't know FBI needs to and Specifically the FBI on that. Yeah, and the FBI stone walling and it's not bun geno. It's not cash-potel It's that I know of I don't know actually, but I know that they're stonewalling on that I think it's very weird. They still can't get into crux's devices the whole thing is so busy because they can read my Tax messages. I notice they can read your signal messages. I mean, they have which which is even worse than text message I haven't even shot anybody. I I will you're not too chaney I will I will go a step for I try to not Spend too much time in July 13. I agree. I had for my name totally agree. It's so weird It's so bizarre. I like spending time with my wife and my kids And I try to have a very focused subset of issues that I get passionate about so I feel things that I can't get to answers on Will drive me endlessly insane? So I Want one day to find out what happened on July 13th because? By only the grace of God and by a millimeter is Trump alive and it's Trump president if you can murder presidential candidates It's not a democracy obviously so and get away with it and get away with it right They just can't get into his devices. I mean he had no social media profile How did he get on the roof and how was it unguarded and and then it was two days before the Republican National Convention It fat again if you were to kind of go in a dark place which again this all speculation It felt like well, this is our last this is our last chance before he's the nominee. Yeah, because you know it happens once you're the nominee You get secret service protection. Yeah, and this is an unknown element of this literally as soon as you get to become the nomination By by laws of secret service whatever you get equal presidential protection So he had a bunch of like DHS hangovers You know no offense to the people that were protecting him on the day of Butler some wish at a great job Some of which are not people I would necessarily you know go to war with no Just you know more more of the TSA agent mold than the secret service agent mold and again That's not a criticism of them So if you want to get like really dark and go in that direction you have to ask those questions But I try not to focus too much on Butler because I think it it actually it leads you in a place We ask more questions and we have answers. I have the same instincts So we want to brag but this has got to be the most pro dog podcast on the entire internet. They're almost always Dogs actually just off camera So dogs are non-negotiable dogs are the best and people who love dogs really really love them We can relate and so for that reason we are thrilled to announce a new partner Called Dutch pet it's the fastest growing telehealth service for your pets It's on a mission to create affordable quality veterinary care at any time no matter where you are They'll get your beloved pet what they need and they do it at a high speed and by the way If you've ever brought your dog to the vet the dog doesn't like it They can smell the darkness sometimes it's true Sometimes you have to go to the vet But if you can avoid it You should and you want to and Dutch.com has vets you can treat over 150 animal conditions Which is 10 minutes on the phone you never have to leave home You never have to scare or upset your dog no wasted time enough to wait weeks for an in-office appointment And you don't waste money Unlimited visits and follow-ups for no extra cost free shipping on all products for up to five pets Membership starts as a little as 11 bucks per month and Dutch.com saves most customers nearly a thousand dollars a year We use it. It's awesome as dog owners It sounds too good to be true probably but it's absolutely real visit Dutch.com Slash chucker to learn more use the code Tucker for up to 50 bucks off your veterinary care plan per year That's a year of unlimited vet visits for 82 dollars a year Crapettes and your wallet will thank you. This is going to change the game and we're proud to be partnered with them so you are I think well you are More in touch with young voters than any other single person in American politics certainly on their public inside Way more effective than they are and see though. I think they have a bigger budget than you We get along great We're not quite sure what they will then. I don't want to cause you browser. I have no idea what to do But back when Ron a lot of time we did not get we were very vocal about getting rid of rana McRawny, but I think you're the most effective Republican organizer and certainly among young people you are and you deal with them And you wait into the crowd and you go to college campuses and you debate people and you have a tactile sense I think of what younger voters care about and so I'll just ask you the obvious question. What do they care about? So there's a race against the clock that's happening right now and Think president trumps uniquely suited to fix it. He has to fix it which is can we reorder the economic reality of Under 30s before Dark political radical radicalization sets the economic reality. It's there's a topic that's never broached. Well here we go No, but it's just interesting before you it's interesting. That's your first answer Economics I have always noticed and I am insulated from a lot of that stuff. I'll admit. I don't really notice I would be dinner. I would be otherwise if I didn't spend as much time Because we're we do very well. We're in the top income bracket So well, I just noticed no one talks about it. So I think that's weird People just talk about economics. They don't anymore So you think that that's economics is the number one issue for young people. Oh, if we don't address it We go to dark places. What does that mean? You're so a couple things number one the rise of mom Donnie should be a It's a coming attraction of what is coming next. I'm Donnie. Zell Ron mom Donnie the The the muzzling communist that is running for mayor in in New York City Who obviously there's a whole rabbit hole we can go down there He just looks kind of be like central casting and you know his ideas are terrible He wants the city to run the grocery stores all that but I think everyone's kind of not everyone But most people are missing the point of really what this is This is yet another distress signal by young people to say hey If you're not gonna fix our life economically We're gonna get very radical politically. Let's take a step back president Trump won the youth vote many states across the country in many battleground states Now talker 12 13 years ago when I started turning point If you would have told me that a republican running for the presidency would be winning the youth vote in Michigan In Arizona. I'd say no way it was it's an incomprehensible accomplishment of what president Trump was able to do One of the reasons he was able to win younger voters and younger men especially in big numbers Is that they were trying to get their leaders attention? They said hey this guy Donald Trump He is pledging to go fix our economic anxiety. He is loud. He is going to get your attention Donald Trump was a distress signal By a lot of young people especially young men that were stuck in a in a credit centric Renter economy And again, this is what is the rise of mom Donnie. It's just another iteration of this only from the left Which is a credit credit centric Renter economy. Yes, which is the way that we need to focus that we need to kind of frame this and conservatives I think I know why are just so Unwilling to have this conversation And I'm not even to get into what we should do about it. I think I have some good ideas Trust me. I'm not a socialist. I'm a market guy. I like capitalism. I think markets are good I think entrepreneurship is good We need to kind of paint this picture first because I think so many I know this for certain so many people in DC Have no idea what I'm talking about when I bring this up to them And secondly a lot of people over 50 think this is a foreign concept And they think, honestly, this is just the complaining of young people that don't want to work So let me kind of paint this picture It is harder than ever to own a home. We know this, but how much harder back when my parents had to go own a home The price of the home. How old are your parents? They're early 70s. Yeah, so late 60s early 70s So baby winners. Yeah, and so and great parents by the way phenomenal upbringing great values So back when they wanted to go buy a home in their beginning income years You know 1970s 1980s Home prices were on average about three times the average income in America. They are now seven times the average income in America Rents have gone up inflation adjusted from about $900 a month to now about $1,500 a month inflation adjusted inflation adjusted The age of a first-time home buyer in 2008 was 30 years old It is now 38 years old first-time home buyer So when we have a picture of first-time home buyer and that's scary You think of you know kind of a toddler in one arm a dog. You're trying to figure it out 38 years old So what is causing this one number one? I don't want to get like to Ron Paul libertarian But the Federal Reserve pumping and cheap money post 2008 has just been a catastrophe We have spent too much money borrowed too much money We have deteriorated our currency and the purchasing power every generation is getting weaker So your dollar is actually going it's going it's going less and less as far Yes, as it as it has year over year. So then what is the consequence of this? So you have a generation that is renting a lot more than its owning so when you do not own something Why would you defend it? So what and so do you find them political radical radicalization start to seep in? Because an entire generation is getting routinely cynical year over year as their net worth either stays at zero Or goes into negative now my question for every Republican Senator in congressman watching this if you do not know these four letters Then you are not doing your job BNPL do you know what that means? No clue by now pay later By now pay later is how 60% according the surveys of generation Z is paying for things month-a-month they're not credit cards So they're not is this not regulated by credit bureaus It's not regulated with credit checks. It's basically it can anything from Amazon To instacart groceries clothing furniture you can finance anything. It's BNPL It's run by three main companies Plarna a firm and after pay and essentially your 21 22 years old You can split a pizza into four payments sounds great right? This is the modern tech economy by a pizza on credit. Yes You right now happening now you can go to instacart right now and either through Klarna a firm or after pay those are the three Big actors these are non credit regulated bureaus shut those fuckers down tomorrow No, I'm serious. I'm so offended. Here's a depressing but true statistic nearly half of American adults They would suffer But shut those fuckers down tomorrow. No, I'm serious. I'm so offended. Here's a depressing but true statistic nearly half of American adults say would suffer financial hardship within six months if they lost their primary income or another. That's a telling sign that people are living on the edge, many of them, economies fragile. That's true for millions and millions of people. What do you do about it? Well, life insurance is one of the best ways to protect yourself from potential hardship. We recommend policy genius to get it. Plan's offer life insurance policy starting at just $276 a year for a million dollars in coverage. It feels complex to buy life insurance. They make it really easy. They help you compare different quotes from the markets top insurers so you get the lowest possible price, the best deal for your family. Policy genius lays out all of your options really clearly. Coverage amounts, prices, terms, no guesswork at all. It's all very clear. They handle the questions. They handle the paperwork. They advocate for you throughout the process. If you don't have life insurance because it seems too complex, they are the answer. Your family's future could be guaranteed to a great extent with policy genius. Policygenius.com slash chakra to compare free life insurance quotes from top companies sandwich you could save and to what extent you could protect your family. Policygenius.com slash chakra. By the way, two of them are foreign companies just so one is a Swedish company and one is an Australian company. I did a deep dive into this. You can buy a pizza on credit. Yes, you can buy almost anything on credit. Concert tickets, you can buy. I'm a big sports fan of you Chicago Cubs fan. It's just fun. I grew up in Chicago. When I go to buy tickets at Rigley Field, they say finance this over the next three years using Klarna. Actually, yes, concert tickets, Taylor Swift. What you have is a workaround. What's the collateral? There's no credit score. So it's just you. It's like your social security. They're collateralizing you. So it's very high risk for the quote unquote lender, but they have the late fees and the penalties make these companies eventually whole because they know they got you. Again, this is not regulated by traditional credit bureau. So the federal government has not really waited in on this yet. And again, you can, you're younger folks from everything I'm saying. I'm just right. Am I correct? I'm not making any of this up. It's B and P L. So when I sit down with a Republican saying, I never think of myself as out of it or not in a touch or whatever. I flatter myself that I've got my thumb on the pulse of the country. I am shocked. I've heard people refer to this. I didn't realize you could, you can buy a pizza on credit. Someone needs so, but here's the kicker and your groceries. The belief is that Gen Z is doing this to live above their means. Some, most are actually doing this to meet their means. That's the definition of predatory. Right. And so again, this is not structurally healthy debt. So there's an argument for debt if you have a mortgage because the whole system is kind of rigged towards mortgages or so this. You could deduct the interest. The asset price goes up. It's hard to get off the mortgage addiction. I did it, but there's an argument for it. You take your lumps if you don't have a mortgage. And I think there's an argument that's actually an okay and yeah, you could reconcile the type of debt. I know smart people have mortgages. If you are an investment banking and you have student loan debt and that student loan credential got you the investment bank, okay, you bet on yourself. Maybe that's just felt again, I'm very anti-collegious. You know, there's really no place where you can make an argument that financing your whole food's order is good for you. But to do that to young people who really, I mean, I'm 56 and I'm still terrible with money. I mean, it's hard. It's hard. And I don't think I'm lazy. I'm not lazy. I don't think I'm properly good, but I also think I'm easily fooled because I'm distracted. And if I was 21, imagine how much more unsophisticated I would be and how much more vulnerable to predatory behavior like that. And everything is so easy because everything is digital now. I mean, that's an awful thing to do to young people. And it creates a subterranean debt market that a lot of these young people think this is how you pay for stuff. They haven't been educated else otherwise. I'll go, yeah, just pay for that meal in five installments. What are the interest rates like? They can get very high. I don't want to speak at a turn, but they can get to be double digits. Right. And so that's really where they get you is the late fees. This is so bonkers. And so it's not regulated by traditional APR. So this is a great area. And I think people are finally waking up. So hey, Republicans, can you tell me the name of the three companies again? So it's a firm, a firm, Kalarna, Kalarna, and after pay, after pay, which is the American one. I believe so, yeah. So one of them was bought by box and is operated by square, which I believe is Kalarna. I don't want to speak at a term here. One of them was, it's still Australian run, but it's run by box. It might be after pay. Someone can fact check me on this. But those are the three big actors. And they've kind of just gone below the surface. And we create all this economic anxiety by pumping the system with cheap money. Everything gets more expensive. Meanwhile, we have millions of young people that are financing their Coachella tickets, but it's not through credit cards. Because in credit cards, we have a very regimented regulated system. I think the credit cards are disaster and we need to kind of figure that out. But this is a totally different thing. And so what they've done is they've tried to create a loophole and federal regulators are slow as they typically are. And they're like, oh, no, this is not credit cards. This is something else. This is like a repayment thing that's like buying now pay later. And it's the opposite of what built the West. What built the West is work now, pay after. So you're going to like, meaning like we will enjoy things later. That's what built the West. This is like enjoy things now and pay for it later. It is a, you know what I don't like about conservatives and I am one is that it would never occur to some of them that there are two sides to the story. It's like immediately, they blame the people who are buying Coachella tickets on credit, which I get. You shouldn't buy Coachella tickets on credit or your pizza or your Whole Foods or I totally agree with that. That's stupid. But they never, it doesn't occur to them that there's another side to the people loaning the money or taking advantage of the dumb people borrowing the money. They both are culpable. And by the way, I think the people with more power and more wisdom are probably more culpable, act morally than the people who are buying. In other words, like, are we matter at the drug user or the drug dealer? And then also. And then also the dealer, but conservatives look at all economic arrangements and they never blame the dealer. And I don't know what that is. Like how about we'll blame everybody. It's bad. I think the reason and it's a tick within the conservative movement is that all of a sudden we're Marxists if we do that. And I think that there. No, I'm not saying, I don't believe that obviously. But you're absolutely right. I think there's a racist if I don't like mass immigration. Well, I don't like mass immigration, but I'm not a racist. I don't like this. And I'm not a Marxist. Like it's just name calling to stop you from raising the question. I thought terminating cliches is what it is. It's stop thinking it because we're going to terminate your thought by calling you a Marxist or whatever. And do I think this should be illegal? I don't know probably. I need to learn more about it. All I'm saying is I am here as a messenger of the next generation. I'm telling you this is bad. This generation can't own anything. They owe so much more money than generations prior. This is the most indebted generation in history. And I double checked that Gen Z owes the most money in any history, any generation in history. So we wonder why then all of a sudden, hey, you want to go buy a home now at the age of 38. Your credit score is destroyed. Your spending habits are terrible. You don't want to save and you don't think you should save. And you know what I hear from some of them is they say, well, why should I save when what I saw around me is that you need to get into this economy and spend spend spend because the savers got wrecked in 2008. And again, that's an oversimplification, but there is economic nihilism that is set in to a lot of this next generation where they're not participating in any of the upside right now, any of the upside of the last five years. In fact, they're only seeing the downside. They're seeing their apartments get smaller. Their rents go up. Their groceries get more expensive. Now mind you, I think President Trump is, again, he's uniquely positioned to solve this. I think that is one of the beautiful bills going to help. And I think growth will help this in lowering interest rates. But let me just say though, why do I say it's a race against the clock? And here's why it should concern conservatives because when I'm at dinner parties raising money, some of our donors are a little indifferent about this. They'll have kind of like a hey, pull yourself up by the bootstraps attitude. It's hard to shake. I don't have that attitude. I actually have a lot more compassion for the 23 year old that is working a double double shift and can't afford anything. But even if you don't care about them, you're not going to like the politics that comes in there. But how do we wind up on the side of the money, lenders? I mean, at no other time in history is that I think considered a virtuous business at all. I know a million people in that business finance, we call it, but I don't understand why they became immune from criticism. And that's, I mean, there are places where you know, loaning my bar to a lot of money in my life and I'm grateful for it and all that. But I don't think it's virtuous. And I don't think we should say that it's virtuous. I don't think the people should do it. Who do it should be above criticism? I don't know. Why is the right participating in basically a cover up of a crime against people or even like from my perspective, why is the right so blind to the suffering of the young people that just gave you a Senate majority? Oh, I got a fair hug. Good question. So Roe v Wade was over two and three years ago and people celebrated, but the battle over abortion is not over. In fact, did you know that abortions are at a 10 year high? In a lot of ways, it's the saddest thing that happens in this country. The birth rate falls and the killing of children accelerates. It's awful. Preborn is fighting this trend. They're expanding their life of firming care in the darkest corners of the country. to help women and save babies. Now, abortion mafia don't want women to think about what they are carrying. They want them to think that ending the pregnancy will solve all of their problems, but that is not true. 11% of women who take the abortion pill, for example, go on to suffer serious health consequences. And that does not include the emotional and moral consequences. It's bad. It's ending a life. So when you give to preborn, you are not just saving a baby. You're saving a mother to preborn is already rescued over 350,000 babies. There are still many, many more who need help. They'll pound 250 and say the keyword baby to support their cause. That's pound 250 baby. Go to preborn.com slash Tucker preborn.com slash Tucker because children are the greatest gift period. This is a generation that just put you in charge of all your committees. Young people, thank you. You should say thank you, younger voters. You voted Republican and overwhelming numbers. One of the reasons, again, I like Dave McCormick of tons. I'm not forming into this, but younger voters help put Dave McCormick as a US senator. And I think he gets this more so than most. Donald Trump built this movement of younger voters that galvanized the nation again. This is the untold story, the 2024 election is how Donald Trump won the youth vote in so many parts of the country. Okay. So what are they experiencing? They own nothing. They're renting constantly and they're involved in this scam of a credit based economy. Everything is based on credit. And so then what it does is it deteriorates your capacity, equity. And so again, I'm not here to propose like a solution of all these different policy requirements. All I'm saying is how about some national attention for this? How about there's going to be a conversation about it? There's going to be a policy solution imposed on the rest of us, which is a stealing your stuff. Well, that's the thing. So that's what I'm, this is where the continuum, whatever you want to call it, the spectrum, whatever DC term, we're here in kind of again, I am a market guy. I like private property. I agree. I like trading. I like with you. I meet someone good at their craft and they're a carpenter or they're a small business owner. I actually want to save markets. And if we don't do something about this, you're going to get a Venezuelan style youth led revolt. And I am not exaggerating because what I would I see right here is with this next generation, longer voters, young men in particular, they're going right. They hate all the cultural stuff. The trans stuff's driving them crazy. The hyper feminization of the economy, which we should talk about because I want to talk about that whole, whole economy's become feminized to the last couple decades. And no one has the courage to really talk about it. And that's not just female empowerment. It's more than that. No, because we went from blue collar jobs to pink collar jobs. Yeah. I don't want to, I can't wait, but I can't wait. But I'm sorry to wrap it. We could talk about pink collar in a second because that's super important because that's, male unemployment is significantly higher than female unemployment. But let's put a little button in that and just revisit in a second. Political radicalism, he's a catalyst. Political radicalism does not come out of peace, prosperity, rising wages, stable families, church attendance, and happy people. Happy people, grateful people do not get behind Vladimir Lenin, and they certainly don't get behind Chavez or Castro. That's right. People that own nothing that feel like their property is diminishing, that on property, or their dollars diminishing in value, they start to look for alternatives. And so the political project in front of us as conservative should be, how do we actually de-radicalize the country in the next couple of years? That's my obsession. And that's why I say I try not to think about all this other stuff because it's just, you know, it's such brain space. My number one obsession is I know what is coming next because nobody spends more time on college campuses than me. I hate to like pull rank on that. I spend 100 hours a semester on college campuses. And you're getting no credits? No, I get no credits for that. I still don't have a college degree. No, I love that. But I listen. And that's the thing I know you, hey, people ask all the time, hey, why do you do these campus events? Why don't you just give a speech? Because I listen as much as I talk. And I put my microphone down and these videos have been seen around the world and people have grown familiar. But almost all of them are like, Charlie, I don't know what to do. Like trading crypto until 2 a.m. and kind of, you know, betting that the Green Bay Packers are going to win the Super Bowl. That's not enough for me. Charlie, what can we do? And one of the reasons they voted for Trump is they said, President Trump, please reorder this accounting for us because it's severely disordered. And so the Republican Party currently is focused on a lot of stuff. I get it. You have a lot of constituencies to serve. But we have participated. We being the body politic the last 20 years, especially last 10 in a concerted effort of intergenerational theft. And if you don't care, mom Donny is just the beginning. So someone, you know, in the next 10 years is going to shut it down because the public doesn't want this at all. They don't want shut what down shut down just the Paris had economy because it's going to get shut down. This is and everyone just going to know that they're trying to steal as much as they they can before it gets shut down. So the question is, is it shut down by Teddy Roosevelt or is it shut down by Hugo Chavez? And here's the brilliant to Teddy Roosevelt. So there's a lot of anti-roses, Ferv around the right. And it is? Yeah. Yeah. Why? Well, not a lot. I should say amongst the intellectuals, they're the worst. Why do they dislike Teddy Roosevelt? So part of it I get, part of it is that he was the war crazyness. Well, actually, it's funny actually ended the rush, the rush, rush, rush, rush show Japanese war. It's not mistaken, right? Yeah. Did he get a Nobel Peace press? I don't know. But anyway, he deserved one. It was a bloody war. I know some would say that Roosevelt began the progressive era. I think that's an over description. I don't want to get into that because I'm not that is interested in that. What I'm interested in though is how Roosevelt was one of the feet. We were one of the few powers to successfully manage the transition from the farms to the factories. And that's hard when you think about it. You have your entire population that is moving into cities, that transition, if done incorrectly, creates a ruling class that is untouchable. So Roosevelt was like, actually, I'm here to save capitalism. I'm here to save markets. And he did. And he did. And that is the enduring legacy of Roosevelt. Obviously the National Park Switch, my wife and I are enjoying right now and yeah, untouch beauty, which I think is amazing. And just the fact that he was a hunter and outdoorsman and like a man's man and super masculine and all that was awesome. I don't I don't love the fact he ran for president in 1912 out of bitterness, but that's the whole separate thing. He gave us Woodrow Wilson because of that. It's hard to decelerate for guys like, no, I mean, he's, you know, I know the type. Yeah, I do too. But but his legacy that I want us, the rows of Veltian, whatever I don't think that's the right term. You know, let's coin it. Let's coin the rows of Veltian energy or aura to use a Gen Z term is, hey, don't be ideological. Have a prudential aim. What do we want? We want an ownership economy. And people that feel invested that have real equity. So how do we get there non ideologically? Because we've actually want to preserve markets because we want a country. Would I come and like, people listening to you? I hope people in charge are listening to you. I'm not, well, President listens to me. He's amazing. People in capital. Don't say I would say, let's listen to you. What you're saying is true. Well, thank you. And I, again, I am, this is going to sound really cringe, but like in some ways people have compared me to like Paul Riviere and it's like a warning of something that is coming. Like the Bolsheviks are coming. The Bolsheviks are coming. I wrote a book on this and no one paid any attention. Well, I did. But no, but I'm saying it's gotten so much worse in your explanation is so much more vivid than anything I came up with. And you have the credibility that I did not have, which is someone who does not have college degree and is constantly in college campuses. I just hope they're, I hope they're listening because this is the story. This is the biggest story happening that has not yet happened. And that's what I always say. That it's happening, but it hasn't yet happened on the front page. And what it does, don't be shocked when all of a sudden people are calling for a 75% wealth tax. That's happening. And they wanted 50% tax on capital gains. Totally right. And so what Roosevelt, just to complete the Roosevelt point is that when you know what you want and you can aim towards it, you can shed yourself off the bumper sticker logic. Yes. And you can get towards something practical and prudent, real and beautiful. The best leaders in American history, the ones that are underrated, honestly, the Roosevelt and the Eisenhower's, they were non ideological. Exactly. They were nationalistic. They were America first. They loved the country. And they weren't like caring about whether or not they were fitting a mold of a think tank white paper. And TR was a sincere Christian, a sincere Christian. Yes. And I believe Eisenhower was as well. I can't, I don't actually don't know. So the, the, the, the, the statesmanship dilemma of today is can you either challenge or convince because it had one of the others, the ruling class that this is necessary. And I don't think convincing is going to work. No. So you have to challenge them. And hilariously, it's actually the best thing for them. Because otherwise they're coming for their mansions and they're coming for their assets and they're coming for their companies. And I don't want to live in that country. I do not want to live in South Africa. I don't want to live in a resentment bitterness country. I have to walk, I have to drive around and armored cars all the time. And I can't leave my house after 10 p.m. Especially we don't even know who lives here. Well, that's a whole other component of that. No, but I'm just saying that makes it more volatile. So if there is a horse severe economic contraction and of course at some point there will be, it's not, you're not going to have a civilian conservation core. It's like because the country is inherently not united. And citizens are nothing in common with each other in like, Renaissance. Who are my neighbors? They must speak my language. They don't know what the civil war was. We're not on the same page on any level. And they have expectations that are totally unrealistic because they were getting freestop the second that got here. So like, man, you could have, this is an emergency, I think. Yes. And it is a volcano waiting to explode. I mean, any one of your metaphors that you could put in, but we are a nation of strangers. The ties that bind us together are purely economic. If you think about it, it's not language. It's not culture. It's religion. It's not shared history or history. It's not any of that. We are basic. And this is the distinction is that economy. I ask Republican leaders all the time because voters get it. That's the thing. Do you want to be a country or a colony? What do you mean? Well, tell me the difference. Because I could tell you what a colony is. A colony is a place where everyone just kind of comes and they trade stuff and you have a good time and you kind of go in your own little corner, but you have nothing in common. It is the reverse colonization of America, which is the greatest of all ironies, right? Because we tried to do the colonization thing, but we are colonizing ourselves. You think about it because we really don't have much in common anymore. We're kind of in our own little corner and all that unites us is the dollar bill and we're told that that is the most important thing. What happens when the dollar bill then shreds? You see, economic volatility is survivable if you're a nation of neighbors. Exactly. Because then you go to church and then you have commonality and you're like you kind of bind together and you figure it out. Like the Great Depression, for example. We survived that because we were a different people. Demographically, we were different religiously. But when you're a nation of strangers filled with third worlders that don't really understand what this country is about and they're just here for free stuff socialism, watch out. This again, I don't like the term emergency. I'm not challenging on it only because I don't want to do the Greta Funberg thing. We're like, the story is falling. You don't. I mean, it just drives me crazy. The over-contastrivation of American politics. It's probably addressed immediately. But it will become an emergency. It is a canary in the coal mine. It's a harbinger. It is a sign. It's a warning of things to come that if I get 10 minutes with somebody, I think I can convince them it's kind of a problem. Ish. But then as a step further, it has all these other secondary problems and third and fourth tier problems like birth rate collapse and marriage issues and young men not participating in the labor force. And then you don't have a civilization. And so I guess that's a long winded way to say that almost every politician when they run for office will give some sort of euphemism, some sort of thing. I'm doing this because of my kids and they bring up their beautiful family up on stage. You've seen this what 500 times. Are you really doing this for your kids? Are you really doing this for the next generation? Because if you were, you wouldn't be doing it. You're currently doing it. This is just settling hard at me because you've confirmed and put a much finer point on a lot of things that I can intuit. I can smell into some extent seed. So when you talk to college kids, the first thing they bring up is money. No, not always. I shouldn't say that. Sometimes it's abortion. Sometimes it's trans. Sometimes it's foreign policy. But the undercurrent of anxiety is economic. I do get more economic questions than anything else for sure. But I don't want to oversimplify. But let me also divide this into two different categories. So young women are doing much better in this economy than young men. For the first time in the last 30 years, young male unemployment is around 7%, young female unemployment is around 4%. So we are seeing the creation of kind of the lost boys. They're disappearing. They're leaving the workforce. We don't really know what they're doing all day long. You and I can speculate, but they're not, they're not reading, you know, they're not reading Montesquieu. It's a whole society organized around hating white men. Should it shock us that they're being destroyed? No. And how is this an accident? No, it's a deliberate intentional campaign. And so what I find young men are flocking to our events and they want meaning and they want purpose. And some of this is values. This is not all economics. I want to be very clear. But some of those, you're making me so rackle that if I first thought was make them a militia Charlie. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, dis about no, you dis about that lately. Right. I'm the lunatic here, not you. You are very on the state of future. Yeah. Okay. But so I mentioned this earlier when it dive into this, the entire economy has become hyper feminized. The education system has become hyper feminized. I'm sure you've heard those arguments. Oh, well, I know that a lot of kids. Yeah. Sit, sit still, do what you're told, right. Read the, read the, you know, the hyper feminine books. But you think about what are the jobs that have had the greatest emphasis of the credentialing, you know, which basically is what colleges, it's just a massive credentialing exercise. They're not the more masculine jobs that we need, which is like industrial engineering or their HR managers. They're Norman forces. They're empathy driven. They're, they're, they're sociologists or DEI's ours. And so thankfully we're profoundly pushing back on DEI. But a young man doesn't want to go be an HR manager. I mean, they would rather go to a WNBA game than be an HR manager. I mean, it's that's, that's a strong thing to say. It's, it's a, it's a coin toss. But I think there are allowed to be HR managers. Are they? No, but that's a straight man. No, of course not. And so the entire economy, the push, the thrust to the last decade has been the growth has been in what we call pink collar jobs. Jobs that men would rather sit at home and kind of just be, you know, slovenly than be caught doing because it's just so demeaning to how we as men are wired. They're not about creation or risk taking or value proposition or, you know, boundary pushing. They're kind of about, well, here are the rules and the norms. I mean, that's important. By the way, there is a rule. They're mom jobs. Exactly. And you know why they're mom jobs? Because these women aren't moms. Okay. Now, now I think we just need a militia, but whatever. Okay. That's sorry. Now this is, no, because you think about it. Yeah, I have thought about it, but I haven't. I haven't even thought about it as deeply as you thought about it. You are connected. Because why are these, these women play mom at work? Because they don't have kids at home. That's dark, man. It's true. So the effect is, I mean, the effect is obvious in it. And all of this comes from economics. So those about all that there's values to, of course, but to some extent, I just notice that living in a predominantly black city and then spending part of the year in an entirely white area that had been deindustrialized, you saw a kind of similar, you saw lots of million differences. Well, there's no violence in the all white area for one thing, which I'm grateful for. Zero violence. But you did see similar family formation patterns, whereas the jobs for men disappeared, people stopped getting married. That's right. So what I thought was purely about values, like decent people get married when they had children. I totally agree with this. Yes, turned out to be partly about values, but also the values were shaped by the economic realities. Women don't want to marry men who make less than they do so they didn't get married. The same reason why women don't like dating guys smaller than them. Exactly. Because they know intuitively at some point they're going to be pregnant and they're going to be vulnerable and they want a man to be able to defend them. Yes. And so again, women, my wife is right here. They're an interesting way of communicating. They won't put it as bluntly as I am right out. Let me just kind of put it out there. Women deep down want to be protected and serve, of course. And so they don't want a guy that is earning less or that at some point they feel as if they're going to have to provide for. Of course. That is very off putting. So Scott Galloway, who's a man of the left, he's actually done some really good scholarship on this. He's from NYU. He has a really important point that I think is necessary to hone in on. When women get disenchanted in the dating pool, they focus on friendships and work, which is totally true. They pour all their energy into either friendships or in work. We see that when men get disenchanted with the dating pool, they pull out from society basically altogether. Because you know why? There's like a hint of embarrassment and shame. That's to hint. More than that. The definition of shame. And so you can't provide you failed. So the women are more likely to graduate college. They're more likely to close on a home. They're more economically secure. They're also simultaneously many of which are miserable. We know this. They're the most incredibly addicted antidepressants and suicidal ideation. The numbers speak for themselves. The most miserable women of the West are unmarried without kids. The numbers know that. They speak it out. And again, this is materially true. We see this in our life. Well, the rate of diagnosis, like off the chart. And I think part of that is just confirmation bias. I think we're looking for more of it. So people think they have it more. But I will also say that people are, we and I both see it, they're unhappier. This is an unhappier generation. Yes. Let me just be clear. I think most diagnosed mental illness is a total lie. Some of you, which is legit. Of course. You and I both frankly is real. But I mean, whatever. That's a whole separate. That's a whole separate. And I would refer everybody to Lord Delano who was diagnosed with profound mental illness and recovered. I had a conversation with her earlier this summer that was one of the most, I was still thinking about it. But that was just Lord Delano as in Franklin Delano Roosevelt. I'll have to check that out. It's worth it. Anyway, sorry, to know. No. And so the entire configuration of the West has been to put men down and to put women up. And so what are the consequences of that? The cliente marriage rates, declining fertility rates. And then a disordered mess. So I keep on going back to that word disordered. And it's a very important word. We could use chaotic or we could use bedlam. But that is what young people are feeling. fertility rates and then a disordered mess. So I keep on going back to that word disordered and it's a very important word. We could use chaotic or we could use bedlam, but that is what young people are feeling. They can't always put it into words, but they're like, Trump, mega hat, something's wrong. Let's go to the Charlie Kirk event and they're trying to like piece this all because they know something is just so off. They're like, women don't want to date me and I don't want to date them and everything's expensive and what's going on here. So the task in front of us is conservative and we're perfectly positioned for this because we're not people of the left. We don't see the destroyer to burn where arsonists is to kind of reorder this, put it back together to say, okay, how do we go wrong too? Too much emphasis on pink color. So Larry think, who I'm not a fan of at all from Blackrock, he said something very interesting that no one decided in the mainstream you to cover. He said, there's an urgent need right now for 500,000 electricians, 500,000 electricians. So here's a guy that $10 trillion man, he's one of the largest funds he controls. By the way, he's also purchasing single family homes, which are pricing families out of buying homes. We're going to get into that, I think in a second, which I want to talk about. But here he's saying that there's a need for 500,000 non college educated jobs. You're trying to tell me that we don't need more sociologists. We don't need more communication majors and then what about media studies? Yeah, exactly. Media studies or North African lesbian poetry. And so we peel back this a little bit. We realize that one of the other reasons why men are being checked out of this whole system is that parents and the whole momentum behind young men have pushed them into a feminized system when in reality would have been better for them to just not go to college in the first place and pursue just normal blue collar trades of which we have the greatest deficit in our country. But it goes that part is all it is very this not economics as much as social status. And you said this on your show once it was a one sentence thing. I'll never forget never peated it like a hundred times. Upper middle class suburban parents do not want to tell their friends their kids are working construction. I don't know if you even remember saying that, but no, but I've seen I were I was forced to work construction by my father as a child and it totally changed my life and my outlook on everything and I made lifelong friendships literally lifelong. And and I remember I didn't force my own kids to work construction to be honest. Because it's not even matter if it's society changed so much. Yeah, but it's almost when you destroyed the white working class, which they did on purpose because they hate them above all for some reason. When you destroy the way it working class, then you have immigrants running everything in the bottom. And I'm not against immigrants. I like them actually, but I'm not going to send my kids to work on a drywall crew or they're the only English speakers. So there's actually it cuts off that whole I worked in a factory. I worked at a gas station. I was a dishwasher and a restaurant. I worked construction. That's what I did in the summer for high school and college. And I was from a rich family, but that they made me do that. And it totally changed my life. And but I wasn't unusual in that. I hitchhiked. They made me hitchhiked too. My parents did. And that was pretty normal. And it wasn't that long. Those were the 80s. Now you can't do that because no one else working those jobs has anything to come with your children. That's right. They're from here. They're strangers exactly. And on top of that, there is a belief by upper middle class America that that's those are the dirty or lower class jobs. Don't 100 percent. But don't do that. They don't even speak English. So it's like not even a thing. Period entry. Half to send your kid to work at a clothing store on Martha's Vineyard because if you want to work, I'm serious. If you want to work in class job, what else is there? Did you know what I mean? I know exactly what I worked in a kitchen in 1985. Everybody in the kitchen had a criminal record every single one. But of course, every dishwasher has been in prison for something. Right? But they were all Americans. And they all spoke English. And you like take a cigarette break with them. And you could like talk to them. And they were part of your country and your culture. They were at the lower end. I'm from La Jolla, California. I'm with this guy. You know, he's got tattoos on his neck. And he's done 15 years or something awful. But like he was recognizable as an American, I'm not going to send my kids to a kitchen now. I'm sure they're better. I'm sure the hundreds are better people than the people I work with, but they're not Americans. That's right. And so what does all this mean? If these young men stay lost and they came out in huge numbers of upper president Trump. And we don't give them purpose, the civilization will collapse. You cannot have a generation of young men just check out. So when Biden says the number one threat or straight white men, which he said about a million time or what are the white nationalism or Christian nationalism talking about young white men? That's what he's talking about me and the young men I represent Bingo. I just dumb. This is one of the reasons why, but he's afraid of them. Of course, of course, I get it. Again, I hate this racialization stuff, but they forced the racialization card for the record. I don't look at people in terms of skin color. But when they start categorizing me and the young men that show up to my events as toxic because they breathe, you force the race card. So, but the power of young white men in this country, if they were motivated and purposeful, yeah, young white men helped us win a world war and get to the moon and split the atom. You better give them weed and fentanyl and benzodiazepines and draft kings and porn just to kind of disable them so they don't rise up and eat you. That's what I would do. I'm just saying, like if I were in charge of society, I'd be like, holy shit, I'm afraid of these. You're so right. And I try to, so I listen to your show all the time, talk to them. Sorry. You say stuff like that. I try to challenge it. Like, is it really a centralized can like, no, it's not spirit of the internet. But then I'm like, I got nothing. Yeah, but it's like, you know, if you were trying to make the most, by the way, if you look at just the genetics of it, like I'm Scott's Irish, I'm like a very disagreeable, boundary pushing, yeah, you know, like rebellious. I know my genetic type. And by the way, genetics matter, we should talk about genetics more. It's not racist to say that. So my genetics come from all the way, you know, from Scotland, from the Maxwell clan, you know, fought alongside William Wallace. But if you took, if you want to like kind of calm down that kind of Appalachia fighting spirit, man, you would do what you're doing right. It's a Protestant spirit. I mean, let's just get, let's just get, of course, let's just get really honest about it. The people who found the country were Protestants. I'm as pro Catholic as anyone could be my best friends or Catholic. I'm Calvinist to not against Catholics at all. I love Catholics. However, this country is found my Protestants because they think for themselves. And they're the leg is, you know, they're the years of Martin Luther who took on, you know, the ancient the 1500 year old church by himself. Totally. You know, they are people who believe they communicate directly with God that their conscience is more important than federal law. And they're really hard to deal with. And so you have to destroy them first. And they did. Well, they're not done yet. There's still a lot in that that's why I know some. Well, I'm one. And but by the way, even the young men that are currently lost, let's bring them back in. And that's what I'm saying. You can shed your addiction. You can give your life to Jesus. You can get your aim figured out. You can reorient your purpose. Again, Larry Fink is getting to something deeper. There's actually going to be a massive blue collar need for all this AI stuff or whatever. Well, that's the kicker. So that's where everyone I refuse to accept the premise that we need a bunch of H1B workers and a bunch of foreigners. Meanwhile, the men of this country are withering away in a basement because they've been told they're toxic and terrible. They're entire life. And so anyway, I feel a, I feel a moral obligation to fight for the young men that show up to my event. And you could tell their batter down. I mean, they've been, they've just been so suppressed by either the H art apartment or the, the pronoun policing or the hyper feminization of their classroom. And they're like, I'm done. I'm not doing this. I'm going to go play video games. I'm going to check out. And is that the right move? No, they should not do that. They should do what, you know, you and I do and get your life together. Don't be a victim. But they do it because you beat down a group of people so much over so long period of time. They're going to exit. They're going to be just been trained to blame them though. It's so wild. It's all our sides. Find it. And I find it also that must be now. What you, I don't think a conversation has pissed me off as much as this one that I can remember. Well, I hope I'm not pissing out of your ear. Just what you're saying is true. And that's why it's upsetting me. But I'll even say that about black people. I mean, I didn't grow up in a black neighborhood. I have a few black friends, a couple of good black friends, but not like the voice of black America. So it was easier for me to like blame 100% blame black people for all the huge problems, like the overwhelming problems of black America. Now I'm like, you know, and that's someone said fair. I'm for blaming the victim sometimes. But I'm also for acknowledging that there are other forces and like economic forces really do matter as noted before. And I just think it's so interesting in the, the people I know and grew up around with politically like they will never mention how this happened in the first place. They'll never blame the company. I don't know how we got to this place. We have to defend the company. I've worked for companies. They're horrible. They're anti-Christian. They're anti-human. They're greedy. And you know, they provide, they paid my kids tuition all those years. I'm grateful and all that. But they're morally neutral at best at best. So why are we defending them? I don't get that. Well, and at the very least, again, because we, you know, wealth is important. We don't want to be a third world country. Right. But if we're well, no, of course, we want it. We don't want to be poor. That's the, that should be like the operative don't be poor. But at the very least, we shouldn't have a gut instinct to defend them. Like we defend companies if we're defending our children. No, they did nothing wrong. So Harry did nothing wrong. Or, you know, it's as if like you don't even know any of the facts and immediately you're on ExxonMobil side. I never even did my own immediately. Immediately you're on the video side. And you're on. I think you're, it's like, well, you're, we let's at least let's have a presentation of what's happened here and what how did that? It's in here. So much younger than I am, but you seem to have paid closer attention than I have ever been on to this more than I am. How did that happen? I think it's a philosophical inheritance from the Rockefeller Romney takeover, the Republican Party. Yeah. Many years ago, but well before I was born. Yeah. That's my best guess is that this, there was this anti-Soviet anti-communist, anti-Marxist belief that was, you know, kind of the connective tissue of what was Reagan's rise in the 80s. And therefore, again, we exist on these ridiculous binaries at times, which is fine. Some things are binary like sex as binary, male male, male, male, other things are not, which is there's a lot of steps in between like anarcho capitalism and like oligarchy run capitalism, which is what we have right now. We have oligarchy run capitalism and Marxism. There's a lot of steps on the continuum right from oligarchy run capitalism to that. And so, but also we, if you look at the tax code, if you look at the whole configuration of the current system, which can credit the president Trump for finally putting a working class tax cut, no tax on tips and no tax on overtime. Finally, workers get something. But the whole configuration of the tax code is really rigged towards the big incumbent actors and the top 1% or the parade of principle. I know I sound like a left wing Elizabeth Warren person one hairs. I don't care describe the problem. It needs a remedy. But, but here, again, let me just kind of complete, you know, the problem should not be how are we going to get the 1% of flourish. We should penalize them. But the question should be, how do we get the bottom 50% to have a little bit better life and their kids have a much better better life and their grandkids haven't even better life than that. That's the American project. Is intergenerational wealth building? Is that you're going to sacrifice a little bit. Your kids will be better off. And this is the kicker. Why is it that these students are showing up in massive numbers? My events, why do they vote for Trump? This is a fact. It is the first time since George Washington that this generation has it worse off than their parents at the same age. It has not happened. Not even during the Great Depression is about the same. There's this generation is significantly worse off. And the problem, this is this is what no one mentions. We're not poorer. So you look at all these problems. You would think like if you're from Mars, you're like looking at all these numbers, you would think that the country's gone through like an economic tailspin the last 15 years. Like, okay, you're young people can't afford homes and they're putting groceries on credit and they're killing themselves and they're socially isolated. And they're addicted to benzodiazepines and Zolov. It's obvious you guys went through like a terrible economic attack. Like you lost your war. Yeah. No, the stock markets that record highs are companies and more valuable than ever. So wait, we've solved the tough stuff. We know how to create wealth, but we don't know how to create it for the generation that needs it most. If you look at the economic conditions, you would think the other conditions surrounding it are like object poverty. These are the problems that like third world nations have. I know. Our young people can't afford stuff and they have to finance their basic necessities. And yet we're the wealthiest nation in the history of the world on the planet. We have 37 trillion dollar GDP. We have the greatest companies and we've all this stuff to brag about. And yet all of our problems would beg the question and it's like this inherent contradiction. We're super wealthy on one side, like a powerhouse juggernaut. And we are like an economic nightmare on the other side. How did that happen? Answer. The wealth went to older people at the expense of the next generation. That's for sure. Every single economic growth decision of the last 30 years has been made. I am going to benefit my baby boomer generation is going to benefit. And I don't care if it hurts young people. And I'm not anti boomer. I get negative hate mail all the time because the boomers are super protective of their generation is if I'm like attacking Presbyterians or something. They're repulsive. They've always been repulsive. And I grew up in a world as born in 1969, the baby boom ended in 1965. So it was 65 or 64. Whatever. It was just the post war generation ended mid 60s. I'm not a boomer. Thank heaven. My father was not a boomer. He's born in 1941. So I'm totally different attitudes. Right? He was born before the Second World War, our entry into it. I was educated by them. They were my teachers. And they were the worst, the dumbest, most narcissistic, the shallowest. Every sentence had like nine cliches that they were all at Woodstock. They remembered when Kennedy shot it was the day of the music. I'd like everything they said was like the Don McClain tune. It didn't make sense. It was just a series of evocative cliches strung together to create a feeling. They were idiots. But above all, they were about themselves. I hated them then. I hate them now. In fourth grade, I remember saying to a buddy of mine, I hate these people. Our math teacher just told us I was at Woodstock. I was like, how many fucking people were at Woodstock? Like everyone in America was at Woodstock. I thought it was three thousand people. They meant it was they're the worst. They're the ones who lecturers about the civil rights movement for 40 years as the actual supposed beneficiaries of the civil rights movement, black people declined. They didn't care. They were only about feeling good about themselves. The only good thing they produced was like the music of 1972. Other than that, horrible people, horrible. Sorry. Well, and so yes, so I grew up with that. That's okay. Everyone can email Tucker your hate mail when it comes to this. And by the way, if you are a baby boomer, take some takes responsibility for what you participate. That is the kicker. That's what I will say. You guys have had a great, you've had the greatest run. You've had what Eric Weinstein would call the ego, the embedded growth obligation. You go, meaning things just keep getting better. The market goes up. Your house gets more valuable. And you guys are trying to squeeze the last of a lemon and you are leaving a crummy unrecognizable serfdom in your wake. Of course they are. And that is bad for you. It's bad for your legacy. It's bad for your nation. They're the ones who went right from protesting the Vietnam War to making all this money on Wall Street. Remember Jerry Rubin was a yippie. I mean, this is before you were around that like Kerry went from, you know, the whole thing. It was all live action role playing rebellion. Let's larping is what it was. I would just exclude anyone born between 1946 and 1964 from ever holding any office. And I know a lot of them. I'm sure they're nice people are we like Trump. But you're generate. Oh, I forgot. The whole generation is just rock. But let's let's extrapolate one part of it, which is that it's definitely that generation has not had a regard for leaving an economic. They don't care about anyone but themselves. That's the whole point. So if you if you employ that belief into fiscal policy and monetary policy, this is what you get an intergenerational war. Yeah, they're grandchildren who they don't care about. And so when I'm trying, is there on John's Island or wherever they are, right? They're on John's Island, but whatever. Well, yeah, amongst other places. No, I like John's Island. I'm just saying they're in retirement. Yes. And they're kind of psyched with what they have. And they're stocks keep on going up. Yeah. And their grandson Dylan is like totally zoned out in prescription drugs and they don't really care. Right. And but or if they are to impart some wisdom, it's, you know, when I was your age, we worked two jobs and I was able to put myself through college. We worked really hard. I'm telling you selfish people. This is there are their lazy people in Gen Z, of course. But honestly, the majority of young people I come in contact with, they're working their tail off. This is not a stereotypical lazy generation. I'm sorry. Like, it they're no lazier than some of the people I've seen in prior generations. Because give you all that on that hill. I'll defend the standards. I mean, but young girls, I've got a lot of them like they're always buzzing around doing something. They're just self-directed, but young men, I think that's why everyone likes to hire women because they're self-directed. You give them a task. They're micro 100% women. They're amazing. And look at what the scriptures tell us. And this is a very interesting thing. What it, what did God say? He said, it's not good for man to be alone. Exactly. But he wasn't alone. He had God. What he's saying is that it's not good for man to be without a woman. Of course. So it's not enough for man just to have God. And then some people don't like this teaching. But it's true. Adam had God. He had a relationship with God. If you look at almost every third world country where men don't feel that they are able to have economic prosperity or any romantic future, you get either revolution, gang violence, or complete disconnect or suicide, or suicide, which is what we have. So it's the most suicidal generation of history. Now, I don't want to paint like a totally negative picture because there is one really good trend. And it's not because of baby boomers. And it's not because of our leaders. It's not. I guess that. Well, no, it's men, young men are going back to church. That is legit. That's happening because honestly, it's the only thing that they can find. It's a life raft in this just tsunami of chaos and disorder. So I get asked all the time, why are they going to the Catholic church? Why are they going to Orthodox church more than the evangelical church? And I'm evangelical. I'll say, well, first of all, they want something that has lasted. They want some that is ancient and that is beautiful. Some that has stood the test of time. Some that's not going to change. Some that's all of a sudden knocking all of a sudden just flip around and have some sort of transgender story hour. They are so that's a really positive trend in the midst of all this. That's my great hope is the spiritual hope that the young men that are lost and if any young man is listening to this right now, like stop, stop watching porn, stop smoking weed, stop drinking endlessly, find yourself back to church. That will reorient your life and do it. The church tells you to do. Find a woman, marry her, provide have more kids than you can afford. That's my advice for young men. Yes, don't play the victim even though you legitimately can play the victim card on everything we've said. The mindset of a victim is parasitic to your soul. I completely agree. I completely agree. And you shouldn't wind. You shouldn't wind. Winding is bad. But that's our job. And just to be clear, so people say, but Charlie, you talked about this a lot from a winding standpoint. No, what I'm doing is I'm communicating to a very specific audience of people in charge that are ignoring this and they are ignoring what's coming next. And that's the whole context of the conversation. So I agree with you. I mean, every way, I really hope that people are listening to you people in charge. I mean, the president does to his great credit. It seems obvious that everything you've said is true. And I just want to say for the ninth time, I really hope members of Congress will listen to what you're saying. I think it's the most important thing right now because we are in the last stages of what we had when we're moving towards something new. This isn't working and it's not working for the people it has to work for, which is the next generation. They're specifically the ones being heard. And so they're going to be big, big, big changes. And people will be punished for what we're going through right now. There's no question about it either from the right or from the left. And my concern is not preventing them from being punished. It's making sure the right people are punished. It always feels to me like the greatest injustices are going to be the, you know, we've solved the crime, but we executed the wrong guy. And I just want to make certain that the predators are punished, the people taking advantage of desperate young people, the people who are, you know, getting rich from payday loans and from, you know, by now paid later for your pizza schemes, like those people should be crushed and not, you know, hardworking people. How do you how do you make sure that punishment is allocated just like? Yeah, well, first, this is why the right needs to administer it because we would pursue justice where the left would probably pursue revenge. Exactly. And revenge is bad. Exactly. So good. So, but first, secondly, I would, I hope you're right. I hope that the people that are doing bad here, which is plenty will be held accountable. There's no guarantee. No one to jail after 2008. And I think that was a stain on our nation. I mean, I remember my family having to metaphorically and literally downsize after the 2008 financial crisis. I mean, it was a real turning point if you will. I had to sell my house. Yeah. And we didn't praise God. But I remember like we didn't go out to eat for like six months. Like it was a real trimming. And no one and you, you remember that. Did you connect? I was a freshman in high school. And so you connect what was happening to your family to large economics. Yes. And a lot of millennials, such I'm a millennial, I'm the younger and millennial, almost Gen Z has a very similar stories as to where they saw their parents have to downsize trim vacations, you know, cancel luxury items because of macroeconomic events. And I think it's still to this day a stand on our nation that no one went to jail for what happened in 2008. None of the bankers, none of the people were held accountable. And there's a lot that went into that. Obviously, the federal government was heavily involved. But we did the worst possible thing, which is we actually created and we codified the bad behavior by making the incumbent Wall Street banks even more powerful through Dodd-Frank. So it's harder for a small and community banks to compete. And then we flooded the zone with cheap money. We went to basically zero interest rates, which then depreciated the dollar, which only hurt the next generation even more. So look, I would have liked to have seen. It's too late now. The statute limitations as well passed like per pox for people that helped wreck the economy back in 2008 and 2009 because there was plenty material there. So there's no guarantee that justice is coming. But I think this is different. I think this is far different because remember what I said early on in 2008, the average first time home buyer was 30 years old. Now it's 38. In 2008, you could have bought Apple stock for six bucks, eight bucks. Now it's like $180, $200 a share or something. I mean, things asset prices have ballooned so dramatically. And young people are so priced out of the entry point, let alone the completion point of the American dream that I think you're right, that there will either be this could be to it. This is kind of a, this will be a sloppy way to say it. But you can either be a stormy the best deal or Nuremberg. And Nuremberg is like orderly and at least there's some sort of like, you know, justice component with a Soviet judge in charge. Well, sure. I mean, it's not a perfect example, but the guy who did the style of show trials would put him in charge. Yeah, it's not perfect. But at least there was a pageantry to it that we're trying to pursue justice. I don't want revolution. My whole temperament is anti revolution. And so that's just my point. Any legal proceeding is flawed. I don't think you should put a Soviet judge in charge. But I think any, any judge is just a man or person and you're not going to get absolute justice in this life. That is absolutely right. But it needs to be an, I think that's the key point. It needs to be orderly and sensible and explain to the public. There's a reason for this. So another one is, I mean, again, one that we haven't even touched on is, are we ever, I think Trump is actually in a great job of this holding these colleges accountable. But are someone going to finally have to be on the hook for the amount of student loan debt this generation has? Can we season raid the endowments? I mean, these colleges are hedge funds with schools attached. Exactly. They're growing their endowments by hundreds percent and their enrollment by like three to four percent. So their endowment is exploding and their enrollments are barely explode and not to mention all the other problems embedded there. It's the medieval church. It needs reform. Yeah. And so I, again, I'm not here presenting all the solutions smarter people than me can kind of come through with a buffet line of solutions. My biggest contention is, why is no one even admitting this is a problem? And that's what's so important. What is that? So we began on that question. I don't know the answer. What's your guess? Again, I'm not doing one of those things where I like, I asked the question. It's not rhetorical. I have guesses. The first of which is that it's so bad. They're just ignoring it. And I really think that's part of it, which is that Congress is so filled with septicinarians and octogenarians that is so distant from their purview, they're way too concerned to send more money to Ukraine or whatever their primary priority is that kind of representing the next generation. Like, oh, those kids will kind of sort their way out. We had it tough too, which they didn't compare to what this generation has to go through. But secondly, I also think that they're, the left will eventually wake up to this. I'm telling you, they're all, they're all mess right now. They don't know which way they're going. But the mom Donny thing is a little bit of a, a little bit of a trial balloon. They're like, wow, that's interesting. It's getting younger people interested in involved and just remember like, Bernie Sanders won the Democrat primary in 2016. And he won it in 2020 if it wasn't for the COVID lockdown. He the base of the Democrat party has been yelling about economic anxiety for 10 years before it was even nearly as bad as it is today. And so what we as conservatives need to be really concerned about a cautionary tale is a Democrat candidate or politician that says everything I've just said that runs on basically resentment and bitter driven politics. You own nothing because of these people. Let's go take it. And that's a little bit more sane on the trans stuff, the crime stuff and the border stuff. It's exactly right. And that's why I don't think Gavin Newsom has a real shot because he's so transparently a tool of the ruling class. Totally. AOC obviously wants to run. She's dumb. That makes her a better puppet for a kind of fake economic populism. She's actually controlled by the banks and the neo cons. But I don't know. She's if you had one candidate on the left who is even shortage anyone, there's kind of like a Tim Walz who without the creepy personal life. Who wasn't sending off kid touch or vibes like he is. I'm not accusing him of kid touching. I'm just saying he sends off those vibes like there's an aura there that wouldn't have dinner with him. But if you had a slightly more normal person who was an economic populist, oh my gosh, that person would be emperor. Well, I don't know about emperor and I don't even know if I don't know if they'll, again, they're so off course on the trans stuff, the border. I agree. I totally agree. And they're so married to those three things. But just all those things back, something is going to come. And I wonder if they're married to those things because I have always sort of wonder like, what is that? There's a lot at stake here. This is running the world. Okay. So you don't just like decide trans rights or central to your platform by accident. There's smart people thinking about this. And I've always wondered, was that a way to tame economic populism is the thing that the donors and both sides are fear of the most by far. They need a little bit of it in order to stop the revolution from coming, as you have said, you need a Teddy Roosevelt, actually. Everybody needs it. They're too greedy and stupid to realize that. So I did. Exactly. So, but I always have wondered like, what was the trans thing? Why if I'm under the democratic party, I'm a huge general of the party. I don't want, I may, you know, like the trans thing or whatever. But I don't want to put that to center my platform because that's going to turn off all the normal people. Like I'm going to lose with that. It's too bonkers. Maybe that was inserted into the dialogue on the left to really kind of stop the Sanders insurrection forever. Yeah. I mean, that's interest. I mean, for my being too. No, I mean, I always, because Sanders is what they feared most. Sanders, Sanders would have given any candidate, including Trump, more of a run for his money in 2016. I think Trump would have beat Sanders. But like Sanders would have campaigned in Michigan. Oh, they said Sanders would have campaigned in Wisconsin. Yeah. And there's a lot of crossover of Bernie Sanders Trump. Oh, like that exists. Right. I mean, Sanders is a fraud. like Sanders would have campaigned in Michigan. Oh, Sanders would have campaigned in Wisconsin. Yeah. And there's a lot of crossover of Bernie Sanders Trump. Oh, like that exists. Right. I mean, Sanders is a fraud or whatever you think of Bernie is. It's a total fraud. However, a sincere Sanders, I think would be unstoppable. Yeah. So the, unless interested in the biography or the person of the Democratic Party is going, I agree. I'm much more interested in the movement that obviously is coming next. it's just so it is manifesting. It's bubbling up. And so we on the right, we should exist to de-radicalize, to create normalcy and order, and a regular America, the good America that you and I miss. And so as far as the trans stuff, look, there's a lot of theories on this. Number one, I think that there's an element of the Democrat Party that's into really creepy weird sex stuff that is religious stuff. And I dark. There is a religious element to the trans thing. I take dominion over my body. Exactly. I'm God. Where, yeah. If you think about the Christian element, which is that we surrender our body to the Almighty, our body is a temple. Right. God made us in his image where the trans thing is in. I make myself in my image. It's diametrically against every one of the teachings of Christ and of those scriptures. It's against the distinctions between what is holy and profane, what is good in evil, child and adult, art blurred in the trans thing, male and female. So I think that there's like a irresistible temptation amongst the kind of dark base of the Democrat Party, which exists that they just had to just hold on to this. Because again, it's the snake eating itself. Progress knows in those limits. Right. So it goes from, you know, homosexual marriage to eventually, you know, gay adoption to then finally, you know, to transgenderism. But I think you're getting onto something important from a corporate media standpoint. Do I think that Pride Month is emphasized more for a reason almost certainly? Because I think it's a smoke screen grenade to make us kind of be unsure where we're going. So no one actually talks about it. Yeah. We don't have get out of debt month. I know. No. If you want to be more, if you want to be in Malek or again one, either be even more provocative. One of the 613 laws of Judaism and one of the more beautiful teachings is called the Year of Jubilee, which is every 50 years is debt abolition and basically the rectifying of your financial situation for the nation of Israel. It was in law every 50 years because the religion recognized, I think is all religions do. The debt is slavery. Well, it says that in Proverbs 722 where it says basically, like, if you borrow money, you are slave, you are slave to the lender. Of course. I repeated all throughout the Torah all throughout the old and New Testament. And so now here we are in a modern context. Again, a little bit of debt is justifiable, mortgage, maybe. But when you another one that we even touched on that is crushing people, Democrats are starting to talk about this more is medical debt. Oh, it is crushing people. They go to the ER for just, you know, broken leg and they have a $7,000 bill and they are just murdered by those bills for the rest of their life. And so you have medical debt, you have credit card debt, you have personal debt, you have student loan debt. There's something kind of sad about the emphasis on healthcare too. I'm all for healing. I've been to the, you know, I depend on the site is back surgery. I mean, I've been saved by surgeons and I'm always grateful. However, if like the most important economic sector in a lot of parts of your country is healthcare, what is that exactly? shouldn't you be focused on like producing life? 100%. And not just like say, and I say this is a middle age person has passed the age of producing life. But I think like there's something, it lacks energy. It's it's too inward like, oh, what about my healthcare? Oh, shut up. Oh, shut up. It's also inherently bureaucratic. No, but it's also like, shouldn't you be, I don't know. I just, I'll tell you how I feel about my life. It's like getting older, you know, probably getting get physically decrepit at some time in the foreseeable future. That's inevitable. That's nature. That's like I have that in common with every person who's ever lived. I will die. And if you can't accept that, if you're a baby boomer and you think the point of living is to go on vacation, which they do, because they're selfish and stupid. I don't know. That's like you're missing life. Actually, the point of life is to produce new life and then help it thrive. Yes. There's an energy there. Teddy Roosevelt died. I think he was younger than I was am now when he died. Does anyone think Teddy Roosevelt didn't live a life? He was the very full life. He lived a life. And I don't think Teddy Roosevelt in his final moments is like, oh, damn, I've been cheated. You know, if only I could get to Barbados, you know what I mean? Yes. Like, there's something sad about everything is about maintaining an increasingly declining quality of my health care, health care, health care. We're building something. Do you do what I mean? Yes. I'm not. No, I think you'll it. I hate it. It's sad. And it's all, if you look at, yes, the prior generations had a different moral view, which was far less about getting another 15 years on your life expectancy. It was about how are my kids doing? Yes. If you just look at it from period can I'm again, I'm not a U.J. Do I have a mission? If I'm making something. Exactly. And what are you leaving? And right now, and again, I'm not here to like make people feel bad if you're over the eight to 70, you're leaving a crappy country for your kids. Trump is fixing it. He's working his tail off, but they're structural stuff that he's going to have to fight like hell. So stop talking about your illnesses. I don't like that. Stop that. My father died in 80, 40, like a million illness. That is definitely. I never knew what they were because you never mentioned them. But by the way, that's very waspy. Not to talk about your health stuff. But like 70 plus a tick is like all your health stuff is like the only dinner conversation, right? Are you joking? I remember thinking my father was saying when he got old these old people, they talk about us. They're health. It's so bearish and self involved in boring. But it's also, it's also you can think about it. It's not very Christian. No, because we're just here temporarily in the Christian view. There's an afterlife for us. There's the next life. Our bodies will actually resurrect. Yes. If I start Lord will come back and rain over this earth in the thousand year millennia. So we shouldn't be overly fixated. But until that happens, they're rotting. We're all by the way, it's like just like deal with it. Yes. Exactly. Like you have an expiration date. Yes. And God is in charge of that. So what do you do with that? And so if you look at the biblical figures, they weren't like overly interested in like, you know, mastering the back nine. You know, at the Naples country club. No, it was do God wants us and forwards love God love people that and we've done a very poor job of that in the West. I agree. Wow, Charlie. You've really really spun me up. So how do you get this message since? So we we've had a conversation around a half kind of on a on a you know, on the on the what I think and and you clearly think is the single biggest and least addressed issue going forward, which is how are we serving the next generation? But you also spend an awful lot of time like in actual American politics and the mechanics of it. How do we get people elected, how do we get people out to vote, etc, etc? Can you just be a little more precise? So you know every lawmaker certainly Republican lawmaker. Why isn't like what is so hard about what you just said for them to understand? Well, a lot of them only represent that they only represent their voters just as kind of as an act. It's not an actual thing that they do. I think of Lindsey Graham and look, Lindsey Graham, sure if we had him here, he'd tell hilarious jokes. Most charming remember the Senate. I'm great. I'm sure. No, yes. Smart, yeah. But great guy. But does he represent like the economic anxieties of a 24 year old welder in Columbia, South Carolina? I mean, of course not. And but part of the problem is, and we're trying to fix this at turning point action is actually the process of how difficult and how expensive it is to get good people elected in office. We haven't figured it out, but we're working on it. So we're engaging in Republican primaries and across the country. Lindsey Graham is primary. I think Lindsey Graham is up soon. I say this is something who has enormous affection for Lindsey Graham personally because he's enormously likable. But he can't get if he gets reelected to the Senate, then it's all fake. Obviously his zero interest in America. He only cares about honky Ukrainian soldiers or whatever his trip is with them. He needs to lose just in order for the system to stay viable and real. How hard would it be? I'm going to do whatever I can to help him lose because he does need to spend time in retirement. How hard is that? It's going to be very difficult. Why? Well, for a couple reasons, he's going to have a ton of money. Probably have tens of millions of dollars to spend. Really? Oh yeah. I mean, Senate leadership will most likely pour a lot of money behind Lindsey Graham. His numbers are underwater, but also it's going to be he'll try to make a mess of things. I'll be other candidates kind of thrown into the mix to try to split the vote. Yes. Remember it's a plurality, not a majority. I don't think they have a runoff system in the South Carolina primary. I could be miss. I don't want to speak out of turn there. But senators are really, really hard to come by that are decent. Mike Lee is a great example of a decent person in the US Senate. He's a great person. There's not many of them that are actually decent and that Eric Schmidt's a good man. I agree with you. Eric is a really good digger. Yeah. He's a personal fan. Besides that, he's a great person. But no look, as far as how hard it is, this is why what we are doing, I think is very exciting at turning point, but also simultaneously a threat to the Republican establishment because that we're big. We're not going anywhere. God willing, we're loud, we're young, we're energetic, we're principled, and we're kind of new right. Yeah. Because we're not part of this whole neo-con, you know, invade the world and invite the world. And we got to talk immigration too because that's a whole component of this because amnesty is going to try to be pushed by some people soon. But we're a different, we're different flavor. We represent a generation primarily that is mad, that is angry, but we want to channel that frustration into a prudent way because again, we don't want to revolution. So we're a threat to the established Republican order and we kind of delight in that in more ways than one. So look, we're going to be involved. One other one that really involved in is Kentucky for Mitch McConnell's empty Senate seat there, Nate Morris, who's phenomenal. He's actually running on a migration moratorium up against kind of two of two of McConnell's lackeys there in the open Kentucky Senate race. And here's the thing. If we or anybody were able to take out Lindsey Graham, that will send a signal to the rest of the conference. That will be such a definitive signal. And so look, we're going to involve ourselves in many races. We'll see if we do Lindsey Graham, we most like, well, we had Andre Bauer at our event. We're also going to be really involved in stuff in Arizona because we got to kind of get some things sorted out there. But more importantly is this is that there, and this is the other structural problem. What we at turning point action specifically our political arm seek to do is try to make Republican voters back into alignment with their elected leaders. Because there's a misalignment that's happening. And Trump was the one that exposed this alignment for the ratcher for sure. He's like, wow, you guys are totally not in alignment on your worldview. And I think Lindsey Graham is a perfect manifestation of that. That's it. It's not personal. I just not at all. I'm so mean to Lindsey Graham, but it's not personal. It's just that the system is fake if Lindsey Graham Graham keeps getting elected in one of the most conservative states. That's all. In the system can't be fake. Where else do you have a revolution? And I don't want to revolution. So you did this. You're very close to President Trump. I think personally and politically you did this amazing thing the other day where you tweeted out. Amnesi's coming. People are pushing amnesty. You don't have to answer if you don't want. But my sense is that the president was part of your intended audience. You just wanted people to know what was going on. And bless you for doing that. But I wasn't exactly sure what you were talking about who is pushing amnesty and what form could it come in and how imminent is this? Yeah. And well, firstly, the president said no amnesty, which is great to hear. And I'm glad he's saying that he should keep on saying it because he ran on that. And so I was not surprised when he said it, but he needs to say it. But look at Maria Elvirus, Elazar. I think that's her name, right? She came out the other day and she is pushing an amnesty bill through Congress. I have a a text from a US senator that you and I both respect. And he said, look, there's whispers that are now becoming real conversations in chatter of amnesty. And think of how sick and dark this is. We passed one big beautiful bill, which is by far the greatest fortification of the southern border of the greatest deportation effort that we need. I mean, it's legit investment to get the deportations that we voted for. And that the ink is not even yet dry of President Trump's signature and almost simultaneously we're hearing about amnesty. And so look, Maria Elvirus, Elazar, she's saying, well, if they've been here more than five years, it's not a pathway to citizenship. It's a pathway to dignity. Let me tell you exactly what would happen. How about get out? Of course, Osteo La Vista. How about that, right? And so, but let me be even more clear, there we have no documentation of anybody that's in this country. Undocumented is not the proper term, but it's not totally incorrect. So all that someone would have to do, let's say an ice agent knocks on the door of somebody and they have deportation order, you are going home. All they'd have to say is Cinco Anios five years and they could end all deportation in real time. So the person's been there for three years and they'd have to just say they've been there for five years. Lie, go to some judge that would take them four years to get in front of the judge and they'd hit the five year threshold. It's effectively amnesty and they loophole work around being pushed by Miss Elvirus Salazar. And I don't know what she's a Democrat. She's a Republican, which the whole thing doesn't make any sense. First of all, she's from a Cuban district and why a Cuban district is so about like mass illegal immigration is very bizarre to me unless she has a bunch of constituents that are doing visa overstays because it's not exactly like southern border central there. I think she's just a leftist. I don't know what she is, but I'll just, it's very perplexing. Number two though, we're winning Hispanics and record numbers because we're strong on the border, because we're strong on deportations. She's like, oh, if we don't, if we don't save this, we don't solve this problem, we're going to lose Hispanics for a generation. We're winning Hispanics because we're hard on immigration. We're winning. Also, what about everybody else? Yeah, how about like exactly? And then that goes to the thing, the court essence of what about the actual American people that have not been represented the last 50 years. Your ancestry here for the Civil War, okay? Those whatever 160 years ago seems like you should have a say in all this. My family came here in 1620, Alfonso's Kirk. We've been here for a while. 400 years. Yes. So I mean, it doesn't, I don't think you should get two votes or anything, but I also don't think that we should ignore you on purpose, which, and it's like, what did it be quiet, Maria Salazar? Who are you anyway? Stop. When she does this ridiculous thing, she says, you know, we're going to try to have the salonic compromise of splitting the baby, which by the way, it's not even what happened in first Kings. It's a whole separate issue we could talk. It's, so why would you want to cut a baby in half? You freak. You literally said that on with yourself that clip. She's obviously dark. Yeah. But also the fascination of the ruling class when it comes to amnesty is very, very sinister. And it's like abortion. They just can't give it up. It really is. And I've had amnesty pitch to me multiple times. And every one of the ruling class havens you can imagine, I never get amnesty pitch to me on either a college campus or like in Columbus, Ohio. Like when I go to football game, no one's pitching me amnesty. But they never want to see for there's never amnesty for bank robbers or drug dealers or people convicted of hate crimes. I notice it's only such a good point for illegal aliens. That's a good point. And why is that because they don't like the people who live here and they want to change the population? That's why it's about mass demographic replacement, of course, because if you can't win over the population or if you hate the population, which they do, then you need to replace that population. And again, this is the great replacement reality that is happening in real time. And so we finally have this mandate and God bless Stephen Miller. He's fighting his hard out every single day to get this deportation effort underway. And the president ran on this and the president is committed to this and the president is going to get this done. If, unless these people in Congress try to get in his way, which is that we need to deport 20 million people, this all goes full circle by the way back to the young people conversation. It's just a 2010 strategy. We need to build 10 million new homes and make sure private equity cannot buy them. And we need to deport 20 million people. We do those two things. We're going to be a much better place. However, we voted for it. We have a president office that wants to do it that is doing it. And yet there are several congressional actors that are trying to undermine him right now. What what about the pressure you keep hearing about from different sectors, hospitality? I think that's real ag. I don't know. Is that real? I mean, who is pushing this other than the corporate titans for sure? Yeah. I mean, so the ag one is interesting because we're told that we need to have mass immigration or else the crops will rot in the field, which is interesting because I thought we're going through like a moment of mass automation right now. I kind of thought that. So what's the argument now for mass immigration if robotics is going to take over everything? Well, you want to just send a video at this morning of a robot making popcorn. So if a robot can make popcorn, you can pick a lettuce, I think. I would imagine. So maybe it's not about picking the crops. Maybe it's about the fact they want to change the demographics of this country. Yeah. And so, but I mean, but secondly, the hospitality one maybe guess I guess sure. How about this? Higher Americans and pay them more. There's a 7% young male unemployment rate. Remember, I said that earlier. Wait a second, 7% unemployment used to be called a crisis in this that was during the great recession. Remember, we got up to 8% to 9% unemployment. So maybe we should go higher some of the young men that are on the sidelines of this economy and make this a nation again, not just a an economic dumping ground for the third world. So you often hear people say, well, I would love to that, but the native whites won't work hard. Okay. I don't know. There's something about mass immigration that degrades the existing population. People get less impressive when their countries invaded. I don't know why that is. I've always noticed that case a great example. It is a great example. The Brits themselves. It's like, I go to the UK, a family, there I go there all my life. I've gone there and you see, you know, I was kind of like the Brits, they're weird, but I sort of like them creepy kind of, but whatever, but they've gotten weirder and creepier over time. They've got as it has become more Pakistani, the native born Brit the white Brits have become way less impressive. I'm not imagining this. Or do you know, talking about it? Also, the morale goes down. It's almost like you're a conquered nation. And you know it. London was 95% white in the 1920s. It is now 29% white. Now, again, I don't think whites are better than other people, whatever, but it's just not London anymore. There's some digit in this. It's something exactly. And I thought we're against mass replace. That's ethnic cleansing, isn't it? What's literally I think. I mean, I thought, I mean, we're you know, lecture all the time about ethnic listening happening in Tibet, which it has. Again, I'm not for that wherever it is. I agree, but if you replace Tibetans with Han Chinese, no one's like, they're all Tibetans. They're all Tibetans. It's a strategy designed to replace the Tibetans. Again, if something fails, when you change the people, it fails to be what it once worse. But it also it has a dispiriting effect on the people being replaced and they're not what they were all of a site. It's hard to measure, but it's so true. It's so noticeable. It's noticeable. You feel it. You see it again. It's not going to. This is what's so important about conservatism in the new era. A lot of what drives us will not always show up on a chart or a graph. Because look, a lot of this I talked earlier as like numbers of, you know, home ownership, but something as simple as that is so true. Their morale is down. They believe goofy and weird stuff. They almost have the strange fetish in London that they like being conquered, that they're like enjoying the slow motion. Any favor. It's like, no, seriously, oh, I agree. It's like this weird sexuality. Like, yes, Islamist, you know, coming to my country. Like, why? No. And it's just, I don't know what that is, but I will see this. I will make a hypothesis though. It's the immigration cock. I think we would say no, it is though, but no, a secular nation cocks up for sure 100%. And so what does that mean? When you don't believe in a divine power, I mean, they're super secular in the UK. Then all of a sudden they need to have some sort of belief system. So they're like reason for being is that they're master is some Muhammadan from Afghanistan. Totally right. And again, I debated Oxford and Cambridge back in May. These are broken, conquered cities and talents. They're completely unrecognizable. London especially is just gone. It's a husk of its former self, as you would say. It's a museum pressing. It's depressing. It brings down your soul. Agree. And when I go walk through Piccadilly Square and there's just more Muslims than native born whites or there's something wrong about that. And that is a metamorphosis that and you have to wonder, like, did you vote for this? Did you want this? Did you invite it? And so something about the two, it's the way it happened. It's the scale of it. And what's really intro, what's really a head trip, which I'd recommend to anyone is going from London to reorder London to Dubai or London to Doha. I've done all of that. And you're in London and you're like, man, we've got a huge problem with Muslims. Like they're bad. And then you go to Doha or Riyadh or Abu Dhabi or Dubai or the World War. And you're like, man, I love Muslims because they're awesome. So how do you I don't understand exactly what's going on. And I asked to do with, and let me just say to point a fact, I've never been where I am not currently anti Islam, especially it's not my religion. I disagree. I think it's wrong, but I'm not mad. And I'm not mad at Gulf Arabs. I think they're amazing. They're amazing. They couldn't be more tolerant, open-minded kind, just great. I mean, things I don't agree with. But in general, they're great. And I have even said, you know, because you can see whatever you want in their countries because as long as you're not attacking the leadership, they have free speech in a way that we don't, which is really wild. But I've said at dinner like, what is that? Why am I so happy here in, you know, pick the Gulf Capitol versus London? And what is the deal with the Muslims in London or or Cologne or Berlin or whatever? Like what is the difference? I've never gotten a straight answer. But I do think part of it is mass migration of any kind is a lot. It's a lot. It's a lot. And it has bad effects on everyone involved. So the immigrants and the conquered. And also, I think that there's just a lot of third world Muslims that are on. Well, there's also that. I mean, Doha is a very industrial, you know, very, well, there are 300,000 citizens. First is Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Riyadh are very first to people. Karachi is not exactly. No, Karachi is pretty intense. Is it? I would say, Karachi is pretty intense. Yeah. I wouldn't put Pakistanis up with. No, though I've had amazing meals with people in Peshawar, Pakistan who are like reading PG Woodhouse novels and are super smart and have all these languages and stuff. I don't know. There's something about immigration, a mass migration that degrades everybody involved. I just noticed it. This is not an ideology that I have. It's just something I've picked up from traveling a lot. And you just become, so you have two options. I mean, and the UK has decided just to kind of just bend over and take it, which is just you can fight it. And they've been doing that for a long time. That's kind of their whole stick. Oh, I know post world work with a cane. Yeah, exactly. It's just that's their whole thing. But in America, we've actually were finally having a different attitude to mass immigration, which is we can now talk about it. We can question it. We can vote against it. The question is, can we remove it? And that again, that's one of the biggest public policy challenges in front of us. Can we remove the 20, 30, 40 million people that have come here and we're president Trump is embarking on doing this. One of the hardest, most difficult things that we could possibly come here. I think it has a shot. I think we can get to 10 million this term. And that would be huge. If you count self deportations for sure. Wow. Are we on track to do that? We have a million self deportations already. Gestimated. And I could tell you anecdotally in Arizona, like a construction project happening right down the street from where we live, they said that whole crew of kind of laborers self deported. They hired Americans the next day, or at least people that were here legally. So there's anecdotal evidence of self deportation occurring. And the the the marginally center eyes now when he did mass deportations is 10 people self deported for every one forceful deportation. And so CNN just did a special of a guy in his family itself, departing from Pittsburgh, you know, audios. So look, I think I think the goal needs to be 10 million this term. 10 million would be a massive accomplishment. That would make the country a considerably and measurably better place. Is there any effort or even conversation by getting the refugee system under control? Oh, without a doubt. Yeah. I mean, I think that first of all, it's a scam. Why do we owe refugee status to anyone? No one's ever explained that. I don't know if we again, this is a really important point. Almost all of the accesses mass migration refugee is because the left has weaponized and heritage Christian principles against us. So we as Christians, we have an open hardness towards refugees says what we should do that in the scriptures. Doesn't mean that we should do that blindly. So what the left does is they take good, hearted Western Christian beliefs and they totally weaponize them for their kind of remake the body politic of American. Here's what I find so unChristian about a refugee system even before the left distorted it or maybe they just sort of in the beginning is Christian charity is the responsibility of the Christian. So all these Christian groups and Jewish groups and lots of different groups, but a lot of Christian groups, Catholic charities, Lutheran social services, all these groups that use the gospel to justify bringing in families or individuals and then offload the cost onto taxpayers. It's like, how does that work? How is it charity? If I take your money and give it to somebody, do I get credit and heaven for stealing your money and giving it away? I don't think so. Yeah. And also it says in the book Deuteronomy. When the last thing Moses says it's farewell address like Deuteronomy 28, I'll tell my head, be careful who you allow within your gates within the country because they will soon become your masters. Well, and boy, is that not? Wow, we're about to find out how true that is. Phenomenal truth from the scriptures as always. But look, the yes, I know the Trump administration and President Trump, they're trying to strip refugee status of the 500,000 Haitians. I mean, that is just grotesque, I would say. And so I think I think every single one of them has to be returned back to Haiti. By the way, it's like this great contradiction. Haiti is a wonderful place that everyone should go visit the left tells us, but they don't want Haitians in their neighborhood. It's like, okay, well, which one is it? Haiti is an amazing place. It's the best place ever. It's not a shithole nation at all. It's incredible. Stephen Colbert actually goes on vacation there. But everybody in Haiti needs to get out immediately. That's exactly terrible. And you have to pay for it. It's so wonderful that they have to be allowed to leave to your communities, but not my community. I just hope that this last two hours that every member of Congress sees it, sees what you said. I was like trying to keep up with your analysis, which is the sharpest I've ever heard on that subject. What's, you know, what is the crisis among young people? I think you described it better than anyone. And I really hope people listen to what you're saying. Well, thank you. And I mean, we covered this on our show every day. People can follow the podcast. And thank you, Tucker, for your leadership on this. Look, there's a lot of issues to cover, but this one is going to supersede every single one. I think that's right, because it's going to be President Mom Donnie. And he's not even a real socialist. He's just a trans nonsense lifestyle liberal bullshit like all of them. You know what? He even marks us, right? Exactly. Exactly. If he was like a wobbly, at least I'd be like respect. But no, anyway, thank you. Thank you, Tucker. Charlie Kerr. Thank you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the customer fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's more. What can you do about it? Well, we could blind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's just subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.