I'm so grateful that you're here. Thank you. I'm so excited. With child number four in tow, who's just off camera. What is going on with Macron? I mean, it's the craziest thing that's ever happened, certainly in my life. It's been repeatedly crazy from the Trump call to the lawsuit. I didn't even know. Can you just back up a little bit for those who don't know what you're referring to? The Trump call, what does that mean? So I was called by Trump in February. Emmanuel Macron had visited Trump and I had done this series about... It was about his wife, Brigitte Macron. And the series got a lot of views. And Emmanuel Macron personally flew to D.C. and asked Trump... to ask me... to shut up, to just stop speaking about his wife. And I was, did you know, this was Going to rise to the level of international incident. No. And it's actually making me go back and historically, I'm thinking, you know, all the times we were told that a war ended because of this or because of that. If this was one element of negotiation of Emmanuel Macron to Trump, and the topic of why he was, you know, ostensibly there was to discuss the end of the Ukrainian and Russian war. But you're taking Trump aside and you're asking him to shut up. This podcaster in the U.S. I'm wondering if anything... that we're told in our history books is real.. That is exactly right. I have wondered the same. That is just absolutely amazing. So he's a viewer. We know that he is a viewer. Him and his wife and their entire entourage, they watch every minute of my show. Trump certainly didn't. I know Trump, I think, stays much more in the mainstream media. yes In terms of watching what he watches... But... he must have been completely confused. He sounded very confused. He said he was very confused when... a leader... of. The leader of France took him aside, of a nuclear armed country during negotiations for Ukraine and Russia to inquire about whether or not he knew... Candace Owens. And clearly it was an emergency because it wasn't like Trump called me two days after or a week after. It wasn't like, you know, a side conversation that, oh, let's take care of that. I was... messaged by the intermediary hours after Macron left, maybe even an hour after Macron had left, and... said, like, we need to get on the phone With you. the President of the United States. Well, first the person said, somebody very close to the President, United States is asking me to ask you to stop talking about Brigitte's penis. And I. This is. This is the true face of diplomacy. I love it. true face of diplomacy And I laughed because I said, okay, no, bye... This seems ridiculous. Kind of didn't even. I kind of question whether or not it was even true. But I liked the person who called me very much. And I thought maybe I was being a bit short there because I'm nine months pregnant, and I was at the time, I think, five or six months pregnant. And I. And I tend to get short the more pregnant I become. And so I called him back and I just said, can you explain to me what's really going on? And that individual told me that it... was presented to him as a condition of ending the Russian Ukrainian war. Like, this was something that he brought up in the midst of these negotiations. That's how it was presented to me from a third party person. And then I was just completely floored. And I just took a second... looked at my husband, and the first thing we said to one another is, no one will ever believe us. This is beyond the realm of things that could be plausible. They're gonna think I'm making this up and I'm lying. And even when I did eventually tell the story, months later, people were like, there's no way... that this could have happened. And until Trump didn't deny it. And then, of course, Emmanuel Macron is now suing me. And he included, as a part of a lawsuit, he referred to that phone call and how he believes that presenting it as an element of the Ukraine, Russian war was wrong. Like, he was like. And so he's nitpicking there. But... so what is he suing you over? What is the suit claim? Well, it claims a lot. It's 200 pages. 200 pages. 200... pages. And what's really interesting is my series was based on a book I worked with, Xavier Poussard, who is a journalist, a very, very credible journalist in France, who worked on the story... for eight years and ended up having to move to Italy, move his family to Italy, because... of what Brigitte and her husband. You know, France is a whole different political system, certainly is, and they can Just bring charges against It's authoritarian country run completely by Macron, and they pretend that's not true, but it is true. It is 1000% true. And so journalists that first got wise to the fact that Brigitte Macron kind of didn't exist for 30 years of her life were harassed by the government. They filed charges against them for, first and foremost, invasion of privacy. So there was never a dispute when she was bringing these charges about. She never brought a charge against people... for saying that she was born a man. And that's what should be made clear to everybody. Like that's not something that they're, they ever say is not true... when it comes down to the legality of it all when, when they get into courtrooms. But they first sued for invasion of privacy. then they sued for defamation regarding a statement, an error that the woman had made investigating when she said, in my opinion, you know, this document is fake. But that document actually was real. It was a birth certificate relating to somebody in the story. And so it was remarkably petty... And this is what they do. They get very legalistic. We'll keep you in the courtroom, we'll harass you. And for Xavier, things were happening where it was. They made, they wanted him to know they were following him... and that the Secret Service was keep keeping an eye on him. yes They never actually brought a suit against him until recently, the same time as mine. They're not suing him for defamation, even though he's the author of the book that I based my entire series on. They are instead suing him for cyberbullying. Cyberbullying a head of state. You can do that in Europe I should just say, because it's true that the French intelligence services, everyone makes fun of France as incompetent and weak, but their intel services are not incompetent or weak. And after probably CIA, Mossad. maybe the Russian intel services, like they are feared. And they should be feared. but They are feared. They are feared, that they're very competent, they're violent, documented, they've killed people and they're nothing to play with, really. Right. That's why he picked up his family and he moved. And so it was this tremendous act of bravery that he did this, you know, putting not just his life on the line with the life of his wife and his children. I get it. Because the story here was so demented and so twisted... and just also the broader consideration that you could have an entire state colluding to protect a secret of that magnitude... And what's so compelling about this story, and I get into this in the first episode of Becoming Brigitte, is the... that by the time it made its way to the English speaking world, people thought that this was like a, as always, far right conspiracy dug up from the trenches of Reddit... And that's not what happened at all. You know, the story begins with Emmanuel Macron and his wife is actually the journalists, the left leaning journalists. The content as journalists who Wanted to celebrate Brigitte... Wanted to do documentaries on Brigitte. This wonderful woman is... Is. Is. Is now empowered, and what is she going to do? And. And they were kind of getting threatened. They were told to come to the Alize palace, and there was only one person that they could talk to. They couldn't find or verify anything about Brigitte's history or Brigitte's past... And they sort of fell down the hole and were like, I don't know why. I suddenly feel... like I've done something wrong for asking basic questions... about the first lady of France. And so that's kind of where the series begins. And it kind of takes you through what they went through and what many people have gone through since, just trying to learn anything about... the first lady. So to be clear, I. It's an amazing story, and for so many reasons, but for the one that you just described, that this was actually well known in France. It all took place in public. But I don't think... one in a million Americans had any idea at all until your... series came out. And the initial reaction to your series was, well, that now we know Candace is insane. Really going off the deep end. The wife's a man. Come on now. Um, and then as the series progressed and became one of the biggest podcast series in the country, and sort of sober, people were saying, actually, you should listen to this. This is pretty. This is pretty wild, pretty compelling. But I just want to get to the lawsuit. So, like, they're suing. They're not. They're suing you for defamation... for things That I never said, which is they. They know that this lawsuit, this. This is why I called it a. A PR strategy. This lawsuit was filed for the press. Right. Because she just lost her defamation case against two journalists in France. And now everyone... was reporting. Wait, you said that this was the big case that proved. Or you presented it as if you were suing them on this claim of you being a man or a woman. And now you've lost that in France. This is your home territory. What's going on?.. And so I think she called the lawyers and were like, just. Just file a lawsuit, because it's very sloppy. The points run into one another. Like, first they argue that I'm doing it for money, then they make the argument that I was fired for talking, speaking about it. So that doesn't make any sense. It can't be both. And it's a bunch of stuff that I didn't say. They're. They're behaving like mainstream journalists where they'll take a couple of words that I said, like gangster, criminal, and gangster. But then they add their own sentence to it, and they're like, she accused her of being a criminal and a gangster... So it's very sloppy. And what they're doing is they. They're just biting their time. They don't want the world to look, which, this was a... very bad mistake, a very bad way to go about it, but they want the world to believe that she has a claim against me, that what we're suing, therefore, you know, because this podcaster lied. But it's way too late. I mean, truly, it's is. Everyone is aware of what's happened. This only made the series go viral. Now it's going viral in Asia. You know, I'm getting all of these emails from people in China saying this series is going viral. They're not even on YouTube, so I don't know how they're watching it in China. But it was a mistake because obviously now people are going, okay, something must be true. You know, a president of a foreign country does not sue... a mom... that does her podcast in her basement because... she spoke something... that was not true. Like, there is clearly something that they want hidden. And so everyone's taking a closer look at the series. Yeah, that's not the way to hide things... The way to hide things is say, poor Candace, nice woman, obviously mentally ill. You know, come on, now. That's. That's the way to do it. And sophisticated liars do that. right So it is interesting. They are. They're responding in a way that clearly is driven by emotion. right and Fear. I mean, that's my read. I don't really know why they're responding, of course, but... looking at it, it's so interesting. You may have noticed this is a great country with bad... food... Our food supply is rotten. It didn't used to be this way. Take chips, for example. You may recall a time when crushing a bag of chips didn't make you feel hungover, like you couldn't get out of bed the next day. And the change of course is chemicals. There's all kinds of crap they're putting in this food that should not be in your body. Seed oils, for example. Now, even one serving of your standard American chip brand can make you feel... bloated, fat. totally passive, and out of it. But there is a better way. It's called masa chips. They're delicious. Got a whole garage full of them... They're healthy, they taste great, and they have three simple ingredients. Corn, salt, and 100%... grass fed beef tallow. No garbage, no seed oils. What a relief. And you feel the difference when you eat them, as we often do... Snacking on Masa chips is not like eating the garbage that you buy at convenience stores. You feel satisfied, light, energetic, not sluggish. Tens of thousands of happy people eat Masa chips. It's endorsed by people who understand health. It's well worth a try. Go to Masa M a s a chips.com Tucker use the code tucker for 25% off your first order... That's masachips.com Tucker code tucker for 25% off YOUR first order. Highly recommended. And there is something also that the way that they're going about this, going after the journalists, thinking that America is the... is the same sort of a beast as Francis and that while we have said that you can't ask us any questions, we'll sue you for cyber bullying... There is something Cyber Bullying. cyber bullying, whatever, whatever the claims are here, but there is something about it where once you really arrive at a truth, what I find the reaction is for the people that are incensed by the fact that you're presenting that truth is I'll impoverish you. And I've seen this over and over again. It's like, okay, she told the truth. But our response to that is going to be demands that she get fired. Right. She should lose her livelihood... for speaking the truth. She should lose. And that's why Jake Tapper, I don't know if you've seen it, you probably haven't because it's Jake Tapper. But... he sits down with Tom Clare who is a lawyer on this case. And Jake Tapper is doing the absolute most to make this just the easiest interview for Tom Clare. He's sitting across from him and he's like, she's deranged and she's crazy and she's a conspiracy theorist. So much so Jake Tapper said that? Jake Tapper. But so much so that people in the comments were like, now I want and watch a series. His own viewers thought this was just so over the top. But then he turns to Tom Clare and he asks him like a basic question. He's like, you know, what evidence did you present to her that Brigitte to man? And Tom Clare can't answer the question. He's like, we, you know, we. There was a. You can read the claims. It's we. It's extensive. And you know, we told her that she was a woman. They never presented any evidence. We went to them before we published the series. We were in touch with Tom Clare... of Clare Locke We sent them a list of questions. We said, look, we won't even do this series if you answer these basic circle yes or no questions... Was Brigitte Macron, the first lady born a woman? I mean, that basic of questions. Did she ever live as a person named Veronique? Before the transition temporarily, Brigitte lived as a person named Veronique. They refused to answer these yes or no questions... Obviously, if you're going to prove actual malice, you have to. You have to present to the court, which is. It's obviously a very high bar that's been set, which I don't necessarily even agree with that bar, by the way, New York Times versus Sullivan But... obviously you have to prove that I acted. I knew the truth and I acted. That's exactly right. I was desperate to get to the truth and said I would stop doing this series. We also offered for me to get on a plane and fly to France... to interview to get Brigitte's side of this. You know, I want to make sure I'm not colored by having read Becoming Brigitte and reading the series. There could be another side. And it was... essentially a big FU. And said, Tom Clare comes back, she doesn't have to answer your question. she, That doesn't have to prove to you. So they retained Tom Clare and Libby Locke then, or Tom Clare. So Tom Clare and Libby Locke are married, second marriage for him... But I know them and they have a law firm, I believe, in suburban D.C. and Virginia that specializes in making people shut up through intimidation. They tried it with me and in a really brutal, cruel way, I would say, to try and just scare you into shutting up. So that itself, I don't think think anyone regards Tom Clare as a good lawyer at all. But certainly, you know, his behavior is designed to intimidate you. So the fact that they hired them at the outset, that's the behavior of someone who just like wants to scare you into shutting up. And I. The timing of when they first sent us a letter was actually December of last year, sorry, the end of November of last year. We missed the letter because they sent it to a inbox that we would have never been checking. It was very weird inbox, like where you would go to return a T shirt. and we. Because we missed that. And I'm glad I missed it because I probably would have been scared. I think they knew because that was right when I began speaking with Xavier Poussard... and I was in London at the time. And I had agreed to interview him. But nobody knew I was gonna do this interview. So what made them suddenly send this intimidating letter? And Tom Clare sent it. Tom Clare sent it. They'd already retained him. They had retained him, and he sent a letter. And I think that they... were monitoring... Xavier Poussard I think they were monitoring either his communications or monitoring him. well how else would they have known That he was flying to London to sit down to an interview with me. And they sent it... just a week before I sat down with him. that is wild, Well, keep in mind, the subject of your story controls some of the most competent intel services in the world, Correct correct. he's the head of state. There are no rules at all. Which is enough to make you a little uncomfortable if you think about it... And the fact that they would hire those two lawyers. By the way. his wife, Libby Locke, is Bill Ackman's lawyer, who Ackman uses to make people shut up. By sending hysterical letters, screechy letters, threatening to destroy you if you keep talking about the client. I mean, it's really thuggish. Interesting. Let's just go through. But can we just go through, like. chronologically, how this unfolded? So at the core of the story is the allegation that Brigitte Macron is not who she says she is. And that would include her sex is not what she says it is. Correct. She was born a man named Jean Michel Trogno. And I'm aware if you have not watched the series. That sounds crazy, because that was me when I first saw the headline. Yes. No, no. I mean, I was alerted to it by the Daily Mail. I thought it was such a crazy, insane headline, but it was. The Daily Mail had done this. Had published an article saying that with a video of Emmanuel Macron denying claims his wife was a man. And I just thought, that's really funny. Like, what could possibly be going on in France that the president has to deny a claim that his wife's a man? But something that caught my eye was just as I was reading this article, they made no effort to debunk it... Like, it was sort of like it was that typical cnn, New York Times. It's so crazy. It's like, okay, but if it's so crazy, just, you know, post some photos of her. Obviously, she's got three kids. There's gonna be tons of photos of her raising her children. There's nothing. They had one solitary photo. And when you look at the photo, it was very obvious. And this is before I got into the details, that she looks a lot more like the little boy that's on the left than she does... Who they were trying to purport was the little girl that was sitting on the family member's lap. And so I got into it kind of very organically. I was like, this is weird, like, what's going on in France, that the President has to make a comment on the situation. And then I, I found a website... where it explained it, and I instantly realized there is something here. Like, you just. You don't have any... photos of yourself for 30 years of your life... And the, the two photos that you've given have been given to the public from a woman who has quite literally been charged... with forging documents. I mean, she's a thug. I mean, Mimi Marshawn, they had to eventually get rid of her. Forging documents, thuggery, things of that nature, of a criminal nature. She's the only one. Everyone's going to go through her... to get any information about your past. This is so strange. I mean, it's so kooky that you wouldn't just. The defense of this is just, hey, could you show us any... pictures... of your living for these 30 years? You know, you had allegedly three children... Do you guys take any photos while you were raising them? Maybe when you were in the hospital?.. No, no, no, no. Tucker, they, there's, there's nothing... there. how So it's an, it's an amazing allegation, a stunning allegation, a bewildering allegation. But I think the legal and the moral question is. did you give an opportunity, did you give the Prime Minister and his wife an opportunity, the Macron's the opportunity to respond to the allegation before the series ran? So that's my question. Weeks to respond. in What way did you do that? Did you call them? Did you. Via Tom, Clare was their lawyer. So it was. It actually, they kind of made a mistake. They messaged us first to kind of intimidate us and say, you know, I don't. You're working on this thing, or you're, You know, Did they say how they knew you're working on it. I don't, I am not clear. Because what was interesting is they, in that first letter, they included claims of what I said while I was working up at the daily wire. That was the previous March. So you're responding to something that I said in March. We're now in December. So what triggered you? Like, and clearly it had to have been that I had just interviewed Xavier Broussard and they were aware of it. So then they said, okay, send her out a letter to intimidate her. And obviously getting a letter, for most people, you get a letter from a sitting president of France, you're going to go, okay, well, I'm just going to be quiet... and not say anything more because I don't want to get involved in this. But for me, it just made me even more curious. And so to be sure, I said, well, I'm glad we have a lot of communication established because I'm certainly not interested in defaming you. I'm not interested in lying. Obviously, I would do myself a disservice if all of this was, was complete crap... and it turned out that I had been pedaling it. So here are my questions. Very simple yes or no questions. Did you ever live as Veronique, who is Jean Michel Trogneux? No... Refused to answer. They just instantly got So you... presented the allegations, them which they of course were aware of, that people had made others, not you, that she's not really who she says she is. And you said, can you explain? Yeah, and honestly didn't require much of an explanation. We also asked, can you give us any photos of you living through this 30 year period? I mean, pretty easy stuff. If you're actually concerned and you're gonna pretend you're so traumatized and defamed... because of this story, I would have been like, yeah, of course. Here I am. Here's me in middle school. Here's me, on the cheerleading team. Here's me the first day I held my first son. Here's me. It's such an easy thing to debunk... that it requires the suspension of common sense to believe that this is a conspiracy theory because it's just, it's so easy to debunk and yet they refuse to do it. And they're being extremely petty and going after every single person that speaks about it. now have they ever provided that, that evidence to anybody? No, that's the point. They haven't to this day? They would have never had to sue anybody because everyone would have then laughed at them. Like if someone was working on a story saying that I lived as a man for 30 years, I don't need to lawyer up. I want you to publish that story so that I can then come out... and say this person is a psychopath. Clearly, here is the trove of me growing up with my sisters. Here's my middle school yearbook to the contrary, Even when Xavier Poussard, because he has been, worked on this for 10 years and therefore filing paperwork with the government to get pictures. Jean Michel Trogneux. has a military File. He also filed to get Brigitte's school yearbook where... she's allegedly has a picture. And he won that case and then took it to secret coeur, which is Sacred Heart. And, and they said, we're not releasing it. I don't care if you won the case. We're refusing to release this to you. So every, in every regard, something that would be able to dispel this rumor, even her children. Where are your kids in this?.. If that's my mom and she's so attacked and it's so horrifying that she's got to put, you know, my dad, stepdad, on a plane to go speak to the president, United States. Way before then, I would have released pictures of me and my mom. Her kids are all adults. I would have said, here's me and my mom growing up on my first birthday, my second birthday, my... Please, everyone, leave her alone. They won't do it. It's just, it's bonkers. Have the kids spoken in public? Only one child has ever spoken and called the rumors... crazy and upsetting and that's her youngest daughter, Tiphaine. And... I have a theory about why, why that is. But again, there's no evidence... since you supplied. Stephane won't go under oath. Tiphaine  won't speak. Tiphaine  won't say, oh no, this is. She just says it's very hurtful and it's not true. And... Okay, Tiphaine, will you have the power to dispel this by just... releasing some photos of you growing up? You're, you're a 40 year old lawyer... It's pretty simple to release some photos of you as a kid... with your mom... And they won't do it. Here's a revealing and unpleasant fact... Mexico is facing a dangerous outbreak of New World screwworm. Screwworm is a flesh eating parasite. It's devastating to livestock and humans. Despite this, the Department of Agriculture has reopened foreign livestock imports, including from Mexico. Does that sound wrong to you? Does it sound revolting? Well, yeah. Our friends at Meriwether Farms agreed. They sounded the alarm on what could clearly be a serious threat to your health. And it worked. After Meriwether's campaign, Agriculture Secretary Brooke Rollins suspended Mexican livestock imports until we can certain that our food supply and our citizens are safe, including from... screw worm. So the story tells a lesson. And it asks an obvious question. Why should you rely on untrustworthy foreign beef to feed your nation? The answer is that you shouldn't rely on it. If you agree, we hope you'll support Meriwether Farms. In a time when so many are selling out, they have the courage to stand up for what is right. And all of their meat comes from... this country, the United States. We know because we eat it every single day. Visit Meriwether Farms. M E R I W E T h e r farms.com Tucker use the code TUCKER for 15% off your first order... Real meat, real values. And it's delicious. So if so, it sounds like from what you've said, you don't believe this case was even designed to go forward. No, they're not planning on a courtroom showdown here. And there's no way. By the way, I engaged with Libby Locke and Tom Clare a long time ago about defamation, and they told me not to go after it because the bar was so high. And I had a very clear case where someone told a blatant lie about me, which we would have. Which we happily countered right away. so you Dealt with them before. Yeah. Oh, I have emails from. This is the funny part. I have emails from them. I love you, adore you, we watch your show. They're totally soulless, both of them. Yeah, clearly. yes The motive here is money, which is fine, if that's what you want your legacy to be. Because at the core of this case, which most people should be speaking about, is their defense. Here is. I'm... I am admitting. Which they've never done before, they've now admitting that Emmanuel macron was only 14... when they met, when he was in that play. Fifteen, she says whenever this affair happened. And in my... suit, they admit that Emmanuel Macron's parents took him away from the school... because of this relationship. Do you understand... how the. The audacity of. I'm a creep. I macked on a student at best, and I have the audacity to file this lawsuit. I mean, what is going on in France... that you would so willfully put that in a lawsuit? Which, by the way, debunks their earlier claims. When he first ran for office, the press said he was 17. Then when Xavier Pussard proved that that wasn't true, then suddenly we're saying he was 16... Now we've got them writing that he was 15... But the truth is, is that Emmanuel Chrome is 14. And they can't go back on that truth because she has. Isn't that child molestation? There we go. That's another big thing happening here. She's desperate now to keep it at 15. Brigitte wants to keep it at 15. No, he was 14 when he was in that play. That she says that she watched him and as, you know, 14 year old boys, I guess as a 40 year old woman, you would just be so swept away... by a 14 year old child on stage. He was in this play, I'm forgetting the name of, it's a French name, Mila Kundera's play. And that's when she alleges that she saw him and, and he just was ahead of his time, a savant so brilliant in his demonstration, his ability to act... that. And he's, he's a little kid. He's a child. He's a child. And this is a very creepy, sadistic story. And the more that you learn how much the press lied about that earlier story, I mean even the press in the beginning, when he was running for office even said that Brigitte McCrone was this like irresistibly hot teacher. Like they kept comparing her to Claudia Schiffer. And then when Xavier and these journalists got documents and like, you know, pictorial evidence of what Brigitte looked like at that time. She looked like a man in the middle of a transition. You know, and so even that, I mean, the way the press lied to sell this creepy relationship... is something that should concern everyone. Whether you believe she's a man or not, what you have is a couple that is willfully getting away with at best, like molestation, a sexual perversion. He runs the country This is not some random guy. Oh, that's. yeah And that's not in dispute. No, that's not. It was in dispute because they tried to at first say that he was 17. Now she's saying 15. The truth is Emmanuel Macron was 14. I'll just go with 15 and say that's wrong. Yeah, right. Do we even need to. Well, I mean, 15, I mean, that's a whole different thing. And that was the comments... under Jake Tapper's interview with Tom Clare. People, and this is the left, this is his show, were outraged. They were going, how could you defend this? I asked the question to Tom Clare on my show as I unpacked all of the child molestation that surrounds them. It's an entire orbit of people who have been found guilty and have openly admitted to molesting their children. These are their friends. Okay. That's why she's angry, because I'm like, it's. And it's not just them, it's this guy, this guy, this guy, he funded the campaign, then had to come out and say, yes, I molested my, my stepson and, and the stepdaughter. Wrote a book about it. A person admitted to that. And these are friends of the Macron's? Oh, yeah, they're a current lawyer. Okay. Who was the finance minister? Brigitte handpicked him to be the finance minister of France. His name is Eric Dupont Moretti. This was my episode two days ago, of course, because everyone in their orbit just, I don't know, has an interesting pedophilia story. Do you have any friends who are pedophiles? None! It's They just can't... stop finding friends that are somehow involved in these crazy pedophilia scandals. And Eric Dupont Moretti made a name for himself as the lawyer that comes in... on behalf of the offending. In this case. It's almost always incest, by the way, in all the cases that he involves himself in. And he convinces the court, as he did in one certain case called the Mannechez Affair, that, okay, yeah, it is incest. Yeah, he's been raping his daughter. But. And this is what he's famous for, it's happy incest. And he sold it to the court and got this guy sentence reduced. He had been raping two of his daughters. Come on. I'm not kidding. You could look this up on Wikipedia, no less. And. And he sold this to the court, coined the phrase along with another person who. Another lawyer, who... Emmanuel awarded the Medal of Freedom, too. And they said to the court in Amiens, which is where Brigitte and Emmanuel are both born, that... you should release this guy because he loves his daughter. And now she's 21, and so it doesn't really matter. And honestly, it's the mom's fault. He. They encourage them to all sleep together. And so they did. They released him early. And then his daughter tried to escape him and he killed her. So this is. This is who? This is the guy who's on the news channels right now saying, we're going to go after Candace Owens because this is a state affair. And he's got this whole glorious story about how I'm being funded by Russia, because it's always Russia, as we all know. It's got to be Russia funded by Russia? His. His theory so, this feels like the. The kind of end stage... of something. I hate the phrase global elite because it sounds so spooky or whatever, but that's what it is. The depraved. I don't even call them the elite. They're the depraved. And they've just been running the game for so long that they're not even Getting creative anymore. There's always a part of town with depraved people. Like, they're. You know, every society has the depraved. The depraved community. But has there been, since Rome, really, a whole class of depraved people with this much power? That's. That's what... gets. I think so, yeah. The more that I study and the more that I take a look at this picture. Because at first, you know, you go through this period where you're going, am I crazy? Or are they all defending, like, children being raped? Like, this can't be... This can't be right. Like, somebody's gonna stand up and say something. And the only thing that you can do in those moments where you're questioning whether or not this could be the circumstance is to educate yourself further. And I find that whatever area they have sort of an inordinate response to, where they're, like, getting very angry about something that seems so simple, is probably where you should press your thumb the hardest. And I did this with, like, Sigmund Freud... I kind of said something on my show about how, like, Sigmund Freud was like, a pervert and getting into children and incest. His whole theory, blaming the children for their parents being incestuous. And the reaction across the. The press, like, how dare she? I'm like, he's dead... Why are you defending this guy? Not American he did present a theory that these children who were being raped by, you know, by their fathers were... actually attracted to them. Why are you defending this? And then I got educated about it and started reading books and stunned. Yes, this is. This is actually something that he was doing. And I learned this from the person who controls the Sigmund Freud archives, who wrote this amazing book called the Assault on Truth... But there is this common thread that it brings you back to... Paris every time, whether you're talking about Epstein, Ghislaine Maxwell, talking about Emmanuel Macron and. And Brigitte, you're talking about Sigmund Freud. He studied and then... came up with this theory while he was studying under Charcot in Paris, that actually, even though we see all this evidence that these kids are being raped, it is their fault because they're attracted to their fathers... And for this guy who rang the alarm on this, like, years later, he was working with Anna Freud and he was in control of the archives. His name is Jeffrey Massone... He got kicked out of the archives... for telling the truth. Very, very famous case. Oh, yeah, he got kicked out and. But he wrote the book still. Cause he still had the letters. He published the letters to prove that Sigmund Freud knew for a fact these kids were being raped. and boy, was he attacked boy, was he attacked for that too. But here's what's interesting about that. He publishes that book, the Assault on Truth, and Anna allowed him to because she could have stopped the book. And Anna Freud chose not to stop the book. I think she wanted the secret to be out... But... you go through these stories and over and over again you get this theme of... this very dark theme of children that are being raped, right? And it's incestuous, like I said, while they're talking about Jeffrey Epstein, why do we keep coming back to this theme? And why does it seem that the media is colluding to cover that up? I thought no matter where, where we were on the spectrum, left or right, like when it came to children, whether it's murder, rape, like we all were on the same page, that like, we have to defend innocent lives. And so then you have to press further and go, what is the theology here? Because everything, as my husband has taught me, as a theology. They're being guided by a theology. And while the rest of the world is being driven towards... either being agnostic or being outwardly atheistic, I think the people that are in control are, are being pulled by. Oh, they're not atheists. They're not atheists at all. Oh, I couldn't agree more. It's interesting. One of my children, one of my smarter children said to me today, actually said, child molestation is the only crime with no justification. And I never thought of it that way. And it's like murder, of course, you know, murder's wrong. Of course there's plenty of circumstances where I can imagine committing murder... and going to hell for it. But I mean, I can imagine, you know, getting so mad that I shoot somebody or you know what I mean, stealing, lying. But it's not possible to imagine a justification... for molesting a child, for being sexual with a child. And it's also not possible to imagine for all the sins that I can imagine committing in a certain circumstance. Like that's just, I can't even get my head around it. That's just not appealing in any way. Like you'd never even think of wanting to do that. So it's gotta be spiritual. You don't want to be passive and tired and dependent, do you? Of course you don't. You want to be strong and self sufficient. That's the goal. And our friends at BEAM can help you. They understand that real strength does not come from drugs. It comes from inside you. Internal motivation, internal strength. health That's the key. Vigor. So we partner with BEAM because they have the same values that we have that Americans have. Hard work, accountability, free will, independence. Be strong... Don't be dependent. Not until you're really old anyway. BEAM can help you... achieve that. This great U.S. company is offering our listeners a new bundle, the American Strength Bundle. And it comes with top selling creatine and protein powder that delivers what your body needs to perform, to recover and to stay strong. No junk at all. All natural ingredients that actually taste good. You will love it... You can get 30% off this bundle at shopbeam.com Tucker this is not in stores, just on that page for, for people who listen to this podcast only. They're encouraging you to be weak. Don't let them go to shopbeam.com tucker for 30 off. It is spiritual for them. And that's why studying Sigmund Freud and I realized why they were so triggered when I kind of, I'm always a person, like accidentally lands on something and then there's just like this reaction. It's like, you can't do that. yes And then I go, okay, well, I better worry about that because there's something you don't want me to know. And so now I'm curious. If they would just leave me alone, I promise that I wouldn't even have come down this path. But, but what you learn about Sigmund, Sigmund Freud, is that what he actually mainstreamed? I mean, the psychoanalytic movement was quite literally a movement to mainstream gaslighting... And this is no question, like I said, you can read Sigmund Freud's archives. This guy was not a guy theorizing this, that this is what was going on. He had access, learned German, read the archives, alerted Anna Freud and was like, hey, did you know your dad knew that these kids were being raped and yet he lied to the public?.. And she's like, yeah, I think, you know, maybe don't publish that. But then she, she let him publish it. And I think that was a cry for help. But that's, that's my theory anyways. The second book to read was. Once you get to that and you go, what is this guiding theology? Why did Sigmund Freud at first acknowledge, as he did openly that all these kids were being raped? Because he was at the morgue. Some of these kids were dying because of their, their injuries. And he was at the morgue in Paris. He saw this up front. There was no dispute... The literature has been published. He's studying under Charcot. And then he does this pivot suddenly when he turns 35 and he says, never mind. These kids are not, these kids are not, not being abused. They're. They're attracted to their fathers. They're the sexual provocateurs. David Bakan... published a book and he relates it to. And he makes a very sound argument and then proves his theory... that it's the. It's called Sigmund Freud and the Jewish Mystical Tradition. And he relates to, he related to the Kabbalah, this sort of gnostic idea that you have to descend into hell and then you'll be brought up and like the worst thing that you could possibly do, the worst of... sin they believe in this idea of holy sin, is to harm a child. Now again, these people that I'm citing just because I know that you start talking about Sigmund Freud and ah, tiny Semitism. These people who wrote these books are both Jewish. Jeffrey Masson is Jewish. He's ashkenaziJew. David Bakan is an ashkenazi Jew. These people are professors and, you know, they have their credentials here to make these conclusions. And what he... theorizes in this book is that Sigmund Freud... was mainstreaming the Kabbalah through cycle psychoanalytics. And the reason why he waited until he was 35, as he explains, is that in the Kabbalah tradition, they don't. They think it's so powerful, whatever the Kabbalah is, and I'm not educated on the Kabbalah, I will admit that, but whatever it is. they don't tell their kids about it until they turn 35. And when Sigmund Freud was 35, he received a Hebrew Bible from his father... And it's like, I guess they believe in numerology, whatever it is. And he was suddenly awakened to whatever aspect of the Kabbalah that it was... After David Bakan published the book, a rabbi came to him. He got in touch with the rabbi and spoke to this rabbi who told him that, yes, Sigmund Freud... was a Kabbalist because... he knew him personally and he had a Zohar in his apartment or in his place. And he then verified that his theory as reading through his papers was correct and that he was a Kabbalist. And so I think it's important for people, as I started a book club, to read these books, like, don't take it from me. And I always say, yeah, we need to stop, stop falling for this credentialism. You shouldn't listen to me because I'm Candace Owens. I have a podcast. I want you to read these same books and to recognize... that something very wrong is happening in this world. And when we point to these facts, we're all being gaslit. Like, we're suddenly being told that having a response as just one example to right now to, like, kids dying in Gaza makes us monsters... Well, Sigmund Freud is the person that introduced the idea of sort of this, that gaslighting could be an effective strategy. And gaslighting, as I understand it, is the process of inverting blame. So I punch you in the face and attack you for assaulting me. How dare you hit me. so. And it feels like we're constantly being gaslit by the media Well, it does. It does feel like there's an awful lot of blame shifting. I see it in a very different context, but it's on economics. It's like. you know, the, the working class. The United States has been like, completely under assault. It's not accidental. They were kind of targeted for extinction and treated with maximum contempt. And then they're like, blamed for their medieval attitudes. They're all racist or whatever. It's like, no, actually I think they're the ones who aren't... winning. They seem to be losing out in a deal that is making a lot of other people rich... Why are we attacking them? Well, then you get called a racist, right? You get called a racist for noticing that. And these people who are like, I just want to be able to feed my families and go to work and feel good about that. yeah It has nothing to do with race. Like, how did race become... part of this? It's like, what? But that's an element of that. And one of the things to, to recognize about Freud is that. So the Freud family creates a psychoanalytic movement. Sigmund Freud does. And, and they're gaslighting people. But then that turns into... modern propaganda because that, it's the Freud Bernays family. It's the same family... Edward Bernays is the person... that created propaganda during World War II. The OSS, like, they were using him to figure out how can we mainstream, like, how can we convince an entire population to want to go to war, you know, to hate Germans. This is the guy that they brought in. So it's the same. The... psychoanalytic movement then turns into... propaganda with Edward Bernays and then turns into pr. Like, the biggest PR person in the world right now is still the Freud family... The Freud family are the PR for the royals. His name is Matthew Freud. So you can draw a direct line in understanding that these things. I think Matthew Freud was married to Rupert Murdoch's daughter. That is true... That is correct. And so it's very interesting to. just, just noting. Yeah, and it's important for people to recognize this though. These people have had a tremendous head start, okay? They know how the mind works. They have run these experiments on people. They have had this relationship with the state forever. In fact, I think they are the state, if I'm being honest. They are the state. I shouldn't even say it's relationship with the state. And... what they are constantly trying to do is to infect your mind. Okay? So picture you being that, that, you know, child who lived this horrific experience... and now you have an adult saying before you and saying that never happened and you're crazy and what's wrong with you is that you're like attracted to your dad. That's what they're doing to all of us in a, in a certain way, obviously way more devastating when it happens to a child in, in that regard, in that sinister regard. But when you see the mainstream media apparatus today... and they're gaslighting us like the, the, the case of Brigitte Macronis, the most gaslighting I've ever seen in my life, where it's just like, you could debunk this in one second, but you won't. And you're calling us deranged and you're calling us crazy and you're calling us anti sematic for caring about a dead Palestinian kid and you're. It's like this is... Yeah, they created this system and the only way that... we're going to be able to defeat it is we have to first, we have to first understand it. And that's why I really encourage people to get educated. And I just made it my point because I constantly kept getting this claim, like anti Semitic talk about Sigmund Freud, that I was like, you know what I'm going to do? I'm only going to read Israeli historians and I'm only going to read Jewish books, books that are written by Jewish authors so that we can just go ahead and dispel the rumor. I never heard that. It's interesting. Sigmund Freud has gone in and out of... style. Well, he was very in style when I was young and then He was very in style. Yes. And then he was really knocked off the pedestal by... feminists as I recall, because he had like... some... non fashionable views on women and calling them hysterical, etc. Etc. But I, I don't recall... Sigmund Freud being like a protected figure. Since when is criticizing him a hate crime? I. That's what was so weird to me. Me, I did one episode on the Daily Wire. I don't think he was a religious Guy, at least exactly. I did one episode and I was speaking about also all of his friends. His best friend was this guy, Wilhelm Fleece, who. His son came out, Robert Fleece, and said, my, my son, I mean, my father sexually assaulted me. Everyone surrounding him was like sexually assaulting their children in Vienna... Which is again what? what is that? I mean, I feel like I've been everywhere, know a ton of people. I've never met anyone who's been accused of molesting his own child. That so far out. I've known people who've done every bad thing and I've never met anybody who's even been accused of that. And yet you're describing two... clusters of people, powerful people, famous people, where like tons of people in the orbit have been accused of or have in fact committed child molestation. Well, let me just tell you as you get into, as you get into my series, like... as I point to all these, these, this orbit around them of everyone who just keeps accidentally committing pedophilia, defending pedophiles, whatever it is... The best part is... for me... that they kind of laugh in your face. That they want you to know that there's something, there's an element of it that's partially sadistic. what the hell! Presidential portrait. Emmanuel Macron leaning against a desk Everybody has to do this, lean against a desk. Obviously the official presidential portrait. He chooses to put a book... and he has in multiple interviews said they anticipated author... by André Gide yes on the table. André Gide- is an author... who admitted openly that he was a pedophile. He's a pederast. He specifically only actually molests little boys. And he would go down to Algeria, Morocco and he would write books based on his experiences. The president of France chose to put that book... Okay. An André Gide book on his desk for his official presidential portrait. Like there was no other book, that you could have picked to put there... There's an element of it where they, I think that they've amassed so much power. And it's quite interesting because I think maybe Daryl Cooper told you about this. But getting into Bill Barr's father, Donald Barr. Who wrote that weird book. yes The space. yes It's called Space something. Space Relations by Donald Barr, where he predicts a colony of Kossars, as he calls them, kossars, K O S S A R S. He Spells it. That are so bored with their power. They're so bored with being elite, just getting away with everything, you know... And he then predicts kind of in this fantasy book, Jeffrey Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell. It's very strange. Got it. And he also was, you know, in the oss, which was the precursor for the CIA. But there's an element of that when I see Emmanuel Macron engaging in that, that it's like they want to get caught and they just have so much power, they know there's never going to be any consequences for it. Where you go, why would you do this? You could have put any other book on your desk. You could have put literally any other book on your desk. But you chose... a self admitted, never denied the fact... that he would go down... to Morocco and he just was into little, he was into little boys. So we're in the nicotine business. We make ALP pouches and they're delicious. But one thing about nicotine, it is regulated by the federal government up one side and down the other. And the main thing you can't do, no matter how much scientific evidence exists, is make a health claim about, about nicotine. So we don't. But that is not true with caffeine. Caffeine is good for you. So we've come up with a better way... to use caffeine. It's called Coffee Break. It's designed for people who want to think clearly, move quickly, never miss a beat. It is delicious and it's strong... and is best paired with an alp. Each XL pouch hits with 50... milligrams of caffeine. Roll out of bed and start your day on the most vigorous possible note. ready to dominate! So this is all of everything that you've said for the past 20 minutes. Makes me think they'd be crazy to bring this to trial... because that would allow you discovery. I think they're banking on us dismissing it. I think one of two options. dismissing it? What does that mean? You can at first file to dismiss the case because you're going, hi, we have the first amendment right This is crazy. It's, it's, it's coming from Paris. I mean, like, why on earth would we honor this at all? Secondly, it's like, are we really going to allow the French president to come in here and like stifle my right to speech? And typically in a normal scenario, a judge would dismiss this case because it's completely crazy. And we can obviously then produce the evidence that we asked them these questions and they chose not to reply to them for whatever reason. I think they want us to dismiss it. And again, I'm guessing just so they can say, oh well, we tried, but you know, America has its own beast and they have actual malice. or they are going to... pretend that Brigitte died from grief. I don't know. I don't. Because clearly they're not going to go through discovery. Right. If you were going to go through discovery, you would have just published pictures a long time ago and put an end to all the rumors. Right. Because then you're gonna, you're gonna have to give me proof of this 30 year period where you just kind of. So you're not going to try to have the case dismissed? I certainly do not want to have the case dismissed. Amazing I've never heard that before Can I just, I just want to Linger on this for a moment. Having been around a lot of lawsuits, I've never heard anybody sued particularly this is. They're spending a lot of money on this because Tom Clare and his wife have big expenses and they, I think they charge a lot. I've never heard anybody say, I don't want a well funded case against me to be dismissed. It's how I feel. And the reason that I feel that way, truly, Tucker, is because this is so that's amazing. you're being serious? So much bigger, you know, and we're, so we're having those discussions. We've spoken to the lawyer, we want it moved to Tennessee. They filed in Delaware. What's happening here is so much bigger and... so much more important for the world. In Delaware, really? Yeah. Which is interesting. You know, Hunter kind of notoriously said, like, we control the courts in Delaware. but Fox News found out, absurd case against Fox News by Dominion. I was not named in him. I got sucked into it. But Tom Clare was involved in that case and it was in Delaware... and they just had a completely compliant judge. It was just a joke. Yeah, Well, that's very interesting because they did file in Delaware and it is a place where we know that the courts are corrupt. But this would be a kind of precedent that would be, I think, almost even too crazy for Delaware. You're talking about a sitting president of another country coming in and saying, I, I'm gonna sue you for telling the truth. We have truth on our side. Right. We actually have truth. So unless he's gonna say, blah, blah, blah, I'm not looking at anything in it. You're not. You're gonna get, get no discovery and we're just going to award this person, I mean, you got to give the other side discovery, right? How does Macron collect, as a foreign head of state? How does he collect? This is. There is... nothing that we can look at. We are pioneering this, obviously, because this has never happened in the history of the world, that a sitting president of foreign country has sued a journalist, a podcaster in another country. It just, it's never happened... So we don't know. I didn't even know how it, how he could sue. Actually, I thought that you could only sue in a... I just am learning with everybody else that's amazing. how this is going to work. But again, speaking of Tom, Clare and Dominion, as he was sitting up there giddy with Jake Tapper, as these representatives of, like, the state, because that's who they represent. They represent the state. of course... they always represent the State, but they're giddy, talking about Dominion because Jake Tapper sits to him, he's like, and how much did you get from Dominion lawsuit? That's a lot of money. You're going to sue her for all that money? And that tells you who their master is, is right? Oh, I think we know these people are satanic, right? That you, you've, you can't beat me in the arena of truth and facts. So what do you do next? Well, I'm going to punish you. I'm going to destroy your livelihood. You're going to have nothing to your name. And that's why I say this, this case matters so much more to me because we can't have this sort of behavior... coming from people that are governing us, right? That say, even if you find the truth, even if I am a pervert, even if I got away with sleeping with my student, even though... his parents try to take him away, there's nothing... you can do about it. And I'm going to impoverish you... for even telling people, like, that's what this lawsuit is. I'm going to impoverish you... for telling the truth. And they're happy. You got to see, they're like, he's like, giddy discussing it. And then he turns in the camera, Jake Tapper and goes, fox News did this... And how much money did you get? Like, it's, it's totally bizarre. I'm like, that's your master. And you're going to come up against. you're going to come up against a hard rock here because. I don't care about money. If I hope the story of Candace Owens over the last two years, people have come to understand... that money is not my master. I think that's very obvious to everyone. What's interesting, though, since I know everybody you're talking about, is you're the happiest person by far. And I don't mean to be, like, fake pious or whatever, like, the good guys win in the end, but it is true that you can tell who's speaking truth by who is common and happy. It is true. yeah Lying makes you afraid, brittle, angry. It does. I've lied before. It makes me afraid, brittle, and angry. And the more you tell the truth, the calmer you are. I just think that's real. And... anyway, I don't think in the end you win siding with the state... against the truth teller. No. And that's why I asked that question. Like, Tom, I know you've watched every minute of the series. You know that they are surrounded by these people. You know about the children, victims that have been silent. Is it really worth it? You said that to him? Yeah, on my podcast. I just said I had to openly, as we went through this Mannechez affair and this woman ending up dead because they fought to, like, get this pedophile... and... creature in Amien released. I just asked him, like, is it really worth it? what did he say Like, because for me, you couldn't... I couldn't look at a case that involved the abuse of children... or a network of people who are involved with the abuse of children, who have admitted to abusing children, who are defending people who have admitted to abusing children. And put my head in the pillow at night. And that's what matters most in everything that I do. I have to be able to put my head on a pillow at night and say, I feel like I've done. I did what I thought was the right thing to do and it was a good thing to do. right yes And most people are not guided by that. They're guided by this master of money. Right. And they're willing to do these sorts of things to look the other way... Because you're gonna cash a check, like, you and Libby are gonna cash a check, and, like, that's gonna be good. Do you want that to be your legacy? I ask him that genuinely, like, I hope that out. We do get to court, and I get to ask him that face to face. Maybe he's deposing me. And I get to ask him, like, is the money worth it?.. I. I just want to know. I need to know that, because I could never. When it comes to children, I will breathe fire... on Tom Cla re. Before I would sign up to knowingly Aid people... who have harmed children. Having sat in a long deposition with Tom Clare, I can tell you the game is to make you mad. And that's very easy with me because I'm a hothead. It probably won't work with you. You seem to have way more emotional control than I do. But... I, I do think, I just want to. I don't want to be mean, but I just want to say when people have in mind when Shakespeare wrote about lawyers and like, oh, that's a little harsh. Kill all the lawyers. What are you talking about? He. He had Tom Claire in mind. He really is a discredit to the profession. I can, I can say or credit To the profession... or credit if I was legit. I mean, the godfathers of my children are lawyers, you know, and really good. My college roommates, really good guys, great guys, men of integrity, true integrity with wives who respect them, kids who love them, and just good men. But... if I was a lawyer, if I was one of them, and Tom Clare is stalking the earth, I'd be like, man, we got to disbar that guy because he discredits the entire profession. Yeah, I mean, it's very interesting. I, I don't know what is guiding him at this point, but it's. It is definitively not Goodness, right? It's definitely not. Does he think he can win, I know he doesn't? Because like I said, I got advice from their law firm not to pursue a defamation claim. So you're in this, what, to help bolster their idea to the world that they haven't done anything? When you know, when you know that they're lying. When you know that your client is lying and you still represent them. I, again, I don't know how people put their head in the pillow at night. And what's interesting about me, and he'll just come up against a rock is I have nothing to hide, right? If I had anything to hide, you guys would have found out last year, right? That where I went through... and... physically felt like a, an X ray from the press as they tried to destroy everything that I had, everything that I held dear. I mean, it was non stop. I mean, banned from Australia, demanding that my speaking events get canceled because I'm an anti Semite, you know, fired in front of the world. I mean, last year was really one for the books and anything that they could find on me, they wrote articles about and they smeared me and they libeled me and the idea was... to kill me. It was like, you know, lay it dead. This girl should no longer have a career... And I survived it. And I survived it because I had the one thing that they couldn't quite kill, which is truth. On my side. I told the truth. Okay? So at the end of the day, it takes so much more energy... and persistence to lie. You have to lie repeatedly. You have to keep telling the person at the shadows on the wall are real. Like, you know, and we tell the truth. You always have to say it once, and. that is true And it hangs in the air and it resonates, and people can feel that it's real. And. And... so they were unsuccessful in trying to destroy me, to try to destroy everything I've ever worked for in my entire life with smears and libels and Lies and. So what's left? What is he gonna say to me? Like, what are you saying to me during a deposition? Yeah, I think that's a man. And I think that everyone around them is way too close to pedophilia. And I think, Tom, Clare, that you should be ashamed of yourself and any person... that would ever launch a defense, knowing... that children were hurt in the process. I think, you know, you. You better hope karma's not real. Have you ever talked to Macron? Texted? He texts people I happen to know. I wish he would text me. I'd love to speak to him. I view him as a victim, by the way. Okay, you are a child and... your drama teacher, whatever is. Is macking on you, and you're 14 years old. I. I don't know what Macron has lived through, but when you get into his backstory, it's very weird as well. It's very weird backstory. A lot of holes in the backstory. And he is, to me, like a Zelensky. He's totally powerless. There's somebody in the shadows telling him what to do. One of the more fun things... learning about Macron is the press sold him as this, like, savant, you know, like, he's just always so brilliant, and he was ahead of his time needed to sell this, like, creepy relationship, you know? The 14 year old's ahead of his time. He was a man at 14 He came across like 6 year old. I don't know what we're doing. Right. That's weird. But what was really funny was that he then starts to work for Rothschilds Bank. And before he went to Rothschilds bank, he went to this school. I don't know how to give you, like, a tit for tat with America. Let's just call it, like, he kind of pursued his masters and nobody knew how he got into the school. He actually didn't get into the school twice. And then he gets into the school... and they take this test and he... is. He graduates. I mean, he passes with flying colors at the top of the class. And the class revolted because they all knew he was dumb. And they knew that there was a fix in for Macron. And so they just canceled test scores that year for the first time in the school's history because the kids were suddenly going, there's no way this person got this grade... Same thing happens when he goes to Rothschild bank. They said. And this is again according to a Wall Street Journal book. I only use mainstream sources... that everyone who worked with him said he was an absolute idiot. They had no idea why he was at this bank except for the fact that David Rothschild's hand was on him. Like they basically, like he was allowed to be in these rooms. He didn't even know what Ebitda stood for. But he worked for Rothschild bank. And they said that it was just very clear that the hand of Rothschild was on him. And so they would all just remark to themselves, like, how are we working with this guy who's an absolute idiot? So even the idea of Macron being this like sophisticated, brilliant banker who was ahead of his time is just not real if the mainstream media sources are to be believed. Again, this was a book that was done by the Wall Street Journal and they sourced people that worked with him and said that he was an absolute idiot. Which mirrored exactly what the people who went to school with him said when they had to cancel test scores because of his fake.. are there? What's the relationship... between Macron and Justin Trudeau? They just remind me of each other. They seem like... they're from the same factory line assembly. You know, World Economic Forum Well Macron very clearly a homosexual. I think that's very obvious. People have come out and talked about sleeping with him, Men, He's never sued them for anything. Very weird. Really? Oh yeah. Right. When he got, when he became president, there was a. And I'm blanking on his name. He came out and spoke and said, there's this guy is, you know, watch out for Macron. He's got some issues. Like they, you know, he said that he was a part of a sex party with him. Macron never disputed it. And since he likes to sue for defamation, that would have been a pretty good one to go after. If a guy is saying he slept with you and that that you have mental issues like that, he's like, almost like a Masochist in many ways... But... the entire. If you just kind of look at the world right now, a lot of theater boys are getting power... You know, Zelensky was an actor and a performer and he actually played the role... of being the president and then actually became the President Macron. He was a theater boy. Okay. And now all of a sudden, he's like playing the part of the President of France. I don't take any of these people seriously. Like, this is You are as people. This is your next act. Yeah. You are told to pretend that you're the President of France and somebody behind you is telling you what to do. And we can definitely. as Americans, I think we can all agree, whether you're left or right, that that is a circumstance after having Biden in office. Because we know, irrespective of whether you loved him or hated him, that he was not cognitively there... And yet the government still ran. right And that should terrify you. Who was in control. exactly While he was on a steep cognitive decline. It's the same for, I think, the entire Western world, that these people are not in real. In real control, and that there's. They are just made to... kind of delude the public into believing that, like, yeah, this is a Republic and a democracy, and you have a say. And look, you elected this person, but somebody else is obviously pulling the strings. That's a fascinating observation that has never occurred to me that the theater kids have taken like, literally literal theater kids. That's just, here's your next role. You're going to be president. So speaking of theater, I just hesitate even to ask this, but since you... Cause, I mean, it just opens up all this stuff I don't want to deal with. But you just interviewed Nick Fuentes. I did. Or had a conversation with him. What did you think of that? What do you think of him? I mean, I can tell you my experience is, was entirely fraudulent with him. I I never interview people as a gotcha interview. It's always just he was making the rounds. He's been around for a while and kind of his story when I learned it, because he was banned from everywhere. So I didn't actually know what the backstory was with Nick Fuentes, but then I learned it when... he was allowed back on X. And Jeremy Boreing, who was then the CEO of Daily Wire, did this X live with him. And Jeremy Boreing did an. Did an event with Nick Fuentes. It was honestly, it was weird. Everything was weird about what happened, but it happened... And... Nick told his story and I was listening in and said essentially that he was canceled because he started asking questions about Israel. He was 18 years old, and... he alleged that it was, you know, very much the fault of the Daily Wire or whatever he said... And I found it very interesting. And I was like, oh, I actually didn't know this was the backstory. Maybe this really is a person who had just, ahead of everybody else, was questioning Israel and had, like, a bad hand given to him. So I had him on the show, welcomed him into my home, and he was very nice. We told him, we're gonna cut, you know, a controversial trailer. We're gonna show you, like, these clips of you talking trash about me, and you can talk about whatever you want for as long as you want. Ask any questions you want to ask. Ask. It went great. He... left. He said, thanks, we can now be friends. And I am not kidding. We published this 11 days later... And he. It was. I don't even know how to. He just starts screaming, calling me an effing... B I T C H who set him up. We didn't edit a single thing... those 11 days. Like, two weeks before we even published the interview. We told him if there's anything that he wanted us to insert, like, nobody does that if you go on their show. yes And I don't know what... I genuinely don't know what triggered him, other than me at the very end asking him about, like. Or talking to him about family. And it was. It was just the rage that was coming out of him was just weird. And... I don't know why he did that. I don't know why he did a 180. You had access to me. You could have said anything after you. Even if he had said in good faith. I thought I sounded a little weird here. Could you cut it out? We probably would have cut it out because I just don't want people to ever... not have a good experience. You know what I'm saying? I understand that. Also, You want people. Well, this. I'll speak for myself when I invite someone on, especially just to hear their views. I want them to be able to express what they actually think. Right, exactly. And you decide what you think, and you decide how to express it. I mean, that's like a basic... human right, kind of. And so I'm not here to trip you up into saying something you don't mean. I want to hear what you do mean. Yeah, exactly. And he told the story. He did all of that. And apparently then. And I. I don't know if it was driven by insecurity. He didn't know how his followers would take the interview. But he just did a complete 180, lied to his audience, pretended that he was surprised he was behind a paywall. We spoke about him and how we were going to release it. He said, great. I mean, it's a totally... total 180 flip. So I can now say... that I didn't listen to other people say that Nick was a bad person. I didn't care about what happened. When he was 18, 19, 20, 21, 26, I sat across from a person, had a conversation with him, he behaved one way in person, and then put on a show for the Internet... So I actually can say my experience with Nick Fuentes is that he's a terrible person and a terrible human being. Because why would you do that? There's no reason to do that... You could have come back onto the show. I agree. You could have had beginning of us discussing various topics. I think in many ways whatever happened to him was when he was 18 may have stunted his growth... Meaning that he now is responding to the Internet, which is filled with people that don't even use their real names. Right. So really, truly the irony of it all is you could just be like the IDF soldiers, just pretending to be his supporters, just getting him to say whatever you want because he's going to do whatever you say. But it was strange. It was totally strange. It made no sense. does he  have a family or a normal life. I asked him about that. He said, yeah, it comes from a two parent household. That's what he told me. No, no. Does he have his own family? Does he? No, no, he's not married. And I just offered to him. I was like, yeah, no, I think these are the things that you learn when you're married. And he just... was vicious about it. And you know, women don't tell me what to do or whatever it was... And it was very performative. about? Like I said the exact same thing to Andrew Tate, months earlier... I had him. And I said, you should get married, here's why. And of course, Andrew Tate did not react like that. He told me what his hang ups were about marriage. It was just a part of two people communicating on a show. But for whatever reason, like it was, he saw this as like... an attack... Even though interesting. Yeah, it was weird. Totally Weird. Thats a tender spot. Interesting. Well, okay, has it occurred to you that. And I just want to say, I haven't watched a lot of Nick Fuentes in my life at all. But what I've seen the guy is very talented, like just as A. As a. Well, let me just say this. As someone who's talked to cameras his whole life, it is very hard... to sit and just like, riff... for 20 minutes. And I just. I think it's an amazing skill. And he has that skill. But I also have noticed that his targets are all people who are sincere, non crazy, non hateful opponents of neocon politics. right So you have to kind of wonder about that. So Nick Fuente is like, oh, I don't like the neocons. But then his targets are J.D. Vance Joe Kent. He, like, tried to. He got involved in Joe Kent's campaign... with.. I didn’t know that Oh, yes. you, me. And it's like, what is that? Dave Smith. I asked him about that because I. That's a question that I had. Dave smith? So I did the right thing by asking him to his face, what's up with this? Like, why do you attack Dave Smith? You say that like your biggest critique that America is being controlled by Israel. Then you have Dave Smith, who has been such a sound voice and by the way, opposite experience with Dave Smith. Had him on my podcast, is a fantastic human being. Dave Smith is one of the nicest people ever. Fantastic human... And so I judge people according to my experiences with them. And so Nick is being judged according to my experience with him. But, like, what is this? Where does... funding come from? I had. I don't get it. I probably shouldn't even say this, but I had. The only reason I know who he is is because someone sent me a video a few years ago of him attacking me. And I was like, so I'm looking at this and I'm like, well, first of all, this kid's really talented, like, legit. And I can assess that just having done the job for so long. So I was like, wow, lots of talent, native talent. And he's attacking my dad as a CIA. His dad's in the CIA or whatever. And I'm like, well, that's no untrue. Then my father dies, and I learn, actually, yeah. you know was involved in that world. I was completely shocked by it. So... no one has to believe me, but that's just a fact. This was in March of this year. right I'm like, well, why would. How the hell would this child from Chicago. My dad was 84 when he passed. Like how, who's this guy? knows who my dad is? And like, he's... in intelligence world. How would he know that? And I. Wait, so that was his critique of you? Because I didn't see it. Yeah. Someone just sent me this video and it was like, you can't Believe anything Carlson says because... his father was in the CIA and he's a CIA working on behalf of CIA. Well, I mean, I think it's pretty obvious and I'm pretty. I mean, I actually feel emotional in my anger towards CIA and I think of that, that comes out on the air quite regularly... And so the idea that I'm working for the CIA right is like deranged. Well, if it helps, he said I was. I'm funded by Russia now. Since the interview, he then did a thing and said I was funded by Russia. but you would be a lot... more likely to take Russian money than I would be to work for the CIA. Because you would never take Russian money. You're not Russian. But. But I mean, I really hate the CIA and I mean, I would... I mean, that's like very offensive to me. So why would you. It's like personal for you. Well, a little bit, And anyway, like, who is this kid? Exactly? And maybe it's just an accident that the guy goes after exclusively goes after people who... are in the same. Roughly the same. And then he gets up there and he's like, you know, making holocaust jokes and it's like, is it possible that this is like David Duke?.. David Duke. Every time I had a new show, David Duke would endorse my show. I don't know. Who the hell is David Duke? Well, David Duke is obviously... part of a campaign to discredit people on the right. Obviously And I think it's very obvious that Nick Fuentes is exactly the same. Doesn't mean everything he says is false. It doesn't mean he's not talented. He's enormously talented... Doesn't mean he's a bad person. I'm not attacking him personally, but he is clearly part of a campaign to discredit non crazy. right voices. that's obvious to me. I've been around a long time. I know when I see it. Yeah. And I will say I. I don't understand it. We were very kind to him. Like, I truly, like, we almost said, like, we felt maybe he was a bit lonely. We should invite him back for dinner. I mean, that's how good of an experience I had. Yeah, clearly. its a sad And then it was a 180. So it's either A. It's being driven from like a little boy insecurity and he just was so worried that he, like, just went on the attack because he doesn't know how to have normal relations after being banned everywhere. Well, I think there's a kind of That could be one element, the angry Gay kid thing going On. Yeah. Or it's the. What you're saying where he does this. He's lying to everybody and pretending that things are one way when it's not. I can say he lied. why is he attacking Joe Kent, who... I mean, Joe Kent worked for, as a CIA contractor, paramilitary contractor. He's in the U.S. Military for years fighting our neocon wars. And his wife was killed in Syria in one of those wars. Joe Kent is the single most sincere... critic, and I would say the one with the most credibility in the United States to say, this foreign policy is bad. It killed my wife... I was a part of it... Joe Kent is actually someone the CIA doesn't like at all because he understands how it operates. And for Nick Fuentes, who's some child from Chicago, who I mean, to go after him, specifically one congressional seat in Washington State, it is random. It's not random, though. It's... the opposite of random. Joe Kent was number one on the list... of people they wanted to knock off. People who believe in our... neocon foreign policy. They wanted Joe Kent out. Cause he could stand up and say, I actually know. I've got the receipts. My wife was killed in Syria. You had to take that guy out. And Nick Fuentes, this child, this weird little gay kid in his basement in Chicago is participating in a super PAC to bump off Joe Kent... Like, I've been around this my whole life. I know what that is, is just... an organized effort. And he also did the thing that David Duke always did, including to me, which is be like, oh, yeah, it's my friend. And everyone's like, oh, Tucker Carlson's been endorsed by David Duke. yeah I've been making like the anti racist argument my whole life... Like, I'm not for David Duke. Do I think David Duke is right when he's against affirmative action? You bet I do. right But I'm not for David Duke. But David Duke Would try to discredit people by hugging them... And that's exactly what Fuentes did. He goes out, you meet all these people, show up. Hi, I'm Nick Fuentes. Can I get my picture with you? That's a campaign... to destroy credible voices on the right. And Fuentes is part of it. And I know I'm gonna. I'm inviting endless trouble by saying this because, you know, this is a kid with a lot of spare time. But it's just a fact, and I've seen it a lot, and I. And I... You can believe me or not, but I know what I'm talking about. yeah I can confirm he's dishonest I mean, there's no. So it's like, you use that as your. Like. I. I could not determine what his motives were. And I said, you know what? I don't have time for this. I gave you a fair chance, gave you a fair shake, and you are a fundamentally dishonest human being. You know, there was no. There was no reason to do it. If he had not done that show and screamed and yelled, his followers would have been like, oh, that was an interesting conversation between two people who agreed. Some disagreed some. And like, that was it. It was interesting that he got there. He doesn't want to be. And I can tell you that he doesn't want to be anywhere but where he is. He doesn't want to have normal relations. And it does. It did sort of feel, and I said that to him, that he's, like, responding... to orders somewhere because. Why are you attacking me? who are the funders? Why are you attacking Dave Smith? What is the issue with Dave Smith? And he couldn't answer the question. exactly He couldn't answer the question. He was just like, well, the fakest Thing I've ever seen. I'm like, why do you hate Dave Smith over Joe Rogan? And it's like, well, Dave Smith is this kind of a Jew. And I'm like, okay, I don't. Either... you really are this immature and you haven't gotten further in your ideas, or you're just attacking people and making people think that these attacks are legitimate when they're really not. And we were so kind to him that I was just like, okay, he's Attacking Dave Smith because Dave Smith is effective. Incredible. He's very effective because... he's smart. He's a decent person. There's no hate on Dave Smith. And you would smell it if there wasn't. There isn't. And he has credibility and he has knowledge, and he's a marvelous debater and once again, a really good person. So you have to take out Dave Smith. You have to take out Joe Kent. Those are the good people. You have to take out J.D. Vance He was against J.D. vance. So if you're against, like, more pointless wars on behalf of foreign powers, like, you're probably not going to be attacking J.D. Vance. And Vance was exactly the person he was attacking. So this. And the sad thing is. And I know that no one who watches him will believe me because they're desperate, because they are the victims of a system that hates him. It's young white men who've been totally cut out of our Economy attacked... mercilessly... given, you know, narcotics just go die. I mean, they really are the victims and they're desperate and no one speaks for them. So they go to Fuentes because he's like, incredibly articulate and they think he's our leader. But... in one of the saddest ironies of all, like, he's acting against your interests. Actually, it's, ah. it's really dark. Yeah. I don't believe he says. I don't I no longer... think that he believes what he says. And I can say that, like even the whole. Yeah, I just say I'm a racist. I know in part he says stuff to be entertaining and that's fine. There's an element of it that is meant to be entertaining. But you got on a podcast, a flight to come down onto a podcast with a black woman. Like, I don't think you're racist. I don't believe your ideas that women, it's like, you know, women need to shut up. It's like, okay, why are you on my podcast? Why are you saying that you want people to have you on their podcasts? So there's just... the, there's a gap between what he says and how he acts. And for me, that's just worthy of dismissing. Full stop. You know, be authentic. I don't care who you are. Like, genuinely, I kind of like Taylor Lorenz because I know that she actually believes what she says. You know what I'm saying?.. At least she's authentic. I totally agree. And I, like, she's been wearing a mask for five years. Okay. It is real to her. I totally agree. Covid is real to her. This is not a performance. She is not. This is not cnn. It's not Jake Tapper, like, and I respect it. I told my I kind of like her. It's weird... because I know she's authentic. And we would... just genuinely... never agree. We would always be at odds, but we would recognize that you truly believe this and you are still double masked in 2025. I'm so with you. Yeah, I like her because it's real. And that's all it takes for me to like someone. I have to know that you believe what you're saying. And I'm good with Taylor Lorenz Oh, that's so perfect. That is such a great... I ran into her in some foreign country. I was giving a speech somewhere in a foreign country. I think it was in the Middle East. But anyway, she comes up to me at the speech and she's wearing a mask. I have no idea who this person is. But I look at her eyes and they're kind of going in different directions. They're like, super intense. She goes, hi, it's Taylor. I don't know her. I've never met her. And I was like, oh, Taylor Lorenz And she's like, yeah. My only takeaway was... the intensity is real. Yeah, it's real. Yeah. So it's like, how can you not like her? The people that I can't stand are people who get up there. Like the Jake tappers of the world who get up there and they say stuff they don't believe. It's not how they live. It's not what their true positions are... Say it for a check. Taylor Lorenz. This is not. It's not a check for her, okay? I'm like, that stops at wearing. She's been wearing a mask for five years. She hasn't seen her face in five years. Okay? This is real for Taylor Lorenz. And I therefore like her. That's how my brain works. I just, I. I am here for Taylor Lorenz. I think that's... I think it's a great way to judge. I do, I do. Just be authentic. I think telling the truth, even if you're wrong. Doing your best really, really matters. So how do you. So you mentioned before that last year was a. Was just a tsunami of attacks on you, not simply on your views... and their accuracy, which I think is, you know, it's legitimate to critique anything any of us say on the basis of whether or not it's true, but on your character. And they were very intense. They attacked your family. I won't go deeper than that. But you know what I'm talking about. I mean, they really went after you, your opponents. How did that affect you? It was one of the strangest things, where it strengthened us in a way... I think you have to get real up close to the devil, but, you know, just really see it in its action and its form. And then you just go, okay, like, we're doing this and we have. There's. There's no thinking because you're just fighting. And I think about last year, it was just. We were constantly fighting and very focused in those fights. And not with each other. No. Me and my husband were just like, we've... truly. I mean, not to say we've never been more united. We've always been united, but we are the way. What we went through last year, it was just, we can make it through anything, you know, how do you keep He was so calm. And I do think I attribute that to his faith. I attribute that. You know, my husband is a spiritual leader first and foremost. And I think if he had shown... even a fraction... of uncertainty, I probably would have come apart. Do you know what I mean? I do, but he was just. it was amazing... I don't know how he does it. I've reflected to him, Because obviously we've survived it. We came back bigger and stronger. And I just look back and I go, were you like dying on the inside? Were you like going into the closet and crying, you know, behind my back? Because I don't know how George did. I really don't know how he did it, but he was just laser focused. Nothing was a drama or a saga. It's like, Australia's banned us. And he's just like, okay, here's the person on the phone, the lawyer. We're gonna go. And we are right now in the Supreme Court in Australia. Right now. It. The case is called Candace Owens versus the Common wealth of Australia. no way I'm versus France, Versus Australia... And he's like, here's what we're gonna do. And so... it was one of those things where when you go through those sorts of attacks, it either breaks you or it strengthens you. And... it strengthened us. And I didn't think that we needed to be strengthened. And so now... I'm so grateful for last year... because there was this divine clarity that came into our lives. Who are, who are our real friends, right?.. Who are our real friends? And, and... these other people, how could we have ever thought that they were our friends? Like even waiting to see who's going to speak out and say this is wrong... Like the number one litmus test is, let's not forget, before we even get down to the books that I've read and what I think now, all I said was Christ is king. Okay? This was like, it's anti Semitic, it's layered, it's this, it's that. And there were people... who I would have been like, I've always been friendly with who are making videos legit, legitimizing that. Like, she didn't say it directed to anybody, but it could have been kind of implied. And this is why you shouldn't say Christ king. And we're looking around going, what is going on right now? What is happening? And I think at that moment, Thats one Of the craziest controversies I've ever seen, this controversy... So there were people... on the so called right who attacked you for saying Christ is king. Of course there were. And... one of those people was. And I've been very vocal about it because he's such a bad person, Seth Dillon. And what makes him such a bad person is I really stood up for Seth Dylan when it mattered. I did, too, when it really mattered... And, like, the. Like, he thought he was gonna lose everything. And I did it privately, you know, no fanfare, just because... I wanted the right thing to be done to him... And at a moment, we're all actually. If he had just given me silence, that would have been friendship in that moment. Like, the whole world is coming after me. I just lost my job... I'm trending, you know, from here to Timbuktu. If you had just... been quiet and said nothing about Christ is king, I would have been like, that was nice. Thank you for not adding to the chorus. No, no. He added to the chorus, you know, and then would like privately try to message me to be like, well, and this was their whole big idea. They were attributing it to Nick Fuentes. And I. No idea that Nick Fuentes chanted Christ is king. And by the way, if he does... Christ is king good, that's a good thing. Like, I want everyone to be chanting Christ is king, he basically. It's like fundamental... Like Christianity. Yeah, yeah, exactly. It doesn't matter if. If Nick Fuentes is saying Jesus is king. He is. And so he was sort of saying to me that I would have to make a layered statement about Christ is King... And he said that to you? Very much... came. Came across. I said to him, I'll publish. Because when he denied it publicly, I said, let me publish the text messages. And then he went radio silent because I don't lie. Okay? I don't lie. And he wanted me to make a statement against Groypers. So my whole world is coming down, and Seth Dylan's like, here's what you can do for me if you'd like a life raft. You know, I mean, it's just tweet against the Groypers. And I was just like, seriously, Seth, f you... You know, when your family had something that you were going through and I stood up for you, and I had. Was nothing for me to gain, everything for me to lose... And you're. You're upset about random frog accounts on the Internet, and you're adding to this chorus of things that are being said against me. And it's amazing. He's a betrayer He's deceitful. You know, he is the Judas at your table. You know, he'll break bread with you, come to your house and feel nothing when he stabs you in the Back yes And so with. But I was just early. Now everyone sees it because now that we're. Him and Joel Berry have been so deranged in their... pro Israel commentary. Like they literally like applaud when I genuinely think that these people smile when Palestinian children die... But I saw it early. His character. I saw his character early when all that was required for him to be a friend was to just be quiet. He couldn't do it. You know, he added to it. I had exactly the same experience, exactly the same experience with him. I put him on twice at the request of other people. I took him out to dinner, my house. And I did think it's kind of weird. And I totally supported the Babylon Bee. I love the idea of it. Don't read it. But I, I want something like that. And I think they're probably really nice people who work there, I assume. No, but I remember thinking and even saying to one of my producers, boy, for a guy who runs a comedy site, he's not funny at all... And he seems to have no interest in comedy at all. Not that I'm a comedian, but I like funny things. You know, I'm a shallow guy... And I did think that was weird. And then. and I didn't, I didn't like his vibe. However, I did it twice. And then I had Daryl Cooper on the last day of August last year. I did not think it was controversial at all. No. And Daryl Cooper's like... not even right wing. I mean, It wasn't. Darrell Cooper's just like a really nice guy. And it was, you know, he's a holocaust center, which he is not. That's a lie. Or at least he didn't do it on my show. He's never done it in conversation, whatever... It became this manufacturer controversy... and one of my producers, like Seth Dillon is attacking you. I was like, I don't think so. I mean, I really helped that guy... twice. And because he was, you know, his site was being banned or whatever. So I text Seth Dillon and I'm like, is this, Are you really attacking me?.. And he starts like lecturing me in a very high handed way and I of course took the bait. And then he published some of the texts. Oh, so he does. Okay, that's good to know. He publishes... I may be misremembering this, but he came up to me at an event. I was campaigning for Donald Trump and he was there, he was very excited to be there... And he comes up to me... I was standing with a bunch of people, including Marjorie Taylor Greene. And he comes up and he's like, well, I think you should forgive me... You're a Christian. You say you're a Christian. You should forgive me. And I should forgive him because I am a Christian and that's like a requirement of our religion. But I just couldn't because... of all the people I've dealt with. I met Kim Jong Un once. Not quite as mad at him as I am at Seth Dillon, because I just. The betrayal, the superciliousness, the stupidity and the cruelty of it, I just couldn't. Oh, but he's gone masked down. I mean, he accidentally sent a screenshot... that they didn't realize. Like, James Lindsay. He sends screenshots to James Lindsay. who's James Lindsay? I don't know who he is, but I know. But he's always on Twitter... in the same... puddle of people who are constantly just, I don't know, like, applauding Palestinian death. And he acts. James Lindley didn't realize that it showed that it was from Seth Dylan's account. So clearly Seth Dylan had texted it to him... And then James Lindsay then, like, said something about what it was, and it was amazing. It was a mask down moment where it's like, yeah, you're all on a group chat and you're... sharing information of people who do attack, and you presented yourself as like the funny, nice guy and you're anything but, like, you know, you're quite sinister and is. We all kind of fell for it for a little bit because I'm just the guy who does satire. No, you are like a totally deranged, angry individual who would literally break bread with anyone and then stab them in the back. And so. So for me, like I said, I fear nothing. I was like, really Daylight I. I will survive daylight. I have always treated people with kindness and I have always worked very hard. I tell the truth. So there's nothing that Seth Dillon can expose about me that's gonna hurt my feelings, you know, or. Or make me look like I'm a bad person? He's genuinely a bad person. So these were the sorts of individuals. Like last year when we were going through it where I was like, am I. Did I misremember us being, like, putting everything on the line to help him and could he just give us silence for a couple of weeks? Like, just not. Just don't add in to the chorus. thats how I felt. I'm not asking you to defend me. I'm asking you to not join in on the chorus of people. It is just A weird world when you wake up and realize, like, Taylor Lorenz is obviously kind of deranged. Her views are, like, repugnant to me. I've made fun of Taylor Lorenz, like, for a living. I've literally been paid to make fun of Taylor Lorenz, I'll admit it... But when you realize that she is actually a much more sincere and decent person than the guy who runs the Babylon bee, then you realize, wow, what's going on? What's going on? she's Sincere. I disagree with her on everything, but she's more sincere. I don't think she's privately, like, being like, I'm not scared of COVID She's scared... of COVID You know what I mean? So she's at least sincerely wrong, but she's sincere. And, yeah, that's that. But I think that's what last year really was, is there. There was this moment where it needed to happen. There was this organic shedding where we got to see people for who they actually were... And a lot of people didn't survive last year. They're not the same. You know, it's not. These people that were really big who spent all the time attacking. Now people are looking at them going, what was that? That. Because you can't attack yourself into success, right? You can't step on somebody's head when they're drowning and think that people are not going to realize what you did. Because like we said earlier, at the end of the day, you're not in a battle with Candace Owens You're in a battle with truth. yes And I wouldn't want to be on the side of lies when you're. When you're in a battle against truth, okay, I told the truth. I said, christ is king. Whether I, you know, when I told even about Brigitte, whatever it is, whatever you're attacking me for, eventually the truth is going to win. And you guys keep banking on the lies. And so I'm happy. I'm very happy last year happened. I was very happy to delete a lot of these people from my contacts. And it was a clarifying year... that I can only... look back on and thank God. You got to thank God for moments of clarity. So maybe the interview I expected... least was most surprised by, but kind of weirdly delighted by was Harvey Weinstein. How did that happen? What was the thinking? You know, the backstory of that actually is somebody... in Harvey's orbit reached out to me while I was at the Daily Wire and said, I'd really like you to get on the phone with Harvey. I'D love for you to, like, think about sitting down and interviewing him, doing all this stuff. And, you know, at that time, I thought he was guilty of sin like everybody else did, because there were just so many women and was thinking, wow, he must be pretty desperate to want to, like, reach out to me. I know he's left leaning. Like, I'll do it. Sure, fine. And I got on the phone with him... in prison and was very surprised that he clearly, this friend, was kind of lying and he. Oprah. I was being floated to do the interview, and he's like, why on earth would I give you this interview? He was very, very powerful... And he. I always describe it as Harvey has, like, a growl about him. You could. He's still very powerful. And he kind of lashed me and said, you know, I support the ADL and talked about Kanye and talked about my support for Trump. He was all over the place. Still. Still a leftist in his prison cell. And I was kind of amazed by this. He lectured you about the ADL from prison? From prison. it was incredible. My autobiography is going to be amazing if I ever sit down and write one. Like, that's definitely a highlight. I'm like, I'm getting lectured by Harvey Weinstein. He's in prison. And... then I was sort of like, I realized at that point that I was trying out for, like, one of his movies in a way, and I had to kind of sell myself of, like, why I would. I wanted to do the interview. And then I thought this was so strange. And then I hung up and I looked into the case... because that person then sent me the stuff. And I was just shocked. I've never seen... a crazier conviction in my entire life. He literally got convicted because people were crying, even in the face of overwhelming evidence. I mean, one case, his argument is, I wasn't even there... I wasn't even there. It's not even like, he's like, I know this woman. He's like, I was not. I don't even stay at that hotel, and I don't know this woman. And... the judge would not allow him talking about the corruption of courts to... subpoena her cell phone records to see if she was even there... It was the. And that was the person that got him, whatever, 15 years in LA. Who. The cases are incredible. You were raped by him over the course of 10 years. Help me understand this. And none of these women are young, by the way, because then I'm like, maybe there was an argument. They were 17... and he manipulated. They were so these women were 30... years old. We know what this is. This is sugar, baby. Traditional relationship. It's how it's always been in Hollywood. Young girls want careers, they sleep with directors. They do that stuff consensually. And I think in the case of Harvey Weinstein, because he actually cared very deeply about his movies, they assumed he was going to give them these roles and he didn't. He just was sort of like, yeah, I'm Harvey Weinstein. These girls threw themselves at him thinking there was going to be an exchange and there just wasn't one. And then if you look back on your life and now you're 50 and you slept with Harvey Weinstein, like, not the hottest Brad Pitt looking person. You're like, what did I get for this? And you kind of then see this movement taking off and it's me too. And suddenly it's, you know, he had the power. And... yeah, so what? I sent him a couple of emails saying, I love you after he raped me. Which they did,  because that's what actually? Yeah, love you, miss you. But constantly the emails, when you read through them, because there's a trove of them, are always them trying to be like, hey, I hear there's an upcoming audition. I'd love to attend the audition. Or I'm going to. Can. Can you get me some tickets? I mean, it is what it is. This... was your traditional oldest trade in the book, is what I would say. You know, the oldest trade in the book. So what? I mean, okay, for a hardened anti Semite Nazi like you I'm failing at it, you're defending... the ADL defender, Harvey Weinstein, like, what? What? I don't. How did you. Why? Why? So a lot of people look at this and first of all, I just want to say I support it. Just that I'm joking and I support it only because I think that justice matters. I know Harvey Weinstein. He's a pig, as you know. Doesn't mean he's a criminal. Oh, yeah. And I just think it's important to convict people when they violate the law and not to convict them when they don't. And truth is the most important thing. So I support it. But it is like, of all the stories, like, what drew you to that? Well, because he was the beginning of the Me Too movement. And I've had a gripe from the MeToo movement from the day that it trended on Twitter. I mean, you can go back. I am left and right. People were scared to say anything about the Me Too movement when it first happened. Because it was about rape. And people are instantly uncomfortable. And left and right, people were just sort of reticent to say, oh, but don't we need to have, like, due diligence here? And people were losing their jobs left and right on the basis of an allegation because it was hashtag trending. Hashtag me too. yes And right away, when it first started Trending, it was mob justice. Yep. I said something against it, and I almost got canceled. Like, I will never forget this Charlie Kirk. We had to get together with the PR agents. I was at Turning Point. He had Turning Point girls that were quitting, crying, saying I was, how could she not support the Me Too movement like I was sexually assaulted? So it was totally... and. And credit to Charlie Kirk. Like, he held down the line because, you know, like I said, if you stand on truth, eventually people catch up and realize that something's really wrong with this movement. But Harvey was this case where I think the entire world agreed that he was. Must have been guilty of something. There were just so many women that were coming out saying that this took place. And his personal style was so, you know, he's like, eating with his mouth open, smoking in the elevator. I mean, I saw him do it. And so I think, because he is just like this piggish, overbearing, crass guy, which is not a crime. Yeah, you just want to see him go down. Well, then he must have done it right And, like, are you really going to take the side of Harvey Weinstein?.. He's today's villain. And I thought I was just doing an interview where I was going to, like, you know, push back, get to the truth. And when I looked at these cases, I was just... shocked. You know, what? 90 women who came out and said he did something. And it actually boiled down to three cases. And in the two New York ones that he got 26 years for, I mean, just. You read the emails. It's crazy. You just cannot come out of reading the emails from Jessica Mann and... Evgenia and blanking on her last name and just go, what happened here? Like, what do you mean? You convicted him of rape... on the basis of these emails alone. Why would you then, like, has anybody ever. And Jessica Mann clearly is the first person ever who's done this, hit up their rapist after, and been like, hey, I'm with my mom in town. Like, can we come by? You know, would you want to meet my mom? Because actually? actually, that's one of the emails post rape. You know, it's hard for me to believe that, that's rape. I don't believe in. If lucky I wasn't sitting on that jury. And I think it does a tremendous disjustice... to injustice to two people... First, women... Right. Who are actually raped. Because if we're now saying all of this is rape and then people are just not going to be inclined to believe women who are actually raped. They're going to go, oh, another rape situation. Okay, Yeah, of course. so that's it. It's like you're, you're softening what it means to be raped. But the second thing is, I have three sons. This case mattered to me because... my son's lives are now threatened by this movement that said, hashtag believe women... Women lie. They lie a lot. Right? I mean, and so why don't we do this crazy thing... and just believe the facts and follow the facts of the case? And so I, I was very... concerned when this movement just kind of got carried away. yeah I even had to defend someone who I don't like. Matt Lauer. That was a crazy case. Very clearly... had a consensual relationship all over New York with that intern... Yes, but she was raped the first time... And then, you know, all the other times, apparently it wasn't rape. It doesn't really matter because here's a check, right?.. And that's what happened. And to this day, he carries on being branded a, a rapist. Like, people still say that about Matt Lauer because, because somebody made an allegation and when you look at the facts, it's like, no, he was a scumbag. He was cheating on his wife. He was abusing his power, certainly because the people, the reason they probably wanted to sleep with him is because he was Matt Lauer of the Today show. But to call him a rapist, like, is that fair? Is that okay? Can we at least all say, I don't care whether you're left or right, but that's wrong. I agree. And that was the challenge of the Harvey Weinstein case. I know a lot about that story just for. Well, because that's the world I lived in. I knew him and I. Everything you said, just said is... true. Of course. I, I mean, I am a woman... I clearly know that women will... flirt with guys to get what they want, even if it's a drink at a bar. So you can only imagine Hollywood where you welcome that climate... of exchange. Women who are just want to be the next Angelina Jolie. They all think they're going to be the next Angelina Jolie. What they'd be willing to do for that part... And Harvey benefited from that. He was Harvey Weinstein. He's making the best movies that have been made in Hollywood. And. And honestly, I'd argue that movies haven't been great since Harvey went in. Right. His movies were like. I mean, every classic movie that you can think of... Harvey Weinstein. The Weinstein Company produced the Mira. What was it called? Mirror. I can't think of the company's name. Miramax was. His company had produced... So it's a lot. yeah It was a lot to unpack, and yet they still moved... You know, obviously, the appellate judges said this case was completely ridiculous, it was rigged. Why'd you guys even allow these people into the courtroom just to convict his character? Not based on the facts. And it got sent back down. But he just lost again on two of the cases. And so I just interviewed him, and that interview is. Is coming out today again to ask him. Okay, here's a broader question. Harvey, who hates you? Because this is so clearly somebody took you out. And that's how I look at the case now. Who are you involved with? Who did you piss off that wanted you to no longer be who you were in Hollywood? Because this is. This is power. This is a structure. The judges are allowing this to take place for a reason. And his answers... were quite interesting. You know, And I think Harvey Weinstein did upset a lot of powerful people. And he was honest about that. I get it. I have no trouble believing that at all, given his style, which is, like, totally overbearing and, like, awful. But throwing someone in prison for the rest of his life is, you know, it's too much. He said Gloria Allred told him if she paid him, and I view her as a gangster of sorts of hurts. Everyone knows how she moves when she's on a case. She doesn't lose... that. If... he had paid her, and I want to say it was a million dollars. Don't quote me. That it would go away. She could make it go away. He didn't do it. Yeah, that's what he told me on record. he said that? So it's. It's. People are going to hear it from his own mouth, but that tells me that we're looking at maybe something different. And what was the Me Too movement? And I've spoken to other people that were victims of it, and they alleged to me that... a lot of it has to do with publishing... rights, that if they want to take out a business, you can take out, force a person to essentially have to sell their business and their assets. If you can create a scandal And... I'm inclined to believe that after examining the Michael Jackson case. because... he was in a war with Sony over publishing rights, and suddenly... he was being accused... And I didn't remember much about that case. But then when I went and I looked at it, it was a crazy story of, like, a kid who was drugged by his dad to say that he was raped by Michael Jackson. Literally, he was drugged by his father... And so you start to wonder if there's a lot of stuff that's happening in Hollywood that many people have tried to speak out about, and those people have either been deemed crazy... or in the case of Michael Jackson, no, he's into children. And we sort of pay attention to the media circus of everything without realizing that, like, there could be other stuff happening in Hollywood. Do you think it's possible that Michael Jackson was not a child molester? I am now convinced after looking at the case that he was not and that he was at a war with Sony. And I did a whole episode on it. I was shocked because I grew up loving Michael Jackson, and then I was absolutely repulsed by Michael Jackson. Like, he meant so much in my childhood, and then I was repulsed by Michael Jackson... And then I decided to reexamine what happened, and I just. oh of course I couldn't believe it. I mean, I literally could not believe, like, Harvey weinstein He was gonna win the Beatles catalog. It was his. He was fighting Sony and winning. And then just like... that, scandal broke. Dead. Even the way he died is weird, you know, but, like, you know, it was. It was a lot. When you go back and look at that case, you realize the media tells you so much, but they tell you absolutely nothing. Michael Jackson was weird in the same way that Harvey Weinstein was obnoxious, in the same way that Richard Jewel seemed like a fake cop. The guy was blamed for the Atlanta olympics bombing in 96. Who didn't do it? They kind of fit your preconceptions of... what... a bad guy, like, that would be. You know, Michael Jackson living Neverland is weird. Kind of personal Disney with all these little kids, you're like, he's clearly a kid toucher. And he definitely had issues because he felt that he had his childhood stolen from him. So he kind of made it his priority in this, I would say, very creepy way... to constantly say, I'm going to create this Neverland Ranch. And so kids are never going to go through anything. But it's quite telling that he was so close above with anybody else, with Macaulay Culkin. Right... Also, another person who alleged that he was being raped by directors. Was that Corey? I'm gonna say Corey... Feldman. Maybe Feldman. Yeah. And he's, he's been vocal about how he was abused. And both of those people said absolutely never, not once did Michael Jackson do anything to them. They stood up for him. And then when you get into the people... that said that he did something... and you figure out what their motives were, one's drugged, one was paid, this, the Michael Jackson story gets completely crazy. And so what you had was a man who was stunted in his growth because of his childhood, who wanted to make the, the world a special magical place for people. And he became the, you know, the perfect. I mean, he won his case. So we can say Michael Jackson was not guilty. Right. He actually won his case once the jury saw all the evidence. But... yeah, it's kind of scary to think that a media circus can be created about you and people can believe things. Just like we were saying with Matt Lauer. Absent very little fact, because the media just keeps saying it. yes And that gets into the importance of why I select and get, you know, know, I'm like a dog with a bone on certain cases... The Blake Lively and Justin Baldoni case is another one. Again, Justin Baldon is Jewish, obviously. So is Steve Sarowitz. I'm like the worst anti Semite ever. Here I am defending these people. But it's the same thing. She went to the press and tried to smear this man and ruin his existence by claiming in so many words that he had sexually harassed her. And she made him sound, with the help of the New York Times like he was an absolute creep. A pervert. A sex addicted pervert. If you read that article, you took away that Justin Baldoni was a sex addicted pervert. Right. And poor Blake Lively had to survive doing a movie with him. If Brian Friedman... had not done what he had done and published... the entire. He said he nothing to hide, the every text message sent between Blake and Justin and Ryan Reynolds... The world would have believed what she and the New York Times had worked on. It was. It's, it's a shocking case. People are going, oh, it's just like celebrity drama. No, this isn't celebrity drama. This is so much deeper than that. Okay? We are talking about the corruption of the media. Who has the trust of the people. Like, you're an educated person. You read the New York Times, right? The New York Times essentially assisted in a hit on a man. For what reason? What did Blake actually want from Justin Baldoni? Publishing rights. And we got to read her messages. And she wanted to be put on the film and she wanted to be put as a producer, executive producer. Or else. Right? You do this or else. Threatening. So I'm not going to come back. Here are my demands. I mean, a total witch, truly. That woman is possessed. I cannot, I cannot. After reading those messages and Justin falling over himself because he was like, she's an A lister. Just to kind of. He was almost like pathetic. Like stand up for yourself at a certain point. And what's happening right now like in the court system in New York, they're allowing her to, I don't know, like... it, it just seems like it's a very corrupt case. But what happened to Justin Baldoni, it is. Everyone should be reading those messages and realizing what the New York Times took part in. Because we're seeing this happen over and over again... where the media, like the journalists are acting like assassins. Right? These are, these are assassins. These are assassinations. Right? You're going to hit someone, you're going to hit their entire career. They're called hit pieces. They're called hit pieces for a reason. Because most people cannot survive them. Like Matt Lauer did not survive it. Okay, that's over. no he moved to New Zealand. yeah. I didn't know we moved to New Zealand. Yeah. He did not survive it. Michael Jackson. Yeah, he did. To this day you don't know the facts of Michael Jackson case. Right? You know, do you think he did it? Blah, blah, blah. Well, I would say 100% he did. I mean, I don't know... anything. Right, but that's the point. You don't know anything. But the media makes you think you do enough that you can have an assessment which I... was like, you, Michael Jackson's guilty. I totally believe that. Look at the guy. He had plastic surgery. He must be a child Molester Harvey Weinstein was guilty. Exactly Enough of noise from the media. And we just, we don't even look for facts anymore. And I want people who watch my show to be trained in recognizing those patterns when actually they're saying a lot, but they're not really saying much. You are watching a team of trained assassins take someone out. For what reason? I don't know. Then we can become, you know, we can come up with conspiracy. But that's what this is, right? That's what this is. They're ignoring facts because if they had presented the facts, none of us would have thought those things about Harvey Weinstein. We would have just said he's a creep who abused his power and he should step down... because nobody who's running a company should be sleeping with all these women and cheating on his wife. exactly Like it's, you know, it's, it's moral, it's morally wrong. yeah Not criminally, Criminally wrong. It's interesting how you select your stories. It's non ideological. yeah, it's you're, you're, your interest seems to be, is it true or not? It's principled... I don't care how you vote. I don't care if you give to the ADL. I'm on their list. Like, I'm literally on the ADL's list. And Harvey Weinstein's like one of their biggest donors. Doesn't matter to me. Do I think he did this thing? Why does it matter? Because my sons have to grow up in that world. I have three sons. So, yeah, I have a stake in this. We can't just have women... going to the New York Times and making allegations. It was also New York Times with Harvey Weinstein... They were awarded Pulitzers. and we can't just have this happening. We can't have, have people having their lives ruined by the press absent... any facts. And so there are tons of people that come to me and want me to take on their stories, and I try to take on as many as I can... Right now I'm obviously very much interested in the Epstein case... And so that's where I'm focusing my attention, The Epstein case, what do you think that was? The Epstein case? I would say Israel, obviously. And again, I'm so tired of us being gaslit. It's the dumbest gaslighting of all time. On record. Okay? When Pam Bondi... said. I love this your getting spun up! This was just a moment where I was like, okay, like, F you. You guys hate us. Like, you just like, you don't even. You have so much power. Why don't you just come out and say, na, na na, boo, boo. You can't touch us. F you. I would rather you do that. Right?.. Then put on this pretend intense... of a conference. And then you've got Trump over here... being like, does anybody still care about Jeffrey Epstein? And then Pam Bondi is asked the question, you know, was he working for another country? And she says, we don't know. Right, you don't know. So in my series, I'm like, maybe we can help them. Maybe we can help the Deep State figure out who Jeffrey Epstein was working for. Here is Ari Ben Menashe, who was a Mossad agent who  on record, literally recorded. Let's listen to him. Tell us about... how Jeffrey Epstein was working for the Mossad Okay. Ari Ben Menashe worked for Mossad, saying that... Robert Maxwell... brought him to Jeffrey Epstein and said, let this guy in, he's going to be involved in weapons. Hey, Pam Bondi, you might have missed this one. Okay, you might have missed this one. Then you go to another person... who is on record, who is Victor Ostrovsky who defected from the Mossad. The Mossad admits he worked for the Mossad. He wrote a book... by deception or by deception only. He says that's the Mossad motto, which they obviously do that. That's why they, you know, execute all these false flags... And he told everybody the truth. He has said Jeffrey Epstein was working with us. So for whatever reason, Candace Owens is able to determine whether or not Jeffrey Epstein might have been working for another state. But Pam Bondi, they're just going to have to keep... surmising about whether or not Jeffrey Epstein, who, who is with Ghislaine Maxwell, her father being Robert Maxwell. One of the biggest lies, by the way, that's, that's told, and I debunked this in our first or our third Epstein episode is the idea that, oh well, yeah, Robert Maxwell, they admit he was a Mossad agent, but Epstein didn't know him. The, the story they try to tell now in fashion to the public is like Ghislaine and Jeffrey Epstein met after her dad was dead. That's just false. Again, Ari Ben Menashe tells the story of being brought into the office and being told that Epstein was going to be brought in. This was the Iran Contras scandal. So since the 80s, Jeffrey Epstein has been working for Israel. I don't know how I know that and Trump and Pam Bondi don't. But they got to bring me in. Like I might have some evidence here. Right? It's like... So it's. We're getting to a point now you're gonna have tough confirmation hearings. Just I just want them to say F you like if. Seriously, that would feel better at this point if they just came out and said F you, Nana Boo Boo. You can't touch us. We rule over you. Haha. That would feel at least authentic. Going back to the Taylor Lorenz thing, you know, I'd be like, I... really don't like that, but at least it's authentic and I know you mean it and it's true. All totally fair. Yeah... Does any of, I mean, to the extent that we can project Forward and guess. Does, does any of this come out, I mean, to a greater extent than it has? I mean, do. Is there ever like a public resolution of this story? No. Because Israel's controlling our government. So no. The answer is no. Trump is powerless against him. We haven't had, I don't think we've been a sovereign nation since they shot jfk. And when I say they, people online say, what do you mean by they? I'm talking about Israel. I don't want you guys to like, you know, read in between. I'm talking about Israel. So, like, let's stop making that a taboo subject because they've gone masked down. Everything they're doing is demonic. I want nothing to do with it. I will never support Israel into the future after what they've done to these children, the starvation campaign, I, I don't care. Like, please write your article. You already written them all. I don't know what you could add right. About me, but I do not support Israel. And I don't think that Jewish Americans should support Israel. And I hope that they're now having those conversations I see many of them recognizing that they have been propagandized into believing they have to support this demonic state. And that's in large part thanks to their Birthright trip. Yeah, that mask down moment for Jonathan Greenblatt of the adl when he got caught on the hot mic, it was released. He didn't know that he was being recorded. And he's like... saying that they've got to get Tik Tok under control. He's like, we have a generational issue with Tik Tok. We need to do something about this. Like what we did with Birthright. What does that tell you? That the entire purpose of that Birthright trip, telling every Jewish American, you forget a free trip to Israel, was to propagandize you into believing that you have some affinity with this made up country in the Middle east, like in 1948, that you have to, you know, react when something's happening to them or you have to look away when they're doing things that are so obviously wrong and demonic. And so I'm hoping now that we're getting to that point where people can recognize that whether you're black, you don't have to agree with blm, whether you're Jew, allowing your identity... to shape your morality is problematic. Okay... And Israel in and of itself is a demonic nation. I will never support Israel. Right. So I went from working for PragerU to I will never support Israel in so that's how much the scales have fallen from my eyes about what they are involved in. And if you. This isn't your wake up call to just look at the footage of what they are doing. They're playing Hunger Games and, and like throwing food at them and then killing people and seeing who survives. You, I mean... it's, it's just at your fingertips. You have to take a look at what Israel is doing. Your point that if you allow your identity to determine your morality is a very deep and I think important point... that I've never heard any. I've never heard anybody put it that way. But it does feel like we're moving toward a world in which. you know, all ethics are situational and it all depends on who I am and who my tribe is and what my identity is. And there isn't, to the extent there used to be a sense of like... universal standards that apply to everyone otherwise known as principles, you clearly operate by those principles. Does that accelerate or do we return to a moment where we can say, oh no, there are universal standards of behavior... Truth is... an unchanging thing. Whether we have it or not is debatable. But there is something called truth. There is a. An actual reality. Or does AI just make all of It like I think the people that were fighting wish that I could make everything. I am troubled by AI. I am troubled by people believing that AI is smart. It's obviously dumb. It isn't. It requires you not to read books and to believe that everything it spins out... which is. Is really just. They're scraping the Internet. Right. That's all it's doing. its derivative of what other.. Which then gives the power to the same people in New York Times... It's like they're just scraping the trusted sources telling you this is a fact when it's not a fact. And. But I very much believe that something is happening globally right now, spiritually. I think me even surviving last year is proof of that. Obviously, if lies were well and not just surviving I should point out, since you're not a braggart. I mean thriving in a way that like nobody would have predicted. As you know, measured by your numbers on your podcast, as measured by your family output. Now you're the mother of four. Like, I don't know. I don't even know how you like have a baby in the middle of all that. But you did. You're. You're thriving. Which is amazing. I never would have guessed that ever. I hope that people take away from me living through it and surviving and Coming out the other side is that it's. It isn't. It isn't worth your soul to tell a lie, you know, tell the truth. And that seems harder like that, certainly in that moment of temptation, feels harder when you're being promised the world. If you just don't say this thing, you know, everything will stay the same. If you just pretend like you don't see what's happening in Gaza, you know, you can have your life the way that you like it. That is, in my viewpoint, that. That is being tempted by Satan. That really is. And that is why they want you to be attached to money, right? That is why they don't even know how to try to destroy me. Outside of saying, we're going to financially crush you, right? We're going to keep you in lawsuits, we're going to sue you. I'm going to sue you for $8 billion... Because there's no truth in these people. Like that. Money is all that is the only motive. That's their only real power. And so I hope that when people. you know, the millions of people that listen to my podcast every single day, that they get that there is. There is something... way bigger than that, way higher authority to that... And... when you commit yourself to truth, right, what is Jesus? Jesus is... the way and the truth and the life... Right? I think that once you get through that temptation, you are rewarded. If you do the right thing, if you do the moral thing and you do the principle thing, you're being tested. We're all being tested right now. That's what I truly believe. We're all being tested. And a lot of people are failing that test, but a lot of people aren't. Right. Strange bedfellows. You had Anna Kasparian on this show, and I've been saying for a while that I liked her because I perceived that she was being authentic even when I disagreed with her. Well, she's authentic. Yeah. I was like, I disagree with her, and she's been terrible to me. But I perceive that she's being authentic, and we're seeing that happen. It's a good thing. It's a good thing that the left and the right are coming together... on this topic and that it doesn't matter if you're black or you're white. And so in that way. yeah, Israel, what's like, Israel has been... a blessing... because I think for the first time, the entire world is in lockstep realizing something is very wrong, that this is allowed to happen in broad daylight and no one is stopping it. When you say you see something... happening globally on the spiritual level. What do you mean? What I mean by that is I can. And obviously I'm looking at my own metrics here, but. But we have people committed to watching my show all over the world, like using VPNs to watch this show all over the world. And... as I. I don't view myself as an authority, I'm learning with them. I think that's what they enjoy about my show is I'm not like Jake Tapper sitting up here telling you... she's deranged. I'm actually saying we're not getting answers here. And something is wrong, actually used the word deranged? like six times in the first minute. Deranged? Deranged like six times in the first minute. It was. It was glorious. It was so funny. It's like a clinical diagnosis. I mean, come on. Have you seen it, Doctor? Oh, yeah. You know who taught that theory of just diagnosing it? Yeah. Sigmund Freud. There we go. So I recognize what you're doing. I read the book. I read the book... You won't grok AI me. I know what you guys are about. Yeah. If you. If you telling the truth, just diagnose it. But, yeah, I guess that's what they do. They diagnose it. But, yeah, I think... we are seeing... all around the world, people are kind of waking up to that and they're responding to it. And they tried to crush you. They tried to crush you. You're lucky you're not on X, because all they do is try to crush you. You're trending all the time over the most mundane things, I am really? I love their hatred of Daryl Cooper. I love it. Because... when you see him, he's like a nice historian, and he really is, but the world can see that, right? So that's why it works. That's why you say, you asked me the question, Candace Why do you have so much joy? Because it is funny. Right? And I think that my joy makes them even angrier because I think it's so ridiculous. You're trying to sell to me that this guy Daryl Cooper is the second coming of Adolf Hitler. That's funny. And then it makes people curious because you're going, he's so clearly not... So what is it that he's hit up upon... that has you guys so triggered? It's got to be a truth. Let me keep digging. And yeah, you. As soon as you start, like, asking any questions about The World War II narrative, which has been decided in our textbooks, which were printed by Robert Maxwell, okay. we are getting that with our Epstein series, you know, who... He who prints the textbook is king. You start asking other questions, Right? How has my mind been shaped since I was a child?.. Why do I feel this way? Why do I have an emotional response to these things that I don't understand? And... that was... set up for you. We were set up to not ask questions about certain things... And so now they're arriving at their final point, and this is why I love it so much, is that we've now forced them into a corner where their legitimate argument, as if it couldn't get more absurd, is that we have to just stop asking questions. Right?.. You're not just asking questions. This is their new thing. You. You're not just asking questions. Why are you asking questions? Say what you really mean. They're the ones that are so... clearly undone that we can't even ask questions. So we're. The funny thing is, I actually am asking questions. I don't really understand a lot of things, We all are. right, We all are. We're reading and we're learning, and that scares them. So what does that tell you when exploring and learning and true education... outside... of the public school system... terrifies them? What does it tell you? That they're hiding something. They're lying about something. You think I would be scared if you were asking questions and I knew the answers to them? I'd be like, yeah, no, here, you can come examine this a thousand times. Like you're. You're lying about something, and the whole world can see that... So, yeah, I'd be... pretty upset if I were you, too, because you have been on the side of the author of lies. You've been just. Liars are afraid and weak, as I said, brittle. And you can just feel it. And I've experienced it. I've lied. And the second you lie, you're, like, afraid. Well, you're afraid, of course, the lie being exposed. But I think the fear is deeper than that. I think it. I think it weakens you. Yeah. And it makes you look ridiculous. Well, that. That's exactly right. It's. It's humiliating. So we. We do have. A lot of our subscribers are very excited that you're coming. Very excited. I feel like we have some overlap. So they sent in a million questions. We can hit you with a couple of them. They're actually good questions. Here's one. I don't know if you can even answer this. What do you think of the Daily Wire now that you've been gone for a while? I Think I wish the best of the Daily Wire. I wouldn't have changed. I wouldn't change a single thing about what happened, how it went down in the moment. It seems so crazy, but I think in every action, people get to see who you are and what you're made of. And the Daily Wire got to tell their story and I got to tell mine. So you get. I mean, you were a big deal, obviously, at the Daily Wire, a little bigger than we realized. When you left, we found out what a big deal you were. So no one wants to lose a job where they're succeeding. But in retrospect, do you feel like that was part of a larger plan? Yeah, God's plan, for sure. That's what I mean. And now with the things and... the discussions that I'm having with my viewers, there's no way I could have been at the Daily Wire. This wouldn't have worked. You know, it worked for a little bit, and... then it suddenly was not working. And now definitively, we would not be a good match. And at the end of the day, I just don't view myself as in competition with the Daily Wire. Like, I am interested in totally different things. Well, you're a lot bigger than the Daily Wire just on the numbers. You're much bigger than the Daily Wire. And I think that's in part because... removing the Daily Wire as the conduit to my ideas was a good thing. Like, I got to. I don't have to have a bunch of people as it is at any corporation. Like, can you talk about that topic? Is it okay? What do the lawyers think? Right. That's right. Got to remove all that, and I get to go right to my audience. So I'm grateful. and you don't have To take credit or blame for what others on that channel do. And I felt this way working for big companies. It was like, I can't believe that I hate your company or I love your company. It's like I. And it's not exactly... connected to me. I mean, I work there, but. Exactly... And I was. I'm definitely somebody that I think I thrive when I get to just truly say and express myself entirely exactly how I feel every second of every day. And I'm interested in so many different topics. And it was getting increasingly difficult to kind of... explore... things that I was interested in without having to worry about whether it would upset this person or that person or have a legal person felt about this. And at that point, you're not Having fun, right then it becomes A job. Right. It always was a job, but then it becomes a job, meaning that... you're waking up every day and you're like. and now I wake up every day, and I'm thrilled, and... I'm researching and I'm learning with my audience. So I'm happier... I hope the Daily Wire is happier. And that's it. And this is another question. Do you ever fear that something that people want to harm... you? I know people want to harm me, so I don't have to fear it. Fair. Yeah. In case you missed it, a guy tried to kill me... last year. I Contacted about the FBI. Right, Sorry, Sorry There's nothing to fear is embrace that. That people are deranged and people are crazy, and of course people want to harm me... Do I fear it? No, because I don't. I don't fear death. And... I think that that is the true challenge... of being a Christian. I asked myself this question when there are so many people who purport to be Christians and they won't say things that they know know are true, or they... actually say things that they know to be false because they're fearful of losing their jobs. Right. And if you are responding or you're. Or you're behaving in a certain way or not saying something because you're fearful of something like the moment right now... Do you believe in the afterlife? Do you believe exactly in Christ? exactly Do you know that you're actually not just trying to get paid by a check, but also trying to get into heaven?.. Right. That's the biggest, bigger thing. So I go for the bigger thing. And, yeah, I. I know that no matter what, I will be okay. My husband makes sure... that. He says his number one goal is to make sure that all of us are getting into heaven. this is not the end. yeah Last question. Do you have advice for the president, whom, you know, you said you spoke by phone. I know you've been a supporter of his for a long time, but do you have advice for him now? Yes. My advice to him would be my advice to very many people who I've seen... become very big and then get very small or have their supporters turn on them, Which is don't ever get to the point where you think you're smarter than your audience. And I think that for Trump right now, and I'm speaking... specifically about the gaslighting... of. Why Are we still talking about Jeffrey Epstein? And then saying, I don't want any supporters that are still into this, that means that you see yourself as a king... and you've stopped Listening, you're not responding to the movement anymore. And... what made us get behind you, you... was that despite the fact that we knew you were this boisterous billionaire, was that you had a way of communicating with it and understanding how people felt. Right. The blue collar worker, how that person felt. The person that's listening to you, the truck driver, the plumbers. And when you respond with, well, I don't want your support, or gaslighting, you know, you've lost touch a little bit with your audience. Just don't never think that you're smarter than your audience. yes I'm constantly getting feedback from my audience and trying to figure out what they're interested in and how I can be better, even if slight tweaks of things like, oh, I don't like the way the audio sounds, or this. And they like that. They know, because then they know that... you care. And I do care. And I think that Trump's message over the last few weeks with the Epstein Fumble, as I'm going to refer to it as, makes people think that he doesn't care... And I think he does care, so he should change that. I think that's very wise advice. I think that's the wisest advice you could give. Not surprisingly, got kids. So my last question is, what is. Because I do. I was thinking about you and my son this morning. You do have, like a... obvious peace and joy about you. It's just obvious. It's not fake. It's just with you and your husband and your youngest child off camera, and it's totally real. What is your... spiritual practice? Well, we're Catholic... My family's Catholic. When George and I first got married, I was not Catholic. yeah I was Protestant. And... to see... just God's design and everything and how me and George met and how he then was so... drawn back into his faith... like he was. I would definitely say he was not a practicing Catholic when we got married, or else he would have told me that I had to convert before we got married, actually, because he's. That he's that deep into the faith now... But our marriage has brought us closer to faith. And I made the decision not knowing how all this is going to play out, but to become baptized into the Catholic Church. And it's just interesting how. you know, there's so there. There is a divine aspect to everything that's happening, the timing of everything. I never question God's timing. Even things seem terrible, right when the whole world is rooting for you to fail, saying, she's canceled and it's over. The reason why I survived it and the reason why I'm happy... is because I have real faith. And also because I know that that's just a veneer that's been created for us. The idea that, like, your media and that if the New York Times can take you out, you. You don't have enough substance in your life... They can't threaten me because they... haven't created anything that's real in my life. They don't. They have no control over anything that's real in my life. And if you think I care about a headline, I couldn't care less about a headline. You're going to try to get me canceled from speaking at an event like, okay, they're probably serving rubber chicken anyways. If that goes through, great, amazing. yeah And that's not going to be enough of a threat for me to give up speaking truth because. And this is the part that I really want to get to because it's super important for people to hear this. I'm encouraged when people say that I give them to courage. Right. That's the greatest thing. That's the greatest compliment that I can receive that they were quiet about something and now they are vocal about it because they realize it matters. Our children are going to inherit the world that we allow them to inherit. So if we decide to become creatures of, you know, pleasure and creatures of social media and creatures of a lack of focus... and... ultimately creatures of fear and cowardice. This. They will inherit the world. Right? That, that, that we've left behind for them. It's so important to stand up for what's right... because your children, if you don't stand up to the demons, those demons are only going to grow more powerful. That's right. And your children are going to be the ones that suffer it. Right. So the question... is, do you care enough about it... to protect your children? To moms and dads, right? When you say, I didn't say the thing... So I just went along with the COVID thing. You would allow them to poison your kids, like, because you were just scared to say something, And again, because we live in the society of pleasure and we live in... everything so momentary and social media and a distraction. We've actually become a very weakened species. Like, I am so driven by who my grandfather was... I always say this. People are like, what's up with this girl? Why is she so happy?.. I say, my grandfather blessed me, he spoiled me. And I just looked up, looked at him as such a... man. Like, truly, what it means, like, to Embody... faith, his family. It was all that he cared about. Faith, family. And he could look you in the eye and do a deal on a handshake, right? If he said he was going to be there, he was going to be there. If he said he wasn't going to be, he was going to do this, he was going to do that. You know, we need to go back to that. We've lost that in this society. Everyone's so deceptive and sneaky and they don't say what they mean. And there's contracts and they're tricky contracts and everyone's leaking stuff to the press. It's. Have some respect, you know, for yourself and for your family. To be a better person... and to speak up when something is wrong. Amen. I can't improve on that. Candace Owens, thank you. Thank you so much for taking all this time and congratulations. I think that your example, even if people disagree with you, I think they have to say this is a woman who's purely sincere and I don't think there's a higher compliment. Thank you. Thank you so much. A lot coming from you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking. With everything that's going on in the world right now, all the change taking place in our economy and our politics, with the wars we're on the cusp of fighting right now... Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally, totally wrong. It's immoral... What can you do about it? Well, we could whine about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive... The way to do that on YouTube, we think, is to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video... That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing... actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.