The Joe Rogan experience Train by day Joe Rogan podcast my night. Oh day. Oh, Come on. Hey, how are you Joe? Good to see you. Oh, It's great to see you. It's great to be here, man. How did you Meet Paul's so Paul's dammit. Yeah, introduce me to you. Yeah. So how'd you meet Paul? Yeah. So I was aware of Paul for quite some time and this past psychedelic science. I was shadowing People and working to help the people that went to the conference feel Safe just because of the like the nature of the environment that That we're in now. In what way? You know, like so psychedelic Science had a lot of Jewish practitioners. They had invited Palestinian practitioners in there was Arab practitioners there. So there was a lot of education around sensitive topics Happening, you know, and I was invited in just to be available to help people Feel secure. What were they worried about? Yeah, any protests Building up just because there was Jewish people in Palestine. Any people? Well, You know, the nature of the environment, right? There's like wars going on. Across the world. This is a psychedelic conference. This is a psychedelic conference. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. They're worried about protest breaking out. It's Like a psychedelic conference. Possible protests, possible people getting overwhelmed With emotion. You know, because in psychedelic science in 2023, there was a situation Where when Dick Rick Doblin was on stage, a group came in and disrupted his presentation And they were allowed on stage to speak. Oh boy. Right, but that's a type of disruption. Right. And it should be handled carefully and Rick handled it like a master. What did he do? He made space for them. Oh, well, was that really the way to do it? Well, it depends. It depends. It depends. There's a time and a place, right? And I think psychedelic science 2025 did It a wonderful job hearing all the groups that wanted to be there and allowing them to have space To speak from their hearts and minds. Why don't you tell everybody what your background is? Sure. Sure. So I am currently law enforcement professional at the rank of lieutenant. At a Massachusetts. I've been in law and my accent's going to kick in and on and off through this whole discussion. Couple beers in. Yeah, yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. So that's been about 15 years. I'm also a therapist trained psychedelic assistant therapist. And I believe a lot of people Believe I'm the first law enforcement professional who who got a religious exemption at their place of work to access and theologians. So how did your journey from being a law enforcement professional to someone who's involved in psychedelics? How did that take place? Okay. Yeah. Yeah. I think I'm going to have to go a little bit further back. Sure. For that. Sure. So I went to a little high school in Boston, Massachusetts. I knew him in prep. And when I graduated there, I was luckily accepted into Northeastern University. So I go on a Northeastern University in my 20s. And they asked you what do you want to major in. Right. And who knows what they want to major in at that age. I was like, let's study psychology. Right. Get to know myself figure things out. Such a behavioral program. What I mean by that is rats pressing levers observable stuff. I wasn't getting what I was looking for. So I take a philosophy class. I take a religion class. Eventually I take so many of those classes. I graduate with an undergraduate degree in religion and philosophy and a huge minor in psychology. Right. So I'm a seeker at that time as well. Northeastern is a co-op school. So you go to school for six months. You work for six months. I was able to convince my co-op advisor to let me be a security guard in the nightclub industry in Boston for my co-op for school. Okay. So five year program. I'm studying religion and I'm working as a security guard in the 90s in the nightclub scene in Boston. I have a front row seat when ecstasy hits the scene. Right. I start working when it's high test stimulants and alcohol. And I'm there continuing to work when the scene gets introduced to ecstasy. I'm not only getting to see how it affects people but it affects the whole culture. The people at the clubs are no longer looking at each other like who are you and what do you want. They're saying hi and smiling. They're high-fiving each other when they meet up. They're hugging each other. I had that in my head in my 20s. Okay. So I become a cop in my 30s. I meet this police chief. He notices that I think a little differently. I see things a little differently. My background is a little different than your typical officer. He starts taking me to the international association of chiefs of police conference every year. This is a really important point. The IACP. It's a really serious, huge international conference with upper level chief executive level officers there. I go one year when Rick Doblin's there in Florida. He's presenting on phase two clinical trials the results for MDMA assisted psychotherapy. It's efficacy against treatment resistant severe PTSD. I can't believe it. Actually, I shared the story before. At the moment that he was going to present to the left was Rick Doblin and to the right was Donald Trump. I'm not making this up. Wow. Right. So I go left. I sit in the front row and the room that they gave him this huge room has 10 people in it because everybody's everybody went right. 67% of people with treatment resistant severe PTSD had their PTSD pushed into sustained remission. From how many experiences I think the way it was set up was like two or three. You know there's a model to the framework preparation experience space experience space experience and an integration. And this is all done through maps. So it's all done in a clinical environment. Yes, very controlled. Very controlled. Multidisciplinary association of psychedelic studies. Rick's presenting there. I'm in the front row. I'm shaking. I jump on stage. I be lying to him. I introduce myself and I say I have to help. He says why don't you tell me some stuff about who you are first. You know what I mean? Like this is a guy in front of me shaking his shaking his hand and saying I have to help with this. And he finds out I'm a therapist to cop and therapist. And he says the best way to help is to become a psychedelic assistant therapist. What? What's that you'd never heard of anything? Never heard of any of that. What year was this again? Man, it must be five years ago. Maybe more than that at this point. Just working from memory. It was Orlando, Florida, I see P conference. Yeah. You said something really important. Joe, psychedelic assistant therapist. What? What? Medicalizing a schedule one substance. What? You know, how is this even possible? But the story gets even more interesting. He gives me his card and he says contact me. What the heck is going on here at this point. I'm already telling my current my retired chief. What's going on? I'm meeting these people. And maps gets me into one of the first MDMA assisted therapist trainings, a cohort of people that were going that they trained on how to do this methodology with people. So you got to know what's going on, right? It's a I mean when someone's on MDMA, they're you know, they're different and you got to hold that. You got to hold that. But not only did they do that. But maps contacts me and says we might be able to get you into a federally sanctioned research protocol as a healthy normal. Because I'm an example of a healthy normal. Right. Where you're going to be able to experience MDMA because they think that it's important for the therapists to know what MDMA does. So I mean really I go back to my police chief and I say chief not only going to be able to be trained as an MDMA assist therapist to help people with PTSD because it matters to me. Right. What are cops doing to themselves? They're blowing their heads off. Right. The suicide rate in cops is two to three times higher than the rate in civilians. More cops are dying by suicide by the barrel of their own guns, then attack on the street. Right. The way the media is portraying everything that that's not getting out there. Right. So MDMA can help with that. I'd say we're in an epidemic of suicide in first responders. If that's the numbers. No. Yeah. For sure. Right. Yeah. And and and we've seen Joe, you've seen this. You've had guests on that talk about this. You've seen what the government allows when we're in an epidemic. Yeah. Radical measures. Radical measures. Not when it comes to compounds on schedule one. Why? Well, because it's federally scheduled one. It's supposed to have no medical use whatsoever. And the most dangerous and addictive of compounds. That's right. May I say something about that? It's a lie. Well, it's certainly a lie. Certainly a lie. And I need everybody to hear that. Because men and women are dying and suffering needlessly at the level of an epidemic. And we're upholding a lie. I think the problem is politically it's very difficult to say what you're saying. If you're anyone who is running for office or anyone is currently seeking reelection. Right. Because it carries with this taboo this narrative that has existed since the 1970s. That these are drugs that are ruining people's lives. And it's a it's kind of waste. You're just going to waste away. It's going to you're just escaping reality. Therefore weak people. They're for losers and addicts. Are you couldn't have summed up the problem better? Nicely done. It's a public narrative that's out there that unfortunately it's going to take a long time to turn that battleship around. So I think what you're helping with is that I am asking for the politicians who can't speak up to help make safety for those of us who either can or want to. I'm asking for their help because I'm active law enforcement and I got to tell you Joe we're muscled. We're muscled not only are our mouth shut but our hearts are put in a cage. Look how sorry what do you mean? Law enforcement is spiring to build a career in the system can't talk about the stuff. They not only can't talk about this stuff. They can't do this stuff. So but what they can do is keep their mouths shut until they get to the point where they put a barrel of their gun in their mouth or they can go by a giant bottle of whiskey and drink themselves into depression. Divorce divorce divorce subclinical depression anxiety disordered eating disordered sexual practices because you know chronically activated autonomic nervous system what does that cause fight fight freeze fawn hyper sexuality I dropped the last step right what is that destroy. It destroys everything it destroys everything it destroys the human behind the badge right well the issue is that police officers experience trauma on a daily basis that most people can't even comprehend and it's not discussed all that's ever discussed with police officers is when a cop does something bad. That's right let me paint a picture based on what you just brought in there's research out there that says the amount of critical incident exposure in an average law enforcement careers 200. 200 murders suicide car accidents baby head crushed yeah 200 most civilians have five critical incidents and people's lives sideways. So the first responders nervous system is a carrier of trauma at a level unimaginable by most people which is what you just brought into this conversation and then. So you got the gasoline right you got the match they fly off the handle and everyone acts surprised how could that happen how did that officer end up doing that because it's a known risk of the job. You know when we die five to ten years after retirement that's a dirty little secret so you strive to get to retirement you will you carry the dark underbelly of society and then you die five years after you get out there's no time to wait. Yeah it's it's an unspoken trauma it's an unspoken issue that you know was really exacerbated during this whole defund the police shit that was going on a few years back was net then you've got the demoralization you know and the fact that these people not only they're not appreciated but then they've been all turned into villains that's right that's right the next worst yeah I work with some really caring young people men and women. And the whole defund the police movement was so hurtful it was so hurtful it hurt me watching them have to come to work and see them take the 911 calls for service and show up and do their best following the rules to make sure that that family of that person is okay and then come back and feel unappreciated and not understood not understood yeah you know. Yeah they were used as political pawns and you know openly openly by politicians who are still in office it was pretty disgusting yeah and just shortsighted and a complete lack of awareness of the difficulty of the job because if you're around cops if you know cops like it is an insane job it's an insane job that you're asking people just regular people to go out and do on a daily basis that's right. You don't know what's going to happen you don't know who you're interacting with you don't know if it's going to turn into a life or death situation. I see people try to paint the job as a normal job and it isn't and someone's got to do it right someone's got to do it because it's inherently a part of human nature at times for confusion to come through for misunderstanding. That leads to violence to happen someone has to show up and handle that it's not a normal job. Yeah so from your first introduction to this idea of psychedelic therapy how long before you actually experience it and how long before you actually help other people experience it. Okay so take us through so you find out about this you bring it to the department yeah what was that like yeah yeah so it was very interesting I mean these were all ideas that weren't even on my radar until I met Rick at the Chiefs of Police Conference they get on my radar and they fire me up because this is what I want to do right because of my history I'm compelled to step in between warring parties and get them to stop. Okay we can touch upon that if it fits into the conversation and then maps is able to get me into this research protocol and I'm able to get permission from my chief to experience MDMA I have a I have a mystical experience I have a mystical experience on film the segment when I want you can't make this up when I take the blue pill you know Morpheus analogy there. You don't want to take the blue pill. I think the red one. Yeah the red one's the one that looks at reality. Okay so I'm flipping the colors. It's okay. It was a blue one picture right back at the same reality right. But I experience MDMA on film it makes it into Michael Collins how to how to change your mind docu series on the MDMA episode right. I have a mystical experience so now I go back and I'm like chief you know what the hell right are men and women need access to this if they needed they should have access to it they still don't have access this is where I'm going this is where I'm going with this. You heard about what happened with the FDA the panel that was supposed to decide the final step before medicalization was allowed said no to Rick. Yeah right yeah what they said they wanted more tests yes and and I love that you did that because I I tend to have to correct people it wasn't a no they said it we're going to delay you and we want another face three clinical trial right but some of the things that came up I want to talk about real quick is they couldn't make sense of how good the data was. I think what you're going to use that as a reason to not go forward is that really what they said I believe that was part of the problem yeah I mean we can look this up but I believe that was part of the problem they also couldn't make sense of how do you make the prescription a drug paired with therapy they couldn't make sense of the therapy part because it would be the first prescription of a drug paired with therapy that was the goal. The next episode is brought to you by visible I want to let you in on something your current wireless carrier does not want you to know about visible because visible is the ultimate wireless hack no confusing plans with surprise fees no nonsense just fast speeds great coverage without the premium cost with visible you get one line wireless with unlimited data powered by Verizon's network for $25 a month taxes and fees included. Seriously $25 a month flat what you see is what you pay no hidden fees on top of that ready to see join now and unlock unlimited data for just $25 a month on the visible plan don't think wireless can be so transparent so visible well now you know switch today at visible dot com slash rogan terms apply see visible dot com for plan features and network management details. Well there's also an issue with doing double blind placebo controlled studies because it's very clear whether or not you're taking the drug that's right that's right so here's what I want to ask you about that and I want to ask a science about that is that a problem with the power and magic of MDMA is that a problem with where sciences. What's the perception problem right because obviously MDMA has profound impacts on soldiers the PTSD the studies have already been very clear and maps is done an amazing job in explaining all that but the problem is a perception issue okay and that this drug is also used by people who go to raves and wind up dying of heat exhaustion. You know and people die because they hear they dive in overdose which really they died of fentanyl poisoning because they're getting illegally sourced MDMA which is probably not even really MDMA a lot of times the fedamines and it's cut with fentanyl and there's a lot of other shit and then they want to dive in overdose that's right look you bring up you bring up something called the the challenge of accessing safe supply yeah right. We need to people need to check their drugs because because the illicit supply is isn't standardized it isn't safe well the real barrier is the fact that it's illegal that's right the problem is there is a demand and so when you have a demand and then you make it illegal for people to access then what happens is outlaws step in and you get criminal organizations who sell it and they don't give a fuck about you there is there used to killing people there is they don't mind poisoning you and they don't mind if they're selling you something that's totally not what you're trying to get that's right that's right and you know where I learned about this I think you'll get a kick out of this yeah my promotional books studying to become sergeant really yeah they actually have an entire section on what prohibition of alcohol cost and yet nobody applies that to other substances that's exactly what's kind of funny it's kind of right kind of funny tragically right and and and here's the muzzle part why are officers allowed to talk about this why aren't working officers allowed to talk about the problems with the war and drugs and how it's being waged why in America really when you say aren't allowed to what is it because it will hinder your career I think so yeah I think it's fear I think it's programming you mentioned the programming from the Nixon time until now right yeah this is prohibited stuff we can't talk about it right not only can't we talk about it but we can't think about it because thinking leads to behaviors and if those behaviors are risky out goes your career yes well I think we're in a very unique time now where the doors open and credit to Rick Perry former Republican governor Texas who championed the I began initiative here and it's now become a thing they're going to start doing that which is amazing and so beneficial for soldiers in particular people with extreme PTSD and people that are suffering from severe drug addiction and they don't understand why and they're just they're just fucked a lot of soldiers and a lot of you know really traditionally right wing people are getting involved in psychedelics they're going to psychedelic retreats a lot of other soldiers that have had positive experiences and have gotten help for reaching out to their brothers and sisters bringing them into these experiences that's right so instead of this narrative that psychedelics are for hippies and losers with no discipline now you've got some of the most discipline human beings on earth who are seeking these things out for help that's right and realizing that there's strength in seeking help it's it's not a weakness to take these things and these things are not out in the sense of something that allows you to escape reality they allow you to see reality through a completely different lens and that can heal you and this is not something that has been a narrative before this this narrative is very recent this narrative particularly among right wing people among conservative people among discipline people hard working discipline people now they're realizing like this is a tool that's been denied us because of a corrupt government a corrupt government that was seeking to silence a civil rights movement in the anti-war movement in the 1970s and the 1960s this was what this was all about and we are still dealing with this shit 60 years later which is really crazy it is crazy it's fucking crazy it's so crazy because we know the facts now we know what started it we know who was involved we we we we know the conversations that they had why they did it in the first place and yet the public narrative is still the same the public narrative is still drug takers are undisciplined losers who are trying to escape reality and I don't want my kids doing drugs and that that same shit that you hear over and over and over again that's right that's right it's it's it's crazy and extremely tragic yeah and let me let me take that narrative thread that you just brought in and let's go all the way back to the times when the Spanish were colonizing this country it was actually part of the program to destroy the medicine and women medicine men and medicine women wisdom keepers which directly connects I believe to the war on drugs it's that's called on forever right I mean that's the illucinian mysteries they the Roman silence that you go to Siberian shaman the Rome they were silenced by the the powers that be in those days it's just always been the case where people that take things that allow them to understand the methods of control that are being inflicted upon them and how to escape that and then they get a bunch of other people that follow them and they don't want to listen to propaganda anymore and then people go hey this is a real problem what's the cause of this oh it's these fucking dudes go to elicis and they figure out life we got to stop that that's right yeah we got to put a fucking kabash on that and then they spread all throughout the world to try to do it there it is and they went into hiding let's bring that threat all the way to the present and I want to see if I can succeed at making this point and it has now hijacked law enforcement it has hijacked law enforcement and it moves law enforcement away from protecting and serving life liberty pursuit of happiness in the first amendment religious expression into industry interest profits without us us even knowing it I'm not pointing a finger at anyone law enforcement professional I'm challenging people to wake up to what's going on because when we kick indoors and arrest black and brown people for having a relationship with a plant like cannabis and charge him and put him in a cage and lock him up and they weren't doing anything violent we have to ask who is this hurting and I'm here to tell you it's hurting them and us for sure for sure because anyone who's a law enforcement officer that's arresting someone for weed they know that they're not doing anything good moral injury yeah it's a moral injury on the person that's actually being forced to reinforce to enforce those laws that's right that's right yeah because you can't feel good about yourself you're arresting some guys kind of now to weed is sitting at home with his wife chilling that's crazy and that went on for decades in this country decades well it's still happening only for somewhere around for a 40 states have recreationalized or medicalized so we still have work to do and if you look at the drug policy alliance few years back might we could look this up we're still arresting in the hundreds of thousands of people nonviolent marital they're trying to go backwards in Texas yeah the lieutenant governor is trying to go backwards and he's against the legalization and so they're trying to ban all THC products and it's completely inappropriate it's not just an appropriate it's funded okay right it's funded by the alcohol lobby and they know that they're losing people from drinking alcohol that's right the numbers are already showing it yeah they're building up to a collapse people are going to get off the alcohol they're not going to be be able to rely on the profits to be the same I agree with you and then you know what else cannabis is such a threat because it's a medicine that can help with such a broad array of symptoms and challenges what a threat to farmer yeah it's definitely that one plant this one yeah yeah I know and it's not just a threat to farmer I mean I'm sure you were you're aware of the original reason why it was outlawed hit me okay remind me William Randolph Hurst so William Randolph Hurst so if you go back to the 1930s when alcohol prohibition ended you have a bunch of enforcement officers that aren't doing anything anymore then you have William Randolph Hurst and then there's a machine an invention called the decorticator and the decorticator allowed them to effectively process hemp fiber hemp was always a very difficult plant to process and when Eli Whitney was Eli Whitney created the cotton gin so was I think that sounds right when they created the cotton gin now it cotton took over for hemp clothing so cannabis hemp you know the term cannabis that was what canvas was so all painting the first draft the declaration of independence was made on hemp paper it's a superior textile it's a superior paper it's a commodity you can take an acre of land that you're using to grow trees on that you process into paper and it'll take you years and years to regrow the trees in order to have the same amount of paper in that area with hemp it's instantaneous almost it grows very quickly and within a few months you have these plants again you harvest the stocks you run it through the decorticator so in 19 whatever it was 1930 something cover of popular science magazine hemp the new billion dollar crop because of this invention so this invention was going to because hemp makes a superior clothes I have a hemp jujitsu ghee that I got from this company called Dadsora it's fucking indestructible my cotton guise they rip apart all the time they're good for a year or two and then they tear and you got to buy a new one or you just show up in class with a fucked up key which a lot of people do hemp geese are way better they're just far superior hemp paper you grab it you pull it you tear it you like this is crazy it's so much stronger than regular paper it's a superior product so William Randolph Hurst who didn't just own Hurst publications he didn't just own this news empire he also owned paper mills so he also owned forest that he was going to do it growing trees and he recognized this threat from this new industry and so to combat that threat he starts putting out propaganda pieces and then they coined the term marijuana so marijuana was originally a term a slang term for a wild Mexican tobacco it had nothing to do with cannabis cannabis which had been used for thousands of years and hemp which had been used for thousands of years and then they start printing new stories that blacks and Mexicans were taking this new drug and raping white women and then you have the re re for madness films and all these propaganda films that show young people taking a smoke of marijuana and losing their mind so people act quickly and they pass laws not even knowing that they're outlawing hemp thinking that they're stopping this new drug because most people are unaware of it clearly this is a time before the internet very difficult to access information understand exactly what's going on right so they hoodwink the entire world so Harry and slinger William Randolph Hurst they all conspired to stop a commodity and that's what hemp was it was it had nothing to do with the psychoactive form of THC it had everything to do with hemp as a commodity that was threatening to the right to the businesses yeah only just visit into this day you can make hemp crete it's a superior building material it's flame resistant it's lighter it's stronger it lasts longer you can build houses with it you can make clothes with it hemp oil is hemp seeds they not only are they good for you they contain all the amino acids it's a superior protein source it's like hemp protein powder is fantastic for you it's like really good stuff in so many different ways and they put the kabash on that in the 1930s and that 90 fucking years later is still this this anchor around our next it we're carrying it's still in place yeah one asshole that's right one asshole in the 1930s who didn't want to compete with hemp and had this incredible power because he owned the newspapers yeah he started this all that's right that's right I'm tracking you're seeing that article pull up that article hemp the new billion dollar crop because it's wild to watch yeah because this machine this decordicated before that it was really it was brutal back breaking work to take the hemp fiber and break it down because it's such a durable plant like if you ever pick up a hemp stock a hemp stock that would this is a mammoth tusk but this is heavy but if you had a hemp stock that was this size it would be incredibly light like balsa wood but hard like oak it's it's like an alien plant yeah it sounds different than sounds amazing everything else so here it is yeah the new billion dollar crop American farmers are promised a new cash crop with the annual value of several hundred million dollars all because of a machine that has been invented which can solve a problem more than six thousand years old it is hemp a crop that will compete with other American products instead it will displace imports of raw materials and manufactured products produced by underpaid what is that like cool and peasant labor and will provide thousands of jobs for American workers throughout the land so that was the machine underneath it that's the decordicator and that's this new machine that they invented and this is what it's all about it has nothing to do with marijuana was a real problem we were losing people no people have been smoking marijuana and taking marijuana in edible form and you know the sadduz and taking hushish that people have been using it for thousands and thousands of years without problems that's right can you abuse it of course you can abuse cheeseburgers too I was just going to say yeah I don't think you should shut down burger king that's to be able to get a fucking cheeseburger if you want and there's a lot of things that people can abuse you get abuse every single thing you could abuse cake you could abuse everything human beings tend to abuse things that doesn't mean that they shouldn't be allowed to use it it's like a hammer you could build a house or the hammer or you can hit yourself in the dick if you're fucking crazy it doesn't mean we should outlaw hammers right there's a use for these things and they require it requires discipline and requires an understanding of what the thing is when you turn that thing into a schedule one substance when everybody knows that's not true especially when you have a schedule one substance that is illegal when there's things like alcohol that are totally legal that I support you should be able to drink I don't I want a bar I don't care I don't drink anymore but I feel like you should be able to drink I drink most of my life drink if you want to I say the same thing about it's not good for you right right it's a depressant that's a carcinogen again when I was also fun right it's also fun get your tips and I drink tipsy's fun yeah but but the the point is we need freedom and you need the freedom to be able to explore these things and find out what's right for you and wrong for you and you need the freedom to be able to run studies and get accurate information in terms of dosages and side effects and what sort of genetic issues that certain people might have that made them that make them more inclined to be addicted to alcohol or addicted to cannabis or whatever their issue is whether it's psychological or biological we need to have information and to put a blockade on this in the form of prohibition is stupid and the fact that we're doing it in 2025 with all the information that we have available today we have an abundance of information that's right that's right well look I think it was as you as you said there was intentionality behind what was done yeah and when you don't have 50 years of creating an evidence base you have a weaker argument for decriminalization right and that was intentional yes that is intentional for sure right Joe I mean you brought this up right highly addictive no known medical use that's a lie we can go through the list of schedule one and we can point out which one it's a lie about which one is actually anti-addictive you take silocybin and you have an experience with silocybin magic mushrooms you don't want to drink right we don't know why we have we haven't been able to study that right eyeball gain you want to reprieve from your opioid use disorder eyeball got eyeball gain I'll give it to you three four four months yeah what's that about yeah it's also one experience has an 80% success rate 80% of the people don't go back to opiates right with two experiences in the high 90s so look look those numbers are staggering science can't make sense of it right we're in an epidemic well we got to slow down watch out for the risks we need to study these things more I can respect that but there's harm in not allowing access to we got to talk about you also have to make sense of it in a time where things are prescribed and you get them for a doctor from a doctor that we absolutely know are addictive and highly damaging and kill people so make sense of it to me if you're there's something cannabis is the easy one right because it doesn't kill anybody right literally doesn't kill anybody the LD50 rate for cannabis is fucking bananas that's right you'd have to it's not even physically possible to consume enough to kill you same thing with silocybin yes right exactly it's this research study it's that the you'd have to eat a mushroom the size of this fucking table you wouldn't physically be able to consume it if that even does right if that even kill and that's LD50 that would be 50% of the population would dive in overdose from that that's right and you wouldn't be able to consume it physically you wouldn't be able to fit it into your body enough to kill you yeah yeah yeah and then on top of that Joe we have the federal government giving permission to certain groups of people to access plants cacti fungi animal secretions with permission and not others under a religious context right so is it dangerous is it not right is it a sacred sacrament is it not right right is it that's Brazilian churches that are taking ayahuasca right yeah right and again we're talking we talk it I don't want to talk poorly about alcohol I drink alcohol I'm not talking poorly about these people should go get their rights right yes on more power to them but you can't have it both ways not them I'm talking to the government right you have to make logical sense as to why you're imposing these laws and then in prison people and taking away their freedom for not listening to you that's right because you don't make any sense and here's another part of the problem a vast majority of the people that are pushing for these laws and want these people to be locked up have not had these experiences themselves and that's a part of the problem that's a big part they don't know what they're talking about that's right they don't know what these experiences are that's right like these drugs are going to ruin your mind are you fucking sure because I don't think they are I don't think you're correct I think they open your mind up to new possibilities and expand your consciousness in a way that I don't think is available without them I agree it isn't available without them and that's was intentionally blocked out so you know that we're hearing the stories about the the really brilliant tech people right you dig deep enough they've had some experiences with these things yeah a large number of them right and still do a large number right yeah so these things that are so dangerous or are we blocking up certain blocking health certain groups from having access and this is one of my primary things that I try to talk about I want the audience that's in law enforcement to go why why is this the case why do I feel uncomfortable not talking about this why do I feel uncomfortable saying that this sergeant who might be hurting needs access say it bring it up talk right go into your power but people are scared of losing their career right I imagine yeah for talking about something and losing their career because most people are ignorant of it that's right yeah that's right the only way that that's going to change is you and I and other people to continue to have these public conversations where more people hear it and there's I guarantee there's people listening to this right now that have never heard this before never consider this before and well am I wrong do I have these deep held beliefs that are completely ignorant and why do I have these beliefs what's what started them why why do I have this in my mind as this is what this stuff is exactly and there's a lot of people out there that are stone cold sober discipline people think that's the only way this is the way that's right that's right and you know what and maybe make this is the way that's your way yeah we're human beings we're called to create an artistic expression of a unique life to me that's what the divine is commanding that's what the divine gets to experience the more of us who get to live and be our authentic selves internally and expressing them outwardly the more the divine gets to experience unique difference well the more possibilities there are for creativity the more possibilities there are for people to rethink their lives go get on a better path there's a lot that people are missing just because you've been hoodwinked and you've been led into this false narrative that's right that's right that's also that there's a problem with the term drugs because just I hear drug I hear drug I hear someone is all fucked up and doesn't know what's going on how are you putting all these things under the same blanket including nicotine and caffeine and things that people use on a daily basis these are all drugs that's right and then you have cannabis and they're and you also have methamphetamine in that category how do you have cannabis and methamphetamine in the same thing how do you have psilocybin and heroin in the same group of things right that's correct these this is crazy that's right how do you have industrial opiates yeah yeah yeah all in that same category we've been stripped of our power to define what medicine is yes right yeah have you heard people say community is medicine yeah joy is medicine oh yeah for sure it is right yeah well ask a hardcore western science model is that medicine and that go well you got to show us the evidence yeah right there is evidence that like loneliness is like worse than cigarette smoking that's right in terms of like how long you live that's right yeah that's right well we can show that right but is community medicine i say it is yeah but this the point i'm trying to make is how did we lose the power to define what medicine is for ourselves yeah right joy is medicine community is medicine and there's the right maybe the term medicine is the wrong term maybe is good for you sure but but but but why define medicine in such a rigid way also why only allow one methodology to create an evidence base for that medicine let me give you an example okay and this is Paul Stammett's I listen to him talk at psychedelic science 2025 where he said we should see the world through two eyes western science and indigenous wisdom right yeah and they don't have to be attacking one another right right the time of extractionary capitalistic relationships with this living planet might have to be coming to an end and what's going to replace it reciprocity stewardship care community yeah right these two eyes they need to be in the same being they need to watch this really makes you wonder what would the world look like had they not placed that sweeping psychedelic act of 1970 and then impose those standards on most of the rest of the world as well what what would the world look like it'll be radically different i believe that it would be radically right it was well the this is what they were scared of the difference between the 1950s and the 1960s culturally is clear it's evident in everything it's evident in the music it's evident in the artwork the films it's evident in the cars the design of the automobiles like everything changed and it changed because the culture was accepting psychedelics it was a big part it was lsd and psilocybin and marijuana and all these different things these people were experimenting with and then out of that you get jimmy Hendrix you know you get this wild new form of expression that was radically different than music that appeared before that that's right that's right they're scared of that that's right and you know i just made a comment about my belief system to you who gets to experience and be with that or in that and of that that's the divine that's jimmy Hendrix outside of the box yeah right yeah that level of artistic expression i think that's our purpose yeah right and you're right we took that away we pushed it into the underground and then we hijacked our law enforcement to show up as enforcers yeah kick indoors and take people to cages yeah right members of our own community that's right and who did we hurt our community and our law enforcement so this is what i want to be clear on here i want law enforcement to ask why why why are we in this current moment why are we still arresting people for wanting a relationship with plants cacti fungi animal secretions why are we protecting and serving our community members or industry interests when you start asking these questions think shake yeah for me they did they made me into an activist not only an advocate but an activist so i got behind massachusetts ballot question four in a very public way what is that that was to decriminalize the psychedelics and create healing centers in massachusetts forty three forty four percent of adults voted yes but it wasn't enough wasn't enough well listen to what i just found out before i came to your show today um the the psyche atric society of massachusetts just endorsed or got behind three silo cyber bills they didn't get behind the ballot question which failed but they're now getting behind decriminalizing silo cyber measures that are at the state house that's great it's great yeah promise is being made me it happens at a snails pace and it happens through back breaking labor from people like you and paul stamens and rick dobblin and so many more who are doing the lords work literally but this is it's just a frustrating thing for a lot of people that know the truth behind this that how many people can help and then how many people who are being damaged by these unfair unjust immoral and illogical laws there they are that's right that's right yeah and if we bend it if we bend it if you take on one end the enforcers right which i believe are called to be peace officers and guardians and the other end the civilians which are being split up into groups and pitted against one another and you bend them everybody's getting hurt yeah and trauma load is exponentially growing yeah exponentially growing and what is the media like to put out there not media like this but standard media the algorithm is based on hate fear division isolation well the algorithm is based on your interaction and unfortunately people tend to lean towards those things yeah that's the problem the algorithm is not evil the problem is human beings can be easily manipulated by their own ideas and these ideas that they have and these this inclination to pay more attention to things that outrage you and fear and fear yeah right things that cause rage and fear and and distrust that unfortunately things that you hate is that those are the things you pay attention to that's right that's right i mean we're biologically created to worry about things that we fear right and logically i'll give you an example from my community i think about this all the time there's about 20 25,000 people in my community every day they wake up they go to work they interact with one another and go to bed 20 25,000 people with one or two issues that the cops have to go to that's amazing people are wildly nice yeah for the most part right yeah and in control and okay yeah but the problem is cops deal with the very small percentage of people that aren't there it is yeah there's this research article called the clinicians delusion i call it the enforcers delusion where your perspective gets completely warped based on the people that you continually interact with so when you're continually showing up and helping people in their worst moment you think everybody's their worst moment all the time of course right that's a that's a box that's a dark box and a lonely terrible box to be in and to require officers to be able to escape that and have objectivity is crazy like how how but through what mechanism of the human mind allows you to ignore all the evidence that you see on a daily basis your evidence right right personal experience that critical incident right amplified data set right you're that that activated nervous system it actually makes you rely on your biases more instead of being able to check your biases it it it actually listens to your biases more so so an officer now is taught try to slow down if you can why so you can breathe why so you can check your bias before you act right yeah because you're amped up right the quicker you act to say for you'll be right and that's through that automatic process near the brain stem right not here yeah yeah it's it's a dark predicament you know because there's a lot of people that are going to fall victim before anything gets changed I agree I agree and and you know Joe when back to that FDA committee that delayed everything with MDMA I ended up really really sad for like three months because of what you just said a lot of people who will benefit from MDMA are not going to be able to the exit not access not for a month or two for years right years at a cost that could hurt a person like Rick Doblin and maps and and like goes in the the philanthropist that help him get to this point that's how expensive it is yeah and then the cost of human life and the cost of human which is compounded every year that's right and all the people they interact with and the butterfly effect that's right yeah that's right and let's let's take that thread back to what you said could you imagine the world we could live in if these things were available to people so that they could heal so that they could dream so that they can become their own versions of Jimmy Hendrix yeah you know I know it's really crazy when you think about it that one president and one administration change the course of civilization because they wanted control they wanted to stop the anti-war movement the silver rights moment and that's the fact that's really what happened and I like that statement course of civilization yeah because they succeeded at taking it on a road show into other countries yeah through international treaties yes you know this brings something up um I was blessed with being able to go and speak on a panel at the United Nations and it was put together by an organization called Leap Law Enforcement Action Partnership I want to give a shout out to Diane Goldstein amazing executive director of a wonderful organization of law enforcement that are trying to change these issues and we spoke about access for psychedelics for law enforcement and I was able to call out schedule one at the United Nations at the CND Commission on Archatic Drugs and say we need to do away with the schedule and here's the two things that I found out I wanted to get to this point the World Health Organization is now recognized that schedule one is a fraud it's fake it's unscientific they're going to try to create their own right and two I got to see how they spend all day on a treaty focusing on one word across like 40 countries whether they agree on that one word or not the world's the world I'm make up a word um are they going to allow harm reduction into the treaty all day 12 hours later they're asking this country if it's okay and that country if it's okay I went oh my God you said snails pace I think you said snail space yeah this is even slower than a snail space it's painful you know change having it happen is painful it's incredible yeah it's well it's what happens when people once once people have laws and they enforce those laws and someone comes along it says those laws are unjust it's very difficult to get back rights that you've already lost very difficult once they're lost like and this is like what's really obvious about the 1970s schedule one act because it's like we're dealing with the same issue all these years later but it's not the 1970s right so we have all the access to the data now instantaneously you could pull it up on chat GPT yeah you know like right now instantaneously so there's no excuse for it but yet it's still difficult to get these laws changed insanely difficult takes so much time well so the system that we have takes the power and then it doesn't want to give it back this is what I'm hearing yeah and then you've got a fight to give it back but you did indicate something which I agree with things are speeding up yeah because of technology I mean technologies involved in this show and I'll be able to talk to each other yeah this is a miracle in and of itself people being able to share ideas at a lightning pace yeah influencing one another yeah if that's a miracle in and of itself but I want to bring up a point maybe we can explore this together um people are taking back their power and recognizing that the founding documents of this country are designed to protect the life liberty pursuit of happiness in religious expression of the individual human being it's the most radical thing ever yeah that's it's it's it's it's a sacred establishment that we're working on but people don't realize that the individual when they truly sincerely believe what they're doing in this country they can do it as long as it doesn't harm another human being it's that simple yeah that's what it should be yeah let's talk about that how do we get to the point where people realize that that's the way it should be we wake the enforcers up we get the politicians to help create safe space for the exploration of these topics we meet up in conversation and break bread and safety well I think the big thing is public perception public perception moves all those other things because then people will contact politicians and respond by not voting for them or voting people out that do have like this lieutenant governor he's politically in deep water because so many people have reacted so negatively to this this draconian attempt to ban all THC products where people like why yeah what are you doing and what are you being paid by like what what lobbies are enforcing this idea like what where is this coming from right right so it's gonna weaken his position yeah yeah I was gonna weaken his career and rightly show right least so it should he's on the wrong side of history there it is there it is yeah and the public perception has changed it's changed pretty radically and I credit the internet with that because over the last 20 years you've seen this massive shift in this idea that psychedelics are dangerous you could lose your mind to hey that's how my uncle quit smoking you know hey that's how my aunt got off of opiates hey that's you know and everyone knows somebody that's had positive experiences that was you know deeply depressed and now is a different person and they're they're so much happier and healthier because of it and so it's the the narrative publicly has shifted a lot of it is because of conversations and a lot of it is because of podcasts a lot of his access to information there's plenty of online documentaries about it now that's right yeah that's right and you know Joe I want to give credit to the courageous people who are the carriers of this knowledge and wisdom by experimenting learning realizing right this is the hero's journey right going into the darkness like metaphorically and literally into the underground and coming back with the bounty the realization right the gold and sharing it yeah having the courage that's a courageous act well especially if you're in a business like yourself like law enforcement you know where it's like that's a forbidden topic that's right that's right that's right and you know I was able to access MDMA and I had a newman a experience I felt like I was surrounded by love I was gifted a gratitude that was big enough to hold everything that went into who I am in the present moment let me explain that real quick if I accept myself wholly wholly completely I have to accept my light and dark aspect as well I have to accept my traumas as well I have to expect my lineage's history as well in its entirety I'm not saying something radical there's been books written about this by smarter people than I MDMA helped me access that right I've experienced ketamine ketamine I say was like a luscious massage of my soul I felt like the energy of my being was traveling in and out of my body and I had three energetic streams traveling with me my martial arts instructor periodically my wife and god on ketamine it was on the way through streams like more energetic streams so on ketamine I felt like there was a bit of a disembodiment that occurred right and we can label what that disembodiment is it's a disassociative anesthetic people say it feels like their spirit solar identity disconnected from their body I had that happen but the energy wasn't just one I had remembrances of these three I felt like I needed to give gratitude to god I felt like the presence of my wife was with me and my martial arts instructor as well Doreen Cagliandro and her energetic their energetic streams were going in and out of my body and I could remember such joyous thoughts associated to them it was like a massage to my spirit you know and the thoughts associated with that massage and that piece and that sense of safety was there ketamine lift suicidality in minutes it just became a medicine approved for depression why that's weird why did that just happen I don't know well it's been going on for quite a bit right I mean I know people in Los Angeles were doing it a decade ago well here's the thing let's let's broaden that how long were the people partying with it right I don't know I did I knew of a guy who had a problem with it he was a MMA fighter he got addicted to ketamine and I remember a friend of mine went to visit him in a rehab center and he was all fucked up but that was the narrative that he was doing ketamine I was like oh he's doing a tranquilizer like this was 1990s like late 90s okay well you can get addicted ketamine is a addicted physically it's a ketamine not like like an opiate is it a psychological addiction or is it a physical addiction there might be a combination I don't want a purport to speak about it scientifically too much but I've heard that can be a compulsion yeah and it can kind of it can hurt your bladder if you go overboard I know a lot of people in the Austin area use it recreationally we actually had a girl go into a K-hole at my club she's in the middle of the comedy club just yeah yeah I mean that's full disembodiment right you're on another place yeah and your somatic self has to be kept well they're doing a nasal spray so they're like doing it throughout the day that's the prescription I forget from what company for depression hmm yeah so you could kind of double pump and for sure go a little overboard yeah do it all day long if you want if you want it yeah that's a problem with well that's a problem with everything right you know so problem with any I mean if you really need aterol you have like chronic fatigue and aterol is the only thing that lifts you out of that what's the stop you from taking two pills I'm glad you did the repel that's right or even coffee right I double espresso can become a quad yeah then you're drinking six oh I know a lot of people are I mean I'm kind of addicted to caffeine yeah I quit it when I was on my vacation I was on vacation for 10 days and I didn't have any coffee any caffeine at all for five six days and I was like ooh I sleep so much better I feel so much better but I feel like when it comes to conversations it's like a lean on it a lean on caffeine yeah lean on it to get me going I'm a happier person on caffeine I really enjoy that substance I like it I just wanted to know that I could stop taking it and there wouldn't be any problem it was no problem at all yeah I stopped taking nicotine pouches and I stopped taking caffeine for I stopped the nicotine pouches for 10 whole days and I was like well fine and I've stopped the caffeine for five or six days then I said I feel like having a cup of coffee and I limited myself to one cup a day yeah I get I have a hard time coming off a caffeine but I get headache but I've done it yeah I get headaches it affects my mood a little bit yeah I like I like it I like the caffeine yeah I don't think it's overall detrimental I don't think it affects your judgment I don't think it makes you do anything squirrely yeah it just gives you a little pepsi up a little bit I mean most of the world is having it in the morning yeah right and then most of the world is having a drink at night yeah but you know this is also the argument for coca leaves because coca leaves apparently is a superior stimulant it's just they chew it and they chew coca leaves and this is something that you know farmers and hardworking people in South America have been doing forever that's right and unfortunately somebody figured out how to synthesize it and turn it to cocaine and then it became illegal illegal yeah now you can't get because if you get just coca leaves and just chew on coca leaves in America I mean maybe that's a period of coffee yeah we don't know because we can't try exactly and that that is the block of experimentation yeah that's unjust yeah right you know what's interesting about cocaine is it's medically appropriate I think they use it for eye surgery yeah there's medical uses for it so I can't off the top of my head remember if it's on schedule one I don't think it is cocaine is on schedule one really I mean we could look it up because it's interesting well here's the thing if it can be used for eye surgery right right so it'd be interesting to see yeah so is it like a numbing agent is that what it is hey they've just I've heard that they've realized before it was it became a big issue that it's safe for eyeball yeah numbing numbing agent well I know there's medical cocaine I do know that I just don't know what the applications are yeah you know the number one manufacturer of it coca coca cola yeah they still use the coca leaf for flavor for coca coca but like they shut down the cocaine molecule somehow they extract it right and they use it to produce medical grade cocaine interesting yeah and then and then some thing of that still gets into the flavor yes what's in coke I guess it's the flavonoids that's what's in coca cola and it used to be cocaine was in coca cola yeah I would like to go back and try something that I like to go like what was that like like how much cocaine was in there you think they have original recipe coke bottles at the factory with cocaine I mean what year was that what year did they let's find out what year they took cocaine out of Coca-Cola because I remember the whole story for I don't remember exactly the details of like how cocaine was in coca cola for the first place but cocaine used to be prescribed 1929 so 1903 fresh coca leaves were removed from the formula after 1904 instead of using fresh coca leaves coca coal started using spent leaves the leftovers of the cocaine extraction process with trace levels of cocaine and since then by 1929 they've used cocaine free so in 1903 they started removing cocaine but they're still using cocaine free coca leaf action yes yes and they're the only company I believe it's allowed to do that I think they're grandfathered in and how did who invented coke coke with cocaine find that out like what's the story what is the story of cocaine in coca cola okay pebroton called for five ounces of coca leaf per gallon of syrup a significant dose in 1891 candler claimed his formula altered extensively from pebrotons originally contained only a tenth of this amount so it used to be really juicy coca cola once contained an estimated nine milligrams of cocaine per glass for comparison a typical dose or a line of cocaine is 50 to 75 milligrams so it was like a mild pick me up nine milligrams after 1904 instead of using fresh leaves coca coca coal started using spent leaves today that extract is prepared at a stefen company steppan company plant in Maywood New Jersey the only manufacturing plant authorized by the federal government to import and process coca leaves which it obtains from Peru and Bolivia a steppan company extracts cocaine from the leaves which it sells to malen croc the only company in the United States licensed to purify cocaine for medical use wild they call it here no and the ads is it's in a excuse me intellectual beverage intellectual beverage a valuable brain tonic a valuable brain tonic a cure for all nervous afflictions affections sick headache neurologica whatever that is hysteria melancholy etc the particular peculiar flavor of coca coca delights every palate it is dispensed from the soda fountains in the same manner as any of the fruit syrups what an advertisement wow i'd like to go back and try that i'd like to go back to 1900 and get a glass and see what's up you hear the pop in the bubbly poured over rice right out of the fountain yeah well that's a beautiful advertisement wow long after this syrups ceased to contain any significant amounts of cocaine in north carolina dope remained a common colloquialism for coca cola and dope wagons were trucks that transported it wow must be good it must be real good it must have been real good like it just a little bit of a juice the colinot colinots for caffeine colinot acts as a flavoring in the original source of caffeine coca coca contains two to three point five percent caffeine and has a bitter flavor in nineteen eleven the u.s. government sued the United States versus 40 barrels and 20 kegs of coca cola hoping to force the coca coca company to remove caffeine from its formula interesting that's interesting court found the syrup when deluded as directed we result in a beverage containing one point two one grains 78.4 milligrams of caffeine per eight fluid ounces the case was decided in favor of coca coca company at the district court but subsequently in 1912 the u.s. pure food and drug act was amended adding caffeine to the lifts of habit forming and deleterious substances which must be listed on a products label in nineteen thirteen the case was appealed by the six circuit in Cincinnati where the ruling was affirmed but then appealed again in nineteen sixty nineteen sixteen to the supreme court where the government effectively won as a new trial was ordered the company then voluntarily reduce the amount of caffeine in its product and that and ordered offered rather to pay the government's legal cost to settle and avoid further litigation wow that was all over caffeine seven kilograms per eight and now it's forty six per twelve yeah but like what is a red bull i was going to say what's in a monster right yeah right so let's let's find out how much caffeine is an monster one of the things that monster i don't know if monster does it but some of these companies do it's kind of tricky by the way i like monster i drink them all the time i do the u.s. the problem is it'll say like two servings who split the monster with the friends that's right that's right that's right that's right that's right that's right that's right that's right you have some 86 perfect serving yeah and how many servings are in a can of monster uh well this just says uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh preserving does it say it in a can like when you get a big old can and just want to Google it just once they have big hands yeah yeah a monster is a devil side out a friend who was a Mormon and he wasn't allowed to drink coffee and that motherfucker would pound energy drinks all day i was like hey dude what do you do it it's a gray area one 40 a monster is oh my god what one forty for zero sugar a regular monster has one sixty one sixty mountain dew rise has one eighty beyond raw lit that is two fifty bang with three hundred five hour energy shots as two hundred holy shit man those little tiny energy shots those five hour energy drinks as two hundred milligrams of caffeine wow bang has three hundred holy shit man and coca-cola led the battle when was that nineteen eleven and something about caffeine yeah amount being in it and it's a lot of it's like people have always tried to control other people for whatever reason especially when the government has the power to do it for whatever reason human beings really enjoy controlling other people yeah they really do and once they have power they really enjoy exercising that power and keeping it and controlling yeah not giving it back and you got a you got a you got a you got a resist yeah you do you got a resist but the problem is like legalizing these things would cause a pro a big problem there'd be a big problem if you just legalize them there's a lot of people that who would never try any illegal drug who would try a legal drug you know if you made heroin cocaine you know fill in the blank all all the different substances psychedelic and otherwise if you made them all legal you're gonna have a bunch of people that are gonna have problems with these things that wouldn't have problems with them normally so there would be a period of time where they would cause damage and that would be really problematic for politicians lawmakers anybody who enforce these ideas you know they'd be blood is on your hands it's like but this infantilization of human beings like turning them into babies that need to be controlled by the state that's the problem and we're in this problem and the only way to get out of that problem is to tear the fucking bandaid off and I completely agree with you and I don't want to do cocaine I've never done cocaine my whole life I saw when I was a kid in high school I saw a bunch of people that had cocaine problems and I'm like I don't want to have anything to do with that right right but listen you made that decision for yourself yeah right and and look we know we we would just touch in upon examples of people having a relationship with the cocoa plant without it causing an issue yeah I don't think it's that addictive when you're just chewing the leaves right I think those people do it without much problems there's also Mottie de Cocoa which is a tea that they make from the leaves well look we're starting to talk about we're using the word legalization and saying there will be a problem with legalization for a time being why don't we talk about decriminalization and regulation but the problem is even with decriminalization what's the supply where people getting it from right if you can't sell it legally then how how do I know it's pure that's right that's the real issue the real issue with cocaine is probably not cocaine itself the real issue is getting cocaine that's stepped on and cut and cut a lot of times with fentanyl I mean we all know people that have died from fentanyl overdoses I know a bunch of people that have yeah I've done follow up on police calls to people who said to me directly I was trying to get coke I got fentanyl and almost died that's a tragedy but but but Joe you're jumping to this next idea that we should probably explore which is called safe supply yeah and who should control safe supply but let me remind our audience and let me bring this back into the conversation our police promotional books we're not we're not we're not talking radical here our current police promotion books talk about the problem with prohibition and criminalization unleashing gangsters and dangerous supply on our civilians and that's where the cartels come into place exactly look when we were kids the cartels were an issue that's right do you ever remember I don't talk about how old you I'm 48 I grew up in Chelsea mass I'm almost 58 I grew up in Newton I didn't ever hear about cartels that's right you never heard about Mexican cartels you never heard about the problem now it's like all over the news right big thing why is it a big thing because they control the drug supply into the United States because drugs are illegal so only outlaws sell drugs and what happens with value when you make something illegal yeah shoots through the roof yeah and the most violent come in and replace the less violent exactly you know just like during prohibition with the mob took over that's right that's so they gained power that's how they got money that's right they were selling alcohol and what so what safe supply or or safe use room I would purport to say that a bar is a safe use room yeah where you can get safe supply right yeah right you know you're getting actual real alcohol that's it and how about we incorporate treating adults like adults yeah powerful education and decide who's going to control safe supply because right now the most dangerous people on earth control it yes and I think education what you just said is a huge part of it and to let people understand like hey everyone knows there's giant problems with alcohol use this alcoholism there's liver failure there's a host of different diseases that come from being an alcoholic and then there's also operating motor vehicles when you're drunk and drunk driving kills a ton of people every year and also a bunch of violent acts that get perpetrated by people that are drunk there's a lot of things wrong with alcohol but yet we allow alcohol you know and alcohol is one of the worst drugs it's one of the worst drugs for you physically yeah it's one of the only drugs that if you become addicted to it you can't quit cold turkey or you're fucking died that's right right then and there yeah exactly so working with this logic show right because people sometimes make me out to be out of my mind when I say this stuff of course if the most dangerous toxic and carcinogenic is available and the least dangerous helpful non-addictic is not available let's fix that yeah why do I sound wild when I say that yeah well I think the mushroom one is the easiest one because of the fact that it genuinely can't kill people cocaine is a lot harder so because also like I don't necessarily think it's good for you but I know people that have done pure cocaine that really enjoyed the experience and didn't get addicted to it so I don't I can't speak on that I just I just think that things that are physically addictive that have been known to ruin your life are things you should probably avoid and we can teach upon that yeah and we can educate upon that I mean look at the the wonderful job we've done at a kind of putting the reins on nicotine through advertisement and education will cigarette smoking in particular right because the problem isn't really the nicotine which we've found to be that's right yeah it's like nicotine actually has health benefits to it which sounds crazy to people it's a real protectant that it actually stopped people from getting covid so there's a lot of weird stuff with the compound nicotine yeah but then there's the delivery method and it's not even just like it's hard to know what's true or what's not true but I'm sure you saw that Russell Crowe movie the insider I haven't it's a great movie but it's about these companies that added chemicals to cigarettes to make them far more addictive and he was a whistleblower he was a chemist that was working at this company Russell Crowe was playing this doctor was a real guy whose life was threatened because he exposed that these companies had put a bunch of different chemicals into cigarettes to make them highly addictive much more addictive than just plain regular tobacco smoking well I was told that the those scientists were absorbed into the food industry well that's the problem is that the companies that were getting sued after it was determined that cigarette smoking does cause cancer cigarettes are addictive once they lost a bunch of money they wound out and bought all the process food companies and now they made those more addictive and so now like you know they even openly flaunted a betcha can eat one chip that's right that's right betcha can give it a try open a bag of Doritos yeah I mean that's the the thing and again I think you should be able to eat Doritos I like them they're delicious same yeah not the wrong with them but they are addictive and why are they addictive because they're they're chemically designed to be addictive that's right because these food manufacturing companies want you to buy more of them simple like how do we get people to eat more chips make the chips impossible to put down or very difficult to put down and if you want to increase their value through the roof prohibit access after they've tasted them and let the cartels produce them in another country yeah try to get them across the border to sell to our people you're gonna get fentanyl petitages that's right which is so crazy what an image imagine if they outlawed all process foods and you had to get fucking contraband twinkies like right right right like yeah I think you should be able to buy ring dings it should be legal but I wouldn't recommend eating them every day they're fucking terrible for you exactly but they taste delicious exactly you want one every now and again and that's the environment that we're in yes some things and not others right right and that's the problem it's illogical it's illogical and there's also this fear aspect to it because if you go against it you know you're gonna get put into a very bad position where there's people with enormous power and influence that want to silence you and this is why guys like Rick Doblin are so courageous like because he spent like his entire life trying to do this the right way and doing it above board by the books and and show through the use with police officers and military people and people experiencing PTSD that like this has extreme beneficial aspects to it that you shouldn't ignore and they're good for society and we should probably expand the use of them in an appropriate way that's right I think that his work is leading to one of the first big kinks in the armor of the system and you speak to the value of the way that he did it you know what I mean yeah what are the rules tell me we'll operate within them what kind of data do I have to create well let me make that data how do I access the compound how are you gonna let me right and if we don't know how we need the rules right and sometimes the rules weren't there and Rick and maps had to push right and in our system how do we battle what's the appropriate way to unleash violence it's with lawyers right it's frowned upon to physically physically be violent so he had to fight he had to fight with the government and what really makes me nuts Joe is you know the amount of back and forth again I heard that they did with the FDA with the regulators they knew what they were doing the design of the process everything was being talked about right and they get a let's wait it's interesting the the results were too good you know I mean just from the ones I hold in my heart yeah so what do you what kind of pressure do you think they're under to not allow these things because that's the question like what is it is it public social pressure because if they do pass this then they'll be scrutinized and people that are ignorant and then have bought into the narrative well then look at them as like you're a part of the problem you're contributing to the deterioration of society allowing this use of MDMA to push forward and and by minimizing the risks of it by talking about the benefits of it you're essentially allowing people to think that it's a lot safer than it really is look I think that's I think that's a component right we're talking about public perception and that changing and then that pressuring and things changing as well yeah I think this is a paradigm changing and shifting thing that the entire system including pharma and all these people that are on these boards these decision-makers power brokers right are trying to make sense of and I'll explain we have a identified disorder or challenge we have a medicine that masks that symptom this is going to allow people to truly heal when you truly heal you don't have to keep taking a medicine you might have to come back to it periodically sure let's call that a flare up yeah let's call it a touch-up but when you're not taking your pill every day every other day that's going to be a big hit yeah to people's power and money right especially when you deal with things like there's a giant business in keeping people I don't want to say happy but not depressed right like there's a giant industry and people that are on SSRIs and anti-depression and anti-exiting medication yeah when it's been proven that exercise is far more effective than SSRIs are far more medically proven statistically proven that SSRIs are not as effective as regular exercise well let me throw something in there is that a medicine right yeah oh exercise definitely a medicine right so there's an organization I think it's called exercise as medicine medicine but you mainstream medical doctor going to be able to prescribe exercise to somebody they can't they should be able to yeah they really should but the problem is there's no profit in that right let's go in the gym I do it on your you do it on your own right join the gym yourself and you know you know have to people aren't going to go because they're scared right they don't want to look goofy right the the other quarter who do go might not appropriate approach it correctly right right you can hurt themselves yeah you need trainers right yeah it's a really interesting thing here so so back to back to your question this is going to be a paradigm shifting thing I believe that psychedelic assisted talk therapy is going to allow talk therapy to live up to its promise as a talking cure I believe the psychedelics are going to be able to cure or push into remission a lot of these unshakeable challenges and that's going to be a big hit to the SSRIs that's going to be a big hit to certain medicines you know what else I think it's going to do I think it's going to move people from agnosticism or atheism towards religion and spirituality and it's also going to be a boon for for religion and which is wild to look right wild yeah wild have you ever heard of John Marco Allegro's book The Sacred Mushroom in the Cross no it's a book that he wrote after he was he was one of the people that was he was contracted to decipher the Dead Sea Scrolls it was like a 14 year job where they were deciphering the Dead Sea Scrolls and he was the only one on the committee that was agnostic he was an ordained minister but through his studying of theology he started becoming agnostic because he recognized that there's just too many religions and too many parallels and like what's the real religion and root of this all or origin rather and root of this all so he wrote this book after 14 years where he was going to sort of paraphrase but he thought that the entire Christian religion was based on the consumption of psychedelic mushrooms and fertility rituals and that this was what it was all about and I believe the book fine because I've said this before I need to know it's true was the book bought up by the Catholic Church I think it was bought up by the Catholic Church and they stopped production of it and then he released a new book called the Dead Sea Scrolls in the Christian myth and that one was available but then since then they've republished both of them yeah both of them but the big one was the Sacred Mushroom in the Cross because that was the one that was kind of very difficult to get and I have a couple copies of it but they're original copies that I had to buy online okay okay and it's a fascinating book it's a fascinating book because he translates or he um he he breaks down the word Christ to an ancient Sumerian word which was a mushroom covered in God's semen and this is what he's saying is that they thought that when it rained that this was God his semen on the earth which has caused all life to to rise from we all need like we all need water and then plants of course need water and then after rainfall they would find these mushrooms because mushrooms grow incredibly quickly and they would consume these mushrooms and have these religious experiences and this was a hugely controversial book of course and to really be able to know if he's right or wrong you would have to have a deep understanding of ancient languages and the Bible and so many different things well you know what that brings up in me Joe is the sacredness of sexuality one I don't know why that what you just said triggered that in me and the other is what about every Sunday magically transmuting bread and wine into flesh and blood of God right this isn't a radical concept this is this is accepted this is like a billion followers strong right type of Christianity that is through sacred ritual transforming food into the body and blood of God right right um just because we can understand that this is wood and a table and we've labeled it and boxed it and analyzed it doesn't mean that the mystery of it all has been stripped away and I don't think we need to allow that process to happen right this is a magical mysterious experience when we're staring at one another just because we identify as human beings do we really know what's happening or is that ego inflation and science trying to dumb down a mystery and a magic well it's all a mystery right we've become a custom to the mystery so it seems normal but you know if you didn't exist on earth and earth was a drug that you could take weak experience life on earth but this is crazy it absolutely is why being a human being interacting with people looking at things through your eyes that's right hearing things through your ears touching and feeling smelling and using all your senses and navigating through this bizarre experience of life very weird and what about that image of the oraboris right the snake or dragging eating itself I mean let's talk about sacred sexuality and the fact that every living thing is in a system that's eating and birthing itself continuously in all directions yeah how do you wrap your mind around that right you know I got a big sense of that when I went into old birth rainforest in Costa Rica for the first time and I touched like the handle of a bridge and it felt like it was moving because like every drop of everything is alive and everything is either competing going along with and helping supporting or eating one another in that space and it's like what is happening in here everything is alive yeah you know and I had that type of an experience on psychedelics in the religious context silo sibon I I felt like I dropped into the collective conscience and I got to see the partition section that was my psychic space where all my complexes and traumas were pulsing energetically into one another and how that energy was spilling over on my family and community that was the access that was given to me through silo sibon you know and those energetic forces are pushing me around right now as we speak well which makes you think like if you were an ancient person and you had this experience of course you would think you're communing with God yeah yeah I agree and look we're all ancient persons right now in this short time and I believe that yeah well we are ancient and you know if you go 5,000 years from now how they're going to look at us like these dorks let's try to shit that was it legal that they were fighting and arguing about yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah I can't wait till war is old technology that we all laugh about yeah God isn't that a crazy thing that if you ask the person is it possible in your lifetime for war to not exist most people would like that there's no way which is insane it's so insane because in small groups it's clearly easy like if it was just you me and Jamie and we were the only people on earth it would be super easy to not go to war with each other that's right we just communicate but then we deal with different languages and control of resources and then you have people that are leaders that have control over giant groups of people and then use propaganda manipulation yeah and manipulate them into thinking that the only ways we have to go over there and kill these people exactly it's the only way to fight for your freedom yeah yeah and Joe you know when we there's research out there that shows that for a period of time our species ended up having something like 5,000 of us on earth it's out there right have you seen that research a few moments in history right the toe of volcano yeah how did we survive that did we eat each other or hurt each other we probably helped each other yeah right well there was probably so few people they had to yeah yeah well this is the also the point of Allegro's work that fertility rituals were important because people didn't really survive much you know it's very difficult child just labor just childbirth killed a lot of women killed a lot of babies infections killed a lot of people you break your leg your dead there's a lot of things that cause people to die so it was very important to have as many children as possible because most of them weren't gonna live that's right that's right and you bring up a point the woman might not have made it through the process itself yeah and what an important process yeah for for the overall species well-being yeah the most critical of all processes and that's been reduced to a thing now that's like trivialized trivialized or even still taboo yeah yeah yeah yeah it's kind of crazy I mean these people out there that love people that don't want to have children okay why wouldn't want to bring a child in this world like yeah why would you with all the books and medicine and shit like nicely said yeah like people had people people gave birth when they didn't know what a door was they hadn't figured out floors yet you know it's like we we're constantly in this process of evolving and changing and growing but it just gets stifled by so many different aspects of civilization so many different aspects of control and propaganda and manipulation and and fear and fear and fear of others and fear I mean look at what's happening with our life expectancy like you said and and and good medicine keeping people alive yeah and we're living to be 80 90 years old and hopefully if you live to be 80 or 90 years old you'd be wiser hopefully right hopefully right hopefully you get more of an understanding of like what you've done wrong and like why have you why have I lived my life in this foolish way like what can I do to correct that what can I do to make more positive impact on people around me and live my life in a more harmonious way but you know some people they're 80 years old they just watch Fox News and yell at the TV you know they they're right the image that went through my head is somebody turning the TV off yeah maybe picking up a book yeah and then you know there's a choice point here Joe where you can you sometimes it's hard because this things in the psyche that are manipulating what you're focusing on yeah trama's plus external factors but if you start focusing on gratitude if you start focusing on the beauty if you start focusing on the benefits of science the benefits of operating in communion with other human beings yeah that thing that we said I mean how many people in Manhattan right every day waking up they go to work they go home yeah there's a handful of problems but that's not how it's presented yeah it's miraculous if you think about it it is right the amount of negative interactions if people have or incredibly small yeah we think about the sheer number of humans that's right yeah that's right yeah we we concentrate on the fear exactly we concentrate on the dangers and the media zooms in on of course someone who doesn't have a house yeah someone who has an addiction problem uh-huh someone is violent someone who's violent someone is a criminal that's right someone's stealing that's all you hear that's right yeah I heard a statistic that the military knows about 2% of people are sociopathic or psychopathic they don't have that same conscience that we automatically assume a human has right on every amputee right yeah um and it seems to me that we're so fear-based that we built the outer ecology that people have access to around concerns related to that we build the mainstream culture the laws that we operate under out of concern for the 2% rather than celebration of the 98% yeah that do care yeah do feel empathy that do that and that is the problem with the algorithm that's the problem with social media and that's the problem with this addiction to devices that you are constantly being inundated with the negative yeah you're constantly interacting with the worst aspects of life on earth and not appreciating all the good that's around you all the time that's right yeah and the algorithm uh-uh Joe like you brought up so so eloquently it it it takes you down the path that you click towards you know and I recall intentionally starting to click things outside of my comfort zone and follow thinkers and presenters not within my bubble and that's what it starts filling with yeah as well oh yeah you certainly can do that if you curate a good feed you know you you and you can ignore the negative and there's a lot of great stuff one of the great things about social media is just the access to new and fascinating information you're you're constantly if you do follow the right people and do go down the right roads you'll be constantly inundated with fascinating information that's right new discoveries the James Webb telescope and new things of people learning about quantum physics and all these different fascinating things that can enrich your mind right and expand your understanding of the world that we live in instead of dwelling all on all the negative aspects of human civilization right right and that kind of speaks to the fact that we are lucky to be able to have access to social media in that way yeah there's nations that don't allow that type of access right by design yeah right so the power the power of our method is liberty and freedom yes right not criminalization and prohibition right see the jump I'm trying to make there and the jump also is what you were talking about before with education and I think we need an education too with people in social media use people need to be kind of coached and understand how to use it how to use it correctly right and you know I've been trying to express to as many people as I can especially people in the public eye don't read comments you gotta stop doing that don't read things about you don't read negative things about you it's bad for you yeah it's bad for you and also you're dealing with the percentage of people that are commenting negative things those people almost entirely live lives that you would not envy nicely second they're almost all a mess that's right and so you're interacting with the I don't say the worst aspects of society but the most troubled human beings the people that are thinking in the most ridiculous way they're constantly focusing on negative aspects of either human beings or of society in general or and they're feeding off of it and that that's their focus all day long and they spend most of their time arguing with people online yeah do you want to be involved in that like that is said when we live in what is primarily a beautiful world nicely said yeah and I think you're pointing at something that's important to keep in mind is be careful about what you let in yes right yeah I think that's like that's a universal principle but it's eloquently shared in Buddhism where they say guard your dharma gates right your eyes you know your mind right your senses what are you taking in yes um because you know there's other philosophies that say thoughts are things be careful what you think you know yeah and I've I've come to notice um let's call it the CBT triangle cognitive behavioral therapy or theory triangle right thoughts lead to emotions lead to actions right because of psychedelic work I've able to see how a thought actually is a portal that allows us to turn energetic flow into you and that affects you and that can manifest in reality out of you as a therapist how have you incorporated this in everyday life okay your patients two things come to mind when you ask that question it's made me more empathetic because I've had direct access direct experience of some of these theories you read about or have a teacher as the expert tell you about I've had direct access to the second is I'm able to share with people when they come to me being pulled towards experiencing these things ideas around harm reduction where to go right there's legal states there's less legal states I can talk to them about the substances right I'm not prescribing but if you come to talk to me I can listen yeah see what I'm saying yeah and I know from direct experience some things right right I'm also able to fight off fear and I can go into these territories with people therapy therapists need to know that themselves you don't want to step outside of what your the lanes that you're comfortable being in right if you're not comfortable being in a certain lane you got to go get training training and experience to be an ethical practitioner before you talk about something right and I've got that experience it's never ending I'm not done I'm just in my process of awakening right and I can share from that reference point you know as a therapist that was your question right right that's how I think I can help people I'm more empathetic you coming in want to talk to me about a particular substance I have a little bit of a lived experience knowledge base I can share with you and legally I'm allowed to talk harm reduction yeah right I can't prescribe I'm not going to tell you to do something illegal right but if you want to talk to me about it I know a thing or two not everything just the thing or two I think one of the best arguments against decriminalization is what happened with Portland okay so you know they went down this path it was Portland right it wasn't Seattle they went on this path of pure legalization or I gone everything yeah decriminalized everything and it went sideways and I think it was probably because the culture that had already been firmly established in that place condoned open-air drug markets people that were addicted to fentanyl and opiates out on the street and methamphetamines out on the street using them constantly no education and then they just sort of open the doors for everything and then people went there specifically because they could do these things and be that on the streets and also be subsidized yeah yeah yeah yeah so let me bring some some things up about that so you know I believe in decriminalization but there's a right and a not so right way to do something right and I'm going to use examples of laws we already have on the book this might not be a popular statement but it's my truth if you say you're going to decriminalize you can look at the way we handle alcohol we don't allow public drunkenness we don't have to allow it a lot of places say you can't walk around and be inebriated and open bottle drink even the most liberal places right a cop can come up they can protective custody you into a cage or they can help you get home right why why don't those rules apply if you're in public we can say we're not going to want you to use openly in public right you know but when you've already got people openly camping out on the streets and littering everywhere and like what they've already allowed unfortunately they need to clean that up first before they can say we're going to decriminalize everything because you've already allowed people to do something that you know publicly is frowned upon to just like be shitting on the street and to you know open drug use everywhere right have people camped out homeless people like covering up sidewalks where you can't get around there's needles everywhere and psych garbage everywhere well we can agree that we don't want that right in many places like there's local ordinances against that their state level laws against that and we can go all the way up there's thing I love doing anything about that well that's the thing we can analyze yeah why why wasn't the funding in place to ensure that public areas with public access followed some rules why what happened you know I think that can be figured out yeah right so we realized that if we say full-scale decriminalization anything goes doesn't work I would have told you right from the beginning well that's kind of freaky why are we going that far why don't we have any funding to help people and tell them no you can't take a shit over there right yeah have to take a shit over here we can all agree we don't want human feces over here right right that that's not a shot against that person we got to figure out what's going on why they pooping over there not in the porta-padi over here or how about have a location where those people can go that isn't a prison right where we have wraparound services where we have maybe access to what they need maybe access to what they're addicted to right now we're starting to talk about safe supply with care and medical intervention yeah there's no one's ever done that successfully though right like is any state ever incorporated some sort of successful program where they gave people safe supply and then counseling and got like percentage of them off drugs and healthy so I've heard that Canada is exploring the medical access of medical grade heroin for certain people and we know that certain countries for years at this point have safe injection facilities where people can come to use their drugs under care and consideration and then leave we know these things work but they've got to be curated properly yeah when you also can impose it on all the rest of society by allowing people to just camp out everywhere on the streets well that's the example that right like we can have rules yeah local ordinances that say we this isn't a campground yeah right right right and what do you need for this not to be a campground let's talk come talk in this building over here right right we could even figure out what kind what I mean what's that going to cost we could figure that out and why isn't it being funded right and why aren't the police properly funded to act in a guardianship way in those situations right yeah because look look our efforts go in the direction that our funding goes because people build their lives around that and if funding is 90% on enforcement then that's what you're going to get right right and we talked about the problems and how hurtful defund was how about properly funding law enforcement to work in a guardianship paradigm for these situations that aren't necessarily criminal they might be public health now you keep in the cops involved right right you're not saying we're going to defund you we don't need you we do need you you play a vital role in our society but that would require like a fundamental shift to progressive ideology enough to like change the way they view cops maybe that'll have to be incorporated in drips and drabs and carefully into training right yeah but I got an example for you okay I got an example for you I think it's really important it's from where I come right and Winthrop Massachusetts Winthrop Massachusetts 10 years ago when I was a patrol officer and I kept coming in seeing public health issues in the police logs and police incidents public health issue meant to help challenge a person not having access to their psychiatrist running out of their medicine overdose save overdose loss tragically over and over and over and over again I went talk to the police chief I said his name's Terence De LaHonti I said chief on patrol when I'm in well you let me make a pile of work let's call it cases to investigate because I think I have a detective fetish I've never been a detective but I want to investigate things too he's like then what are you going to do with that pile I'm going to follow up in police uniform patrol car I'm going to go knock on a dorm how a conversation with somebody see what they really need to prevent that 911 call for service he's on record saying he thought I was going to bang my head up against the wall he's like there's no one's going to talk to this kid in full uniform but he was so excited I had to let him try two three weeks later I come back I said chief I got a problem people are inviting me into their house telling me to sit down calling somebody down who's telling me that they were looking for cocaine got fentanyl we have a good problem I got to connect these people to their appropriate help you know what he said to me he said connect them to the public health department there's a woman in there her name's Meredith Hurley and she's brought in people with lived and living experience with challenges related to intoxicating substances who are open about it to help with the overdose crisis bang public safety connected with public health we created what I call the public the police to public health pipeline right picture this a cop showing up to your house because they know what's going on in your house called 911 and you told us without us even coercing you and saying Joe what's going on what do you need what do you need to be well we don't want you to die talk to us we're not going to use it against you I'm actually not going to run you because I'm playing this distinct role I'm not going to run you I don't want to know if there's any outstanding warrants I'm not here I'm not here to snoop around to find something that I'm going to be able to charge you with I'm here to see what you need to not die and not have my detective show up and put you on a cage that started in Winthrop over 10 years ago it's called clear community and law enforcement assisted recovery well that's hopeful you could expand something like that I think we have room to expand it across the whole country we are repositories police departments are repositories of information on human suffering you know what we're doing with that if it's not traditional enforcement based policing to make cases for court nothing that's not right so it's the way it's approached is the way these problems are approached and that they need new solutions solutions that are preventative and that enforce the sense of community and help law enforcement officers ingratiate themselves to these people and be a part of the community instead of just being a person who comes to lock them up there it is you know what that is that's community policing we call it recovery oriented community policing right now let me plug something else in that I think is a sophisticated important point that people got to keep in mind this isn't an attack on traditional enforcement type of policing right if you are sensitive to human nature you know there's going to be violations of the type that needs somebody to show up and take a person out of their housing cuffs put them in a jail cell and take them to court unfortunately the dark side is a part of human nature and that type of policing done right is important and it keeps us well but when it's the only type of policing we're missing something we're missing something important and special and our people are expecting our officers to show up and put a hand out a hand a helping hand and say we know what's going on and we want you to be well we don't want you to die we don't want you to be in a cage human being in a cage I think it is fundamentally law enforcement's role to do that this and that yeah well said it might be a good way to end this I tell people how they can get a hold of you social media like where you are sure I appreciate that well they can look up my name sarco jadjadiana I'm out of Winthrop master's last name because they're not going to get that right sure it's g-e-r-g-e-r-i-a-n I'm out of Winthrop Massachusetts I'm a lieutenant with the Winthrop Police Department I want Joe let me plug this in I am here speaking of my own beliefs sharing about the positives about my community my department the safety I found there but these are my ideas I'm not important to talk on behalf of Winthrop Police Winthrop Mass I just need people to know that but they can find me online they can they can get a hold of me at my work email I liberally share my personal email and if they send me an email I'll respond how do they get your email you know it's just my last name at gmail.com g-e-r-g-e-r-i-n at gmail.com okay good luck with the amount of emails you're going to get after this all right let's do it give me some time to get back to you all right well thanks brother I appreciate you appreciate your your perspective the fact that you're willing to express it the way you do and that you're willing to come on here and stick your knack out like this means a lot. Joe let me say something back to you man this was a really special special moment for me I'm not only a colleague of yours man I'm a fan and a number of close personal friends one in particular Billy Reinstein who I love to death said to tell Joe that he has helped me so tremendously his show has helped me stay well be well be happy and I wanted to get that message. That's awesome shout out to Billy all right all right thank you very much appreciate all right bye buddy