The general gonna experience yeah, have you ever looked into cloud swabs like dad? No, have you ever heard a new swab in land? New Schwab in land you never heard a new Schwab in land? No, have you ever heard a operation a high jump? I knew I was gonna love this podcast No, dude What does that mean? Okay, so at one point some people like what's going on with Antarctica have you heard this where they sent? What's going on in my yard? Yeah, so the US government's like some's going on with Antarctica There's some activity up there. We want to find out what's going on So they send this cat name Admiral bird up to investigate with a giant Fleet like I just a fleet to go to go bang bro, you know, when was this I think this was in the one was Eisenhower in was it the Yeah, it was like right around like it just either around World War two or right after it and So they sent Admiral bird up to go find out and according to his journal that they found much later he He basically met with UFOs Nazi UFOs What yes, Nazi UFOs the Nazis did not see had a like a flying saucer Had had made a deal basically working with inter. You've never heard this. No, it's the greatest story ever It's the greatest of the Nazis made a deal with the aliens. Yes Pro technology and the deal was they were gonna work together, okay? I know it sounds crazy so basically the aliens go down and Cloud Schwab's dad go down and meet with Eisenhower's gonna be like we get we get either do a one-way or the other way We can do it nicer. We can do it the wrong way and that's where they say Eisenhower made a deal with These aliens that They could kidnap people and do experiments, but they couldn't just do it anywhere They had the they had specific places which were our national forest Yeah, dude, you've never heard of You're making this sound as if this is like a story that is commonplace. It Well for my people it is Jamie. It can't be out here if you heard the story brand new You never heard of operation high jump rope. I feel like I've heard of that, but I haven't not in this contest This sounds amazing. Please keep going and this is where the missing four one one come from The missing information what missing information. No the missing four one one. What do you mean by that? Which is all these people have mysteriously disappeared in force and they don't know what I'm talking about the missing Four one one like information no no no no no so missing four one one is the number of people that have been Yeah, and it's all really weird because they all have like a lot of similar characteristics German born like German background excuse me Highly intelligent and it like I don't know how weird you want to get broke. I want to get weird Okay, bro They think like this might be some time traveling Nazi ship, bro I know you're gonna think I'm crazy, but it's true dude That's what they believe and they made it these days day these day folk who who when you say they believe who these days the conspiracy people Are they united on? No, there's a whole different there's a lot of war and clans There's a lot of war and clans dude, but that was deep you want to go What is interesting is how advanced the engineering of the Germans was? You know, it's really interesting when you think about car manufacturers like Audi and Volkswagen Mercedes it's all out of BMW BMW didn't BMW make engines for Nazi fighter pilots I think that's what they first started off Did bro, I think that's what BMW did right yeah 100% and then we were out he made Hitler a car Yeah Hitler had a race car that was never part of their marketing plan though That would have been a crazy campaign. What does it say there? So 1939 BMW 801 D piston radio aircraft engine and national origin is Germany so In two planes in that year they made World War II planes. They made engines for World War II planes. So that's this why? Oh man I mean IBM was making stuff to for these camps too dude. It's crazy. Yeah, like they had computers talked about that before Yeah, right. What was that? There's a book What did they do they were make it was the precursor to actual computers? It was like a Filing system the geek track of stuff. Yeah, of who was wearing what into these camps right? I'm remembering this and And then oh yeah, man, it's gets super weird that but the place called IBM right was it called something else? I think it was IBM. Yeah, the book is called IBM in the Holocaust. This strategic Alliance between Nazi Germany. I mean you ain't fucking around that title huh? Have you Strategic Alliance between Nazi Germany and America's most popular powerful corporation expanded Interesting so that the area and of Antarctica they went to was new new Schwab in land new Schwab in land do you think that's why addresses with the Santa And So they're all in contact with the aliens. I think well dude. I mean it gets into a lot of people think this is about power and money We think it's about it's spiritual war dude. This is these people got all the money and all the power They got it more than they could ever want. I think they want complete control But that gets in the spirituality not just complete control, but lowering your vibration and I'm jacking your loose Your spirit energy think they're doing that Consciously or do you think they're doing it like they're chasing the economics in a long the way It actually becomes a spiritual battle because everything is a spiritual battle I think it's done purposely. I think they're evil I think I think they're they're at low low there's low frequency stuff going on and they've made deals with people and things and That's why things going on That was very ambiguous, but I understand where you're going with it. Okay. I mean if you want me I just don't want to get too weird too fast Bro, but I asked I'm like we just opened up with good I 100% believe this spiritual war and at these people are working with dark entities and that's what this is all about Let's imagine this if there was like a an alien race that came here from another planet and gave just a random group of people Technology yeah gave them an understanding of things ahead do things How much of a record do you think they would keep it that? Wouldn't that be something that people would want to talk about yeah, but that but that's the beauty of the internet Then we're now able to do that. We could never do that before so you think that's what the story is about The the story is about they went there and they met with aliens and the aliens gave them information I mean, Hitler was really into the occult. Yeah, I mean, he would send people all over the place It's a lot about ideas. Yeah, a lot of bad ideas But see the occult has a negative connotation to it not everything Involvely occult is negative and what the occult really means a secret So there's not as much of the word means. Yeah, it's basically mean it means like it's hidden I always associate it with people that believe in silly shit And someone started talking about the occult. I'm always like mm How do you feel about ghosts? You know, how do you feel but like when people start talking about like dark magic? Real you sure I believe in that there's an energy manipulation, but I don't disbelieve. Yeah, I don't disbelieve Listen, I like I don't know what's going on. I just kind of read stuff and I'm like how does this fit into the puzzle? Right, how does this fit into the jigsaw of life and you start looking around and you just start going okay, man This is interesting that is interesting. This starts the makes sense