First of all, I wish to affect the mentioned that all my my age to guarantee, in fact, that all my actions represent nothing but a selfless sense of duty to my people, to my reunion people. And of course, I have a dream of freedom and dignity for the reunion people. I was denied by the globalist mafia, which they control this region like a colony. And of course, it's the same intelligence group also present in this region, as well as the group, which they try to destroy the campaign or president Trump as well. just a copy paste with different subjects, including that I was falsely accused about foreign interference, particularly, of course, the Russian interference exactly as President Trump, who has accused the best. Nevertheless, there are not evidence. And of course, related to his foreign interference, I was just to mention that, who's a system, 100% in Romania, was a disease, coordinating in control by foreign interference. Before this elections was controlled by the former Secretary of State from Nathe States, Blinken and all the new accounts. And after the President Trump and Trump's advanced administration is totally controlled by France. So actually, the current Romanian president today is President of France Macron. So, Sores Macron, if I guess it. Yes. In any case, the point is that very clear, I was an outsider. And because I was an outsider, they didn't control or didn't let's say had any suspicion in the early beginning, in the first round about this I'm speaking. And my narrative was totally devoted to my people. And was totally related to what we can do alone, how we can be, how we can be remaining in dependence. And with this narrative, including a program which I present for Romania, food, water and energy, I succeed in the first round on the first place. And in the moment when you are outsider, of course, they alert immediately because they can lose, they realize they can lose the power and the money. Moreover, the most important point was in the moment when I said when I pronounced the word peace, they immediately alert. In the moment when I said peace because they need war. And this was the main important point. After the first round, everything, let's say the system was alert immediately. And everybody knows that the Romanian people that was foreign interference, which they control totally the situation. And of course, the system in Romania just they put into practice what they decide in a sense to to ban me immediately. So in the second round was starting December 6th with Romanian living outside of the country. We had three days voting process. So we started on 6th was seven and eight in Romania. So in the day of 6th, in the afternoon, they canceled totally the elections. Well, if the process was started in the morning, until afternoon, I had almost 70%. And they stopped the cancel. So the second round of the election was legally an unconstitutional counsel. They stolen the vote totally. And Qsmeas I said, the force accused me about Russian interference. Of course, they are not evidence. And until today when me and you, we have this interview is now evidence at all. Just to underline that is copy paste as President Trump suffer a lot during his campaign. Absolutely the same situation. They didn't come with any new stuff, just the same one. But in any case, they consider that they don't have to come back any more to the second round. And they promote another elections, which they are coming in the months of May this year. So in one month from now, which is another fraud even bigger than before. This I wish to be very clear. I made an application also for the second elections. They block me again. And in this moment, legally, I have not the right to participate to any campaign for the position of President of Romania. I wish to to nation to you the most important point, which in fact, they alarm them. And the most important is peace. And freedom. Because to the second one, just I want to say that they have fear of free Romania more than fear, war. This I wish to be very clear. The second one, the most important topic on earth is peace. What kind of peace do I mean? The general peace exactly as President Kennedy said in 1963 in front of American University was a fantastic speech. And today is reality. This piece, this kind of piece is the piece which makes life in earth happy. Children happy, family is happy, happiness in general. We have today in one or two minutes I can tell you every church person says today I'm hungry. Every second person today says I'm thirsty. And almost every everybody says I fear. This is a most important point of control of them. The only thing we have to fear is clear itself. So President Roosevelt in 1933, and this is absolutely exactly today, the fear. So confident, confident and on a frame, we must labor towards the strategy of peace. This is a most important point. And I wish to ask you one point also myself. We know how much cost the war, but we know how much cost the peace, how much cost. How much cost it because everybody we are talking about peace, but it's not implemented. So the only chance in the real sense which I can see and this was the main important point in Romania, which I have seen also not only what I said myself, but what they said Romanian people, he's president Trump. He's only chance for everybody to arrive at the peace, to back to democracy, not only in the United States, everywhere. It's already be creepy about it, but you're being watched. It's not just you were all being watched every time we go online. Data brokers accord everything you do when you sign on your phone, your iPad, your computer doesn't matter. People are watching you and some people think that's fine. You've got nothing to hide. But that's exactly the story they tell you to get you to lower your guard. The more you expose yourself, the more money they make by selling information about you. It's pretty sick actually. Congress is not banned it. And instead, the rest of us are here to fend for ourselves. And that's why we use ExpressVPN. ExpressVPN gives you back your privacy. It re-routs 100% of your online activities for secure encrypted servers. That makes it impossible for anyone to track and sell your information. If you're new to using a VPN, it's super, super easy. The service also scours the files of data brokers and requests to have your information removed from their records. It gives you a fresh start. Even if you don't have it, it retroactively cleans you off the internet. ExpressVPN also alerts you anytime your sensitive information is being used, and makes it easier for you to prevent identity theft. And that's a relief. So right now you get an extra four months for free when you use this show's link, scan the QR code on the screen, or go to expressvpn.com slash Tucker and get your extra months for extra months of ExpressVPN for free. That's expressvpn.com slash Tucker. And it's a chance also for Europe that we have President Trump, period. This is all. A lot of things just for one person, but of course we have together. And I want to tell you that not only the Americans citizens, they vote President Trump. Also the remains, they vote President Trump because we are thinking about that. We pray for that. And also time we think to have President Trump in this position, because otherwise the situation could be very critical, related, particularly, that we want peace. And by the way, all my campaign, while just concentrate on peace. And I was accused by the, by, by media, why I'm talking about peace, because they need war. Also time wise, this, all the campaign, I spoke about peace, they said war. I spoke about peace, they said war. They did not expect me to win the first round, because I said about peace. And the people they are looking for peace, of course. During the campaign, they asked me only for war, only permanent, and permanently, I spoke about peace. So this was all the campaign. And of course, another point, very, very important, was my program for water and energy, because I present the, to change the economic system of Romania. And this was based, as everybody knows about Hamilton ideology. Which to make, and Hamiltonian Romania in a sense to be totally independent, to provide performance economy, but depends only by your natural resources, no by debt. So exactly this was a situation. So we can be an Hamiltonian powerhouse in Eastern Europe side or also in Europe, just because we have to follow the best, which we had in the world. And one of the best, which I recognize myself is the founding father of United States, Alexander Hamilton. So this was the, my presentation and for this I was accused that I'm not good enough for them. Well, you were prevented, I mean, your democracy was shut down. But if you're against war and against debt, you had to know that those are the two issues that really matter to the globalists, war and debt, they're in favor of both. So were you surprised when you were accused of being a Russian agent and kicked out of Romanian politics? You know, they cannot, how I can say, it's impossible to change so fast. So I can tell you what they did. It's not so price for me. They're not destroying the democracy, they're destroying lives. It's not about democracy. It's about sitting people free. This is very important to know. And this show to us one thing that democracy, we have not democracy because it's impossible to find so many things today and to realize that in fact, where we had the democracy. It's not anymore. In fact, we have not in 35 years. We have not democracy. You know, what role did US Secretary of State Anthony Blinken play in Romanian politics? So everybody knows that was a foreign intervention and partiquile from Secretary of State Blinken that intervened in the elections and simply dictate what the system has to do. And it's absolutely, you know, everybody knows about this situation, including of course President Macron and Maya Sando from Moldova as well, the internet. But the most important was Secretary of State Blinken. What did he do and say that affected your election and Romanian politics? Well, simply was an intervention they don't very clear. They don't need free Romania to be mentioned that the largest military base of NATO is the Romania, probably not about that. Yes. Of course they want to launch the World War III from Romania and with this situation, of course, they can involve all Europe and also in the United States. So they have interest. They have interest in war. What do you mean they want to launch World War III from Romania? Because let me tell you how is a situation is a key gateway which can cancel, can protect the humanity to go in the war or can go to the war. Why? Because it's a largest boundary which Romania has to Ukraine, we discussed about 380 miles, only for Romania. In compare, Poland has almost 330 miles and Hungary around 80 miles. Geographically, it's very important as well. So it's the largest boundary again for Ukraine, Romania and in this situation, of course, Romania is the asset for European Union for Macron in order to launch the war. Strategically it's important. So number one is the most important strategy to call point Romania. Number two is a security framework for the Black Sea. Number three is a regional influence for the military for the Black Sea and also is the leverage for economic and for energy situations. And they know about that. They know very well about that. They want to turn NATO on an offensive force and we know very well that NATO is defensive organization. And this was my point all the time. First of all, I said it's not our war. We have nothing to do. The National interest is diplomatic negotiation and we can be a peace mediator Romania. And they don't like that because until they want to, of course, they want to cover many things which even today we don't know exactly what. But they want to be pushing the pushing for work. And of course, my position was exactly against them was totally contrary. So the most important is that the people are behind me. And all the Romania and people, of course, they almost, the majority of Romania people, of course, they have disposition against any intervention and any participation for war. They know my position and of course for this reason they can't suddenly need to be anyway for me in order to arrive to candidates for presidents. Even that today I have even now when we are talking, we have this interview. I have more than 50% of the voters from my side. We hope you're ready because how is next prayer challenge has arrived. It's a very good one. Beginning on April 13th, which is Palm Sunday, joined biblical scholar Jeff Cavan's and our friend Jonathan Rumi for a prayer experience unlike any you've had. It's called a seven day Holy Week in the Holy Land Challenge, Holy Week in the Holy Land. It's an immersive video prayer series. You walk the sights of Christ's passion, death, and resurrection as if you were really there. It's an amazing way to embrace Easter Week. It'll be going on in my house and we recommend it to you too. Jonathan Rumi plays Jesus in the show that shows and experience the Holy Land for the very first time as part of this project. The timing is perfect to see prepares to film the crucifixion scenes for the show. It's going to be amazing. So, Sonifer Hallows prayer challenge to experience the sea of Galilee journey into Jerusalem, stand at the foot of the cross, visit the tomb, and much more. This is a chance to go deeper into Christ's suffering, his passion, journey with him in actual sights, where all of these events unfolded. Download Hallows for three months free at hallow.com slash Tucker. You'll be grateful that you did. We are. What is your next move? Are you worried that these same forces will try and put you in jail in prison? Well, what's a subject that I was arrested in traffic for almost six hours? I have almost three or four files. But, you know, we don't give up and I'm sure one point that if United States particularly wants and aliens, not a vessel, an alias, very strong. They have to support the petrias, particularly from Romania and other brass biregrts. So, we are sure that in one day everything can be turned. Today or tomorrow, but it will happen. You know, Romania right now is the most important country in the world. It's alfind omega for a new era of peace, of dignity, of love, prosperity. And I'm saying this because it's a boundary between bad and good. And this boundary have to be close because if we close this door for war, that means peace. If we open this key gate as I said in the beginning, it's a war. And we don't have to have this. I mean, my opinion is that this war is a shame of humanity. And it's that it's not any rational human justification for endorsing war. Doesn't exist. So, what they don't like is if Romania breaks free, we follow other countries. Understand it. Yes. So, this they don't need. We'll be a dominoes full. Okay? And this terrifies them. That one country, particularly Romania, to be free. But this is our values, which we want to share. This is our flag, which we want to share with United States and those who are in the countries. Peace, democracy and freedom. We don't give up. This is our values. And we have to go straight to that. Even the situation looks now complicated in one day can be changed. Because we have been in our land since time immemorial. So, we are here from the early beginning of the history. And all our history is claimed by heroes, by kings devoted to the country and to the land. Romania and people is brave people. It's a great people. And we discuss also that exactly like Maga make America great again, which makes Romania great again. Yes. Strongly believe in our power. We are strong to believe in us. We are strong to believe that this is our land, which we did receive from Brussels. Or from other countries. We see from God. We see power of love. We trust in God. We're setting on on energy resources. We love our families. We believe in Christianity and in Christian families. We believe in our land. So we shall win sooner or later we shall win. Of course, it's a matter of time. And I can understand again that you cannot change the system in one hour. My narrative exactly was this during the campaign. I don't want to change the people. I want to change the system. Yes. And for this, they are afraid about me and afraid about the people which are behind me. So I recognize only one important partner in the United States, particularly in the moment when we have this administration and Trump, Trump, yes. And President Trump is our guarantee that he can solve the situation in Europe. He can solve the situation on space everywhere because, you know, I can tell you that President Trump is not only a leader in the United States. It's a leader in the world because a real leader, a leader in fact, save lives, don't send people to death. And if we know that and if we believe on that, we are strongly believe on that. We shall succeed sooner or later. For this reason, I said that Romania is the most important country in the world. And I know very well what I'm saying because it's exactly the key gates to close the door or to open the door, to close the door or to open the door, so we can play a key role in a diplomatic negotiation, particularly in the moment when the communication is strong. The communication is really strong between President Trump and President Putin. This will know very well. If the communication is strong, we shall find a way in order to arrive for peace because everybody will need peace. And it's incredible that in a turning land to have such a situation which demonstrates to all of us, to the humanity, that will lose the most important piece of power receiving from God for the human being. Of course, you have to negotiate everything very clearly. But more than that, you have to understand the humanity from us. And here we are today. We have to understand by our consciousness the humanity from us, it don't lose the humanity from us. Now we're sure you've heard play those free phone promises for America's biggest wireless carriers. If those deals sound too good to be true. If you're from us, don't lose. They humanity from us. Now we're sure you've heard play those free phone promises from America's biggest wireless carriers. If those deals sound too good to be true, it's probably because they are very often too good to be true. They come with layers of fine print, requiring you to sign up for four lines. Plus activation fees. Plus, plus, plus this, that, the other thing. You don't even understand what you're signing up for. And by the time you're done, you've paid for that free phone three X. It was a pretty expensive free phone. It's kind of a scam, honestly. Our wireless company is called Pure Talk, and it's got a much better and much more straightforward offer, and it comes with no strings whatsoever attached. With a qualifying plan of just 35 bucks a month, you get legitimately the brand new Samsung Galaxy A26 for free. It's actually free. There aren't hidden costs, you're not signing up for us to rely for promising to name your kid after them or something. From virtually indestructible Gorilla Glass to next generation camera lenses, the phone has basically everything that you want. All you need to do is switch to Pure Talk. 35 bucks a month from limited talk, text, and 15 gigs of data with mobile hotspot, all on America's most dependable 5G network. Go to puretalk.com slash talker to claim your free Samsung Galaxy with qualifying plan when you switch to Pure Talk, wireless by Americans for Americans. You asked me how did they kill democracy? Let me give you one example. So we're facing a serious violation of basic human rights, including political prosecutions, because our supporters, and the supporters particularly my candidacy, including vulnerable people like pensioners, like single mothers, like young families. They have been abusedly, fined with thousand euros and subjected to home rise by economic or military units, just based on posted on social media. And I want to tell you that one pensioner in Romania received around $200, $300 per month, and they receive a fine $1,000, $2,000, just because they post on social media, sentence to support freedom, to support democracy, to support myself, and in fact to support peace. So freedom speech today is under attack on the serious attack, and severely restricted, and this is not good at all, including media, very important people. They are blocked on the social media for any sentence they want to say. Recent government emergency ordinance bans electoral content on the social media, unless the candidates for this campaign registered, and be careful, political party members. So with another words, doesn't take this freedom of speech in Romania anymore. No. Moreover, the Romanian lives abroad and they also have been abused, restricted. They had three days of voting period, and this was suddenly cut by just few hours limited by Romanian hours voting only. So the system tried to control everything. Exactly like you remember very well in this plant, any plant in the aquave, which they want to control us, besides any other things. Also they want to control the vote. And in the end, I can tell you that the most important is that we expose with this situation is corruption. You ask me how I can feel how is the situation. I feel good because we expose the corruption of the so many years. We expose them to dramatic situation where we are. That in fact, we have not any more democracy, because it's impossible even that was a foreign interference or other interference by whatever, because I said, I was based on voluntary support in my campaign, but even was interference. How you can destroy the democracy, you know in few weeks, this doesn't end that we have not democracy anymore. And here we are. Moreover, of course, they don't like the position, the system of President Trump in general, the position of administration Trump's and they are totally related with what European Union does right now. And you know very well that European Union established globalism, government with analytic people, even Usola Bauden-Lain is not elected person. We are just nominated. So we have to fight globalist, globally, the seoish donation, globally. We cannot accept just islands of sovereignty in the ocean of globalist. We have to understand that we need the global network of sovereignty countries. So we have to be a union of countries which we fight for sovereignty, because the flag of peace, democracy, and freedom which United States today has, we have to keep also this flag. And also countries around us. And in fact, all of us, we have to work and to fight for peace. Not just to stay to wait a decision from someone. It's in our capacity to demonstrate that the human being has a power to fight for peace and for democracy. Otherwise, we are just links. You know, I was accused that I want to kick out from India, from European Union, and from NATO. So my answer also time was a following. I like the aliens only if they serve the nations, not to enslave it. I wish to be very clear, not to enslave it. In this moment, we are just a client state. Just a client state. And this must end, because we are must slaves. We are free people. And I said to you from the only beginning, I have a dream, and my dream is freedom, dignity for the Roman people. For this, we have to fight. And we don't give up, because we know that it's in our power and together with God, we can succeed. Because God is with us. And it's normal to be the situation because show us how wrong was this system, and how many problems, and how I can say violation of the human rights they did, on it if today. So it's very important that the corruption was exposed and all the situation was exposed, because we are leaving under a cartel of censorship, the law for the law, just for them, understanding, not for the people. Exactly as President Trump had all these problems in their campaign, because censorship is a political police, a political persecution, and legal abuse, which we are facing today. It's a situation which is incredible to have in a permanent venue, to have in the situation when we consider that we are in Europe and Union, we are NATO members. We have a common understanding about what we have to do. No, this is not. We have to change the system. Exactly as I propose to change the economic system. Exactly as I said about Hamilton, President, and ideology. We have to change all these things. Otherwise we remain just as slaves in our own country. We have rich natural resources. We have to to consider that we have to base on our natural resources, not to know, not to debt, because what they offered to us, they offer technocracy and debt, and I propose to remain people and to other countries, freedom and dignity. This is my offer instead of technocracy and debt. Even if we found this, they prefer because they have views, all these people sold in years. And exactly as I said, they have fear of free country. As Romania could be. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Jescu. Thank you for spending this time in explaining yourself and Godspeed. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level that's not surprising, that's what they do, but on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy, and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's immoral. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google, or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's a subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.