Liquid Death, you know, they're they're not really doing us any favors. It's expensive water, but it's cool. The kids love it. You know what I mean? Demon-infused water. Are we rolling? We're rolling. Well, you know, the devil takes it seriously even if them is some marketing stick. He doesn't care. If you give the devil an opening, he's going to try to get through that door. So, you just don't give him any chances he gets enough free shots the way it is and as I have gone through 50,000 exorcisms over the last five decades, I've learned that demons attack from the most unexpected, unusual circumstances. It's not what you think. How did you first come across a demon? [cough and clears throat] Well, um I was a university in pre-med. I would plan to go into medicine. Had several family uh members who were doctors and that was supposed to be the track I was on. So, I bought this around the world airline ticket. Back then on the now defunct Pan American, you could buy a ticket as long as you kept going the same direction, you could stop at endless places. So, I went off to see the world. When I landed in the Middle East and Africa, India, and Asia, I was in for a shock. I saw things, of course, that I'd never seen before. And from a religious standpoint, I had just become a Christian. Uh so, I didn't know much about the faith. I was in my early 20s. Okay. And um I saw demonic ceremonies. Self-mutilation, ritual terror ceremonies. People would pierce themselves with knives and skewers and beat themselves bloody and but whenever they would go through these rituals, they would all always go through a ceremony to invite the spirits to enter into them. So, this was part of the preparation. So, they would go through these ceremonies and when the time came for the spirits to enter into them, they would go into these catatonic seizures, scream, yell, thrash about, roll around the ground. And I said, "What's going on?" And they said, "The spirits have entered into us. It gives us the power to go through these rituals." Uh wow. That sounds like demons. And so, I thought, "Hmm. Does that happen in America?" So, I came back to America and a few years later discovered that indeed it does happen. How much of that do you think is psychological though? You know, there's a tribe in Haiti who who practices a a ritual similar to that, but it's a drug ritual. They get high on like toad venom. Mhm. And then they bury themselves in this like zombie ritual. Yeah. But the problem is what the like how much of that is drug induced and how much of that is psychological belief? You're talking about the rainbow serpent. The rainbow serpent, exactly. Yeah, maybe you can you I probably butchered that. Maybe you can Well, I've been to Haiti and I've been to the voodoo ceremonies and I've interacted with the priests. It's part of the research I've done all over the world. Mhm. And for people that aren't aware of the rainbow serpents the rainbow serpent ritual, can you explain what that is? Well, it's it's just it's there are numerous rituals in Haiti where they call up the spirits, but generally they make what's called a veve, which means they take some [sighs] sacred powder that they've, you know, done their thing over and then they make this drawing on the ground. And the nature of the drawing has to do with the kind of spirit that they're going to call forth for possession. And um very fascinating to watch. They make the drawing just like that. The spirit comes and takes over the people who are there who are part of the ritual. Now, they've also learned that the voodoo priests can have more um more of a sense of awesome power if they can make zombies out of people. Mhm. So, they've they've learned these psychotropic ways like with the toad and so on to put people into a temporary coma, bury them, and then they go out in the dead of the night and dig them up. Right. And then people say, "Oh my god, I just saw this person alive and then they were dead and I saw them buried and there they are." However, uh I have talked to other voodoo priests who disavow anything disingenuous about what they're doing that they believe it really is the power of Satan and the voodoo spirits that uh are bringing about this miraculous event. I don't know. Could the devil do it? He absolutely could do that. But sometimes the devil needs a little bit of a helping hand. Mhm. So, who's [snorts] to say? I think it happens both. I think it's both a psychological and a psychotropic phenomenon as well as a spiritual phenomenon. Mhm. Yeah. I think I think so. And even so, for people that aren't aware of you, um [clears throat] you're a proper exorcist. Yes. And you've done how many exorcisms? Well, I need to update the stats, but it's been over 50,000 and counting. And those are documented cases. Those are cases on which we have files. And I've been doing this for five plus decades. Now, is there like a protocol when you're doing this where you have to like file this with the with the church No. No. No. I don't file with anybody. Uh but I do it for my own benefit. Uh for research purposes. Okay. Also, sometimes people come back for a second or third or fourth exorcism. All right? You don't always get all the demons all all at once. So, then you have to go back and look at your notes and say, "Well, I dealt with this, but hmm, now there's something else here. There's another layer of evil." Different levels, different devils. Different levels, different devils. Okay. So, you were um we were just talking about how you were in your 20s. You went to Africa and you witnessed these tribes partaking in these rituals. Um and how did that lead to you becoming an exorcist? Well, of course, what I saw was unfettered by the constraints of the cultural eyes of a Westerner, the real thing. But in in the Western world, uh we've been overtaken with scientism, with philosophy and logic and all the sorts of things that say there is no supernatural world. There is no nothing out there that's metaphysical. It's all imagination. And and even though I was a Christian and I believed the Bible that there's a lot of supernatural things in the Bible, but I'd never seen it with my own eyes. That was the difference. So, it kind of shattered my Westernized illusions. What do you mean never seen it with your own eyes? Like the the stuff that the Bible talks about? the supernatural of Satan. Right. It's [snorts] there in the Bible, many instances, but I'd never actually seen it Okay. until I got back to America. Because my eyes now were attenuated, if you will, to the possibility of evil in a real very distinctive way that projected itself from the unseen world into the seen world. Um when did you first read the Bible? When did I first read the Bible? [snorts] Uh I was raised in a Christian home, but I never read the Bible. I wasn't a Christian. My goal was to be a rock and roll musician and Oh, wow. Yeah, I taught myself to play about a half dozen instruments. I was a guitar player, had my own band. Uh recorded songs, traveled, played in bars when I was 13. Uh and that's kind of what I wanted to be until the family said, "No, you need to be a doctor." Cuz you know, you have several uncles who are doctors. You need to follow along in that tradition. So, that was my plan. Then I radically became a Christian and Radically? Well, yeah, pretty much so because I'm like, "Wait a minute. I've heard this all my life. I just never embraced it. I'm going to embrace it now." And so, over a period of time, I decided there must be a different path I needed to take. And this journey around the world seeing the supernatural was part of that path. I didn't know you're going to have a two-headed demon staring at me the whole time I'm here. Surprise. [laughter] And this little idol over here looking at me. That two-headed demon with his that come from? short phallus is from the Amazon rainforest. I had a gentleman in here named Mike Corey who uh he travels all over the world and visits uncontacted [clears throat] tribes. And uh this was a a specific tribe in the Amazon who cuts off heads and shrinks them. They make these they're famous for the little shrunken heads that you see. This is holy anointing oil. I'm not going to sit here with that thing looking at me. Are you going to christen it? I'm going to anoint it. In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Both of them. In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. So, just in case this imbued with any kind of essence, I bind it by the authority of the Lord Jesus Christ based upon what this man has said, its origin, and what it represents. And I resist it by the blood of Jesus Christ. I take no chances. When you're an exorcist, you don't take chances. Actually, I've taken some I shouldn't have taken, but [laughter] I've learned better. Sometimes Sometimes when you're when you're an exorcist, you got to you got to take chances to save souls. You know? Yes. Sometimes it's about more about the the souls than it is about yourself, right? Amen, brother. Yeah, that came from I think they used to burn that. So, this comes off the top. And they're supposed they put like bodily fluids and herbs in there and like drugs in there and they would burn it and then that would be a part of their ritual. Well, if this was actually used for that I don't think this one was used. This is just a and a tourist souvenir. Exactly. Exactly. But even so, it's representational. It's an idol. It's an idol, yeah. It's a representation of a belief system of the demonic supernatural. Okay? So, it doesn't have any power in itself as the Apostle Paul taught us in his letter to the Corinthians. An idol is just an idol. Right. But it represents demons and Paul said, "When you worship idols, you are worshipping demons." Mhm. So, that has been an object of demon worship even if it's representational, trace it back to the origin, that's what you've got. Mhm. Yeah, but what if he's just like hanging out I'm not worshipping him. Like he's just hanging out like observing. It was a gift from a friend. That doesn't mean it that doesn't mean it's evil, right? You could be affected by it. Really? Of course you can. How? Well, are you a born-again Christian saved by the blood of Jesus? I don't think so. Okay, then you can be affected. Okay. So, you need you you need to become a Christian. You need to get saved. You need to renounce the devil and then you won't have to worry about that thing. In fact, what you'll do is you'll take it out and smash it. Really? Yes. But you're not ready for that yet. I might be. I don't know. We'll find out. This interview isn't over yet. That's true. [laughter] So, what type of people do you do exorcisms on? Are they are they all of a particular faith? Are they all are they all Christians? They're all over the place. Okay. First of all, there's no stratification from a socio-economic standpoint of who gets demons and who doesn't get demons. Strikes all socio-economic areas. I have Harvard graduates, doctors, lawyers, especially lawyers. Oh, yeah. I bet the lawyers are full of demons. We know what Shakespeare said. Kill the lawyers in case you don't know the quote. Is that what he said? [laughter] It's a joke. It's a Shakespearean joke. An Elizabethan joke. All right. [laughter] And I I deal with people in Hollywood. Ooh, a lot of demons in Hollywood. Oh, yes. I deal with pastors, priests, nuns. [clears throat] That's a demons in the church. I have made the comment I'll go to my grave never [snorts] saying the names of well-known people that I've cast demons out of. Who've come to me in private who are suffering from demons. Respect of privacy, that makes sense. Yeah. My point is anybody can have a demon. And we're talking about all aspects of education and life from blue-collar to no collar to clerical collar. Demons are no respecter of of who a person is or what they do. Demons simply want to possess the soul of a human being and destroy them. Okay. How when somebody comes to you, what do they say? Like what what's when they reach out to you? Hey Bob, saw you on YouTube or Dr. Phil or whatever. I heard you're a great you know, the top world's top exorcist. I How do they what do they respond with? Do they do they think they have a demon or do they think that they [sighs] are having some sort of crisis in their life? Is it a psychological issue? All the above. All the above. But most of them have a kind of haunting feeling that something isn't quite right. That for example, everyone's focused on eating better and staying active after the holidays, but personally I find it tough because they have all those leftover treats and I'm always the one running around eating my kids' leftover scraps. I keep up with my workouts and exercise year-round, but let's face it, there's no amount of exercise that can outdo a poor diet. This struggle often stems from an imbalanced metabolism, which disturbs hunger hormones and triggers intense cravings for sugar and carbs causing blood glucose levels to spike. And that is why I take Cellbeing by Verso. It's made with ingredients that help regulate blood sugar, curb cravings, and boost metabolism. They also work to shrink existing fat cells and prevent new ones from forming. I personally have been taking Verso for years now and I've noticed I feel way less hungry throughout the day, which means I'm snacking less. And I also have noticeably higher energy, which enhances my overall mood. On top of that, I can see a difference in the mirror. I'm not losing weight, but I'm definitely losing fat and staying leaner. Plus, Verso publishes third-party testing from each batch produced to guarantee you're getting what you pay for. Click the link down in the description or head on over to v e r.so/danny and use my coupon code danny at checkout for 15% off your first order. Again, that's v e r.so/danny for 15% off your first order. [clears throat] The individual says, "I've got these six strange diseases. I've been to every doctor." Had a lady the other day said, "I've been to 15 doctors. Nobody can solve this problem. Why am I like this? Could it be a demon?" Now, there's good and bad about the age in which we live because this is the age of occult supernaturalism and witchcraft and Satanism and all these things are on the rise. So, people are thinking more in terms outside of the box spiritually. That's bad because some people go down that road, but for the people who don't, they're thinking, "Well, maybe there is a real world of the supernatural out there. Maybe my problem is that." And there may be other people who come to me with legitimate mental health issues and so we we always ask the question, "Are you under the treatment of a psychiatrist, a therapist? What kind of medications are you on? Has there been [clears throat] a clinical diagnosis for your condition or the things that are happening in your head?" But then there are the people who can tell you exactly when the demon entered. And these are people who have been the new age, the occult, various types of demonic supernaturalism and they know when that spirit entered. They feel it, they sense it many different types of psychological ways and physical ways. Whatever the case, they come to me either knowing they have a demon because many of them have actually invited demons into them. They've they've gone that far. All right. In in a kind of stupid moment of maybe they were on drugs. Maybe they were high. Maybe they were drunk. Maybe they just were so bitter and angry at God and that's a big category, people who are mad at God. And so, they go to his enemy and then they find out, "Whoops, I shouldn't have done that." So, all those people it's it's a mixture, but when people come to see me in person or virtually, most virtually, they fill out an intake form. I look down through that intake form, very specific questions. And I can reasonably What kind of questions? Questions like what was your family life like? List your instances of abuse and trauma. Have you ever thought of or attempted suicide? What kind of drugs have you taken? What type of alternative religious belief systems have you been involved in? Alternative What is the What do you mean by alternative? Well, non-Christian essentially. Is that a Is that a red flag for demon possession if they're not Christians? Can be. Not necessarily. There are many people of different faiths who have a good conscience about moral values and the sense of a higher being. That's not necessarily going to keep you from a demon, but it's it's better than the person who is reading the book of Satan and checking out some local ritual group where they can drink blood with a nude on the altar. Now, okay, that's very diametrically opposite. So, but all over the place, but these people have a sense something's not right and there's something evil. So, they'll say things like stuff is crawling all over my body inside. And a very common one now I first encountered this decades ago, but it's becoming extremely common a spiritual rape. Spiritual rape? Yes. So, I mean I've talked to people, especially women, they're more victimized by incubus spirits as opposed to succubus spirits, who vividly describe being spiritually raped at night. And they they they often approach me as saying, "I want to tell you something I've never told anybody before." Cuz they're afraid people think they're some kind of maniac or they're Right. they're crazy. No, who's going to who's going to believe that? I believe it. In fact, one of the books I wrote, Jezebel, I included wrote the book almost 10 years ago, included a chapter on incubus. This is the first time anybody in the religious community had come forward in printed form to talk about this. Mhm. Um So, this is somebody says this is happening to me. And I look at them like, "You sure you're not just a little over have some over eroticized fantasies?" No. No, it happens. I wake up, it's happening. And I say, "Is it tactile? Do you feel it?" Mhm. Yeah. Yeah, I have an orgasm. Wow. So, when somebody tells you that So, they liked it? No, they don't like it. But it's enforced upon them. Almost always starts out Yeah, but how do they have an orgasm? starts out in a kind of sleep paralysis state. Right. They're immobilized. Now, not all sleep paralysis is demonic. There is a psychological phenomenon of sleep paralysis, but there's also a demonic phenomenon to sleep paralysis. So, it starts out that way. They're they're asleep. They start waking up. They're immobilized. They can't move. And they will say things like, "Something is on top of me. It was I could feel its pressure." Sometimes they can see the thing. Mhm. Sometimes it's visual. And um then they, without getting too indelicate, afterwards have all the symptoms of having been Now, this is not one person and this is not mentally disturbed people. I'm talking about people who live otherwise perfectly normal lives. Mhm. But the door has been opened to the devil at some point. It could be generational incest. It could be ancestors who practice things like this. Going back to Egypt. Going back to ancient Canaanite civilizations. Like epigenetic trauma from from thousands or hundreds or thousands of years ago? Well, now you're going down the road of epigenetics and the idea of inherited psychological trauma. And sometimes it is that. So, a properly trained exorcist, and there aren't that many, frankly, um will try to figure out the difference with God's help as to whether or not this is a re-experience of something that an ancestor has gone through or whether they are experiencing it in real time now. Right, but couldn't it also be the same thing? If they are experiencing it in real time if they're experiencing something that came through the past. Well, then you have to deal with things like the physicality of it. Right. I mean, they are very sometimes quite direct in explaining in private what has happened. Mhm. Well, you're saying if they have the symptoms of it, then it has to be physical, right? So, even if this is something that is happening allegedly in their minds, but there's physical manifestations, is it real? I think I think so. That's when you do the exorcism. That's when you say, "If there's a demon behind this, if this is more than in this person's mind, but the power of Jesus Christ, God from eternity past having defeated the devil at the cross, I command that spirit to come forward if there is a spirit of incubus or some such thing, I command you by the blood of Christ to come forward and face me." And the demon will respond? If he's there. If he's there. Maybe not immediately. Sometimes it's just like that, sometimes it takes a little while. Depends on the nature of the situation. Every situation's different. If nothing responds, it could mean that this person is having a psychological problem and then you have to ask some indelicate questions But are the demons elusive? about their sexual life, their history and so on and what has happened to them. And and sometimes these things are projections of past abuse like which hasn't been resolved or dealt with. Uh But in far too many cases, this is just one of the many things that will happen. But then you have to go down the trail. Did this just happen because of this person's life or is this an ancestral evil being visited on successive generations? With a demon, how much information will the demon give you? Best case scenario, would they tell you how old they are, where they're from? That's not that's not the issue. Okay. The issue is within reason, how much information do I need to know to help this person? No more and no less. This is the only infallible rule of faith as the story creed state. You go by the Bible. So, when you get into an extra-biblical context, you're you know, you're sort of flying by the seat of your spiritual pants, so to speak. What do you mean by that? Well, I I mean that it may not line up exactly with what scripture says, so then you have to make a determination of whether or not there's deception going on [snorts] or there's just something about which the scripture doesn't go into specifically. Case in point, what we just talked about. All right. Now, the Bible does tell us about things that happened in olden times going back to Genesis chapter 6, where there was demonic cohabitation with women and sex between spirit beings and human beings. But now that gets in another another whole issue, another whole track. That's another whole show about the Nephilim and other creatures and giants and all that sort of thing, which is a hot topic today. And as to whether the procreative abilities of demons ended, which I believe it did. But then are they still trying to do what they can't do? That's the question. As you can see, exorcism is much more complicated than Hollywood have you would have you to think. How do you define a demon a demon? What actually is a demon? Well, again, there are various theories about what a demon is. But the historic position of Christianity uh from the early church onward has always been consistent. Fallen [snorts] angels. Those who rebelled with Lucifer against God and were cast from the heavens to earth. And then Jesus in John 10:10 defined the mission as Satan comes to kill, steal, destroy. Doesn't get any more basic than that. So, these are discarnate beings who roam the earth looking for ways to bring about the purposes of evil. A simple illustration I've given many times is that the devil's disembodied. All spirits are disembodied. Okay. Okay. So, the devil is a time-space place being. Mhm. So, he gives the appearance of omniscience by sending forth his demons, highly regimented and under command in his name, to go out and do these things. So, they have specific assignments to attack so-and-so, to attack so-and-so, to do this, to do that on various strata. Which could be political, which could be cultural, which could be highly personal. Mhm. And then they seek to bring about their plans and they're looking for victims. And the question is, does someone want to be a victim or are they an unwitting victim? That's also part of the exorcism process. How far back into history do exorcisms go? Like when was the first exorcism, do you know? Well, first [clears throat] of all, you have to understand that every religion has some type of ritual or belief system expelling evil. It's a new year, which means new chances for our resolutions to start falling apart. And we always feel guilty about it. Via is one of the easiest things for me to keep up with because it's enjoyable. Trusted by over half a million happy customers, Via is the Swiss Army knife of wellness, dedicated to harnessing the natural benefits of hemp to create high-quality wellness products. From setting the mood in the bedroom to chilling out after a long day, Via has something for you. With award-winning THC and THC-free gummies, Via has the dosage to encourage your comfort. No need to block off hours of the day for an unproductive high. When you can experience the full spectrum of benefits from hemp and hemp products with a microdose of THC to give you a little boost without compromising your responsibilities. Via is also well-renowned for their award-winning THC and THC-free vapes, THCA flower, soothing topicals, and calming drops, all crafted with the highest-quality hemp sourced from trusted, independently-owned American farms. I personally like to utilize Via as a creativity tool, or even after podcast, after I'm super overstimulated and need to relax. At night, they're great. I'll cut off a little quarter when I want to study, watch a documentary, or even read a book. Their products range from 0 mg to 100 mg of THC. So, these guys have you covered whether you're looking for a microdose or to enjoy more potent effects. Via is the only lifestyle hemp brand. They are experts at using compounds found in hemp along with the active plant extracts to produce targeted effects. It's incredible. And the best part is, Via legally ships to nearly all states in the US in discreet packaging directly to your door with a worry-free guarantee. No medical card required. If you're 21-plus, check out the link to Via in our description. And use the code Danny to receive 15% off. And if you're new to Via, get a free gift of your choice. After your purchase, they're going to ask you where you heard about them. And please help support the show by telling them we sent you. Again, use the code Danny for 15% off. This year, enhance your everyday with Via. This was not new to Christianity. It was certainly not new to Judaism. Mhm. And it's there with every single religion. [clears throat] And you know, you can just pick the most basic ones of Hinduism, Buddhism, and Islam. And they have rituals for expelling demons. And they believe in a cosmology of demons. Right. Okay. So, that's that's not unique to Christianity. It was not unique to the Jewish faith. What amazed the people in Bible times is how Jesus cast out demons. Cuz they had all these complex rituals that they went through. So, it was about what you did Yes. to get the demon out. Jesus came along and said, "In my name, by my authority, who I am, you will cast out demons." And that's why they the Pharisees were dumbfounded. They said, "Who is this man? He must be in league with Beelzebub. That's the only way he could cast out demons." Mhm. So, they they were trying to wrap their heads around this, and they couldn't do it. I mean, this man just speaks and demons leave. He tells them to go, and they go. We can't do that. Mhm. Wow, this threatens our whole political institution and our religious institution. So, in antiquity We're talking millennia. Right. Four, five, six thousand years before Christ, this was going on. Okay, but when Christ was performing exorcisms he was doing it to people that were involved in religion involved in There was medicine involved. No, there's no medicine involved. And he wasn't always involved with people that had religion. Some of the people Jesus did exorcisms on, there's no indication that they were necessarily people of faith. There was, for example Right. the the daughter of Abraham that the scripture speaks of, which means a godly Jewish woman who'd had a demon that entered her 18 years prior to the time Christ met her. And she was godly. There was the man in the synagogue Mark 1. Well, he was a godly man, too, because he was in the synagogue. So, there were those kinds of people. But Jesus did countless exorcisms we know nothing about, let alone the ones that are recorded in scripture. It just says Jesus went about doing good and healing all who were tormented by the devil. Mhm. But we don't know who these people were. We don't what religious system they came from. We don't know what culture they came from. But he cast out their demons. And what Where Where is this? This is all in the Bible? Yeah. And And the purpose was to demonstrate that he was God. But also to relieve human suffering. So, he came along upended this system of belief about exorcism. Mhm. And I'm I'm I'm fascinated by museums like been to the Hermitage in St. Petersburg, Russia. Um specially like the British Museum in England. Mhm. And when you go through these, the places I look out look at are are all the areas of antiquity and and and you can see in them, like in the British Museum the Hermitage has it, too. So do other museums. Sections where they will show you all the various ways that the ancients made curses and tried to destroy curses. Right. And all the objects and amulets and charms and things they did to ward off evil spirits. Mhm. Evil spirits. So So, in antiquity science and technology was nowhere near as as evolved as it is today. Mhm. So, when people were psychotic having epileptic seizures any of these things that we understand and have studied today wouldn't it make sense that they would have just attributed this to spirituality or some sort of ethereal beings, demons, angels, whatever it is? [snorts] Partially. Undoubtedly, there was a lot of misdiagnosis. There always has been a lot of misdiagnosis and still is today among people who really don't know what they're doing. Mhm. And they try to go out and rid people of demons and they'll have no understanding of mental health issues. Don't even try to understand just the basics of it, you know. Mhm. Or one of the common questions I ask people is, "Have you seen a therapist?" "Have you" you know, they say, "I have I this this this." I say, "Is that a clinical diagnosis or a self-diagnosis?" So, when somebody says to me it's a self-diagnosis, I'm highly suspicious. Mhm. And you know, sometimes I make people angry because I won't cast out their demons. Really? In other words, I will not solve a problem they don't have. But they think they have. They want it to be a demon. Because if somebody can come along, and there are plenty of preachers out there on YouTube doing this, "Out in the name of Jesus, and you're okay now, and you go your way." It doesn't work like that. And so, they want that to happen that way. I understand that. You know, if if if you're psychotic and delusional you don't want to admit that you live in unreality. You You don't want to acknowledge that fact because that that means that somebody else is going to get in control of your life. Somebody else is going to administer drugs to you. You might have to be institutionalized. Mhm. And they don't want to go through that. So, they can build an alternative religious fantasy of demonization. That's very possible. I see it all the time. And if someone comes to you and they believe wholeheartedly there's a demon inside of them. They're possessed. And they just come to you. They're like, "Bob Well diagnose me. Do I have a demon? Can you get rid of it? How do you know that they that they don't have a demon?" Well, I got a checklist in my brain. All right. So, if I ask the basic questions, "You have all these symptoms. [snorts] Have you seen a medical doctor?" Yeah, but you don't have to see a medical doctor to know you have a demon. No, but have you Have you Have you had a physical lately? The The brain does strange things. Uh when Yeah. people have hormone imbalances, or they have infections. People can become delusional from infections. So "Have you been sick?" Mhm. "Have you been to a doctor?" You know, and then I get this typical anti-allopathic attitude. They says, "Oh, they're just in it for the money. I don't want I don't see" Go see a doctor. Just just for my benefit, get checked out. Mhm. So, if the doctor says everything's kosher Okay. Well, now we may be at a mental health level. Okay. So, uh "Have you seen a therapist? Have you seen a psychologist? Have you worked through some of your issues?" "So, you were molested at the age of 6 and raped at the age of 15." And the common answer I get is "I've never told anyone but you." Cuz people are afraid to talk about these things. Uh they're terrified of their trauma. Couldn't a demon enter them through molestation process? Absolutely. And I would say in the majority of cases, that is a demonic opening, even if it's not the person's fault. But more to the point. So if a person is just for the very first time getting that off their chest, so to speak then I try to determine Okay. It doesn't mean they don't have a demon. But it may mean that they've not therapeutically worked through this properly. They've not really had a process. Now, in the Christian community, we call this inner healing. In the deliverance community that does understand some need to free people from the devil, they call it just the basic healing of the soul. And it just means being a good friend, uh a kind, loving Christian to listen to people's stories and and try to help them to through their trauma. Okay. But the majority of the people who come to me have not done that. They've not done anything. This thing has been buried like a time bomb inside them. So, my job, with God's help, is to diffuse that and determine, well, is this just a mental issue or or is there a demon? And if there's a demon, within a matter of minutes, I'm going to know. How often is it the case that you know it's a demon, but the person doesn't believe it's a demon and is not religious at all, doesn't believe in God, doesn't believe in the devil, none of this stuff? Well, the question is why would they even come to me in the first place? That's a great point. They wouldn't. They wouldn't come to you unless they actually believed that there was a demon and they believed in it and they In most cases, in most cases. Wow. Now, sometimes a person is sent to me by somebody, a husband, a wife, a parent, and often times in those cases, um I end up upsetting them because I say, "Look, you're you're trying to get me to solve a problem that's not there. This is not a demon." And that happens with a lot of the the problems today like in the area of autism, of of the the whole of this the spectrum of Asperger's etc. and so on. And and people jump to a conclusion, it's it's the devil. Mhm. Now, it can be the devil partially, but almost always there's there's something systemic or psychoneurologically wrong with the person to begin with and maybe the demon's taking advantage of that, but the real problem isn't a demon. Look, I have enough on my plate of people coming to me with real demons, real demonic manifestations all day long, every day. Have you ever been possessed by a demon? No. Has one ever tried? Pardon? Has one ever tried to enter you? Not that I know of. You would think since you're You would think so. all these demons, they would say, "We got to get rid of this guy." Well, or Satan would just kind of like conjure up his his horde of demons and be like, "Yeah, we need to start a war against Bob." I'm a child of God. The Bible tells us in 1 John, "Greater is Christ who is in me than Satan who is in the world." Through Jesus Christ's presence in my life, I'm more powerful than the devil. Not as a person, but through Christ. That's the first thing. The second thing is what I've learned through the years is the safest place to be free from the devil is to be running at him in the name of Jesus, running than rather running away from him in fear. How come Jesus called himself the morning star? Jesus didn't call himself the morning star. The devil was called that. Yeah, but Jesus also called himself the morning star. I've had I've had multiple Bible scholars on here that have said Well, [sighs] that is referred to, yes, but not in the same sense that Satan was the star of the morning. How is it different? Because Christ is God from eternity past and the devil was a created being. Now, the devil was a created being? Yes. Like he was number two in heaven, so to speak, in the realm of the heavenlies. Mhm. And he had great power and he had great brilliance and great beauty. He was the originator of all music, the originator of a lot of human intelligence. But then he rebelled against God and got kicked out of heaven because he wanted not only to be like God, to be above God. "I will exalt my throne above that of God," he said. Mhm. And the scripture says, "You will be brought low like a rotten carcass trampled underfoot." God said that? Yeah. Yeah. Isaiah says that. That's not not that's not very bright and shiny, but the devil wants you to think he's bright and shiny. He wants to think that he can offer you all the things of this world, every pleasure, every hedonistic impulse fulfilled. And he tried this with Christ and failed. And he still does it today. But his biggest temptation is, as C.S. Lewis famously said, is to get you to think he doesn't exist. That he's not real. He's not a He's not a presence. He's just looking to enter your life through any door that he can find. And if you don't believe that he can do that, you've taken the first step towards self-destruction. There's a famous quote, I forget who the quote's by, but they said the devil was the best friend of the church cuz they kept him in business. That's Anton LaVey's quote. Anton LaVey? [laughter] Well, but it it that's that's ridiculous. The devil isn't a club that Christianity is used to get people into a position of faith. It's just plain stupid. It's a stupid statement. It's not true. Now, in times past, there have been eras when the church was not as rigorous as it should have been in its faith system, in which there were particularly, um during the Middle Ages, times like plenary indulgences and other things like that, where people were coerced by a belief in the devil into clinging to the church. That error has been made from time to time, but it's not been consistent with faith throughout the ages. No. Jesus is the best friend the church ever had. He died for her. He gave his life for her and for every individual who becomes part of that church. Now, you've [clears throat] been on like a lot of big shows like like Anderson Cooper and uh Dr. Phil. Bill Maher. Bill Oh, you were on Bill Maher, too? Oh, yeah. I used to be a regular on his his his old show, um Politically Incorrect. So, you have a lot of people that criticize you. I used to tell Bill Maher, "You just bring me on as red meat Christian to throw before [laughter] the before the wolves of the world." And he just laughed and he said, "Yeah, you're my token Christian." "You're my token Christian." What what kind of What kind of things do these skeptics or these critics of you like to say? What What are you What do your your biggest critics say about you? You know, I don't pay much attention. I've outlived most of them. [laughter] How old are you? They're dead. How old are you? What do you think? You don't know how old I am? I would say [gasps] I'm not going to drink Liquid Death today, but 60s? Mid-60s? Thank you. You know what? Fighting the devil is the elixir of youth. I I see every kind of doctor on a semi-annual basis just to make sure that everything's working perfectly. By God's grace, I'm in absolutely perfect health. You look great, man. Sharp Sharp as a tack? At 80. 80? Stop it. You're not 80. I'm 80. Wow. [snorts] You look great, brother. Thank you. Good living, Yeah. wonderful wife, great children, incredible friends who love God and fighting the devil all day long. Fighting that damn devil all day long. Well, let's say he's the damned devil. The damned devil. [laughter] All day long. So, you won't drink Liquid Death? I will not drink Liquid Death and and this is another thing that's kind of interesting. You made So, before we started the show, I I offered you a Liquid Death and you refused it, so I went and got you a nice me tell you something. Let me tell you a story about that which will drive it home. Yes. I had knee replacement surgery about I think it was 12 years ago. [clears throat] And I came home from knee replacement surgery and walked in the house the day after and collapsed. And I thought, "Wow, okay, I'm just weak from surgery." So, my wife helped me get in bed. And I am this I was the sickest I've ever been in my life. Mhm. I woke up in the middle of the night and I heard the voice of God. It's the only time in my life I've heard God's voice. Wow. And the voice said, "You're dying of a heart attack. Call 911." And I yelled out to my wife in the other room. I said, "I'm dying. Call 911." Next thing you know, the paramedics are over there, check me out. They said, "No, he's fine. Just let him get some rest." I looked at them. I said, "I am dying. Get me to the hospital." They got me to the hospital, wheel me in, did the MRI, did the echo, did all these things, and this doctor, very serious, walked into the room and I'm laying there in the gurney. He said, "You are dying. You're full of blood clots. We need to perform immediate surgery." Full of blood clots? I I I you have blood was from the knee replacement? From the knee replacement. Oh my god. They hadn't properly thinned my blood. Okay. So, he said we're going to wheel you into surgery. My family, my three daughters were sitting outside. And he said I'm going to bring them in. I can't guarantee you'll make it till the morning. I would encourage you to say goodbye to your family. Mhm. So, I'm laying there and my wife and my three daughters. I might say I wouldn't be who I am today without my wife and my family. Cuz they have helped make me who I am by God's grace. They're all crying. And I I said they said what's going on? I said the doctor says I'm dying. They have to do surgery immediately. And that I should say goodbye to you. And there's this long pause and my middle daughter looked at me and said, "Dad, I don't understand something. If God woke you up and spoke to you to get you to the hospital for surgery, why would he let you die here?" And I said, "You're right. I'll see you in the morning." The surgery was successful. Um just before that I had climbed climbed Mount Kilimanjaro. Excellent shape. It went from climbing Mount Kilimanjaro to my life being at risk just within a space of 6 months. And uh Mhm. Sometimes that can do it to you. The the elevate the elevation changes. A lot of people die from that. So, um my point is this. The doctor said to me, I'll never forget these words. This is what I'm getting at. While I was laying there, he says, "I just want to ask you a question. Do you ever drink alcohol?" I said, "Never." He said, "Do you ever smoke?" "No. Ever do any drugs? No." He said, "You have a chance to live." He said, "If you did any one of those things, your body would be so compromised, I'm not sure we could save you." Back to your question. One of the [clears throat] reasons I don't have any demons is because even when I wasn't a Christian, I did my best to live a clean life. Now, I'm not saying somebody who smokes or drinks or whatever is going to hell. I'm just saying you want to live long, stay clean. By the way, if you want to know if I have demons, I have it. I have the proof right here. What is that? This is I thought I'd bring it just to show it to you. Thank you. A 16 Is that Excuse me. 1733 edition of the Ritual Romanum. Hand calligraphy. The Ritual Romanum is the Roman Catholic ritual of exorcism, which was established and we can talk about that in a minute. That's kind of interesting why the Roman Catholic Church did this in 1614. [snorts] So, this is about 100 years later. This is the original in Latin with the proper Latin songs and everything. And it's all hand done. Signed by Father Gabriel Amorth, who was still alive at time. They recently did a Russell Crowe movie about him. Who was known as the Pope's exorcist. Wow. They sent everybody from the Vatican who was believed to be possessed to him and he did exorcisms all day long. So, I went to the Vatican, spent a day with him. I brought this with me. It's signed. Father Gabriel Amorth. One of the greatest men of God that's ever lived. Can you Google him, Steve? You can pull him up. Yeah. Do you mind if I pull him up? The page is kind of loose there. You got to watch it. How do [snorts] you spell How do you spell his name for Steve? How do you spell his name? Father Father Gabriel Amorth. A M O R T H. go. A M O R T H. He was the most famous Catholic exorcist. Wow. Yeah. But here's my point. This is why I'm telling you that story. Oh, wow. This is This is the book isn't it? during the time that I was with him, Mhm. uh my wife and I were in his private exorcism chambers where he does with a group of nuns exorcisms that he did all day long every day. [snorts] That's the guy. Father Amorth. Great man of God. Wonderful, wonderful man. Um I said to him, "Father Amorth, I would like you to pray over me to see if I have any demons." So, he spent some time praying over me. And then he looked at my wife and me with a big grin on his face and he said, "No angel No demons, only angels." No demons, only angels. [laughter] So, my my point is I have it from the highest authorities. I don't have any demons. E E l c r e b a t o r q u i s a n d q u a e c u r s a c r a m o n t a Look, I don't I I studied Latin, but I've long I've long since forgotten Latin. I've never stayed up with it. And I I don't know what that says. for those hut-dwelling Romans, they say. But I I have a complete English translation of the Ritual Romanum Romanum and I've read it and it's incredible. The language Now, this very classic language from 1614. And it was revised again in what? 1999, I guess it was in in Vatican II. But when you read this, I'm going to tell you, these old monks knew what they're dealing with and they were dealing with real demons. In fact, um that was the period in church history when there was a major shift in this whole exorcism thing with the Reformation. And not too many people know about that. Want to hear about it? Of course. Well, the Reformation, which started in 1517 when [clears throat] Martin Luther nailed his thesis on the Wittenberg door, his grievances against the Catholic Church. Mhm. [snorts] Before then, there were what was called the Reformers. If throughout Europe Europe various theologians who were starting to depart from the Catholic Church because at that point the Catholic Church was all you had, basically. Right. So, they broke away in these splinter groups, the Anabaptists and so on. And in Martin Luther congealed all of that with his thesis, which formalized the beginning of the break for the Protestant Reformation. But what most people don't know is that much of the battle that was being fought was not about theology. Was not about plenary indulgences. Was was not about the papacy and the infallibility the ex cathedra. It was about exorcism. They were fighting about exorcism. Because if you could cast out demons, then that proved you have the truth. So, there was this exorcism competition going on. The Catholics were casting out demons. The Protestants were Catholic casting out demons. And they were saying, "Our method's best because we're Protestants. Our method's best because we're Catholics." And the Catholics, you know, were That's that's why they finally codified this. They said, "Wait a minute. If this is getting crazy. Everybody's got their own idea. We are going to commission these monks to do a deep study of this and come up with the theology of exorcism, which this book contains." And that's where the battle started. And then gradually, Martin Luther believed in exorcism. He instituted his part in baptism. He cast out demons. He believed in evil spirits inhabiting people. Mhm. Now, it's gotten away from that over time. Even the Catholics have gotten away from it over time. But there's a resurgence now. My My point is I want you to understand this business about exorcism is not an individual like me coming along as some kind of spiritual entrepreneur or deciding, "Well, you know, nobody's casting out demons. I'll cast out demons." And Dr. Phil will talk to me about it. Come on. That's disingenuous. What I'm doing is what many today are trying to do is to get the church back to the reality of what humanity has known for 6,000 or so years, what the church, both factions, knew during the Middle Ages is that demons are real, the devil is real, we have a battle on our hands, and we have to go fight it in the name of Jesus Christ. Whether it's prep for government takeover, protecting your family, or just exercising your Second Amendment rights, Stop Box is made for you and me. And that's why I'm happy to have them sponsor the show. Instant access to your firearm while being safe around your family is a huge challenge for gun owners today. Most storage options require you to keep track of keys, fumble around with a keypad, or relying on a battery to operate. And personally, I don't want a dead battery keeping me from protecting my family in the dead of night. That's why StopBox USA engineered the StopBox Pro. Now I have a way to safely store my firearm without keys or electronics to open it. StopBox is purely mechanical and dead simple. This means you're always ready, even in the dark or under stress. It's glass fiber reinforced polycarbonate and it's tough and secure. Personally, I love my StopBox because it's super flat and form-fitting for under a pillow or a mattress. Plus, when I'm traveling, I don't have to bring an extra Pelican case. It'll fit in my checked luggage or I can even throw it in my truck and it's perfectly concealed, super easy to open. You can literally do it with one hand. It's two fingers on one side and your thumb on the other side, really quick. Don't have to fumble around with any sort of combination or anything. You use two fingers here, one finger here, and it opens up just like that. Super simple, way easier than a Pelican case, and it's super small and compact. StopBox is also TSA compliant, so you don't need a separate carry case. They also have a wall-mounted version and one for easy access in cars. And for a limited time only, our listeners are getting a crazy deal. Not only do you get 10% off your entire order when you use the code Danny at stopboxusa.com, but they're also going to give you a buy one, get one free for their StopBox Pro. That's 10% off and a free StopBox Pro when you use my code Danny at stopboxusa.com. That's s t o p b o x u s a dot com. Discover a better way to balance security and readiness with StopBox. Okay, so a moment ago we were talking about drugs. Do you think that the use of drugs is directly related to demons? Or do do you think using drugs opens portals to demons entering you? Or what are your thoughts on that? On drugs in general. You are kidding. You are kidding. No, you know my answer. No, I don't. Yes, of course. If I knew it, I wouldn't ask you. [laughter] I understand. Of course, it's it's one of the main factors that I deal with in getting rid of demons. And I'm and I'm How do you distinguish between the the Drugs is a very broad term. There's there's all kinds of drugs. There's drugs that can help lower your cholesterol. There's drugs that can help you enter another dimension. How do you distinguish which drugs are related to the devil? Let's just talk about street drugs. Or weed, which used to be a street drug. Okay, but weed is a plant. It's grown out of the ground. I cast more demons out of people from smoking weed than anything else. You want to know why? What makes weed so demonic? Google. Shiva and marijuana. Okay, let's look it up, Steve. Shiva and marijuana. Mhm. So there's three main gods in Hinduism. Correct. All right. Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva. Shiva is the destroyer. Is associated with marijuana because he consumed bang to alleviate the pain after drinking the poison Halahala during the churning of the ocean. He was using it to alleviate seasickness. But there is a multi-millennial tradition in the East, and particularly in India. Okay, here it says in Hindu festivals such as the Shiva Ratri devotees consume marijuana as a form of praising to Shiva. Mhm. Or as a form of praised to Shiva, symbolizing their love and devotion. So where is the evil stuff here? Shiva. Shiva's evil? Is the lord of death and destruction. Oh, really? That's what he's known as. Oh. Now, of course, philosophical Hinduism has ways to try to So it's like the Hindu devil? to get around that, but he is the lord of death and destruction. Okay. Okay. So Shiva, Steve, can you find out like Shiva's uh what is the what is the Google call Shiva? I'm assuming it's the Hindu devil. Well, no, Shiva is a Hindu god, but you will see pictures, if you look far enough, of Shiva smoking ganja or marijuana or cannabis. Okay. He's the god of destruction. See it? Known as the destroyer within the Shiva is known as the destroyer within the the Trimurti, the Hindu trinity. Do you remember [snorts] what Oppenheimer said when the first atomic bomb went off? Destroyer of worlds, I have become death. become Shiva. Now, that the film changed it a little bit. They didn't tell you the truth. The movie Yeah. Yeah. But his exact words are I am become Shiva, destroyer of worlds. That's what he actually said? That is what he actually said. it? Huh? Who changed it to I have become death? Oh, they they political correctness. Really? Fine, we got to we got to figure we got to find this. But you could find it. I didn't know this. Okay. Scroll up, see if it's telling you in the AI. Robert Oppenheimer did not actually say, "I am become Shiva, destroyer of worlds." The quote is known for I am be uh for is I am become death, destroyer of worlds. The phrase comes from the Bhagavad Gita, the sacred Hindu text. Oppenheimer recalled thinking of this verse during the Trinity nuclear tests. Uh the first detonation of a nuclear weapon But but the point is the point is I'm become death. I am become Shiva. Shiva is the lord of death. Same thing. Well, but he didn't write I am become Shiva. He wrote I am become death. Well, some say that he did, and I don't know what text you're pulling from there, but there's a bit of a dispute over that. I think. This is the Google AI. Okay. But my point is Brief. When someone comes to me and tells me that for a long period of time they've been smoking weed, I'm going to say over 50% of the time I can call forth the demon Shiva. But what about all the I'm just telling you. What about all like the people that come back from war with PTSD and all these these mental illnesses and these hypervigilance, these issues that they're having? And they're literally prescribed weed and it alleviates weed, CBD, all these all these things that that alleviate their stress, Wait a minute. bring them back to normal Wait a minute. and save their lives. Wait a minute. You're talking about the difference between somebody who's under medical care, medical supervision, who's being administered a drug. Sure. Could be any kind of drug. It's a drug that comes out of the earth. Exactly. God-given plant. Well, and then wait a minute. If it's used properly by the proper people for the proper purposes. Okay? So if you've got a Does it say that in the Bible? If you've got a If you've got a doctor who is administering any kind of drug which has psychotropic qualities, and that doctor is administering certain dosages under his supervision, that is very different than a 15-year-old kid buying stuff off the streets that's been laced with God knows what. And that's what I deal with. Okay? That's a very different scenario. Okay, but there's a difference here. You're you're you're talking about a 15-year-old kid buying something off the streets who is a most likely ha- has in is involved with crime, bad parenting. There's a lot of going on here. Exactly. You can't you can't take you can't cherry-pick the marijuana out of there and say the marijuana is demonic because there's all kinds of other influences going on here. I ask the demon under penalty of judgment by the Holy Spirit to tell me, "How did you get there?" And he laughs and he says, "Weed." He says weed? Yeah. Then why did God put weed everywhere? Wait a minute. But by that he means the illicit use of it. So Okay. Heroin as a narcotic Poppy. Poppy. Used in a proper derivative form as is an analgesic, as some form of medication, Mhm. What is morphine? Same thing. Yeah. Okay. But if if it's under a doctor's care and supervision and the qualification of it and the regularity of it, What if that person doesn't have the access to a doctor? They want to play Russian roulette with their mind? That's very dangerous thing to do. Is that the devil? If you don't have a doctor prescribing it? It could just be them. Could be a lot of things. I I'm just telling you. I'm an exorcist. Mhm. This is what I deal with. This is the ugly truth about [snorts] what's going on. And this is where the devil works in the lives of a lot of young people today, and I see it every day. What about psilocybin mushrooms or DMT? Because DMT is a molecule that we make inside our own bodies. It's in our lungs, it's in our brain, it's in every plant, every living living organism that exists on this earth. It's in this table. It's in the wood in this table. Mhm. People can take DMT and have an incredible psychedelic experience where they quite literally leave this dimension and enter another dimension. It's like It's been described in antiquity as dying and being born again. Like they literally their their soul leaves their physical body and they enter another dimension created of light. So they think. And they come back You don't know if that happens. That's what they That's what they describe. But they're describing it in a in a drug state. They're not rationally analyzing this from a biochemical standpoint. They're telling you what they see and feel and experience. Correct. It's anecdotal. The devil is the angel of light, the Bible tells us. He loves to give people these experiences. I deal with people all the time. They come back from Peru and I know this lady the other day, she made six trips to Peru to do ayahuasca. Do you think that woman had demons? Yes. Really? Lots of them. Of course. I'd love to do an exorcism on Aaron Rodgers. Really? [laughter] You think he's possessed? How many times did he to be honest How many times you this. Let me give you this. How many times did he take ayahuasca? I don't know, but I'll give you this. And look what happened Look what happened to his career. The second he started taking ayahuasca York Jets if they think this guy It directly correlates with his downfall in his football abilities. know that. I'm just throwing that out there. It's kind of interesting to speculate. with you on that one. I think you I think you might be on something there. I think Aaron Rodgers might be uh possessed by a demon. I would love to make that happen. [laughter] I did not say he was. I just said some strange things came out of his mouth and brain after he did those ayahuasca trips. What did he say? What did he say? Ayahuasca is shaman direct. He spoke glowingly of ayahuasca. That's the greatest thing that ever happened. It changed his whole world. And then he did this whole hermit go in a cave and and do the silent thing in darkness for a week. Meditated, right? Well, I don't know if he meditated. I don't know what he did in there. It didn't help his throwing arm any. It didn't increase his passing accuracy any. I [laughter] can tell you that much. That's hilarious. But but but Satan [sighs] is a multifaceted evil being. Man, he's coming at you from every which direction. The Bible tells us in 1 Peter 5:8, the devil is like a lion who is roaring walking about seeking whom he may devour. Here's the Here's the bottom line. As an exorcist I want to stay as far possible away from anything within reason that might open a door to the devil. Why would I be that dumb? Why would I want to walk into his lair? Why would I want to give him a shot at me? Why would I want to go try ayahuasca and let a shaman give me a guided journey into the world of whatever? Of course not. Mhm. The Bible says in Philippians 4:8 Paul said, think on these things which are true just honest lovely and have a good report morally. True, honest, just, and lovely. That's what our brains are supposed to be on, not floating around in the ethereal consciousness of some metaphysical reality. No. Doing good in the world. Being pure, being honest, being just with our neighbors, with our friends, with people we do business with, with with everybody in our lives. Loving God and then loving your neighbor as yourself. Why Why don't we focus on that? Let's Let's just love everybody the best that we can. That's one of the best That's one of the best things you can discover on drugs, especially psychedelic drugs, is love. That's the fact That's what you get out of psychedelics. This is what you get. What is this? The Bible. This is the Bible? This is what will give you what you're looking for with a poor substitute that runs the risk of getting a demon. What What did you just say? I don't understand what that means. I just said, this is the real deal. Everything you're looking for is in Jesus. Everything you're looking for is in the Bible. It's not in psychedelics. You don't think Jesus used drugs? If you're arguing from an empirical basis you need an exorcism. Can you diagnose me? Do you think I'm possessed? Have you done psychedelics? Yes. Okay. The possibility's there. You could be the nicest guy in the world and you are genuinely congenial. Pleasure to be with you. But the devil buys his time. So he worms his way in. He's had an open door. He gets there. You're a nice guy now. Uh we were talking about your wife and kids and you seem to be a reasonably decent individual. I don't know you, but I assume you're a good dad and a loving husband. Okay? Thank you. All right. But if a demon got in through psychedelics, he doesn't have to strike you now. Life is long, friend. Many years ahead of you. You know as the Beatles said, it's a long and winding road. You don't know what's going to happen. You don't know. I think the psychedelics made me a better person. I'm a better dad. you're going to face in your life. You don't know what bad things might happen. You don't know what type of crisis you may face morally, spiritually, mentally, physically, with yourself, with your family. Life I'm just saying he's going to look for a moment. I'm not saying you have demons. I'm saying if you had them Right. they could easily be hiding and they wouldn't be showing now because you're not making yourself available for that kind of intervention. Mhm. But if somewhere down the road Satan sees an opportunity to strike you he's got this card he can play. So what you need to do is renounce ever having opened your mind to that realm of transcendentalism through the psychedelics and ask Jesus Christ to close that door and that if anything came in through that door that it has to go through the power of Jesus Christ so that you can continue to be the kind of husband and father you want to be. Just that simple. And but you have to have faith in Christ to do that. Because it's Christ's power that accomplishes the banishing of the devil from your mind. And you you don't want him there. You don't want to take the risk. What if you were laying on that hospital bed and the doctor said you're dying? And you said, oh doc, I did psychedelics. And he said that could be a problem. [laughter] But psychedelics don't kill people. Alcohol kills more people than drugs. right. But but not directly. And We We are It's It's like Timothy Leary has risen from the dead. What's been happening in the last few years. There's been a cultural shift in this whole psychedelic thing now. But now it's coming in through the guys. You know, John Hopkins is doing all this research on it and so on and so. Now there's a certain legitimization taking place. Legitimization? I am an exorcist. I cast out demons. I have the track record to know how demons get there and it would be a miss of me, a dereliction of my spiritual duty if I did not give you this warning. Mhm. For your children. Cuz the devil always wants the next generation. He might not strike you. He might start pulling some stuff off with your kids. And you might want to You might be calling me 10 years from now and I'll still be around casting out demons by God's grace. Who knows? This is a divine appointment. So a lot of historians will claim that especially I've had people on here who specialize in the Dead Sea Scrolls, who specialize in the Hebrew history, who specialize in the Greek pharmacology. All I've had, you know, a wide spectrum of biblical scholars and classical scholars on the [clears throat] show. And pretty much all of them agree that there were ancient pagan drug rituals going on before Christianity and that Christianity borrowed from these drug rituals. No. BS. No. Didn't happen. I don't care what the credentials are. Come on. That's being ignorant of church history. That But they're taking that That's besmears the name of every martyr thrown to the lions in the arena who died for their faith. Quo vadis. They gave their lives for the sake of the gospel, not because they were in some secret gnostic ceremony getting high. Come on. No. That is not true. [clears throat] That is a manufactured lie. There was Are you saying Let me Let me Let me clarify. Are you saying that there were no there there were none of these pagan religious drug rituals going on? Are you saying no. You're saying that they're not at all connected to Christianity. Not with authentic Christianity. There were all these sects, heretical sects, that the early church had to deal with after the 1st century. Mhm. Especially after the 4th century. And there were these groups claiming to be Christian who did these things. And that's why they had a series of church councils to roundly condemn this and to show its error. And they developed the creeds which were not the result of secret rituals and initiation [clears throat] ceremonies and all that other balderdash that gets thrown in there. No, no, no. That was dealt with by the church and that was thrown out. There were people who did that. Only been nutty people who've done stuff like that. They do it today. But it's not authentic Christianity. It's not biblical Christianity. I don't care what anybody tells you and what they think their credentials are. Measure those credentials against the larger academic community in the Christian world and see how that measures up. Yeah, but here's the problem with it. Why does the academics What Why can you only look at the academic scholarship in the Christian world? Why can't you look at it outside of the Christian world? We have We have our history, right? We And then we have We have all of our history and then we have this narrow lane of Christianity. It's all part of history, but some of the scholarship only stays in this one lane of theology and they don't look outside of the theology and all the other texts that existed at the same exact time. And everything They They don't take the context of everything in history, right? They're only They're only taking into account what the Christian history is. This is the canon of scripture. And it was declared to be the only infallible rule of faith, God-inspired. When we move away from that, it's a free-for-all. Sure. Pick and choose what you want. Throw in what you want to throw in. Throw in. Does it say it in the Bible? Does it say it in agreement in the original languages with a cross-section of respectable theologians, all of whom are accountable one to another in terms of the translations? So. Yeah, it does according to the translators. Huh? According to the trans- According to people who read the text, they say yes. Do you know anything about the translation process of the Bible and the canonization of scripture? No, not really. a little bit. A little bit. You don't know much because it's incredibly [snorts] rigorous. It's letter by letter, word by word, and it does not It's not just one person. It's a large group of people all And And they're not outside of the framework of a commitment to Jesus Christ. Now, that's what it really all comes down to. The person who says these things, the gnostic who did this or did that, are they worshipping Jesus Christ as creator God, God from eternity past to eternity future, the only hope of salvation of the world who died on the cross, who defeated the devil in the wilderness, who crushed him with his heel by Genesis 3:15, and who rose again from the dead? The people who believe that gave their lives. They sacrificed everything. Peter said, "Crucify me upside down." Paul said, "I live, but net not I. It is Christ who lives within me." That's really what it's all about. And And do you think I could cast out demons if I didn't believe that? Are you kidding me? Wow. I would have been toast a long time ago. No. When you face demons, they hate this book. Fact, sometimes when a demon won't do what I'm telling it to do, once in a while you see some videos, I just smack them with it. Smack them with the book? Yeah. Be- Because that's sort of spiritual psychodrama in the sense that I'm taking a physical word and treating it as a spiritual word. And I just go boom like that. They scream. They cry out. Don't put that thing near me. When I lift up my cross and doing an exorcism, they do everything they can to get away from it. Get that thing away from me. I hate that thing. I hate that thing. I hate See, he's doing IT RIGHT NOW. [laughter] [gasps] THIS IS THIS IS my real world. I am an exorcist. I see this happen all day long every day. Mhm. So, if I followed your train of thought, I would not be an exorcist. I couldn't get rid of any demons. And the marriages which have been saved, the families which have been restored, the people who are happy now, off drugs, out of their pornography and living good, decent, godly lives, none of that would have ever happened unless I believed this. Yeah. I think there's probably a a a huge amount of people that that that do benefit from that legitimately. Um but, you know, my point was I think there's also a lot of people who really really benefit the same way from psychedelic drugs, from things like uh ayahuasca, psilocybin mushrooms, these things that come from our earth that God created. Just Just remember what I warned you of. And it may not be next month or next year, [snorts] but God makes no mistakes and no moment of this ever lost on God. And someday, sometime, you will remember me looking at you now and saying these things. And you will have an oh my God moment. Why didn't I listen? I don't know, man. I think we need to get you to try some some DMT. Get me what? Some DMT. [laughter] I got some in the other room. I think you won't regret it, man. It'll be an eye-opener. You might meet God face to face. You will meet the devil appearing as God. Okay? You won't meet God. You're meeting God face to face now. Not with me, but with his word, with who he is. He is the logos. He is the living word. And as I speak that word to you, you are facing God. But as Billy Graham once said, people don't have intellectual reservations about being Christians. They have moral ones. I think that's true. I've seen it. Mhm. It's not intellectual People that don't want to be associated with the child and stuff. No, no, no, no. Don't pick the extremes. People have moral reservations. There's a moral That's true. But they have moral reasons for not wanting to be a Christian. That's not an accusation, by the way. I don't know. Sure. Could be. I don't know. I don't know what's in your past, but if you came to me in an exorcism, I'd want to know and I'd make a detailed list and I couldn't get your demons out unless you told me everything. Mhm. And you might not want to tell me everything. Right. Well, I mean, I would only go to an exorcist if I was like really really If If I believed in God and I believed in the devil. If I was a religious person, I would believe exorcism was real and would work. If I wasn't that kind of person, I probably wouldn't I would think ex- exorcism is So, why would I bot- waste my time? Kind of to what you know, you you kind of pointed that out earlier. Well, like I said, comes comes back to your belief system. What is your core What is your What is your core core What is your core definition of truth? Exactly. Is it Jesus said, "I am the truth. I am the truth. I am the way. I am the life. No man comes to God but by me." [snorts] Mhm. Well, you can argue any way you want. But again, I'm an exorcist. Mhm. I see the real evidence of truth such as that every single day. Right. I have no power over a demon. I can wave my Bible, wave my cross, but unless I am doing it with faith in Jesus Christ as the son of God, brought back from death to life and living eternally, Mhm. no demon's going to go anywhere. Mhm. Everything is going to collapse. But you see, I'm in a I'm in a life-and-death struggle every day with for people. And the demons look at me and they say, "I'm going to kill them. I'm going to kill them. I've got a plan. I've already done I've already got it working." And these These people have already had suicidal ideation. They're cutters. They're self-mutilators. They have done all sorts of things. They're self-destructive in nature. And the devil just looks at me and laughs. "I'm going to kill them. I've got them. I'm the spirit of death or whatever." And then I'll look at them and say, "Well, maybe they've fallen by the wayside, but have they at least once in their life put their faith and trust in Jesus Christ?" The demon says, "Yes." I said, "Then they're not yours. They belong to God. You got to go." And the demon obeys. You need to be with me in an exorcism. A real exorcism. would love to. That's why I brought you here today. I wanted you to exorcise the man in the other room. This was going to be a This was originally That was the plan. I know that. I want to exorcise you. You do? But I can't do it. Why? Well, because you're you're not putting yourself in a faith position to be able to do that. And that's That's okay. You're not there right now. That's fine. I don't underst- That's That's the part I can't get past. That's the part I can't get past. Why do I have to believe in you? Why do I have to believe in the devil and God to be to have you exercise the demon from How can I cast out a demon you don't believe in? If you don't believe that it exists in me and the demon's in me. If it's not an existential reality of to you, you're not going to get rid of any demon. But if it is and if you've got some dark secrets in your life and I don't know but what maybe you have. Most everybody does but and if any of those were I won't open door to demons. You've already told me several of them then you you likely have some demons, very congenial ones but sometimes they are. Mhm. [snorts] Doesn't mean you're a bad guy. I just told you. I cast demons out of priests, out of nuns, out of pastors. Because there's been a dope open door in their life somewhere and often times it's the ancestors. What's your ancestry? [snorts] What's my ancestry? Yeah, what's your ancestry? I am like I think I'm like 80% Norwegian. Uh-oh. Case closed. Devil worshipers? Case closed. Please tell me. I want to know. I'm a I'm I'm a quarter Norwegian. Are you? So, that's [snorts] that's that's my disclaimer. Yeah. So, I'm good. You believe the Marvel myth. Loki's not a good guy. He's a demon. So is Thor. So is Odin. And if you have Norwegian ancestors [snorts] Mhm. I would say there's a high probability there is somewhere in your bloodline and if you've never renounced those gods Do you know your history? They were brutal. Rape, pillage, destroy. They came into the British Isles. They burned the churches. They killed the priests. The Norwegians did? Yes. The Vikings did. Right. You're Norwegian, you're Viking. That's metal. It's it's it's bad. Yeah. Really bad. I'm not joking. And so you've got that in your ancestry. It's in your DNA. Maybe that's what gives me my instinct to want to rebel. Well, maybe. But what did they do? They came down. What did they What did they do? They had hunts and all those crazy things. The German civilization. Look at the German civilization and I'm half German. Nazis wanted to recruit. They wanted they wanted the Norwegians. They were into Nordic stuff. Yeah. Deep dark Nordic stuff. Yeah. Okay. That's where Hitler got his power. Goebbels got his power from that. They knew that stuff. And they knew the history. Read the paganism history of Germany. It's very fascinating about the Nordic influence that was there but now you've just kind of told me some of that. And the occult stuff that they were into, lot of dark Very dark. Very dark. I deal with Loki, Thor, Odin, Fenrir, Freya and Balder and the likes of them. demons you're talking about. These are all demons These are all Nordic Nordic demons. names for the pantheon of the superhuman beings who were in reality demons. Okay. But they were characterized by these various names. Okay, understood. So if Fenrir the wolf manifests and I've seen it happen many times it is one of the most vicious things you can behold. Please explain. The person becomes an animal. Have you seen this? Yes, I've seen it many times. Growl, snarl, come at you. They become violent. teeth extended [snorts] They become a wolf. And we're not we're not talking about lycanthropy here or you know Wolverine no we're we're talking about the real deal. Mhm. That's your heritage. A quarter of that was my heritage. So, what did I do about it? I said, "Lord Jesus Christ all the evil of my Nordic ancestors I cancel. I cut myself off from it. I renounce their evil deeds from passing on to me, my family and my children that that may not be my heritage." And also did that with my Irish part and my German part. Mhm. Don't tell me you got Irish. I don't think there's any Irish. Nor- Norwegian is enough. I mean I'm I'm not joking. I'm dead serious. Right. No, yeah, I believe you. I believe you. And and you know, if you read the characteristics again, not the Marvel comic series Right. kind of Right. Balderization of this. Read the real thing about what these gods were like. Right. It's you. Somewhere back there, your ancestors were that. So, you need an exorcism. Let's do it. Can't. Why? See uh [sighs and gasps] that's what people don't understand. don't believe right cuz I don't believe in the the devil. I don't I'm not religious. I haven't accepted Christ into my heart. Yes, but this there's this triangulation. God me you. That's what every exorcism is about. The exorcist the supplicant and God. There has to be triangulated agreement. And we know God So, I need to become be free. God wants every person to be free from the devil. I want you to be free from the devil. You you want to be free from the devil. So, God cannot and will not enforce his will upon man. We are free moral agents. I cannot enforce my will upon anybody who doesn't want to get rid of their demons of the possibility that they might have them and that they do so with the measure of faith they have at that moment. Mhm. I mean you don't have to be an altar boy to get delivered from demons. You just have to want God. Right. And stop getting high on psychedelics. What is God though? [laughter] I don't know what God is. Oh, I know what flower child Do I want God? Depends what Depends what your definition of God is. Right? I think I think you can find God on psychedelics. Read the Bible. Just read it. You don't read it. I don't read the Bible, you're right. Okay. So I will read it. That's one of my That's my New Year's resolution to read the Bible. [laughter] I'm serious. Good. I'm going to read I've heard it's a very hard read. No. Depends what translation you get. Mhm. There are more colloquial translations. Huh? What translation do you recommend? I like the New King James Version. It takes the lofty language of the original authorized King James Version and takes out the these and thous but it keeps it very close to the original. That's because that's what I started out as a uh [sighs] as a student in ministry to memorize scripture. So, you had to pick a version. Back then they didn't have so many versions. That's the one I picked. Right. But but you know, the essence is the same. The basic truth is the same if it's a proper translation. Right. You know, it's not a transliteration. It's a translation. There's a big difference but but look The crazy thing is that it's all translations. You're just at bat. You haven't swung yet. You got to start swinging in the right direction. Mhm. And opening up your heart to the possibility that God is there, that Christ died for your sins, that demons are real and you don't want demons. I mean look at that. I don't want demons. These priests are trying to get rid of them. Mhm. You know, but that's that's kind of [laughter] kind of a archaic way of looking at it. baby in the bottom left? Heart of Jesus is zapping those demons and they're they're going. Okay. So that's You do you think these people were all nutcases? No. A lot of them probably. No. These were holy men. They feared God. And they wanted to be to be people to be free from the devil. Mhm. Nobody's perfect. Were they all totally mentally balanced? You're not. Certainly not after all the psychedelics [laughter] you've done. I think they make me more mentally balanced. But exorcism is ridding people of an alien entity. It is an evil spirit who seeks to take over psychoneurologically every part of the mind, the nervous system the psychopathology of the person. They want you to to emote and to think and to respond to things the way they do. They want to become you because they don't have any other way to express themselves. They're disembodied. No matter how evil they are, they can't molest a child. They can't pull the trigger of a gun and shoot somebody. They have to be in somebody to do that. Sure. Okay. So if there's a woman in the subway that a fire's going to be lit and burn her alive and sit there and laugh at it well, they can't do that but they can be in the guy on in the subway and lead him to do that. Mhm. And much of what goes on in our society is demonic. Not all of it. Some of it's just fallen human depraved nature of people who are indecent. But much of it is demonic and that's why exorcism is needed to help the people who are driven to do those things. I can't wait to get to heaven and the Lord tells me about all the people who would have killed themselves, who would have killed somebody else. I remember one night want to hear an interesting story? Yes. I was in Christchurch, New Zealand. And I was speaking in a public forum. Mhm. And this guy starts screaming in the audience. And I go back. I say Were you doing a talk, a public talk or something? Yeah. Okay. And this guy starts screaming. So I go back to him. And [snorts] I said, "What's going on?" And he said, "I'm filled with hate. I'm going to kill my father. I hate him." I said, "Why?" He said, "The whole childhood my father molested me. I want him dead." But he said, "I'm a Christian. I know I shouldn't think this." And I said, "Well, you got demons." Mhm. So we cast the demons out of him. Demons of murder. Hate. Etcetera. Right. When it was all over with, uh, he said "Can you come outside to the car for a minute?" I said, "Okay." So I had a couple of people with me in the dark and I were going out to the car. He lifts the boot as they would say the trunk. And he reaches inside and grabs an axe about that long. I thought you were going to say his dad was in the trunk. He said [laughter] "I'm not going to be needing this. He said, 'I was on my way to kill my father and chop his head off. Wow. And I decided I would give God one last chance. And so I came to this meeting Yeah. hoping somebody could get rid of this demon." If that alone was worth my lifetime of commitment to exorcism, that would be enough. To save one life. But I'm convinced that I and others who do this have saved many, many, many lives of people who might have done horrible things had they not gotten rid of their demons. Does God punish anyone? Ultimately yes, the devil. But he wouldn't punish a guy who his own son. Yes. Unless that individual seeks the forgiveness of God's grace. So God saved that guy's life who was his own son. God's merciful. That's hard to understand. God is merciful. But God says in the word "Vengeance is mine." says God. "I will repay." Mhm. So the minute human beings decide they're going to take things into their own hands and wreak vengeance Mhm. [snorts] trouble always results. Because we're in no position to cast the first stone. We don't really know what's in a person's life. But I can tell you something about that father that I've learned from being an exorcist. You know why he did that? Mhm. His father did it to him. High probability. Right. And so on and so on. And that evil compounded Yeah. until that night it was canceled. Because this young man did not murder Mhm. because of what his father did. And now he's gone on to live a decent, productive life. That's what exorcism does. It stops evil in its tracks and says, "You have come so far. No more." Do you believe in extraterrestrial civilizations and aliens? Absolutely not. No? No. You know the Vatican's starting to explore that stuff, right? What? The Vatican. Well, what about that? They're starting to explore that possibility. Well, they're exploring what it's about. But they're not exploring the idea that there's extraterrestrial life because the Bible is pretty clear. I think the head The head of the heavens declare the glory of Oh, yeah, there could be some people there that are Somebody people there think so. listening to people who are not in the Vatican. Yeah, the guys in the Vatican. He's like the guy who's in part of the whole talked to the guy. No, I just, you know, I read it online. Well, okay. You read it online. Look. What does this say? Here's the Here's the report right here. Says Steve. From From where? What's [snorts] the source here? We need the source. We can't just be taking anyone's word for it. [laughter] Go up. Scroll up. Scroll up. Scroll up. Let me read it. Let me read it. Give it to me, Steve. The Vatican has shown interest in the possibility of extraterrestrial life but does not seem to be actively searching for aliens. In 2009, the Vatican held a conference on astrobiology which included discussions about the implications of alien life for religion and science. The Vatican's chief astronomer, Father Jose Jose Funes Funes Funes has stated that if aliens exist, they could be considered part of God's creation and might not need redemption. Wrong. Dead wrong. That That right there. That's it. That's the core of it. Wrong. It's wrong. I'll tell you why. Please. Okay? [snorts] Want to know why? Yes. But the Bible teaches that the fall of Adam and Eve was cosmological. It was not earth-centric. The entire of creation the Bible says groans and travails. It's in agony awaiting for the completion of God's purpose for the universe. So all of the universe all of it outside of heaven, of course, was affected by the fall of Adam and Eve. Sin has corrupted the entire universe but particularly Earth. Christ came to Earth. The Bible's very clear about this. To die for the sons of Adam and Eve who have been affected by their original sin. If there are civilizations in other planets dead wrong. They do need redemption. But then you have a philosophical question and a theological question. How many planets did Jesus have to repeat going to and die and rise again from the dead over and over and over and over? chose Earth? No, he did it once for Earth and citizens of Earth, the descendants of Adam and Eve to complete the spiritual redemption of the cosmos ultimately. Mhm. And so what are these beings? I deal with them all the time. Now What do you think's going on cuz there's lots of accounts throughout history of people explaining Look. The The ones This The beings who are not figments of people's imagination they're demons. Like, um, like the the the classical explanations and accounts from, for example, uh, Professor John Mack, the Harvard psychologist who interviewed hundreds and hundreds of people who believe they were abducted by aliens to come into it into a spaceship and had their sperm in their, um, their eggs extracted. I've heard the same stories. What do you think's going on there? First of all, the devil knows the transmutation of energy and matter. He knows this interchangeability. E = mc squared. He knows that. He knows how to manipulate that. If you go back to when Moses confronted Pharaoh and Pharaoh's sorcerers or magicians Moses threw down the rod of Aaron and it turned into a snake. What did the magicians of Pharaoh do? They threw down their rods and turned them into snakes. Although God's snake ate the Egyptians' snakes. But they did know how to change matter into animated life of some form. There was no illusion. They were real snakes. All right. Wow, that's pretty interesting. If the devil knows how to do that why can't he in the skies at night or whenever change energy into matter and for periods of time create an objectified sense of reality that defies the laws of thermodynamics and do all sorts of crazy things because it keeps people interested not in the problems of sin down here but the fascination of UFOs out there. That's That's It's just It's It is so disingenuous it's almost laughable. [snorts] And so I meet these people. I talk to them. I was abducted. I went to this spaceship. Oh, yeah, they impregnated me. They did this. It's possible. It is possible in an interdimensional reality that could have taken place. I don't deny that. But it's not a permanent physical reality. It is a temporary phenomenon designed for deception. That's my belief system because if it was a common phenomenon, it would be everywhere with the same objectified forms of materialization. But it's always different. It's a little It's very similar, actually. Read the writings of Jacques Vallee. Do you know who he is? I have Oh, yeah. He He said these things were extra-dimensional. That was his ultimate conclusion. Okay. Well He thinks He thinks they're not only extra And he's a He was obsessed with the devil and he was obsessed with the story that medieval stories of angels and demons. He had a book I had a woman in here who met Jacques and went to his house and she showed it She actually gave him the book of Satan. I didn't know that. It has 666 pages. Wow. She and he told her he said it you want to know what these beings are he's like you need to understand this book. And it was the book of the devil. I didn't know that. I didn't know that. I'll have got to check out that a little further. But the point is So So The devil creates this phenomena because while people are fascinated as are many of your guests and many of your viewers and listeners by all of that they're overlooking this. Their time is spent conjuring thoughts about what might be there and who it is. I'm I'm I have a slight interest in it. I think it's a very similar thing. I think it's a very similar thing. People like to fill the gaps of knowledge they don't have with things like God and aliens, right? Peop Very well put. And Whitley Strieber's a good example. You had him on. Oh yeah, you familiar with Whitley? He He He told I've I debated him on Oprah. Oh really? Yes. He told you he had a chip in his head. I not find that interview? Why didn't see you follow that up? I'd like to know where that chip is and if if he you know, it's medically provable he has an implanted chip in his head by aliens. Yeah, he gave us a video. He showed He gave me the video of it. Well, then that's interesting. Have you seen the video? I haven't seen the I've seen your video but I haven't seen anything else that proves he's actually got an implant. it's his ear. Well, what's interesting is the thing that the demons do to people is consistent outside of the whole spaceship thing what they also do to people. We started out talking about incubus and succubus and demonic sexual experiences. Well, this is just another form of it in an interplanetary mode. You know, they're either having sex with these beings or or they're these beings are probing them sexually. Almost every person I've talked to who claims to have an alien encounter, there's some sexualization connected to it. I'm not saying all of them but the ones I've talked with it all comes down to something sexual. Well, that tells you something. Mhm. That's not godly. That's evil. Well, if it's evil is it a manufactured material reality from another realm and just loving sitting back and laughing at us while we're all so fascinated by all of this. I'm not. And meanwhile, we're forgetting Are we forgetting there's a war in Ukraine and people are dying. Are we forgetting that the international order is is being upended and we don't know where things are going to go. Are we forgetting about human trafficking over forgetting that our kids overdosing on drugs and the the admissions to emergency wards in the hospitals because of psychosis from psychedelics and weed laced with fentanyl is exploding. Are we forgetting this is the real problem, the homelessness the hurt and the pain of people that every day somebody's being damaged damage for life because of an evil individual. Let's get our eyes off of that and get our eyes down here and let's do good in the world in the name of God to change things. That's my mission. Because every person that I can save through an exorcism through Christ, of course Mhm. is going to be a changed life who's got the potential to be a loving human being and make somebody else's life better. Mhm. That's exorcism. That's Christianity. I think um going back to what we're talking about with Jacques Vallée, I think whatever people were seeing or witnessing back then that were are described in the Bible and and biblical texts as angels or and or demons, things like Ezekiel's wheel. I think Jacques Vallée believes that those were UFOs, aliens. It was the same thing going on back then and we throughout history, human history, people have either seen them as biblical ethereal entities or trying to channel Erich von Däniken? No, I've never read anything from Erich von Däniken. Well, Chariots of the Gods. Right, I'm familiar with his book but I've never read anything from Yeah, okay. Well, I mean you're just spouting what he thinks. I mean this is What is the point? What is the point? Yeah. If If our neighbor next door is in need and we don't recognize it. Mhm. If If the people in our family are going through some type of a crisis and they need our love and care and concern. Isn't that where we should be putting our time? Sure, of course. what's going on with with the emotional breakdown of people today, the amount of institutionalization, people living on the streets because of fentanyl. Why aren't we doing something about these things? It's easier to worry about what's out there than than to roll up your sleeves and do something about what's wrong down here. Mhm. Well, there's diffusion of responsibility. There's so many people on this damn Earth. You walk around New York City, you can find somebody overdosing on fentanyl foaming on at the mouth on the side of the road. People just walk right over them. I know. Somebody gets in a car accident, they're bleeding pulling their child out of the car seat. The people just walk by. You know, there people are are psychopaths. They're losing their connection to community and to other human beings because of technology and because of population because of urbanization and these cities. There's lots [snorts] of reasons. But right even as we speak where is God? I'll tell you. He's with those firefighters in California who are risking their lives to save other people. They may or may not be Christians but they're doing good in the world. They're doing something that changes another person's reality. So that they don't suffer. They're doing their best. They're risking themselves. Mhm. Yeah, definitely. That's my job as an exorcist. I'm not a firefighter. Those are brave men. Yeah. But I am fighting fires and I'm trying to change people's lives one individual at a time into somebody who is no longer indwelt by this visceral sense of evil inside them that torments them day and night. And if I rescue one or two or 10 I've done the work of God. If you could rescue one public figure or somebody in politics or somebody that everybody knows, who would it be? Who is the most demon possessed person in politics [laughter] right now? Oh. Have you had that in your hip pocket just waiting to spring it out? Yes. [laughter] Uh [gasps and sighs] There are so many candidates. I agree. I think I think US politics is run by demons. Well greed Greed, yes. The spirit of mammon. Spirit of who? A mammon. Oh. And the spirit of Leviathan, the spirit of pride. Mhm. Runs politics. I know how desperately you wanted me say Nancy Pelosi or Bernie Sanders or Kamala Harris but I'm not going to do it. Maybe Trump. Maybe Trump's got a demon. Maybe. Anybody could have demons. And some of those people override those impulses by trying to do the right thing with a belief system that is good. Mhm. But What I'm really getting at is Hillary Clinton. They You don't know how they sleep at night and you don't know what they're like behind closed doors, none of them. Mhm. And that's the thing. It isn't It isn't how we act in public, it's how we treat our families. Mhm. Our innocent children, our spouses, our friends. Jesus said greater love has no man than this and to lay down his life for a friend. That's pretty simple, isn't it? Mhm. We don't do it. Sure. A few do. Few brave soldiers, firefighters emergency workers, people like that. That's kind of obvious. Doctors. You know. [snorts] Mhm. But But I mean it in a broader sense. We lay down our life for somebody else. We give up of ourselves so that somebody else's life is better. That's what the gospel of Christ is all about. Jesus said if you don't deny yourself and follow me you're not fit to be in the kingdom of God. Well, the rich young ruler came to Jesus and he said I've done everything right. I've kept all the laws. I've been a moral man. And Jesus said there's one thing you haven't done and he said I want you to sell everything you've got and give it to the poor and follow me. He walked away. We don't ever know what ever happened to that man. It's It's It's this impulse of pride of power of wanting something we ought not to have whether it's some psychedelic transcendent experience or whether it's some orgiastic high. Mhm. When Jesus said follow me follow me, I am the way, the truth and the life. And when people are beset by demons, they say something in common. They say I try to read my Bible and I can't. I can't I go to church and I get sick. I try to receive Holy Communion and I feel like I want to throw up. Is it psychological? Could be. Most times it's not. When you get that much evidence, it's likely a demon cuz they're trying to do something holy and good and the devil doesn't like that. So, we have to get rid of the demons. We need more demon people who are out there fighting demon hunters out there fighting down the devil looking down the devil taking him head-on boldly, aggressively. Mhm. With determination saying, "I'm not going to allow by God's grace any more evil in this world. I'm going to fight evil with everything that I have." Have you ever encountered somebody who is demon possessed who smelled like sulfur? A couple of times. Because um I've heard through many people including Alex Jones that Hillary Clinton smells like sulfur. [laughter] I'm serious. Okay, I would not think Alex Jones is the paragon of Christian virtue to make that determination. He's a very devout Christian. Well, he's devout in his own kind of way, but I think the Sandy Hook thing did him in, shall we say. Okay? You know, all right. Okay, I I don't want to go there. I haven't met the man. But I'm not concerned of whether she smells like sulfur. That What's What's the relevance of that? she's in she's so high up in politics and she could she has so much blackmail on so many people cuz she was related to Jeffrey Epstein. children from a pizza parlor. Yes, been there, heard that. Again, what are we doing? We're we're focusing our attention on the the odd, the strange, the unusual Mhm. the chaotic. Yeah, we're going to go jousting windmills. No, no, no, no, no. People are in need around us. The people who sit in front of me on a Zoom monitor every day of my life. Right. Yeah, you do a lot of exorcisms exorcisms on Zoom. Yes. Yes. Yes. I I remember when I started doing that on Skype going back some years ago. Back to the Skype days. CNN said at that time it's number their number one reporter. And uh even um Comedy Central uh What's his face? He used to host the show. My mind went blank. Um [snorts] Anyway, he's retired now, got a beard, and he's a political pundit. [laughter] On Comedy Central? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. I remember. Noah, whatever his name took over for Yeah, no. Not Noah. The guy before him. Oh, I don't remember. Okay. Of course you do. [laughter] You We just can't remember his name. John It's irrelevant. Okay. Jon Stewart? He wasn't on Stewart. Yeah. Was he on Comedy Central? Yeah, he had his Comedy Central show. Okay. Okay. So, anyway, he sent a reporter out and and these these the news media they the word had gotten out I was doing Skype exorcisms. Yeah. This is like Yeah. you know, 10, 12 years ago. And they were like, "You can't do this." I said, "Well, I'm doing it." Well, you can't do that. I mean, you can't cast out and they they interview some Catholic priests. They said you can't do it. Now Catholic priests are doing it. But there's a point here. I don't have It's better if I'm physically here. Yes. It would be better if I could cast your demons out of you right now, but I can do a Zoom with you later. Okay? I'd rather do it in person. [laughter] Um all you have to do is be face-to-face with that person to see how they respond to certain things. And I do it all the time. All day long. 5 6 7 days a week sometimes. Wow. And the most amazing things happening. I mean, it's just astounding. The complete turnaround in these people's and they're all over the world. 50% of what I do people are outside of the United States of America. Mhm. They're in India. They're in Bangkok. I did a major exorcism on a guy in Dubai this week. So, the way I learn about stuff on this podcast is I have people come in and explain to me what they've learned. Explain to me what they've studied throughout their lives. Explain to me what they believe in in your case about the Bible and Christianity. [snorts] And Ammon in the other room when he came in, you heard the podcast that he did with me. Yeah. I can't get anybody. I can't get a Bible scholar. I can't get a classicist. I can't get any kind of religious person who studies this stuff or has a PhD in this stuff to combat the stuff he talks about or to combat his theories and dispute what he says. Mhm. Well, So, how how I can't get an an alternative or a reasonable pushback to any of the theories he has other than people that tell me over the phone he's wrong, he's completely he's blasphemous, but no one will actually step into the arena with him and confront what he's saying face-to-face. I So, so someone like me when I when that when that happens to me, what that tells me is he's got to be right because nobody can come up with a reasonable a reasonable pushback. logic? Where did you get that? Because nobody can come in here and debate him and and and and prove to me and let me and the audience make a decision to what is what is actually real and what's right. You just dis- constructed a a a logical fallacy. You got to battle ideas with better ideas, right? That's how you learn. No. So, as far as this particular individual is concerned, Yes. the people who come to me want to forsake, to put behind them the life that they have been living. Mhm. They are repentant. Which means godly sorrow for the evil they have done. Yeah, I understand. They want to stop that evil. They want to quit it Mhm. immediately. You don't get rid of a demon so that a person stops sinning. They stop sinning so they can get rid of their demon. In fact, the people who have the greatest success are the people who fast before they come to see me, which is a spiritual biblical practice to prepare one's spirit for what they're about to receive. And there's a difference between someone who questions the faith, someone who is unsure about the faith that they have, and someone who has become an apostate. Which means a clear departure from truth. They have once known the truth. Christ speaks of this. Peter speaks of this. Paul speaks of this. There are some who having known the goodness and the grace of God deliberately turn against it and they become an enemy of the faith. There's a difference between an ambivalent person and an enemy of the faith. Okay. When someone is an enemy of the faith, that is not the basis for a reasonable discussion, nor is it definitely the basis for an exorcism. But you are an enemy of the devil. So, why can't you debate the devil? I don't debate the devil. But you've done many debates. I have debated the best on national television and open forums. But that's very clear. It's them versus me. They're not apostate. They just don't believe. Right. They have not been at a place of belief Okay. and deliberately walked away from it for whatever reason. Right. All right. And remember something else. When someone comes to me, they do an intake. The form they fill out. I want to know everything about them including the deepest darkest secrets they've never told anyone about what they've done in terms of moral transgressions. Cuz that is sounds like? What? That sounds kind of like what happens in Scientology when they go through the auditing sessions. no. I'm not having somebody hold a couple of tin cans called an E-meter. [laughter] This is not about a galvanic response. to get blackmailed on that. not. It's about it's about due diligence to understand where the open doors of the devil are. Right, but if someone's telling you their deepest dark if they're truly Well, look. honestly telling you their deepest darkest secrets, they are submitting their will to you. If they're going to trust you with that stuff to God. They're They're sub- [clears throat] Right. I am the instrument of God in human form bringing them to that place. Okay. If you're telling them that same at the same time that they're telling you honestly their deepest darkest secrets, they are submitting everything every fiber of their being to your power. No. It's not about my power. Come on. It's about honesty before God. They're asking me to bring them to a place with Christ where he will set them free. So, if this person let's just take a simple thing. They are a serial adulterer on their wife. Mhm. Okay? And they're living that life and seeing prostitutes and uh going to strip clubs on a regular basis. And people I know do that stuff. Well, they're going to hell. And they need to be saved. And they need an exorcism. And you have my phone number, so send [laughter] them to me. Okay. [gasps] Well, I'm serious. So, let me give you an illustration. I had a lady uh who believed her house was haunted. All right. And so she I I flew halfway across the United States to go to be there. Took another Christian friend with me. Walk in the house. We go through the whole house praying over it. We take the holy oil. We put the oil everywhere. I put the sign of the cross everywhere. Go through the whole house. And then I to cleanse it of the evil spirits. All right. And I'm walking out the door. And after all of this, just as I literally standing at the door, she says, uh "You suppose I should have told you that I'm currently having a sexual affair with a pastor?" I said, "Well, I'm late to catch a plane. I can't do anything about that right now. But yes, you could have evil spirits in your home because of that." Oh. I said, "Sorry. I'm late for the plane." See what I'm saying? She She just I understand it was such a painful horrible thing for her she couldn't bring herself to confess that, to bring that into the open, to break the bondage of Satan on her life. Mhm. She waited till the last minute to tell me. Right. Well, no wonder she had She was on the fence. No No matter wonder that she had demons in her house. No wonder there were spirits haunted her house. She She had opened the door to them. Right. So, this is the point. If somebody has something that is the open door to the devil and they don't tell me, it's not that they have to bare their soul to me as a human being. It's They're They're doing this to God. Right. So, so my the the thing that frustrates me the most is you have a guy who grew up in Christianity, studied the Bible his whole life, devout Christian, talking about Arman Hammer in in the other room. And started reading the ancient Greek literature, the classical literature, the stuff that surrounded the Bible, all the all the all the medical stuff, all the legal stuff, all the um philosophical stuff, all the comedy, the arts, and all this stuff that was happening the same time that the that the Gospels were written. Before, after, during, the same time. And devotes his life, 30 years of his life, to reading the actual original sources in Greek. And it pulls him out of Christianity. It He almost studied his way out of Christianity and devoting his life to Jesus. Well, that's what he says. So, somebody who who has is so freaking educated in this stuff, right? That's his That's his story. Okay, even if it So, let's just say it's a lie. Give me Let's just say it's a lie. If he's lying, right? Why can't I get another scholar to come in here and call him out on his lies? I don't know how hard you've tried to find the appropriate scholars. so hard you would not believe. I've gotten like 18 Harvard scholars turn it down. Well, okay. I can't speak for them. But I don't think we have a problem of intellectualism here. I don't think this has really anything to do with the veracity of scripture nor its credence with respect to the original Greek. I don't think that's the issue. Back to Billy Graham. Most people have a moral reservation. Now, that doesn't mean that I'm sitting in judgment. It just means that if I don't know the whole story, it's like a doctor diagnosing the disease and you don't tell him where it hurts. You don't tell him the problem you're really having. So, any individual who comes to me for help, and I've had it happen many times, and then they they come back again a second time and they say, uh "I just didn't want to tell you about this about this about this." And it could be anything, but usually it's a moral transgression of pretty serious nature. Okay. pointing fingers. I'm just saying that's often the case. Or theological serious theological transgression. You know, they they experiment with Satanism or or some metaphysical cult or some uh sorcery practice of some kind. You know, it opens them up to a demon and then that demon, of course, is a highly intellectualized demon. Most of the demons are in academia. They're not on the streets. Really? Yes. Of course. What do you think's destroying this country? Academia? Yes. How so? Look Look at the kids that are coming out of that. Look at their thinking about the country, about the society, about the culture that political ideologies? Huh? Their political ideologies, you mean? Well, their political ideologies, but they're also what the Bible calls doctrines of devils. Okay? Which means the people who walk out of academia and they say, "Let's blow up the country. Let's destroy it. It's worthless. It's hopeless." And there are young academics who are saying that today. You well know that. Okay? But that's just just demonic as anything. But more to the point. The point is So, do you think there's a distinction between um good and evil when it comes to political parties, like if they're left-leaning or right-leaning? No. It has to do with Is has to do with the moral qualification of the belief system. But the belief system says, "I want to burn it down. I want to destroy it." That conflicts with what the Bible says about proper order in government. But that's another whole discussion. Okay. The point is the individual who wants to be delivered from the demon has to repent, renounce, and break the curses of all the things they have done to open themselves up to demons, which have created the intellectual delusion that has them see things in a very different light than truth. Mhm. Jesus died on the cross. He rose again from the dead. That's the teaching historically of the church. That is the teaching of the Bible. Is that the same person who could possibly be impugned from being a child? What kind of intellectual honesty is that? And what basis for dialogue is there grounded on that premise? None. Now, that doesn't mean that I want to cast the first stone, nor does that mean that I want to not be friendly even to enemies of the faith. My goodness, I've s- sat down with, as you know, with Satanists. Mhm. With Zeena LaVey back in the day when she was trying to get out of the Church of Satan. His daughter? I've I've I've sat down with neo-Nazis, people who were accomplices to murder. Uh I've I've I've I've sat down with dozens of Satanists and debated them and gone head to head. Because they're an enemy of faith. They know they're the enemy of the faith. There is no pretense about this. There's no intellectual argumentation whatsoever. "We hate God. That's it." Mhm. Okay, I'll talk with them. Mhm. Because they're not departing from the faith. They ain't got it. They don't want it. Right. That's the difference. Well, I'm not sure why that's a block, but but that does create a different dynamic. The paradigms are not the same. Now, whether that individual or anybody in that position comes to me and says, "I want to return to my faith. I want to come back to Christ. I want to put my trust in his death on the cross, the shedding of his blood, and his resurrection from the dead. And I'm willing with sorrowful repentance to make that fact known to you and to all and apologize for what I have done to defame the son of God." Mhm. And as the scripture says, to recrucify him. Hey, now we're getting somewhere. Now, let's talk. Now, let's do an exorcism. Understood. Okay? Bob, thank you. This has been a pleasure. I really enjoyed this conversation, man. This has been fun. This is This has been fun for me, too. It's been rather interesting. I really appreciate you taking the time to travel down here. Um how can someone get themselves demonized? you would be a great exorcist sometime. I would love to. You would be great. You've got the heart for it. You think? You just Really? You do. You do. You know what? I believe every meeting I have is ordained by God when it's something like this. Mhm. I'm here for a reason. I don't know what it is. You know, Paul started out killing Christians. Did he really? Yeah. And what changed him? Jesus. Wow. Jesus had to knock him off his feet and appear to him. Could happen. How do I How do I give in to Jesus and how do I become born again? By recognizing you're a sinner and you need God. And that you can't handle everything that comes this I'm interested. I want to learn more about this. Yeah. I'm open to it. But I have to take a leak real quick. [laughter] See, I was going to lead you in what's called a sinner's prayer and your bladder is full. to do that. We're going to do that. Pause. I'm going to use the restroom and we're going to continue the the sinner's prayer. We'll bring it on back here.