In a moment, we're going to speak to a former Colonel Douglas McGregor about what is happening around the world in the wake of the war in Iran that began a little over a week ago. And so much is happening and it's not exactly clear how it's all connected. All of a sudden you read that Israel is occupying parts of southern Lebanon, killed a priest last night. Really? What is that? Is that true? There are power outages in Bangladesh, Bangladesh. Yes. Asia is suffering the world is suffering due to the choke point of Hormuz, the Straits of Hormuz that are closed or semi-closed by Iran and have been since this began. And that's causing massive downstream effects in markets in manufacturing and the global economy. How long is that going to last? What's the end game there? And then of course the war itself, which is playing out in Iran and Israel and throughout the Arab world really primarily in the Gulf states, but not just the Gulf states. What's the damage? Well, the truth is that in a lot of cases we don't really know because the censorship of this war on social media, and of course big mainstream outlets are censored, always have been. But the promise of social media was you could get unmediated information, you could get videos live from the scene. And now suddenly you can't. It lasted about 24 hours before the clamp down. And in part that was by governments, governments, the Gulf states, they don't want physical destruction of their country's broadcast to the world. The government of Israel is clamped down completely. They don't want videos of Telviv or hypoburning. You can, in fact, in some of these countries go to jail for posting that stuff online. But it's not just the governments of those countries that are imposing censorship. It's a social media companies here that are imposing censorship on the American people who are paying for all of this. So they can't know. And then there does seem to be a kind of censorship practiced by the US government around casualties and deaths. How many people have died so far in this conflict? How many have been injured? Where? And under what circumstances? Now, these are sensitive questions in any conflict. And of course, you don't in any way want to degrade the effectiveness of the US military. You don't want to disapear the troops whom we are rooting for sincerely, always and everywhere, rooting for Americans in whatever theater, in whatever war it wasn't of their choosing. In some cases, they are just the people who suffer first and most to do the decisions of politicians. So we're always on their side and you don't want to make things worse for them. On the other hand, Americans do have on a fundamental level a right to know the effects of this war. And they're countrymen. If Americans are killed, we have a right to know that. And yet there's some indication that we really don't. So as you try to figure out what's going on, keep in mind, you can't really get the full picture because the clamp down on information. So in the conversation that we're about to have, we're going to go through what we think we know. In some cases, we might be wrong. Just want to be honest about that upfront. Very hard to know what the truth is at this stage, really at any stage, but particularly in the face of this kind of censorship. But we're going to try to be as honest as we possibly can and provide as much information as we possibly can given the limitations because this war matters maybe more than most wars. This war hasn't been settled. Clearly there are parties who would like to settle it, but no one person's in charge of whether it gets settled. Israel is a partner in this war, probably the first war the United States has ever fought with a true partner with decision making authority. It's very different from going into Afghanistan with a NATO coalition, Norway didn't have veto power over anything, but Israel does. And so it's complex, very complex in the Iranians have their own, of course, completely different agenda. So it may not be settled anytime soon. We're praying that it is. But more fundamentally, this is a different kind of war. So over the course of our lifetimes, most wars the United States has fought. All of them really on some level wars of choice. The U.S. hasn't been invaded really since 1812. So all of these rewards that the U.S. government decided to become involved in or start. And pretty much all of them were initiated on the same pretext, which is we are preserving the order of the world, the international order, the rules based order, whatever you want to call it, we're preserving the way things are. And this country we're going to war with violated the rules. Therefore we're going to war to restore the rules. That's not what we're watching now. There are some evidence that the President of the United States Donald Trump thought that's what this was about. Iran wants to get nukes. They can't have nukes. We can't have more nuclear proliferation. You can have rogue states or nuclear weapons. Weapons of destruction are bad. God, we've heard that before. Of course, the effect of this will be to radically accelerate proliferation around the world because what's the lesson of what we're doing right now? You better have nukes or else you're going to get regime changed. No one's trying to regime change North Korea because they have nukes. So the incentive for every small but reasonably wealthy country as of right now is getting nukes as quickly as you can because you're going to get regime changed if you don't potentially. And if you're a bystander to a war and happen to get caught up in it like the Gulf States are right now, no one is going to protect you. These security guarantees, formal and informal are not real. The town Dubai can still get destroyed and your economy destroyed for a generation because who's going to stop it? You're on your own. So countries that feel there sincerely on their own have every incentive to have the most effective deterrence possible and that would at this point be nuclear weapons. So you're going to see a lot more nuclear arm states in the next few years without question. So if the point of this was to preserve the status quo on nukes, it had the opposite effect. But the point of this was not to preserve the status quo at all. It was to overturn the status quo to usher in a new age. That's the point of this war. This is a pivot in history and a lot of the people supporting it know that. Now there are really in two groups. One or people motivated by religious impulse that would include some Israelis, some religious Jews, not all but some. And that would include some Christians, Christians, Zionists and both groups believe that they're helping to accelerate the end of history. Armageddon, the end of time, they're turn of the Messiah, whatever you want to describe it, but both groups believe that history is linear. It began in one place and arrives at another with the return of God to earth and then history ends and we are redeemed or damned depending. That's the basic idea. And both of these groups seem under the impression that they can force God's hand, that they can bring this about through an active will or violence, which is to say both groups believe on some level that they are God, which they are not. They're not in charge of history. You can't force God's hand. He's in charge. You are not. But both groups have lost sight of that. So that's their motive. And then there are secular boosters of the war, promoters of the war, planners of the war. And their vision, while not strictly speaking religious is not really so different, they would like to usher in rule by technology, whether that's mass surveillance, whether it's transhumanism, the merging of man and machine, but the rule of the earth by technology. And there are a lot of people who want this and a lot of people who think it's inevitable, and this is the moment where that age of history begins with this war. So again, this is not a war that is confined to the region. This is not a war between the United States and Israel and Iran. This is not a war designed to prevent a rogue state from getting nukes. It was never that. This is a war designed to usher in a new age of man, a new period in history, a new world. And so wars like that are fundamentally theological in nature. That's theology, whether it's secular or religious, it's still theology. These are articles of faith. This is an eschatology. And wars like that aren't resolved quickly because we're talking not just about disarming a madman. We're talking about changing the nature of life on this planet forever. So big stakes in the minds of the people pushing this. And that means this is going to go on for a while to clear it or not. And as it does, how do we respond? Well, we pray number one, the most effective thing you can do is to say prayers for peace. Number one, most effective thing you can do. But to keep an eye on the effect of this war on us here in the United States, we're prosecuting this war. We're the main combatant here. We're spending the most money dropping the most bombs. And how do we do that? So the key, really, whether you think this is insane as a lot of people do, probably the majority of the country believes that, or you think it's necessary. Some people do believe that. Fox News viewers believe that. Like leaders believe that in the House and Senate. But no matter what side you're on, the United States needs to behave with honor. Now why is that? Because that's the whole point of being the United States. You can't have wars in a democratic republic or in a country where the people supposedly rule or their consensus necessary, whether it is or not, that's what we tell ourselves. You can't have wars unless you believe that you are on the deepest level better than the people you're fighting. We're not savages. They are. Therefore we get to kill them. And we've always told ourselves that. And in some cases, it has been absolutely true whether we can kill them or not. It's another question. It's a moral question. But as a sort of matter of civic engagement, the population has to believe they're better than the people they're fighting or else you can't have the war. And you're really sort of flirting the revolution at that point. And we don't want that. So in order to believe you're better than your opponent, you have to be. You have to behave with honor. And so for example, if innocents are killed, girls at a school, to name a current example, you have to believe that it was accidental. And you have to say out loud, that was wrong. And in this specific case, the bombing of a girl's school next to an Iranian naval base that was apparently the school of choice for officers at the naval base. These were the children, the daughters of the people were fighting. You have to believe that was accidental. Despite the fact it was hit twice 40 minutes apart. Looks very much like a double tap, which is to say a bombing and then an attack on the people coming to rescue the injured. That's what it looks like. But as an American, you have to believe this was a tragic mistake. But we have to verify that. We have to know for certain that it was in order to keep our honor. Because if you wake up in the morning and you're living in the kind of country that thinks it's okay to kill not simply military officers, but their daughters, that country is not worth fighting for. Now speaking for myself, I am assuming that was a tragic mistake. But it's important to get to the bottom of it. How did this happen? Were these autonomous weapons that made the decision? Was there an AI program that targeted the school that thought it was something else? Were thought it was within bounds and targeted it, bombed it, and then bombed it again 40 minutes later? If that's the case, no more autonomous weapons for us. Should we really be making life or death decisions with a machine with no human interaction? No human sign off on that? Of course not. That's grotesque. To hand the power of life and death over to a machine that's just transparently insane. Of course you would never do that if you were a civilized country. And we can't do that. Did we do that? We need to find out. And if we did, we can't do that again. And we have to apologize for it. You can't kill the children of your enemies. In fact, you can't kill innocents, period. Because we're the West and we believe that people are responsible for the sins they commit, not for the sins the relatives committed or their ancestors or their future descendants or people who look like them. We don't believe that because we believe in the individual soul. Each person individually accountable to God and to the US military for the things he does right in wrong period. Collective punishment is the opposite of what we believe. That's what Israel believes. And that's why on a basic level Israel is not. It does not have a Western outlook because the Israeli government believes it is okay to kill people on the basis of their bloodline. They are Amalak, as the Prime Minister often says, again and again and again. This is Amalak. Kill not just the perpetrator but his wife, his children, their children, his pets. This is a theological concept that Christians and the West reject as grotesque and evil. We cannot participate in that ever because the moment we do, we are not better than the people we're fighting at all. And we can't have that. We can't sustain on all of us. So we need to find out what happened there. And the second thing we need to do is make certain that the diplomatic efforts the United States made to get to a political agreement before the war were legitimate. That they were in a ruse designed to distract and trap the Iranians. Why? Because an honorable nation does not engage in that kind of deceit and trickery. An honorable nation states its objectives out loud, attempts in good faith, a political nonviolent solution. And then if that fails, resorts to force. That's the American tradition. That's the Western tradition. That's not the Eastern tradition. But it's our tradition and we have to uphold it. And as of right now, we have to believe that's what we did and that it just didn't work, couldn't come to terms. And so President Trump was effectively forced by the Israeli government into this decision to go to war. But if it ever emerges that are diplomatic efforts with Iran, both in February of this year and in June of last year, we're fake and they were designed to lull the Iranians into a false sense of security so we could launch a sneak attack on them. How is that better than Pearl Harbor? How is that better than any dishonorable sneak attack in history? Of course, that's not. It's low. It's beneath the United States. It's beneath us as American citizens and anyone who participated in that needs to be punished for it right away. And as a practical matter, it makes diplomacy of all kinds impossible. How do we settle the conflict between the United States and Russia using Ukraine, poor Ukraine as a proxy? We fight the war, Ukrainians die. How do we settle that conflict? By the way, a lot of us should have been settled before launching a war on Iran because now the Russians are, of course, giving targeting information to the Iranians. Why wouldn't they? We've done the same with Ukrainians for the last four years. That should have been settled. But it's going to be hard to settle it now because the message to the rest of the world is American diplomacy is fake. It's not real. You send negotiators in. They distract us and then you prepare a sneak attack on us. Now we don't know that's what happened. There's no proof that's what happened. But we need to find out what exactly did happen because you can't behave that way. It's a disservice to American citizens if you behave that way. And it makes our future much, much tougher, much, much tougher. Spring is the most refreshing time of year. Nothing compliments a better than black rifle coffee. Lots of it is that American company founded by veterans with conviction. They built the whole thing around a simple idea. Do it right or just don't do it. They're definitely doing it right. We know because we drink it all day long. If you want coffee without the atric, start with just black whole bean if you grind to yourself ground. If you don't, no sweeteners designed to skies, mediocrity, no seasonal gimmicks, masking, weak beans, just bold American roasted coffee that delivers what it promises. And if you prefer variety without lowering the bar, try these supply drop variety rounds, the curated lineup of pod rows that rotate in, but never compromise strength. Consistency standards discipline out with watered down blends in with pure American coffee. You can grab just black or supply drop variety rounds that Amazoner go right to black rifle coffee dot com to stock up from the source. Black rifle coffee veteran founded American roasted still standing, still brewing. So giving the full benefit of the doubt to the United States as a default position as Americans and we are, we need to get to the truth of that and everything else is happening in this work. So with that, we turn to a man who is highly informed on this. Again, we're feeling in the dark, but we're going to tell you what we think we know because you need to know. Colonel Douglas McGregor. Doug, thanks so much for doing this. So energy markets spiked future spiked last night today. They've come down quite a bit. They appear to be pricing in a shorter war of the belief that the president of the United States will find they're calling an off ramp and the things will cool down quickly. Is that a good bet? Do you think what's likely to happen? Do you believe? Well, I think that's a call that we can't make at this point. I think it's going to be very difficult for the president to retreat from some of the more stride green marks that he's made, not the least of which is his recent demand for unconditional surrender. And we have to remember that from the standpoint of Iran and everyone in the region looking at this, he's demanding unconditional surrender to Israel and Israel's demands. So I don't think that's likely to happen. And I don't know how he gets out of that particular box. You have to add to that lots of what I would call toxic inflammatory rhetoric about chopping the heads off of babies, which Iranians have not done and have nothing to do with. And I think some statements about deliberately killing children, insisting that the children at the school that was bombed in Iran were deliberately killed by Iran. There's no evidence for that. And that's the sort of thing that if you're looking for an off ramp, that's not how you find one. So I just in the intro said that I don't think there's ever been a war led by the United States in which we've had a partner with decision making authority as Israel obviously has. Well, I think the British had considerable influence over us during the Second World War. Not because we liked it, we didn't. We had Britain as a staging base. The island offshore was invaluable to us or we couldn't have landed on the continent. I would say something else about your deduction. By the way, after I heard that, if I were a drinking man, I would have had a stiff shot of single malt scotch because it's a very sobering introduction. I hope everybody listened to you. We live in a world today that is so remote from the world that I grew up in. It's almost impossible to recognize. And one of the things that historically presidents have tried to do is they go back to Abraham Lincoln and he made a number of statements. And one of them was paraphrased by Ryan Holt-Neebor. I'm sure you've heard of Neebor. Yeah, today nobody studies him anymore. But he was a very thoughtful man, a theologian, a philosopher, and someone who studied international relations. And he quoted Lincoln by saying, and that the challenge in American foreign policies to link the contingencies of power with the principles of justice, said you've got to do both. You can't simply justify armed action on the basis of, well, it's a great, we're a great power, we've decided to do it has to be done. That was unacceptable to him. Now this was spoken in the 50s in the aftermath of World War II. We did a lot of things during the Second World War that we subsequently viewed as having been very wrong. Curtis LeMay famously told his staff, if we don't win this war while the war was going on against Japan, after the war we will all be executed as war criminals because they were fired bombing German, excuse me, Japanese cities and killing tens of thousands of people. So we do know the difference. We know what's right and what's wrong. And I think we have tried to be on the right side of that equation. The problem is that we haven't always linked our actions in the way that Lincoln said. In other words, we don't always link the contingencies of power with the principles of justice. And I don't think that our attack on Iran is justified. It's not something that if you put it to a referendum in the United States, people would overwhelmingly support. I think people would reject it. But we're doing it nonetheless. And each day that it continues, we look less and less justified, less and less legitimate and less and less moral. I don't think that something Americans want. And I don't think a lot of Americans are really paying attention at this point, sadly, because these are things that always happen on other people's soil, remote from the United States. And so the average American says, well, it's too bad. I'm going to go down to the 7-11 and buy a six-pack. That's part of our problem. We're a big country. And there are a lot of people that are deciding, well, I don't have any influence. Doesn't mean the difference is you elect. You know, you still get the same outcome. What's the difference between Tony Blinken and Marco Rubio? I mean, there really isn't. What happened with Biden? Well, Biden was viewed as this very corrupt and not terribly smart man who was manipulated by people. Now we have President Trump. And many people are beginning to wonder whether or not that's also happening to him. So it seems as though we haven't seen dramatic change from one administration to the next. That's another serious problem. But I think your introduction hits something very, very hard that we need to focus on. We need to be concerned about injustice. We need to be concerned about human life. We can't afford to surrender to the impulse, to murder anything that stands in our way. And that's effectively what Prime Minister Netanyahu and Israel state is engaged in. Well, I mean, anyone who does that will be punished for it. Not just in the next life, but in this life. I mean, that's just a fact, right? That when you murder people, you are punished. And so you can't engage in that. And it also saps sort of like the reason for having your country and being proud of it. As you said, we've, you've led troops in battle. You've seen war and you know that for all the ugly things that happen, the United States has made in general a good faith effort to remain decent at the level of like shooting people, like trying to shoot the right people. And if we give that up, then you sort of wonder like what we're left with. Well, I think we need to keep something in mind having worked with the Air Force and knowing people who were targetiers. Back in 1999, we had six layers of private tears. In other words, if you multiplied it, I guess we're like 24, 25, 26 people, all professional targetiers who studied maps, who studied photographs, studied intelligence. And after your targeting had gone through all of these tears, that's when the target became valid. In other words, two people didn't walk in the room, put a picture up in the wall and say, okay, let's blow that up. No, not at all. I'm absolutely certain that whatever we did in Iran was an accident. Absolutely. Or striking of the Chinese embassy was an accident. And that's not necessarily because the targetiers weren't doing their jobs. Frequently, the photographs don't tell you everything. Frequently, you don't have the best maps. You should, but they're not always perfect. You would think at this point, having planned for decades to bomb Iran. Well, I mean, let's face it, this has been on the shelf for a long time in the Department of Defense, excuse me, now the Department of War. So we've looked at lots of targets, but this may have been something else earlier, or mistaken for something, but I know absolutely without question this was not delivered. What I don't like is if it becomes clear and I think it will, that we did it. It was a Tomahawk vessel or some standoff in the nation. Shouldn't lie about it. This is a big problem. Everybody's impulse at the top is to lie. And if you do that, you destroy your credibility, not just overseas, but here in the United States. Yes. So it's always best just to tell the truth, but that seems to be the last thing anybody wants to tell during war. Inflation makes credit card statements particularly scary. You work 40, 50 hours a week just by groceries and gas, things you used to be able to afford without thinking that much about it. Then the bank's charged you 20% interest. The system is designed to keep you underwater. It's working. But there's another option. Our friends in America and financing are doing something the big banks despise. They are helping people. Mortgage rates in the fives, supporting the American Dream of Homeownership. And they're showing homeowners how to take their hard earned equity to wipe out high interest debt. Now, we're against debt in general, but in this economy, most people have no choice at all. So don't go bankrupt and sleeving yourself to a lender. Average savings are right $800 bucks a month and it takes only 10 minutes to talk to a salary based mortgage consultant. Now upfront fees are obligation to see how much you can save. Give American Financing a call. $800, 685, 5696, as 1-800, 685, 5696, or visit American Financing.net slash Tucker, America's Home for Home Loans. You know, I'm sympathetic to the impulse to lie during war because in even now, I mean, I think certain things are true. I don't know that they are, but I probably wouldn't say it because you don't. You know, they're consequences. So I understand that. I think it's wrong, but I get it. And I agree with you. It's impossible for me to imagine that an American would press go on a tomahawk headed for a girl school. I just can't believe that. And I don't believe it. But I do believe that we have autonomous weapons at work and that some of these targeting decisions are being made by machines, not people. There's a park called police park in Tehran that apparently was blown up because, and you can understand if it was an AI program making these decisions, it says police and that's, I'm just guessing. I don't know why it was blown up, but it was a park. No reason to target it. That suggests that autonomous weapons that machines for making these decisions and that strikes me as totally wrong, tempting. I get it. But is that acceptable to you? No. But I think you have something else at work. And I also saw this in the past in another air campaign that is enormous pressure from the top. Give us more targets. We need them now. We have all this equipment. We have all this aircraft, all these ships. They need more targets. Where are the targets? And at the time we were engaged, we couldn't find very many valid legitimate military targets in Yugoslavia. Yugoslavia is not a very developed country. It's quite backward. And so that's when you begin to say, well, look, we'll hit the, you know, this Gulf VW Golf factory. Why? Well, it could have military use. How? Well, you know, they could take the automotive parts and it could be put into the arm. This is the sort of mentality that you get. And you blow it up. You blow it up because you can find it. You have multiple bridges across the river. And somebody comes this, we're only two bridges there with any military utility. So you get those. Then you come back later on and say, well, we've got to get, we need more targets. Well, what about these bridges? Well, they don't really have any, could it be used? Could soldiers cross that bridge? Well, I, I suppose, blow it up. And I think that's what happens over time with air. don't really have any could it be used could soldiers cross that bridge well i suppose to blow it up and i think that's what happens over time with air and missile campaigns you go into something where you don't have a ground force there is no long-term strategic outcome that forces you to include all the elements of power and to think through carefully your objectives you're being told our job is to go in there and bomb the Iranian government into submission and that means it's 93 million person population is going to be made to suffer until the government relents and surrenders and says okay we'll do what the Israelis want i don't think that's plausible i don't think it's militarily useful i don't think it's strategically attainable but it looks to me as though mr netting yahoo's delusions and you were talking a little bit about this when you touched on the issue of greater Israel have now become president trump's reality i think he is fully absorbed assimilated into the Israeli mentality that this state these people must be destroyed or bent to Israel's will because if they're not then Israel will never be safe and if Israel's not safe then potentially we're not safe well you and i know that's wrong you know Israel safety is one thing our safety is another their interests are one set of things one set of goals but not necessarily our interests do we have an interest in destroying Iran you know during the war at mule he who was fdr's effectively chairman of the joint sheets he was the senior military advisor he'd been cnO the Navy very very brilliant man and well it very experienced he brought in Arnold who was treated to get to the staff of the air force at the time de facto under marshal and general marshal was shoot staff of the army and he sat down and he said do you understand that when this war ends we actually want to be friends with the Germans and the Japanese and they both sat there with blank faces and he obviously was obviously they didn't understand you said this war is going to end you are destroying everything in these countries this is a catastrophe well lady was thinking in the future is it really any interest of the United States in our lives to flatten Germany to turn it into rumble and of course you always have people that are eager to hate in the plural and internalize hatred and say oh yeah let's get those people there terrible so forth same thing with japanese attack this into summer nineteen forty one they deserve it really you know we destroyed both countries for all intents and purposes and then we spent fifty years paying for it it was called the cold war because we turned half the world over the communism now we are we're apparently on the road to destroying Iran and make no mistake about it we have the capacity to destroy Iran now if this doesn't come faster enough or we begin to back away from it what does mr netting Yahoo do and I think that's a question that we need to answer because he is not clearly under the authority of the president of the United States he's you know in other words the president is the commander chief of NATO if NATO goes to war they look to us our c4is are our command structures and everything and the president to make final decisions the British and the French would never launch a nuclear weapon without consulting with us is that the case of mr netting Yahoo who leads a country that refuses to admit that it has any nuclear weapons and I would argue no so while we may be partnered this relationship is not an easy one and we should not dilute ourselves into believing that under the worst case scenario if they're not satisfied or they think that their country is being finished off and quite frankly right now even though we're not seeing a lot of footage from Israel is real is being subjected to polarization the the large missiles the quorum shard too that landed on top of Haifa and destroyed the refinery the oil infrastructure I'm sure the docks have taken a beating I mean that's a very important port for Israel and if we were going to bring troops into the region we would probably have to come through that port right now it's in bad shape it may get worse so is this going to go on and on and on I think right now there's no ended site because there's really no strategy other than we're going to bomb you into submission and a war with no strategy tends to be a war effectively without end and then if you pour oil onto the fire and say I the use surrender unconditionally or we destroy you what does the enemy do what is the incentive for him to surrender to someone who is demanding effectively the submission of his country is people to a state like Israel that hates them and they're well aware of that why would the US government ever yoke itself in a war to a country with different aims with different objectives and this is not an attack on Israel but any country that had a different goal why would you ever be a co-equal partner with that country well we concluded in the aftermath of World War one the divine covinge and the British Empire had enormous influence over us had misinformed us this lettuce yeah with the unfortunately with the assistance of President Wilson and of course the man who was his quote chief of staff and national security advisor was not even in American citizen he was a British subject his name was Kermo House and that led to conclusions after the war that this should never happen again one of the reasons it was so much opposition to going to war in Europe again was because of the extreme war one not we took terrible casualties that's a little story awful worse frankly in a shorter period of time than World War two and i think what we have now as a similar situation we have large numbers of people who are dual citizens and we have large numbers of people who they call them Zionist billionaires pick whatever name you want they have spent enormous quantities of money over many years to reach the condition that exists today a condition under which Israel's demands and you have to link Israel to the larger financial picture because these billionaires control more than just a fraction of finance they control the financial system in our country have a huge impact on it globally certainly in the west and they have interests in expanding that power and influence Israel is a way to do that and the Israelis of course they see themselves in a position of either we expand or eventually we die that's because we don't have people our birth rate is in high enough so we have to annihilate the people that are close to us in our country and eventually on our borders and expand that means you march in the Lebanon it means you march into the Sinai and into Egypt it means you go south in the Jordan and Saudi Arabia all you have to do is look at the map mean from their standpoint this is a rational calculus i just don't think it's attainable by them and that's why we're involved because the only way to attain these goals objectives is with the enormous power and influence of the United States and we have committed ourselves heart and soul to this project it's as simple as that all you have to do is listen to the state of the Indian speech by President Trump and the one time everybody stood up left and right Democrats Republicans was when he talked about depriving Iran permanently of any nuclear weapon and everybody stood up and applauded and I will not allow that I will prevent that well first of all there's no evidence that they've got a nuclear weapon we haven't had any evidence for that for a long time so is that really what this is about no I don't think so I think it's about more than that it's it's also about the missile arsenal that they want to eradicate in other words Iran has to live in a state of permanent vulnerability to Israeli attack and destruction otherwise Israel is not safe now many of these corrupt Arab states have accepted that bargain and they are in the view of many of the people that live in the region in Arab countries as members of the Arab version of the Epstein class and they're hated so when you go to the Emirates for instance there are plenty of people living in these countries who privately happy to see these people removed from power these family dictatorships which are hopelessly corrupt they're sick of it so we're involved in much more than just Iran this has global implications for power and influence and it's no accident that you have Mr. Whitcoff and Mr. Kushner as the principal diplomats and in Russia the Russians have sort of looked at this and say okay fine we understand you want your son-in-law and you want your friend to negotiate and they want to enrich themselves in the process fine we'll help them do that but please can't you find your way to an agreement with us can't we hammer out something concrete that serves our interests as well as yours and of course the answer to that as far as being no and I think you're dealing with the same people vis-a-vis Iran we pray that the war with Iran ends immediately but the truth is it doesn't seem to be ending immediately if you're the head of household you need to think through what this could mean for you and the people you're in charge of the ones who love you who rely on you and in a time like this you can't really know what's going to happen next energy markets are when indication they're rattled people are dying the world is well one miscalculation from something really really bad so it's really clear you can't outsource your responsibility for your family for your people to the government when systems fail they fail and they fail quickly no one's coming to stock your pantry or keep the lights on so in minimum you should be thinking this through don't wait for disaster to the strike to ensure that you have the basics covered food water light energy and that's exactly why we started a company called last country supply it's our store it carries the same preparedness products that we have well in this barn for example the products that give any head of household peace of mind knowing that if something bad happened you could take care of the people you're responsible for no matter what so continue to pray for an end to war and violence but also at the same time make sure that your family is ready stock up with the products that we trust at last countries supply dot com slash tucker why would the United States ever allow its own citizens to be killed in order to expand the Israeli empire well it's not an empire let's face it it's a relatively small country the size in New Jersey so I guess if you live in Jersey that's an empire i've got some friends who are in the army with me and there were Italian and it was an empire but that's another story I think Americans don't completely grasp what's happening and they have been forced said for decades a narrative that is designed to depict the Iranian state and its people as the sworn enemies of mankind and most of all of us of course people to be in there spending time in there especially over the last 20 years have come back and said look you're wrong today bears very little resemblance to Iran of 47 years ago your on has changed a great deal in fact I think you can make a good case that had we not bombed anybody and stayed out of this that within the next six months to eight months the Islamic government would be gone because I think the country itself sees it not as this Islamic state at all it sees itself as a Persian state with a Persian history and culture many many people in that country view Islam itself as a unwanted import from the Arab world now there are plenty of people who are very religious there's no question about it most of them live in the rural areas very few of them live in in the large urban areas and here's another interesting insight I received this lengthy note from someone in who explained that we had when we bombed and the Israelis bombed Tehran they killed large numbers of people in these what they call middle class over class neighborhoods who are actually very much an agreement with us that the Islamic government should go away yeah I think if left alone it'll go it'll go that way one way or the other but Iran is a nation state they're not prepared to sacrifice their sovereignty put their citizenry at permanent risk essentially to live under the control of what they see is the Epstein class and on a plantation run by the Epstein class and that's the way they look at it and we don't see it that way because we're not thinking in those terms all we can do is go back to 1982 talk about these Marines and that barracks that were killed and nobody knows the whole story behind that business and I stumbled on this because Cap Weinberger who had former Secretary of Defense his office called asked me to fly to Washington he wanted to talk to me about this book I'd written called Breaking the Failings which he liked and so I I said sure I flew back there and I ended up spending instead of the expected hour I was there for almost two and a half it was a wonderful meeting and one of the things it came up was Beirut because one of the arguments I was making is that if we followed this plan went to a very small but potent presence in Kuwait and just kept that there we might avoid any future war in the Middle East he said of course absolutely no question about makes perfect sense and I said well what happened in Beirut and he said you know that's an interesting story I was sitting in my office watching television and suddenly it was announced that President Reagan had approved the commitment of U.S. Marines in and around Beirut as part of some sort of peacekeeping operation to separate the PLA or the PLO from the Israelis and so forth and he said no one called me he said Ronald Reagan didn't call me didn't say anything so I picked up the phone and I called the office and I said can I see the President and the Secretary said of course Mr. Warren come over I'm sure he'd be delighted to see you again Reagan got along very well so I showed up and he walked in the office and he said sit down and cap what what's going on he said boy you just announced this what are you doing and he said well you know George Schultz was here he spent a couple of hours and he convinced me that we had a moral obligation to participate in this peacekeeping force multinational that's going to bring peace to to Lebanon and Beirut and keep these Israelis in the PLO court and he said sir that you're not going to get that in that part of the world all we're going to be here targets this is a waste of time it's worse than that it's dangerous can't you rescind the order he said well cap I made a public speech I committed myself in my administration this how would I look if I suddenly within a few hours and now I'm reconsidered it we're not going to participate in what this is being built as a moral mission so I said all right he said well I'm sorry cap I sure called you but you know George was here and so forth but you know George Schultz is a Secretary of State was considered on the very liberal side and cap Weinberg was furious said fast forward several months and I get a call in the middle of the night and it's a secretary of Reagan he says the president wants to see you immediately so he gets up and he finds out about this bombing you know he finds it's coming through CNN and everything else this time when he when he gets to the White House he walks to the door the door opens and Ronald Reagan is standing right in front of him and he walks in and he grabs Weinberg or saying he said you know cap you were right I was wrong now we need to get our men out of there immediately yes and the rest is history he did now there were lots of statements about will track down whoever did this or else but he understood we were blown up because we were there most of the people that we lost in Iraq and I would argue Afghanistan have been killed because we were there and the real question is why will be there and I've never been satisfied with the explanations because if you wanted to remove somebody from power in a place like Iraq that's a fairly straightforward operation you don't have to kill a lot of people and the army will help you you know we look what was demonstrated in Venezuela I mean I think that was a bad decision but nevertheless what did we demonstrate that we could pay everybody off and we could shut everything down go in and bring out the president and his wife fine well those kinds of things can be done in certain countries under certain circumstances I know there was a good thing I wouldn't have done it but that's what are under the bridge now you're dealing with a civilizational state Persia represents much much more than people in the United States realize they owe some of their culture and language to Sanskrit and Indian civilization which is another civilizational state Russia is a civilizational state China is a civilizational state these are foundation stones in the edifice of humanity and world civilization now you want to destroy Persia which has been around for 2,700 years well good luck I don't see it happening and I don't think if it even gets close that the Russians and the Chinese are going to sit there and do nothing how do we get out I think you have to find an intermediary first of all someone who is not part of a problem my personal preference if I were advising the president is to call president or excuse me Prime Minister Modi in India now you can say well he was just in Israel well that's fine he has good relations with Israel that's not a bad thing he also has good relations with Iran he's never been an enemy of the Iranian people neither are the Shiite Iranians is it I mean he knows that and he has reasonable relations with the Chinese they have their differences up in the mountains in the Himalayas the Hindu Kush and that is a legacy of British colonialism but my point is that he's historically leading a neutral state and a neutral state that is growing in stature in power and influence and importance we should recognize that and welcome it not treat it as a problem and I think if President Trump talked to him and said look we need to end this and somebody will say well why do you need to end it because if we don't we're going to hit $300 per barrel of oil we're going to watch 60 to 80% of the stock value crash people are going to lose trillions in wealth it will be a disaster and it's not something we'll recover from we've we've already seen that the Israelis hit a refinery on the outskirts of Tehran and what did Iran do they destroyed the refinery and it's supporting infrastructure in Haifa how does this help us how does this help anybody the damage it's being done is going to be semi-permanent and by that I mean it's going to take years to recover from this the katari government has said we're shutting down we can't store anymore we can't drill anymore we can't refine anymore I mean this this is a catastrophe we look at this is say well only 3% of our oil comes from the Gulf well I got news for you 50% of it goes to India 50% goes to China you know 70% plus percent goes to Japan mid 60% or so 64 or 65% goes to South Korea now did we call the president or the prime minister of Japan did we call the president of Koreans they by the way we're considering a war against Iran action against Iranians and we want to know what you think the impact will be on your country because you are friends of ours you are allies did we do I don't think so I think we are acting like the biggest bully in the school yard they hell with everybody else this is what I want and I'm going to pound your face into the dust maybe we've all seen those people they exist I grew up in some of them had to crack kick that in me once or twice it recessed I know exactly what that is well you can't do that in international relations for very long before people gang up against you we already have this thing called bricks and we seem to be determined to destroy that because we see bricks and right now as what ten members something like that and there are 50 60 standing in line ready to join we don't like it because they're looking at potentially gold backed currency what a novel idea and if it's not gold it'll be gold plus maybe platinum silver who knows other precious metals and we're saying well this is a threat to us it's a threat to our petro dollar Tucker we're killing the petro dollar right now in the Gulf this is going to end this very lucrative cycle where people we buy oil they take the dollars that they that they get from us and they reinvested in our country in a place called the bond market not anymore and that's one of the engines that drives our economy we've thrown all caution to the wind think of any number of worst case scenarios in the era on the horizon president Trump is still president of the United States not president of Israel and he has to think about the consequences here at home for us for the average man not for the billionaire class the Epstein class for the rest of us I don't see that we're thinking this through and I don't just blame him because he's had whole hearted support from everybody on the hill don't believe any of those Democrats who truck shoe to slot any number of them oh I was always against it really well you sure as hell aren't on record and things are getting very bad eventually I think members of his own party will deserve it if he doesn't find an offering so back to your question step number one find a mediator somebody that they will listen to because no one is going to listen to us if you're in a running would you pay any attention to what we say how many times have they been attacked in the midst negotiations now twice why would the Russians pay any attention to us this is this is a catastrophe and if we do nothing eventually we will wake up and discover there are some aircraft in the airspace over Iran they're probably Russian and they probably will put up something similar to AWACS and if that shows up then the message is stop and the question is what do you do you know we used to have this thing in the ranger course it's three o'clock in the morning it's below zero outside you're in the mountains and snow up to your rear end and somebody walks in and says you're now the patrol commander you're now the platoon leader where are you on the map what are you going to do now ranger I mean that's kind of worked on trump is hit what's he going to do that I mean I clearly the wise course at this point since doesn't appear to be a way to open the straits using the US military is to try and decelerate to find that mediator but the hitch or one of them is israel I mean if Iran remains intact with a functioning government that is a descended direct descendant of the previous government that we tried to overthrow we wound up killing the wife and the child of the current Ayatollah apparently that government will acquire nuclear weapons why wouldn't they and will dedicate itself even more resolutely to the destruction of Israel so if you're I think why wouldn't they and they've said they will so if you're Israel you you can't you cannot allow that you can't have a cease fire and leave this government intact and that leaves you no recourse but weapons a mass destruction does it well it could there is also the other possibility that is it as the Pakistani government has said they will provide a nuclear weapon to the Iranians now the Pakistanis have always had a very close relationship with the Turks and that's one of the reasons that Erdogan who's the ultimate defense sitter never quite aligns with anybody and it's worked well for him by the way yes Martin that was longer has always said we're not afraid of you because the Pakistanis have made it clear they will have a nuclear weapon if they need it in fact the exact conversation was held back under the Obama administration and I think it was the deputy secretary of state who was there and he said what do you do if Iran gets a nuclear weapon and he asked the chief of staff of the Turkish armed forces and he said well that's our problem you said why not because Pakistanis said they'll provide us with a nuclear weapon if that happens this is your watch out of your area as well yeah and this is your logic playing out exactly what you described so you got it you really want to stop this train now it's headed down the side of a mountain and doesn't seem to have any breaks so you've got to go to someone who can stand in there now you've got to tell this man what are you prepared to do you know are you prepared to cease fire immediately which is not difficult to do because we're talking about air and naval forces if you had seven eight hundred thousand men under arms on the ground in a massive army that stopping everything is very difficult but air and naval forces could immediately disengage pull back yeah that can be done are you willing to do that and if you are willing to do that what should I ask the Iranians to do you know the first step is to get this fighting to stop because of exactly what we're discussing it's going to run out of control and I have worried for the beginning because I am people in Israel that I cared about very much some friends and they're all angry with me because I'm not unconditionally supporting what they're doing and I told them for the beginning I don't think this will work and I do not think this is in the interest of the Israeli state and I have said if this goes to the inevitable conclusion Israel may not survive this and I think the hatred the hostility that is growing in the region not just against us but especially especially against Israel is just earth's shattering beyond anything that is ever seen it needs to stop now I hear all these people worrying about anti semitism well if you're worried about that then stop doing what's what's going on that's the quickest and easiest way to try and bring this under control no they're they're thinking is if we kill everybody it doesn't like us we'll be fine yeah that that attitude doesn't have a good track record that's self that's self defeating I would say and I I I would know there's one other thing I would like to mention real quick and this was a conversation believe it or not the Churchill allegedly had with Stalin and through an interpreter have to understand Churchill knew Stalin was a criminal and a murderer no doubt about it and he certainly did not see him as morally superior to Hitler in fact he probably thought he was worse and Stalin knew that and he used to sort of jab at him because FDR was Stalin's poodle anything Stalin did was good and he Stalin was morally superior to the British Empire anyhow Stalin said to Churchill you know what the difference between me and Hitler is and Churchill said no he said I know when to stop yeah he was right he was right Hitler never figured that out and he He said I know when to stop. Yeah, he was right. He was right. He never figured that out And he vanished Staloms are glifed Yep Until he went too far domestically in his own guys killed him, but yeah, no, I mean he lived another eight years I mean I ask what do you think the likelihood of the US committing ground troops is I? I think it's zero. I don't even know why they they maintain the pretense first of all the army today is a shadow of what it was 30 years ago And I hear all this while I rebuilt the military during my first term that's just silly Army stick about ten years to build you know, that's what it took us after the Vietnam war ended took us ten years to build an army It probably takes 20 plus years to build a Navy Because the building ships in some Marines is time-consuming resource-consuming very expensive Takes a long time to train people one of the reasons that Yamamoto attacked Pearl Harbor he said was if we're gonna fight the Americans we have to kill all the officers in the United States Navy So we need to kill him in the harbor in Pearl Harbor if we can kill them It'll take the United States years to recover from the loss of all those trained officers He was right didn't work thank God, but I Don't think people understand civilians have no idea what it takes to build effective military power and the second thing is a draft privately I would like to have a selective draft because I think average young man not woman But the average American male who if he's got an IQ of a hundred or above and his physically fit should spend a couple of years in the military I think it's a healthy thing But that's not widely accepted in our country. We don't like it the British never liked it so the idea of Of this being something good is impossible to convince people to support and if you go back you live through the Vietnam Period, at least some of it and I as soon as Nixon ended the draft suddenly all the demonstrations against the war Why do I now there were some very sincere people who were against the war for all the right reasons? My point is of as majority Just didn't want to go. Yeah, what's it going to be like now? Why are we going to Iran? Where is this place? How long is it going to take us together? And then we have to look at what's happened in eastern Ukraine? Warfare has changed It's changed dramatically. We have persistent surveillance above we can see everything everywhere all the time We can target everything everywhere all the time So where are you going to concentrate two or three hundred thousand men? How many ports are you going to get into? How soon are you going to be taking under effective ballistic missile attack? And we already know that however much money you spend on air and missile defense It's not going to be good enough to deal with Modern hypersonic missiles can't be done So it's it's an accident and a disaster waiting to happen We're not prepared for that and the nation psychologically is not prepared for it because no one has sold anything to them We haven't had any fireside chats From Donald Trump saying I just want to spend a few minutes and explain to you why I'm doing what I'm doing. Have you ever heard that? Oh So why would anybody go? Do you think it's possible since you're describing a cul-de-sac? You know box canyon Here um once again, do you think it's possible that nuclear weapons are used? If a nuclear weapon is used, it will be by Netanyahu and his government not us. Yes, good I I you know, I I met and talked with President Trump. I like President Trump personally And you can say what you will about the man But I see no evidence that he would be talked into that by Mr. Netanyahu I just don't I hope I'm not wrong, but I just don't see that happening. I also see The little evidence that people at the top of the military establishment collectively would sign on for that you might get a few Unfortunately most of them are airmen or in the Navy, but I don't think they would be very supportive I think they'd say is this really the right place time and reason? Yes, because increasingly we view nuclear weapons is something that protects your territorial integrity Everybody knows if you try to invade the United States from Canada or Mexico. Yeah, we'll know you No, no question about it, right? But why would we do that with Iran? But Israel is different as we discussed and the more desperate they become if Iran does not submit and I see no evidence that they will submit The more likely that option could be embraced and employed And that's why we started this because you asked specifically about Who has the authority? I hope President Trump does, but I don't think so. I think Mr. Netanyahu is going to do whatever Mr. Netanyahu wants to do I mean because we're implicated in that and because the million-odd Americans who live in the region and the energy Interest there and just like the fate of the world or all part of this calculation Why wouldn't we bring him to heal and prevent that? How do you do that? How do you do that? I mean you're gonna have all the people that put you into the White House It's been billions on your campaigns Who gave you the power and the Congress? That is essentially being purchased by the lobby Not by the lobby directly, but by the Zionist billionaires had poor money into the process to get people elected You know how that works What are they gonna do? Are any of them going to sober up and And go to Trump and say look this has gone too far. I don't see any evidence for that Before this started we are now learning and I think these are accurate Reports that members the uniform military understood visors to the president understood that this was Now the things we were promising we would achieve were not actually achievable And that this was a very unwise course. They knew that But apparently none of them threatened to resign if the president went forward. What do you think of that? Well, we have to understand something about the people of uniform And I don't think we've ever had anybody that resigned in protest. The only one that I can think of Who made his use on Vietnam Heard was General Decker He only served two years as Chief of Staff of the Army because McNamara went to Kennedy and said He doesn't support our policy in Southeast Asia. He won't put any troops in So Kennedy said good rid of him So he he simply retired at the end of the first two years of his Service as Chief of Staff But we say in theory that and this is something that goes back to Frederick the Great Depression any officer whose conscious Conscience will not permit him to execute an order Always has the right to refuse that order and resign his commission Without prejudice Yes problem is we don't let people go like that If General Cain were to go in and say this is it can't do this I'm tendering my resignation. He loses his retirement benefits and his pension So if you're in the military and you do that you lose your whether you're a sergeant or whomever you are the law Sarge if you resign and protest over something you don't get to keep your pension and you don't get to keep your benefits So it's it's really not true now when you move to the civilian side The cabinet members what's to stop them? Nothing and that's where the resignations should take place But that's the last place. I would expect to see any Even though you and I know a couple of them and consider them friends I don't see any evidence for that and and the theory is interesting Enough if I do this I poison the waters against me for the rest of my life If you're in the military, I'll never get a job after You know, I believe no one will hire me in the defenses to have a spin no one will hire me anymore And the civilian says well, I won't get any cushy jobs. No bank boards No industrial you know concerns. Nobody will have me around It's a it's a terrible thing because the ones who really have the flexibility to simply stand up and say thank you very much Here's my resignation I'm handing it to you right now as of this moment I resign as x and you could walk out of the Oval Office and that's just fine Instead what will happen if we're gonna project into the future Is if we don't change course we're going to escalate We're gonna double down In the words well if the last 2000 bombs and 800 missiles didn't do it Will drop 500,000 bombs and 200 more missiles you understand. That's where we're headed Double down escalate escalate escalate And then at some point it's gonna dawn on everybody. This is going too far. This is dangerous Either because the Russians make it clear they won't tolerate or the Chinese or both Or because they suddenly look in the United States and people have said wait a minute You know, I can't put gas in the my car. I don't have a job anymore I mean, you just go down the list economic catastrophe will visit us Then all the heroic figures in the cabinet will say oh, I resign You know, I never saw a more empty place than the west way of the White House in the executive office building Right after the election in 2020 That's what you'd see every this is Are you think I mean you're describing a system that doesn't serve the country of governs and That moreover has been revealed as useless in fact counterproductive like everyone knows this isn't working now You can't lie about it anymore So does that mean we get a new system? Are there after this war however, it's resolved however, it ends Do you think that there will be structural changes to the country? I think we have to anticipate something like that happening because government Federal government is a big part of our lives I listen to people all the times they why I want a smaller government Well check your mailbox. What are you getting in the mail? What's coming into your bank account? How much of it is government? How much of it is federal? People don't realize that what is the what is the percentage of gross domestic product now for the government somewhere in the 30 plus percent? You know back in 1900 it was what two percent? You go back before the Civil War less than one percent I mean the government was there But it wasn't a big Feature of the economy and involved in our lives You know general Sherman And everybody's heard of Sherman and his Civil War service. He became commander of the United States Army in those days We didn't have a staff system So he just was designated commander in chief you had sorry and he was so frustrated With the corruption in Washington They were without telling Grant who was then president. He packed everybody in the war department up And he went to St. Louis He said I'm getting out of Washington and when Grant found out he said oh my god and he said why did you do this? He said this is a cesspool It is full of corruption. I hate those people And finally Grant persuaded his old friend Yeah, God come back to Washington And eventually he did So this is not an entirely new problem No, but in those days the government was not what it is today. It's very intrusive. It's a source of wealth Everybody that is sitting in the various cabinet departments over there a lot of them have their eyes on money What comes down the pike? What sort of new generous program Grant or opportunity is presented and They're involved. They're they're part of this process A friend of mine said the other day. He said these people are parasitic. They're like crustaceans You know or remora on the body of a shark. I said well, it's pretty rough but you know As I said this is a huge problem and the American people went when things go very badly for us and the financial system in the economy They're gonna want answers and it's not gonna be pretty and this unfortunately what we're doing right now is put us on an accelerated path into disaster I think yeah And I I mean it was so obviously going to happen. It was it was just couldn't be clearer that there was no compelling National security related reason to do this that the aims even to extent they were articulated We're gonna be hard to achieve if not impossible And that we were dragged into this by foreign government, which is what happened that was all so obvious That you have to kind of think maybe Destroying or weakening the United States was was the point I Don't think so but now you're up against a different problem There are a lot of people in Washington that do not understand what Stalin talked about limits They don't understand the limits of power they don't understand the financial limits of expense They don't appreciate debt Remember oh, this is the new economy Debt no longer matters. I mean I don't know how many times I've had people tell me that for the last 10 years You know after World War II when Eisenhower was president. What does he do? He shrinks the defense budget He cuts back on the size of the army He invests in nuclear weapons He sees this as a relatively inexpensive way to maintain deterrence Tries to keep the Navy in the air force within bounds, which is why everybody in the services of the diamond's president hated him Now why? Well, he understood that investment in military power There's no salvage value to what you produce. Right. That was it's the sunken cost is enormous He also understood something else. He did want to be involved in wars Why not why would the man that was at the top of the military establishment and you're not want to be involved in a war? Well in January of 1945 He had sent a letter to Marshall and said oh my god this bulge is terrible The Germans have done something we didn't think they could do. I need more men And Marshall wrote back near not getting anymore You've got all the forces that you're going to get you better get out there and win the war So Eisenhower learned there were limits to what we could produce That's right. Limits to how much we could invest And we were not Stalin We could not pave the road to Berlin with millions and millions and millions and millions of dead troops dead soldiers and destroyed lives and civilians So he kept us out now then you get Jack Kennedy and later on you get LBJ and Nixon and these three people Were at a very low level during the Second World War and they were in the Pacific And they saw these vast fleets on the ocean and aircraft in the sky and they said We're the greatest country in the world. Oh my god. No one can do what we can do. Our power is limitless And Eisenhower always said that's a mirage Our power is limited Always yes, and we have to operate within limits I don't see anyone with the sense of that in Washington. No one not a white house not anywhere Yeah, it's called hubris and it's the death of men and empires Colonel Douglas McGregor. Thank you for that wise summation of everything that's happening Thank you, Chuck. I bless. God bless. Thank you