the general gonna experience. Well that's why it's a weird one like this UFO disclosure thing comes out. This guy, didn't it just come out today? Yes, a whistleblower? Yeah, this gentleman, David Grush, and David Grush, let's find out who he is and what his credentials were. But he essentially said that they are illegally hiding it from Congress, and they are illegally hiding it from the American people, but they have off-world, off-world craft in possession. Who's the they in that? It's somewhere, well it's, the things they're saying is, oh here, well let's read it. Air Force veteran has made a bombshell claim that US government has recovered materials, that could be proof of UFOs, including an intact craft of non-human origin. But they are keeping it a secret from the public. David Charles Grush, a veteran and former member of the National Geospatial Intelligence Agency and National Reconnaissance Office, has blown the whistle on this information, speaking with several news outlets about the crafts. These are retrieving non-human origin technical vehicles, call it a spacecraft if you will, non-human exotic origin vehicles that have either landed or crashed. Mr. Grush told News Nation. Mr. Grush served as the senior technical advisor for the unidentified aerial, phenomenon analysis with top secret, secret compartment and information clearance according to the debrief. He also served as a senior intelligence officer in the National Reconnaissance Office in total. He has 14 years of experience serving as an intelligence officer. So here's the question. Is that a sigh up? Is this, we've got a non-human craft a sigh up? Like if I was the government. And I was working on some shit. And I didn't want to try and rush to know about it and we could do some wild shit, some anti-gravity shit. I thought it was totally nuts and I thought at first I was being deceived. But it was a ruse, Mr. Grush told News Nation. People started to confided me, approached me. I have plenty of senior former intelligence officers that came to me, many of which I knew almost my whole career that confided in me that they were part of a program. He told the debrief that he's prepared many briefs on UFOs for Congress, but last year decided to provide hours of classified information and data about the materials recovery program. Mr. Grush claims the materials recovery program was shielded from proper congressional oversight. So this is what Bob Bozars been saying forever. This guy's saying that it was going on for 80 years. So this brings us back to the 1940s. I mean, this is like, this is means like Roswell. This is what they were talking about when all the people that were at Roswell, that were at the actual crash site and the actual claim they saw bodies. And then there was two different aircrafts that were flown in to Roswell, New Mexico, and took the wreckage and flew it in two different aircrafts in case one of them crashed supposedly. And they flew them to Wright Patterson Air Force Base. This has all been documented. Now if that was a balloon, it was just a balloon. Why would they go through such lengths? And why there's so many people that have so many stories about Roswell? Why there's so many hokey, goofy, fucking explanations of what happened, including it was a parachute, there was human dummies like crash test dummies that were a vlog, there were crash testing things like not according to the people that were there. What they saw was materials that could not be explained insanely light. You would crumble it and it would immediately flex back to the stage that was out there. They found things that had some sort of riding that resembled hieroglyphs. They don't mean these people, they could have all been full of shit. They could have been just some story, something happened and everybody told everybody in your play in the game of telephone. And the next thing you know, it's this wild story of bodies and little tiny caskets and people being silenced. But the problem is the story is very universal. When they're all telling the story, it's a real similar, man. And the guy who was a part of the initial release, he went public afterwards and said, that's stuff that we showed the American public. When they were sitting there, I forget the gentleman's name, but he was showing like a piece of a weather balloon. And they had to smile on their face. This is one day after the, I think it was the Roswell Daily Record. They had the front page of the newspaper that the government has recovered a crashed UFO. I mean, I don't know how big the universe is. I've heard it's hard to quantify in size. Yeah, that's it right there. I mean, what do you think the odds are in all of the universe that we are alone? It's not good. If it is, it's wild. If it's just us, it's wow. What a weird fucking aberration. Well, this is too much not us. So for a species, I mean, we can look at where we are at. We can make it to kind of the moon before we start fucking up. Maybe Elon can get us tomorrow. Maybe not. But so let's assume that a species that was able to come like check us out is probably more advanced, probably more intelligent. I think they would run for the fucking hills. Why? Because we are idiots. And I think anybody who viewed humanity from a long enough more objective lens would say maybe we can just leave this trash planet alone for a little bit and we'll come back after either they have killed themselves again and re, re grown into something better or when they come and visit us. And he's the guy, like he's ended his career to come out and talk about this stuff because he's like, like this is nuts. Like this is, and if you're a real patriot, that's probably the thing you do. And apparently, according to Sogger, he was talking about breaking points, the New York Times rejected this, the Washington Post rejected this, they didn't want to talk about it. This is the gentleman. So let's play this. Do you make? These are retrieving non-human origin technical vehicles. You know, call it spacecraft if you will. It's probably not the right parlance, but no kidding, non-human, exotic origin vehicles that have either landed or crashed. We have spacecraft from another species. We do. Yeah. How many? Quite a number. Where's the whole interview? I'm probably that way. See if you can find, is that something you have to sign up for? What is it? News, what is it? News Nation. News Nation. Meanwhile, that might be a 100% government controlled organization that just promotes propaganda, that guy's working for them. You got to think about all these things. I know. News Nation. Who are these folks? I'm going to go. Oh, interesting. He's their fucking centerpiece. Look at that. He looks a little taller than usual. Can we save ourselves from ourselves, Joe? To go back to the humanity sliding shorts to bring it's possible. Oh, here's the 10 minute interview. Okay, let's hear it. It's going to be about how much. Let's just see what it's up. The military program that has reportedly found wreckage of fully intact, exclusive and more. That's not the UFO question. What conclusion did you come to at the end of your time on the UAP task course? The UAP task force will refuse access to a broad crash retrieval program. When you say crash retrieval, what do you mean? These are retrieving nonhuman origin technical vehicles. You know, call it spacecraft, if you will. Nonhuman, exotic origin vehicles that will be landed or crashed. We have spacecraft from another species. We do. Yeah. How many? Quite a number. You're kidding. No. I thought it was totally nuts and I thought at first that was being deceived. It was a ruse. People started confiding in me. They approached me. I have plenty of current former senior intelligence officers that came to me, many of which I knew almost my whole career that invited me. They were a part of a program. They named the program. I've never heard of it. And they told me based on the oral testimony and they provided me documents and other proof that there was in fact a program that the UAP task force was not read into. Grusher ledges the US government. Hmm. Was it keep going? What else is this? The entire American public has been lied to for decades. Yeah. There's a sophisticated disinformation campaign targeting the US populace, which is extremely unethical and immoral. You are saying to the human race for the first time an official intelligence representative at a high level from the US government is saying publicly, we are not alone. We're definitely not alone. Absolutely the data points empirically that we're not alone. Do we have bodies? Do we have species? Well, naturally when you recover something that's either landed or crashed, sometimes you encounter dead pilots. And believe it or not, as fantastic as that sounds, it's true. It's also harder for people to wrap their minds around the concept. I don't know, man. He might be a full agenda. Well, I'm fascinated. He might be a government agent. Well, to unpack that a little bit, you know, so there are, I can only speak to it from a military perspective. So he was in the Air Force. There are programs, there are covered programs or there are programs that you're not going to get read into. And just because you're read into one program doesn't mean you're going to get read into other ones. So his clearance TSSCI is not an uncommon one. It's the same clearance that I held that I was in. Having a clearance, there's two things. You have to have the clearance and then you have to have the need to know. So you could view him saying we were not read into another program as something that would be a conspiratorial or you could view it as like one program didn't necessarily have something to do with the other one. So there's no need to actually read them in. I'm not saying that's the case, but I'm fascinated to understand. It sounds like what he is saying is that the United States military is nesting that program, the program to go recover. And that would be fascinated to know how they are doing that invisibly. I mean, we're talking aircraft. We're talking identification early on aircraft moving teams and this, you know what I mean? Like there's a lot of shit. Right. I'm not saying it's impossible. I have, but there are people that are coming forward. So it's not like they're totally being quiet, which is sort of a mind. They're coming forward with a piece of a pie. I'd be fascinated how all the pieces of the pie fed together. I'm not saying what he's saying isn't true, but watching that actually for me with my limited understanding of some of the stuff he was talking about, I have more questions that I would want to ask him. Yeah, I would want to ask him too. We got to get him. We got to get him on here. I bet he would come on here. I mean, he's kind of going fucking, I feel like though. I feel like, you went on it to where it's something. Yeah. Oh, why didn't he contact us? I think you might get more circular answers. Maybe he did. I asked him a question. You might get more, maybe I asked him any questions. Maybe they were and I get a lot of questions though. Is he still in? I don't even know if they probably allow weed in the current military. You might get more circular answers than specific ones. If you look at the answers that he was giving and again, I'm not trying to discount what he's saying. And I personally, like I have said many times, I think it's improbable that we're alone. He was speaking in generalities and not specifics. He was talking about other people's experiences less his own. Yes, that's a good point. And that's my question would be what have you seen? Yeah. What have you seen physically with your own eyes? Yeah. What do you know for a fact? And again, I'm not saying he hasn't had those experiences, but I would ask those same questions as well. And just from my understanding of how the military will compartmentalize as all organizations who actually want to keep information at least delayed the release of information compartmentalization is not a novel concept. Well, that's what Bob Ozzar said was the problem with the back engineering program. He said that science can't exist like that in a vacuum and the propulsion experts were not allowed to talk to the metallurgists. The metallurgy experts were not allowed to talk to the biology experts. He said, if they really did have physical bodies, the people that were working on the propulsion system had no knowledge of that weren't allowed to talk about it. But they were all, there was all chatter. Everyone would talk about things. And apparently there was some sort of a debriefing they gave them. And in that debriefing he said it was so nuts. He said, the first of all they said they would, they've been coming here forever. And they also said that we're a product of accelerated evolution, which is wild as fuck that human beings in general, that why we are so different from all the other primates. I mean, that's always been the fucking conspiracy theory folklore. That's the fun one. You know, that they came down. That's the Anunnaki that came down here and messed around with lower primate DNA and did something to it to create a human being. I'm here for it. I'm here for that. Yeah. That would make everything fun. And then I would think that the government would want stuff like this to come out if they're in the middle of stealing money or doing something really wild. Oh, the classic misdirection? Oh, for sure. Yeah, if you're going to take something that gets rid of a certain amendment or you're going to do something that allows you to infringe on rights or impose some new sort of restrictions and bring the aliens out. Yeah, bring the aliens out.