Dave, I'm really glad to see you. I know you've been here before, but it's nice to have you back. I am an expert in all things Tucker Carlson. So, um I know you've been asked this a million times, but I I'm coming to this late. Uh like how do you assess um the debate that you had with Douglas Murray? Now, it's been a month. How long's it been? Something like that. Something like a month, right? So, few weeks. Looking back, what was that? [Music] [Applause] [Music] [Music] [Applause] [Music] It's an interesting question. I mean, I think I think essentially it was what everyone saw. It was ex it's it's like my first impression of it. My impression during it during the first half hour of the debate I was like well Douglas just embarrassed himself in front of the world and you felt that in real time. Oh yeah yeah yeah. Well I mean it was you know look it was he was ridiculous and it was uh it was kind of strange to witness as it was happening. I go, "So, you decided to open the debate by just chastising everyone as not being as good as you, that the expert class ought to be the ones consulted, that you I mean, you know, you could argue what he exactly he was saying, but he was clearly saying that you you guys on podcasts are simply not qualified to talk about these subjects." Now, you're saying this on the Joe Rogan Experience. Of all places to go and deliver this message, this is the place guaranteed to turn the entire audience against you. And of course, I just think that um I think it's a it's a ridiculous non-argument that never would have made sense. But coming off of the COVID years, the idea that you're going to convince people that you ought to kind of um they they ought to trust your opinions, they ought to that your class ought to be trusted was a ridiculous, you know, attend that class. I mean, he's not I know Douglas and I think that um always gotten along with him and I think that he's clever, but he's clever in a boarding school way. He went to boarding school um as I did and you instantly recognize it in the way that he debates which is by dropping references that suggest deep air addition that doesn't actually exist. I think he's clever. He's got a kind of bullshitty boarding school vibe to him. Again, that I recognize that I have sometimes, so I'm not, you know, not trying to be holier than now, but like the idea that he's an expert is absurd. He's a journalist like the rest of us who's been taken on PR tours in various countries by their governments trying to win his support. Got it. I've done that, too. Um, but he's hardly an expert on anything. Well, what? Well, also it doesn't look all of this in so the the analogy that I I've used about it is that like uh if you had two UFC fighters that are going to fight, so they've signed the contract, they've done their training camps, they show up to Madison Square Garden, they both get in the octagon and like one of them puts up his hands and then the other one puts his hands down and goes, "You know, I'm such a better fighter than you." And this is ridiculous that me and you are even fighting. It's like okay but we are but we are we're here for it right we both accepted we're both here. So if you are such a better fighter if you have trained so much more if you have all these advantages against me well then you can't just you have to demonstrate that take on the argument you should be able to then destroy me. And so he weirdly opened with this thing where he was going to turn everybody off, turn everyone against it because the style is [ __ ] Even if you're, and I've had lots of people who are pro-Israel reach out to me since then and be like, "Listen, I disagree with you on the issue, but that was ridiculous the way he attempted to argue." Um, because weirdly, number one, you're turning everyone against you. And number two, you're just setting the bar so much higher for yourself. Because now once we start actually getting into the debate, you've already explained that you should be dominating me on every facet of this and yet you're not. And yet actually when it comes down to it, you have no answer for the points that I'm making. And that was the theme of of the entire knowledge either. Yes, that's right. But no, but there was there were two points in the debate that actually stuck out to me the most. Um, and it wasn't the have you been, which is, you know, was the funniest thing that everyone's making that you know, Douglas will be mocked for eternity for, but you know, he made his own bed. Um, but the two points to me that really stuck out in the debate because this is the way my mind works is that I'm like, oh, if you like, give me something g give me something to challenge me on that will actually keep me up at night. By the way, if you were to be like, no, Dave, you got this completely wrong and you need to read these three books to understand why you're missing all this information. Can I interrupt and say I knowing you pretty well I think I mean this I believe I would take a lie detector test and pass. I believe that if you read those books and found that you were wrong that you would admit it. Oh yeah. And I've done this lots of times before. I have I have views from a decade ago that are quite embarrassing. Uh in heights I was at one I was an atheist at one point. I was pro-life. I excuse me. I was pro-choice at one point. Um I've oh god this I was up for open borders at one point. I've been I've had all of those views. had some really bad views over the years and I've changed my mind all the time. You think Douglas would admit if he was wrong? Well, of course not. I mean, that's that's obvious. No, but that's kind of the Look, if you can't if you can get Iraq, Afghanistan, Syria, Libya, Ukraine, and COVID wrong and then with certainty say you're right about the next one and then also tell also arguing that the other person should have some humility. I mean, come on. Like, what is this? So good. It's just too You couldn't write if I just scripted this for you and wrote it on a script, you'd be like, "Take it down and this is too ridiculous. No one would believe this." But regardless of that, so there were two moments that actually really stood out to me in the debate. Um were Okay, so number one was in the Ukraine portion. Number two was in the the Israel portion. So in the Ukraine portion at one point I said to him we were talking about the um you know what led up to the war and so he said something like he goes you know the real question is why all these countries wanted to join NATO I mean we didn't incorporate them in NATO through force and I was like well yes obviously that's the argument isn't that we force the governments willingly wanted to join NATO. I was like, that's pretty obvious why you'd want to be sub you have your defense subsidized and want to have the most powerful government in the history of the world guaranteeing your defense. Sure. And also because they're concerned about the former Soviet Union, which is still Russia and Okay. But I was like, but that wasn't the argument. You know, the argument is why would we do this? And so I I was like, let me just give you two bullet points, right? Two quick arguments. And the two uh quick points that I made were number one uh the net means net memo which of course as you know well you've talked about this a lot you talked about this back on your Fox News show was that uh uh Bill Burns later director of the CIA. Yes. Yes. The the CIA director through Joe Biden's four years who was the CIA director through this entire war up until Trump to turn back over but then the ambassador to Russ in 2008. He was the ambassador to Russia. He wrote a private uh cable to Conda Rice. This was not for the public. This was a private cable that later the heroic Julian Assange released. It's the only reason we know it exists. And he lays out in there that all this talk about Ukrainian entry to NATO is going to lead to a war. And he specifically says that this is the brightest of all red lines for the Russians. And if we keep moving forward, they fear this could result in civil war and and then they might have to intervene. In his words, quote, a choice the Russians do not want to have to make. So, I was like, "Hey, there's a pretty compelling piece of evidence." And then number two, I said, "Uh, uh, Stro Stlenberg, I always say this name wrong, but the head of NATO, Stolenberg, the head of NATO, he said that Vladimir Putin in late 2001 put in writing, sent a draft treaty to NATO and said, "If you just put into writing that you will not bring Ukraine into NATO, I will not invade the country." This is the head of NATO. So, I give him these two points. Okay, there's I could talk a lot more about this, but I was like, let's focus on these two. Seems to me that all the powerful people involved are admitting that this war was about Ukrainian entry into NATO. And his response was, the war was not about Ukrainian entry into NATO. It was about Vladimir Putin's desires to reconstitute the Soviet Union. And I was like, yeah, but what's the response? Like, what's the response to my point? Like, I made a point. You made nothing. You just made an assertion. So there was this one where it's like once you actually get down to it, once you remove all this like you're an expert, you're not an expert, you've never been, what are you watering, what are the you've got no actual argument here because you're not an expert yourself, right? But even that it's like that again just the way I work that doesn't do anything for me. Then you got to have an actual argument otherwise you're not going to persuade me. And I think for most of the the viewers knowledge too and I just refer back to the boarding school thing. It's like the whole point of that style in debating is to create the illusion of knowledge. Like you have an escalus quote sort of, you know what I mean? Or you can cite the titles of three DH Lawrence novels, but you haven't read the novels. You haven't read Escalus. You don't you don't actually have you don't have an original thought that's actually yours. You don't even have the material. You haven't even you haven't even read the books. It's just it's a slight of hand. And uh that's what they teach you in boarding school. Well, the Okay, so then the other one, which some people did pick up on this, but this to me was like actually the biggest moment of the debate, I thought. Um, and and it was sad in a way cuz Douglas Murray is someone who I have some degree of respect for as a smart person. It was kind of sad that he was reduced to this, but so he made the argument. He said um first off he was dishonest where he and I didn't call him I know this but I I let it slide but he goes you know I was very iffy about the war in Libya. It's like I've read your columns at the time. No you [ __ ] warrants. Okay. Anyway, but he goes I was very iffy about the war in Libya but the war in Libya was fought because there was this tremendous fear that Gaddafi was about to go genocidal and it was a humanitarian intervention. And so then I said okay now they have slave markets in Tripoli. is humanitarian. But even but forget even the point that okay, maybe maybe their argument is they thought he was going to go genocidal and they didn't realize it would be so much worse without him. Like what? But I said, "Okay, Douglas, so riddle me this then. If it was a humanitarian intervention, how come I have fourstar general Wesley Clark telling me 10 years prior that we had already made the plans to go overthrow Gaddafi?" Because he said this very clearly to Amy Goodman on Democracy Now. And then I I mentioned that he later uh actually very recently on on Pierce Morgan he clarified uh this is really interesting if people go watch it. Scott Horton uh who is amazing by the way his book provoked is the best book on uh Russia US post collapse of the Soviet Union relations. His book uh enough already is the best book that's been written on the terror wars. So Scott Horton is debating Wesley Clark on Pierce Morgan. And this gets brought up, you know, the fact that you said in 2001 you had already seen in the Pentagon that we were going to overthrow seven countries in 5 years. And okay, so he says he goes, "Well, actually the plans go back to 1991 and I saw them first from Paul Wolawitz's office and then basically the plans got killed and then they were revived uh by Richard Pearl and a study paid for by the Israelis." This was fortar Wesley Clark's comments on it. So, I brought that up and I go, "Well, look, you're going to say that this is a um you know, a humanitarian intervention, but that seems strange because the plans to overthrow Gaddafi were already written many years earlier and then they had their opportunity and they did it. I think it was more than just a humanitarian intervention." And then his response is this thing about how Paul Wolfitz's name starts with an animal and ends Jewish. And it was kind of funny the way you said it, but then he just he went be careful what you're watering there because you can't, you know, there a lot of people are going to hate Jews if you just start bringing up Paul Wolfwitz's name. And I just could not believe, by the way, the end result of that is he had no response to what I was saying. He didn't have a response to why this Wolfwitz has an identifiably Jewish name. you're abetting anti-semitism by bringing it up even though he's a government official who helped get us into this war that killed a million people. Yeah. He's also in other places talked about how Paul Wolfwitz is like a hero in the in uh the Kurds in Iraq consider him a hero because he was the architect of the war that overthrew Saddam Hussein. But like I'm not allowed to mention him because that which is first of all it's just beside the point like forget what this will lead to. What's the truth? That's that's what matters. So, he's of course a very pro Kurdish, I would imagine. Yes. Yes. I'm sure. Yeah. Well, I actually have been there. Oh, have you? Yes, I have been there. And uh and I can say firsthand the most brutal people I've ever met in my life were Kurds. Like, actually, I saw it firsthand. So, I'm not against the Kurds or whatever, but I I it's just interesting. Everyone in Washington, no one's ever met a Kurd. Can't define what a Kurd is, but everyone reflexively loves the Kurds. And I' I've never had strong views about the Kurds, but again, I just want to say I've seen it in action in Iraq, and I was shocked by the Kurdish behavior personally. Yeah. Well, also, you know, it's uh it was all the people who are, you know, were were knocking Donald Trump in his first term when he wanted to pull out of Syria and they were like, "What about the Kurds? We can't betray the Kurds." And then those same people will tell you what a great President George HW Bush was, but we can't betray the Kurds, right? The guy who really betrayed the Kurds. I mean, told them to rise up against Saddam Hussein and overthrow him and then decided, "Ah, we're going to back off that and just allowed them allowed them to get slaughtered, you know, but and look, I mean, it was just kind of blatant. It's like I'm presenting an argument and you're responding with a pure woke tactic." Exactly. A pure woke tactic to say, which I, as I mentioned to him, I go, "But wouldn't this apply to everything you stand for?" I mean, everything you stand for about how we shouldn't have so much Muslim immigration into the UK. Okay. Well, someone could take that and that might lead to a rise in hatred of of Muslim people. But that's not a counterargument. That's not an argument. That's like, well, okay. Well, then maybe you could say you should also add in there, I don't mean all Jewish people are guilty of some conspiracy, but that first of Jewish and he's not. So, like, what the hell are you talking about? You said you're Jewish. So that gets me to I mean I don't think you've convinced Douglas that you're Jewish. So um true I saw that and read the commentary after and as someone who's always liked Douglas um and known him for a while. My first instinct was wow he just destroyed his career like he's done. Um no smart person will ever take Douglas seriously again. And I don't I don't know if he felt that way but it was clear by a day or two after he realized he destroyed his career. And in response, rather than admitting that and admitting what he'd done wrong, he attacked you. Really kind of doubled down in the New York Post. I want to read this cuz I was offended by this. Um, he goes, "The whole column is an attack on you." And I'm quoting, "Claiming some Jewish ancestry, Smith has spent the last 18 months since October 7th being very unfunny indeed, claiming some Jewish ancestry." Now, I'm not really sure. Well, I'm just going to I don't know why that just Oh, well. So, what do you claim some Jewish ancestry? I uh my mom and dad are probably the big ones. Uh but I do I do claim some Jewish ancestry. Um, but yeah, it's it's I mean it was so well first of all I joke which I'm not even the f cuz everyone made this joke already about the art, but he says I haven't been funny and I just Douglas has never been to one of my comedy shows so he should come and check it out and then he could tell me what he thinks. I think I'm pretty damn funny in my shows and the audience seems to think so. But I guess you're Jewish ancestry. You claim first of all he suggests that you're like a fake Jew. Yeah. Yeah. Claiming some Jewish ancestry. It's like you're hiding behind a cloak of Ursat's Judaism, which is in a way um you know, one of the things that I thought was so interesting about the piece uh was that and I couldn't imagine, man, I hope I'm never this person. Um because even now, right, like there's so there's so many shots I could take at Douglas, but even when you ask me about the debate, like my first instinct is to go like, well, look, here are the points I made that he didn't have counters to, cuz I'm about the argument, you like that's what actually matters and it's it's tough for all of us because there is as as you know well you've talked a lot about this right but it's like in this kind of show business news world where we're talking about events and things that matter but also there's a camera on us and we're talking on a microphone and we're we're public people and so it's kind of impossible to completely remove your ego and your own narcissistic tendencies from that but like you got to keep reminding yourself like yeah but there's a [ __ ] war going on like that's what actually matters. All of this is much less important than like the actual policy. So you try to focus on that. But I could not imagine writing an article about a debate that I had just been in where the reaction was so unfavorable toward me. And in the piece, what you might notice is he does not take on a single one of my arguments. He does not point out something that I got wrong. He does not say Dave argued this but this is so clearly a reflection of his lack of knowledge on this subject because he didn't account for X Y and Z. It's just once just like the actual debate. He would only debate me. He wouldn't debate the topic. We're always looking for cool companies that make products that make you feel better. And that's how we ran into Bond Charge. Bon Charge offers a wide range of products that improve your physical condition, help you sleep better, perform better, and center your mind, recover faster, maintain energy, etc., etc. They make blue light glasses, red light therapy, a lot of different products like this, and they help you address the trials of modern life effortlessly and naturally. Now, one of the things they make is a sauna. We could go on and be boring about sauna. Take one every single day. Bunchar makes a sleek infrared sauna blanket. It's got a similar effect to a finished sauna, but without the intense heat. It's an easy and comfortable 30-inut session you can enjoy while relaxing with your family, talking to people, reading, and it leaves you feeling refreshed and slightly euphoric, but in a good, healthy way. It's a great addition to your wellness routine. You may even drop a few pounds doing it. Bon Charge ships worldwide. Bond Charge is B O N C H A R G- E offers free shipping and allows for easy returns and exchanges. So go to bondcharge.com/tucker. Use the coupon code Tucker to save 15%. So why do you think he did it? I mean, he was basically It felt to me like he was sent on a kamicazi mission. That's the way it looked here. The guy just flies into your aircraft carrier, doesn't sink it, but it destroys his his plane, his career. I don't get it in a sense. I don't know. I don't think Douglas Murray destroyed his career. I think he destroyed his reputation. And so his reputation amongst the people, but his career is actually going to be fine. Much like Camala Harris's career is actually going to be fine. And I don't know, you know, I'm I'm speculating a little bit uh with this cuz there there really there was not almost any interaction off the podcast. Like Douglas Murray showed up five minutes later we were recording. He left immediately afterward and me and Rogan hung out for a so like there's nothing more that the viewer didn't see that I saw really hellos and goodbyes. Um but I think number one of my my guesses I'm speculating here is that he just didn't uh wasn't really prepared for me and it was like oh some a comedian will be on there and maybe he came in kind of confident that like he'll be able to handle me. I've had that happen a few times in in my career. I think it's happening less. I can't imagine he didn't like look into me before the debate, but maybe that's possible. But the feeling that I got as it was going on was kind of okay. I do you remember you I'm sure you do. You remember very well when Camala Harris was running for president. I know that seems like a long time ago, but that actually happened which is really crazy. It's like a dream sequence. Now, it's not just that Dick Cheney and Liz Cheney endorsed her, but she started bringing Liz Cheney out to campaign events and campaigning with Liz Cheney. Now, if you were just looking at this on paper, you'd go, "Okay, what demographic of voters is this for?" And you'd very quickly realize that that demographic doesn't exist. No. Are the leftists? They still remember her last name as Cheney. And especially with the the year that had preceded that, like they're kind of anti-war again and they're not really into like the idea of we've got a Cheney on our side. It's not going to win you. It's not going to get out your base. And then on the other side, I mean, she lost by like 50 points in her congressional run. I mean, she's it's not like you're bringing Republicans in. And so, I think the only thing you could conclude is that, oh, this isn't actually for the voters. There's somebody else who Camala Harris is talking to here. There's a power source that may be a little concerned about her and she's trying to let them know. Don't worry, I'm good for business. I've got Liz Cheney right here. That's kind of my assumption. It seemed to me with the Douglas Murray thing, he wasn't playing to the audience. He certainly wasn't trying to persuade Joe. No, he perhaps was talking to a different audience, which will make sure that his career is just fine going forward. That's the sense I got. If you want to make people paranoid and hateful, act like that. Well, again, look, there two things that I I really want to make sure I express. number one with the thing where he's this this claim some Jewish ancestry thing which by the way would be I think if you were to ever do this to say like a Jewish person who was on your side you would be like well that's a pretty anti-semitic thing to do right to like challenge their Jewishness because they disagree with a policy but what does your Jewishness have to do with it anyway well right that's the whole [ __ ] point and that you know it does I think it's basically like this I think that particularly when it comes to the Israel stuff, a lot of these guys don't know what to do with me. Because typically, as every American who's ever criticized Israel knows, you get labeled as being a Jew hater. Oh, you must be anti-Semitic. That's why you would say something like that. Like remember that horrible uh anti-semite Pat Buchanan who said that the Israel lobby wanted a war in Iraq? She just hates Jewish people. Like even though we all know that's true, when you say it, they go, "You're an anti-semite." That's like the game that they play. That's much tougher to do when you're talking to someone who's Jewish. And so in a in a sense that ends up being kind of a shield against the accusation. And so they want to remove that shield so that you don't have But the bottom line is that no one should have that shield. And I am Jewish. My mother and father are both Jewish. I am I think I was 86% Ashkanazi Jew on my DNA test. I think that's enough. But uh the point is it shouldn't matter. It shouldn't matter at all. You should anybody I'm talking about the behavior of nations by the way. Nations with militaries and parliaments, congresses, like these are countries and I what does this have to do? I mean well first of all and this isn't even the most important point but the American taxpayer is forced to pay for this stuff. So, but even if he wasn't, even if you didn't have to pay for it, if you're a human being, forget even an American. If you're a human being, you have a right to have an opinion on any issue you want to have an opinion on. This is what the left did during co. It was like, wait a second, it seems like this came, you're telling me it came from a penglin in a wet market, a fish market, a mammal sold in a fish market somehow, you know, was the genesis of this virus. But there was this level three bolab like a mile away. Maybe that was a source and they're like, "Ah, you hate Asians." It's like, and they claimed racism, so you couldn't pursue that line of inquiry. I see people like Douglas Murray, supposedly on the right, and there are a lot of others like Douglas Murray saying the same thing, like you can't you can't express an opinion about where your tax dollars go or about people dying or else you're a bigot. How is that different, right? Well, no, it's not. It's the same thing. It's the same kind of pathetic um tactic where if you can't if you can't argue against someone's ideas, you just say, "Oh, you're a bad person and that's why you have these ideas to begin with." It's it's a a very it's a very lowgrade like social psychology attempt to shame someone out of having the the views that they have. Um and yeah, it's exactly it's it's what the woke did on everything. It's no matter what it was. If anytime is a I don't I can't remember who coined the term but uh is a racist is anybody winning an argument against a progressive. Exactly. You know, it's that's it. And so he's doing the same thing. But then the other thing which is is really separate and secondary from that. But the argument that Douglas Murray is making is that if I call out Paul Wolawitz or even, you know, more broadly speaking, if I call out the neoonservatives, um, and how they hijacked American foreign policy and how they very much had Israel's interest in mind, which I I get from reading the neoconservatives. I don't get this from reading critics of them. It's from their in their own words, right? He'll he's saying me calling that out is fertile ground for Jew hatred to rise. And it's like, no, what you're doing is fertile ground. What you telling me I'm not allowed to call out the deputy defense secretary because his last name is Jewish. That's that's actually what leads to a rise in people not liking Jews. Couldn't agree more. And I do think Douglas, though he's not an expert or a genius, is smart enough to understand that, but he did it anyway. Yeah. And I don't know his motive, but in the moment that I think made me actually turn it off, I had to stop watching. Um, but it was most revealing of all is when he goes after Daryl Cooper, the historian, really one of the great historians of the United States, Daryl Cooper. Um, and doesn't know his name. Yeah. And but goes after him personally as like a Nazi or something. And let me just parathetically, and I'll shut up after this, but Dale Cooper is one of the kindest, most reasonable, most fundamentally liberal people I know. anti-Nazi people, you know, a guy who you could give your routing number to would never steal money. Yeah. A guy who, if he had absolute power, would kill nobody, like a truly decent Christian man. Basically called him a monster and didn't even know his name. And so that suggested to me that he was like briefed by somebody before, make sure you get in this Holocaust, which he's not, Daryl Cooper. Like what is that? Well, it's also, you know, if you're if you're smearing people who, which and Daryl wasn't the only one, but if you're smearing people whose like names you don't know and who you admit you've never listened to any of their their work, maybe don't put that right in the middle of an appeal to expertise, you know, like like maybe don't maybe have that in a different section than in the section where you're going, you really have to know what you're talking about in order to have an opinion on these things. And so that didn't that didn't work out very well. Dude, Daryl is a is an amazing guy. He is brilliant. His work is phenomenal. Um I know him personally and he's like genuinely a great person. He's a humane man. Yes. And it's it is something it's a comment on our time and on our society that the guy who essentially if you if you actually consume any of Daryl's work as I have consumed a lot of it basically Daryl's whole kind of um his template the way he operates is he's uh there's basically only like a couple rules and like number one is he has to read everything that's available on the subject. So he reads everything. The guy's a machine. His his depth of knowledge is like second to none. He just knows everything. And then number two is whenever you talk about history, basically his rule is that you have to understand that everyone involved is a human being, every one of them was a three-year-old at one point. So like totally innocent, like good little boy, like my three-year-old that I have at home. And that they grew up in real circumstances and real things happen to them. And if you're going to do history, you have to constantly be doing your absolute best to put yourself in this person's shoes and then put yourself in this person's shoes and then put yourself on this side of the conflict and then put yourself on this side of the conflict. That's basically it. He It's pure empathy. Like all and actually um as I've mentioned to you personally and I've told Daryl this personally, he is probably the best shot people have at dradicalizing people in in the worst form of being radicalized. He's the guy, listen, for me personally, and I thought I was pretty well read on the history of of Israel Palestine. And he has this this incredibly long series, like a 30-hour series called Fear and Loathing in the New Jerusalem. And like the thing is, I knew most of what I knew, not all of it, but most of what I had read about with the Israeli Palestine conflict, like most people, was like starts in 1947, 1948, and then goes up to today. his series is about it's like from the 1890s until 1947. So he's talking about the creation of the state from Zionism being created to the state being created and going rehearsal to Bengurian. Right. Right. Exactly. That's that's basically the the whole, you know, he has a little bit where he's talking about the pgrams that preceded, you know, the Zionists, but that's really the the story. And it actually made me much more sympathetic to the Zionists. You know, as somebody who grew up kind of in that propaganda, in the pro-Israel propaganda, then ultimately turned on it and became a critic of Israel. Listening to his series, you understand. It just puts you in the position and you do understand like, oh, okay, these were real men who were reacting to the circumstances of their day. you can kind of understand why a lot of them wanted to do this. By the way, it's pretty amazing that they pulled it off. However you feel about however you feel about what the government of Israel is doing, it's amazing that they did this. And yet, look, and of course, for the one, this is why I say it's a comment on our time. So, there's one guy here who's going like, "Listen, you got to like really completely educate yourself on a subject and then you have to have empathy toward all sides." And then everyone goes, "Nazi? That guy's a Nazi." I mean, that's what it is to be a Nazi in 2025. It's just so funny. I'm too old for a lot of this stuff. And so, I thought, you know, among the many lessons, great lessons of the Second World War that I I mean, I grew up marinating in, you dehumanizing people is bad. Treating them like treating human beings like they're not human is bad. And I I still believe that. I think it's the core of Christianity. And but it's also just the core of any civil society, any decent society. And that's what Daryl is trying to do. Yeah. And I don't know that I've ever heard anybody try and take apart his his, you know, factual analysis. It's always it always immediately goes to motive. You're a Nazi. Shut up. You're a Holocaust den or just claim, right? Or claiming he said something that isn't at all what he said. Like he downplayed the atrocities the No, he didn't. It's also um but but why why should Daryl Cooper um and by the way a number of my friends, people I really like have been involved in this like their authority has been marshaled to destroy Daryl Cooper and I grieve to see it cuz it's you know they're paid to do it and it's so degrading to them and dishonest and sad. But why? Daryl Cooper's like this one guy living in the Pacific Northwest. Why spend all this time and energy to destroy him? Well, I love uh you said this um I forget a few years ago. I can't remember what it was where you said this, but it was you and I this really hit home with me. And this isn't like and you weren't suggesting that this is like a proof. This isn't like a like a a irrefutable logical argument. It's kind of like a guide, but you know, you said the thing about you could tell when something's infected because you touch it and you recoil and you go, "Something's going on there." Now, what exactly is it? Now, it's that doesn't prove what's going on, but look, you can't. The fact that Daryl's moment on on your podcast sitting right here where I'm sitting got such a reaction Yes. really demonstrates something like something and and you see that it's like, oh, you touched on like a third rail. Oh, hurt dog barks. Yes. Well, and and in the same way when you uh had first uh questioned the morality of dropping nuclear weapons on on cities and then there's this big freak out over that and now nobody here has said, "Hey, the Nazis were the good guys. The Nazis didn't commit any atrocities." No one's even downplaying no one even made the argument that I remain anti-Nazi for the work for the record. But I'm saying like no one even made the argument that like it was 5.9 million, not six, you know, like there's nothing this this topic hasn't even been broached. No, but what what you are attacking is really the underpinning of the origin story of the American Empire. Exactly. And that's what you're not allowed to question because and you see it the way every every defender of every war, including the current one, if you can call it a war going on in Gaza, I'm not sure war is exactly the right term to describe it. destruction of of a captive people. Um, but every single person who defends it will always invoke World War II at one point. Not even arguing that like not even making an argument that this is why it was justified in World War II. Just like we did it in World War II. We did it in World War II and we're the good guys. So good guys are allowed to slaughter entire peoples. You know, it's like it is the and and look, even if you even if you accept the official World War II story as being completely correct, it's still something that's used to justify all of these other indefensible wars. Every war of my lifetime, and I doubt too many people really want to defend the ones in between World War II and when I was born, you know, like I I don't think anyone's going like, "Look at Vietnam. It did such a great such a good thing that we did that." and those who are attempting to defend it are pathetic. But, you know, Iraq and Libya and Syria and Afghanistan and um even the ones when I was a little kid, you know, Serbia, every one of these guys they always said was Adolf Hitler. Mallich is Adolf Hitler. Saddam Hussein is Adolf Hitler. Gaddafi is Adolf Hitler. Noriega is Adolf Hitler. Every bad guy has always been It's like they use this model to justify. You're only ever allowed to learn the lesson in history that's like Chamberlain was an appeaser, appeasing bad. Exactly. Confrontation good. As if that's as if the lessons of history are that aggression is always correct. Trying to work out a deal is always wrong. Yes. And that's why I think it's so important to attack that narrative. Yeah. And from my perspective, it's like not even about principle as much as it is effect. If what we're doing was working, then I I guess I wouldn't be interested in, you know, analyzing it so critically. But it's not working. It hasn't worked for the West, which I love. It's where my ancestors are from. It's where my children live. So, it's like, I don't know. I think it's fair to ask like, how did we get here? It's all falling apart. Why? And maybe the assumptions were bad. And what are those assumptions? Well, they're rooted in that war. As you said, it's just interesting that anyone would want to defend that. Like, I don't really I still don't get the motive. Maybe I never will. Like, why would you want to defend any of that? Why would you want to defend Dresden or Gaza or any things that America did? By the way, it's not attacking not it's not attacking Israel. It's I'm attacking the US government, which I pay for, which my ancestors helped build. Like, yeah. Why Why would you ever want to defend bad things? Well, it is um you know there there is a tendency by people who if you're if you're pulling away like the underpinnings in someone's entire worldview, they usually get very defensive. You're right. You're totally right. I've been there, by the way. I've been there. So that I have felt defensive when I first heard Alex Jones question 9/11. I was outraged by I was totally outraged by it. And so I in a in a reflexive stupid way. Well, I remember um just because I was like very um on I was very on board with the Ron Paul presidential campaigns. This was my like radicalizing moment was was Ron Paul running for president and I remember that you were hosting the uh the event that he had. I can't remember what it was called but very well. It was the Rally for the Republic. The Rally for the Republic. I should have 2008. I was the MC of that. Yes. So at the time it was a really big deal for us that we had you mcing it and because it was like Ron Paul was getting blacked out in all the the you know mainstream media as we used to call it at the time. Uh, and but we had Tucker Carlson. We had like one of the big players in that world hosting the event and I remember um when you walked out well you it I saw like an interview with you where someone was like hey why did you walk out of that event and you were like I don't know man the the saying 911 wasn't inside job stuff was just a bridge too far for me and honestly I totally understood that at the time I was just pissed off at um Jesse Ventura cuz I was like come on dude we actually got like a chance here to make a mark and then you're going to go you know start spouting out with these conspiracies He believed it. I mean, I think Jess, even just a whole rabbit hole I won't even go down, but I think I don't know what happened to that guy. Sure is a very flawed guy. Um, for sure. We're all flawed people. I'm a little less judgmental than I used to be. Um, now that I know the depth of my own shittiness, but which I think is important. Yeah. Meditate every day on your death and your own flaws and you'll be a happy person with better perspective. But, um, I I shouldn't have done that. I don't I don't know why, you know, was so my views are so different. But anyway, the point is I understand what you're saying. Well, it's also that you you know, it's not even it's not even necessarily that you would have to like all these years later be convinced that he was right. It's just I think after so many years of seeing how evil the our government actually can be that you go like, "Okay, I'm listening. All right, fine. I I dismissed that out of hound, but now I'm more or how about the only question that matters is whether or not something is true." Yeah. And another way to put it, a phrase that I've coined in and make copyright is facts don't care about your feelings. That's a good one. You like that? Someone should really run with that. You could get a long way. You could get like a special deal with Facebook on that on the basis of that. Um but uh but but I actually agree with I agree with that, right? And I agree. I don't think you should hurt people's feelings on purpose, but I think the the core question, the only one that matters is is something true. And I know that you share that. And that's why and I I hate to beat up on poor Douglas who's like a sad a sad character, but he had this line in here. Oh, this isn't Sorry, I never go to my notes, but I'm No, I This is from a guy called Sam Harris. I'm loosely familiar. So, one of the easiest decisions you're going to make this week is to make your home secure with Simply Safe. The moment you arm your system, your family, and everything you work for is protected, and you can focus on what matters. You can leave the house without worrying that someone is going to break in and steal your stuff, violate your sanctuary because the best security system in the country is watching. Millions of Americans use Simply Safe and enjoy the peace of mind it creates. Now, a traditional burglar alarm only goes off when someone breaks into your house. That's not good enough. Smashed a window, was already in your basement. Simply Safe prevents burglaries before they happen. It's got AI powered cameras and live professional monitoring agents, so it leaves nothing to chance. Plans start at about a dollar per day, plus a 60-day satisfaction guarantee, or you get your money back. Check it out at simplysafe.com/tucker. Go to simplysafe.com/tucker to get 50% off a new system with professional monitoring and your first month free. That's simplysafe.com/tucker. There is no safe like Simplysafe. So Sam Harris, um, wow, he doesn't care for you at all. or it looks like me either, but whatever. I'll ignore the stuff about me. I'm not even exactly sure who Sam Harris is, but um a sad atheist guy, but he describes you as a pure misinformation artist who lies as freely as he breathes. And I just thought as I read this, you can say, you know, Dave Smith, I don't know, whatever. But I I feel like that's the opposite of the truth. I feel like maybe you lie under duress, but in general you you are like very focused on what you think is true. Well, I mean, again, I just feel like it's a I I benefit in a way from us having this conversation like after co and after kind of all of these insane things that Okay, so Sam Harris, what did I get wrong? Like I don't think that if you're gonna if you're gonna smear me as I'm being a misinformation art, which I you know I'll take that to I should make t-shirt t-shirts about misinformation artist. I'll take that. Pure misinformation. Pure misinformation. Everything you say is a lie. It's like breathing to you. Dude, I got I got called that throughout all of CO and I was right about everything I was saying. So keep calling me this. Okay, fine. Make an argument. What have I said that's wrong? Why does he Why is he so mad at you? Oh, he Well, Sam, he's a rationalist, right? Oh, yeah. Yeah. He's the guy who uh defended the war in Iraq and torture and uh fell for the Russia gate [ __ ] Thought Trump was a Russian spy, fell for lockdowns and vaccine mandates and all this stuff. So, I'll put my misinformation track record up against Sam Harris's, you know, whatever. I mean, I know he's got a meditation app or something like that, but did you see the Tim Dylan thing the other day? Oh, so dude, it's so great. That was like I texted him. I saw that funny. He Tim Dylan the brilliant comedian. Think about how Sam Harris is a meditation app. I didn't even know that. So by day he's a he's a meditation guru and by night he's encouraging like carpet bombing of children. I mean it's just on it's just too ridiculous. and you know all you know all of these guys it's it's sad in a way because they're it's you just you can't contradict yourself on what your entire like purpose was for your entire career without some people noticing and that's kind of what's going on with all these why the emotion so I notice it even now in our conversation you are there's a lightness to the way you describe things um you obviously have passionate views But you don't seem emotionally overroought. Douglas seemed emotionally overroought. This guy Harris seems emotionally overroought. They seem very emotional. What is that? Well, I mean, I would say that um kind of ironically, although not really actually ironic, and this kind of goes to, you know, the conversation that you and Brett Weinstein were having the other day, who I really love Brett. I think he's he's great. Um, I'm on your side of that debate. But I think one of one of the fundamental flaws in atheism is that it doesn't really exist. Yes. They think that's the flaw in believing in God. No, they see they think they think the flaw in believing in God is that God really doesn't exist. God does exist. What doesn't exist are atheists. There's no such thing. So true. And you could even get into an like maybe if there was such thing as atheists, it would be a good thing to be one. But there aren't. They don't exist. They all have their religion. And it's it's almost it it's almost by definition that whatever your highest thing is becomes your religion. Um I don't know if it's quite by definition. And I suppose it is it is theoretically possible to be an atheist, but almost no one ever is. And so what you're seeing is just that, you know, I'm attacking their religion and according to them that makes me guilty of blasphemy. But it's just so interesting that they're so brittle about it. You'd think if you're an atheist, you'd be like, does it really matter? I mean, there's no right or wrong obviously cuz how can the authority on that? Well, there is no authority. So it's all just a matter of preference and in the end you just cease to exist. And so the stakes are zero. So what are you so mad about? Like why do you care? You'd think everyone would be like, "Well, how I'll take it a step further. Sam Harris does not believe in free will. So what is he upset with me about? I have no choice. I have to be a misinformation artist. This is what I'm I'm wired to be a misinformation artist. Right. So what are you upset with? And he's not even making the choice to say that. listen anytime and this was one of I again I really really like Brett but I think one of the the areas where he failed kind of in that uh conversation with you in that you know very friendly debate is that he had to say several times throughout it yes I live as if what you're saying is correct but I view things this way so yes I'd much rather live but if your if your like thesis involves you having to engage engage in a performative contradiction, then something's not right with your theory. And so Sam Harris will sit here and say, "None of us have free will, but I'm still going to act as if all of us have free will." You've got a major flaw in your theory that like this is just too much. This is this is too f you can't do that. That's not right. And so yes, again, with all of them, the the bottom line, I think, with a lot of these people like and some have adapted better than others. I think Brett's one of the ones who's really adapted well from like the old academia world to this new podcast world that we're in now. But I think the problem with a lot of them like uh like Sam Harris and and I think Douglas Murray too is that what they've worked their entire career on has been completely rejected and that's a tough position to be in. Um but it's not really I mean I spent my whole life in cable news. It you know obviously is in terminal decline. And I had all kinds of views that I argued for passionately that were totally wrong. I admitted it. I gained perspective and humility humility in admitting it. You're just a human being. Yeah, but that listen, you that may have happened kind of naturally for you. I'm just saying when you run it on scale, very few people are able to do that. It's not hard. It's it's it's the only act of liberation that's really possible in this life is freeing yourself from like the lies. And the number one lie is I'm God. Yeah. And like I'm omnisient or the, you know, was perfectly wise person, whatever. It's like, you know, you make mistakes. You're you're a ridiculous primate. It's a little fur. Like, just admit it. There's just there. Look, you got some things wrong. Yeah. But there's a difference between that and your entire foundation being built on hypocrisy and that hypocrisy being shown. You know, look, I mean, you can't make this stuff up, right? Ben Shapiro built a career opposing identity politics as a proud Zionist. Yeah. You listen, feel however you feel about Zionism. It's identity politics. Like, like that is the definition of you could not find a better example of a politics built on an identity. And yet you're out here saying facts don't care about your feelings. Identity politics is wrong. And then while you're saying that, your number one priority, I know, is this this manifestation of identity politics. You can only keep that charade going for so long. No, it's totally true. before someone sees through it. There's something in people that the the lowest part of people that instinctively accuses others of doing what they're doing. And I've never really I man I don't that's the one thing I don't want to be is a guy who does that but I remember Bill Crystal who I worked for for years and really liked and was grateful to and he was a great boss in the 90s um and came out against me and called me a Nazi and all this stuff like without calling me by the way I called him and asked him to lunch he refused he wouldn't go to lunch with me end of our relationship but one of the criticisms against me I'll never forget it when I realized this phenomenon was real was when he accused me of advocating and I'm quoting for an ethnostate Now, I have a lot of flaws. They're all in display. I've never wanted an ethnostate. And it's like, wait, one of us is for an ethnostate, and it's not me. But you just said that like of all the possible criticisms. It's just too unbelievable. I mean, it's like unbelievable. You're crystal accusing me of wanting an ethnostate, but you like you just like you almost like don't even you can't even respond. You just have to go like, "Hey." It's like I I didn't say anything. I was like, "Okay, right." Yes. You know, I people can't hear themselves. I mean, you know, when people get old, they you know, they tell the same stories and you just, you know, when you love them, you're indulgent. But I I just hope that doesn't happen to me. I hope I don't lose all self-awareness to the point where I've got like lunch on my chin and like accuse other people of doing exactly what I'm doing. Exactly what I'm doing. Well, you're going you have lunch on your chin. Like you, you know. Yeah. That's you don't want to be there. I don't want to be that guy. Um, and I think that there's like look, obviously like we're we're living through something, you know, we're probably living through several things that are very profound, but one of the most profound things has been this revolution in in um information and the technology and this it's led to this like kind of mass decentralization of media and where there's now like there's so many things and shows and different voices, you know, we I find people all the time who have never heard of before. You know, I'm sure you've had this experience, too. You'll find someone you'll be like, "Oh, that guy's actually really smart. People should know about this guy. How many followers? 7 million. Oh, he's got 7 million. Oh, he's huge. Like, I just found some guy who is bigger than anyone on cable news. And I didn't even know he existed, you know." And so now it's just because of this dynamic there aren't you know as you know the the corporate media apparatus like big newspapers and big cable news shows and was very controlled very controlled the range of allowable opinion was very narrow it's what uh my uh my good friend and brilliant historian Tom Woods uh always called the uh was it the the 3x6 card of allowable opinion you know you get this area of allowable opinion and then that's where the conversation takes place. That's been shattered into a million pieces and now there's voices from all over the place and some good and some great and some bad and really bad. But it's just much harder for people to you know that control existed so that you don't get exposed so that you don't get expos so that you could go like look even the right-winger John McCain agrees or even the far-left activist Nancy Pelosi I mean it's like dude have to hear Sean Hannity goes the far left Nancy Pelosi it's like how many leftists have you actually talked to in your life how many leftists have you ever read you think Nancy Pelosi is a far-left it like really they got her vineyard in Napa. All these different, you know, these different tools of corporations are left and right. But so that's over now. And now I think it's just much it's much tougher to keep this charade going. And it seems to be collapsing so fast. Yes. Yes. And it's not again, you could you could be honest about it and and kind of maintain some of your respect, but the the truth is that like look, even when they'll say these things like if you if you accuse Ben Shapiro of having dual loyalty, they go, "Well, that's an anti-semitic trope. That means you hate the Jews." But then he'll sit there in his own words and say, I forget his exact quote, but it was something like, "My favorite thing about the United States of America is that it protects Israel." And so, you're already saying you have loyalty to both of these countries. In fact, I'm not so sure about the one of the loyalties, but I'm very sure about the other one. And that is not I'm sorry, that's not a statement against Jewish people. I'm Jewish. I love Jewish people. You know, it's like I I get called a self-hating Jew on Twitter or whatever. It could not be further from the truth. I actually really love Jewish people. There's many things about Jewish culture that have, you know, had a huge impact on me, made me the person I am, made me a better person uh for their their impact on me. But this is a foreign government. Like I'm I'm sorry. That's we're we're allowed to talk about that if you you know, I saw Glenn Beck the other day had uh Douglas Murray on and he wasn't like Glenn Beck wasn't like mean to me personally, but which I appreciated. Um, but he was just going I mean it was just so ridiculous. But it's like you were sitting here. We're going to we're having a conversation about a foreign government. You started crying on your show talking about this foreign government. That's [ __ ] weird. That's weird. We We should not be doing that. What the hell is going on here? Like I don't even think you should cry about our own government, you know? But if you're going to cry about one, it should be ours. And no, but no one would even think to cry about our own, right? I mean, like, come on. like let let's have a real conversation about this and if you don't especially and by the way this is not my primary goal. My primary goal is to tell the truth and to advocate for what's good for our country. Um but if you're concerned about like the young men getting a little bit too radical and and you know being too obsessed with the Jews or too against the Jews which I do think is a legit concern. It definitely is. You know that's not good for you and it's it's not good for you. It's not good for the conflict. It's not good for the country. I just don't think any of racial collectivism always leads to bad places. You don't want to you don't want to embrace that stuff. But if you're concerned about that, well then the first thing you have to do is tell the truth. You can't keep lying to people and you can't you can't keep sitting here and going like, "Oh, no. The neoconservative." You can't say neoconservative, right? Wasn't that Mark uh Levin? Didn't he uh just say if the neo concern Mark Levin who's a who I also know I mean I've been in right-wing world my whole life I know everybody I work with Mark always got along with Mark always been nice to me but yeah he just accused Trump the Trump administration of anti-semitism for calling someone a neocon well what he what he did was he accused Steve Witoff of anti-semitism right and I just want to say I think Steve Wickoff is if there's anyone who is you know has the hand of odd on him. It seems to me, I sort of overstate it, but I feel that way. It's Wickoff who's like a thoroughly decent man and who was running around the world trying to bring peace. And also, by the way, nations who single-handedly saved 20 Jewish hostages. Well, exactly. I mean, I don't know if they were all Jewish. I think most of them were. I think almost all of them were, but I think they got 20 hostages released in the phase one of the ceasefire that he worked out. Then Israel violated the ceasefire and so they didn't get the other hostages back, although thankfully the the American was just released. But this guy, Wickoff, has actually done more to help those hostages. So, here's what I mean, here's what he said. I actually wrote this down cuz I was I was really bothered by it. Um, this is Levin on Twitter, Mark Levin, who works at Fox, which is like basically seems to have turned his programming over to advocating for a war with Iran. Um, neocon is a pjorative for Jew. Unbelievable. And this is in response to Wickoff saying, quote, "The neocon element believes that war is the only way to solve things." So you have Mark Levin calling Steve Witoff an anti-semite. Right. Right. And again, we've reached Pete Crate. I mean, I think Wickoff is Jewish. Right. Again, but it's I I don't even know, but again, it shouldn't matter. It shouldn't really matter. It doesn't matter. He's American and he's on the side of peace and so I'm for that guy. Um, but you know the crazy thing, so I also I I at one point in the debate with Douglas Murray, I said something about the neoconservatives and he went, "Ah, the n-word, you know, the," you know, making a play on the n-word or whatever. And it's it's interesting. I mean, Doug Murray wrote the book called Neoconservatism, Why We Need It. It was his book. And so what happened was for people who don't like know you know a lot about this it's there there was a this was their term neoonservative was not a porative term until the neoonservatives got control of our foreign policy and ruined everything and then it became a term that we'll we'll call every war hawk we'll be like oh another neocon now a lot of times we will use the term when strictly speaking this person may not have been a self-identified neoconservative it's just become a pard a porative for someone trying to get us into stupid war. But the neoconservatives themselves, the original group, this was their name for themselves. And you, right, you were there. You worked alongside them. I worked for them. I worked for Bill Crystal for 5 and a half years. I was a neocon. Yes. It wasn't in. And they had no Episcopalian neocon. But look, they had no problem using the term until everybody started to hate them. And then they went, you can't call us this. But it's like, no, you guys, like this was your own term that you used for yourself. You can read their own documents and the project for a new American century. You read the clean break memo. They laid out what they wanted their foreign policy to be. I mean, literally, right? Wasn't it um oh god, I can't remember whose quote it was. I know that um a bunch of them loved sharing it, but what is it that every 10 years we got to throw a small puny little country up against the wall and show them who's boss? This was their foreign policy. We need multiple theaters of war in the Middle East in order to ensure the new century is an American century. So immoral and disgusting. Yes. And also that and look as anybody can read, I think we talked about this last time I was on, but anybody can read for themselves the clean break memo. It was written by Richard Pearl and David Worms to Benjamin Netanyahu that was like, "Look, here is our plan." And the break was from the peace process. The break was from Oslo. And they go, "Look, here's the plan." And you know how Yeetszak Rabin and all these liberal uh Jews are saying we have to make peace with the Palestinians so that we can then make peace with the broader Arab world? Well, no. We got a new plan. We're going to break with all of that. We're not doing this land swap thing. We're not giving the Palestinians a state. What we'll do is we'll have America overthrow all of these other governments. That way you never have to make peace with the Palestinians and you can just enjoy domination over the region. And I from my reading of it, it does seem to me that a lot of them believed it. You know, I think a lot of them hubris and you know, yeah. Yeah. We overthrow Saddam Hussein, this will democracy will sweep the region, then we'll overthrow Gaddafi, then we'll overthrow the Mullers in Iran, and then the region will be way better. Except every time they actually did it, it resulted in nothing but disaster, which really could have been very easily predicted and was predicted by wiser people than the neocons. But all these years later, you either have to like apologize for your role in this catastrophe or defend your role in this catastrophe and talk about how you still really believe it was the right thing to do. But you can't sit here and say you're not an expert and you're a Jew hater if you say the word neoconservative. That's not an appropriate response. But if if Mark Levin is calling the Trump administration anti-semitic, Steve Wickoff, we're at the end of something and the beginning of something new. I mean, that's right. Right. I mean, I that's so I almost called Mark when I saw it cuz I I really I know him, but I really love Steve Wickoff and I think his decency I don't agree with him on everything at all, but his decency is just palpable. I mean, it just comes through. his concern for people, his reasonableness, uh, is just so obvious and the effects of what he's done have been so great. Great for America, great for the world. So, I almost I was so offended and then I thought, I'm not going to solve anything by calling Mark Levin and scolding him, probably scream at me. But, but I did think like he's not stupid. If you're saying if you're calling Steve Wickoff an anti-semite on Twitter, like you know you're losing, right? Is that what that is? And it's such a um you know in the what's what's weird is that at the same time because I know all of these these people will they'll be lecturing me about how I don't understand like the gravity of anti-semitism and it's like no actually I kind of do and I would never just throw the accusation around like that. I'm very hesitant to ever call any person a bigot or a Jew hater or or racist or any of these things because it's like you're you're intentionally trying to to dehumanize them on the accusation that they're dehumanizing others. Scaring the crap out of people. I'm getting texts from people I really love personally who are very very, you know, who aren't paying a lot of attention. and they just hear that there's anti-semitism and I'm part of it and hurts their feelings and they're confused and upset and it's like it it has such a divisive effect. Yeah. Like for real and it's I'm a little bit concerned. Okay, so it's time for an intervention. All your loved ones are here and we're here to tell you it is time to stop overpaying for your phone. Verizon, AT&T, T-Mobile, there's a way better way to do this. It's called Pure Talk. Pure Talk is a wireless company created by Americans for Americans. It offers reliable coverage, excellent service, and it's the smart way to cut costs without giving up quality. Qualifying plans start at just 35 bucks a month. You get unlimited talk, texted, 15 gigs of data, a mobile hotspot on the most dependable 5G network in the United States. And if you join today, they throw in a Samsung Galaxy for free. Actually, for free. There's no weird hidden fees or charges that you don't see at first. Legitimately free, no dollars. So, do yourself a favor. Cut your cell phone bill in half at least with Pure Talk. Go to pure talk.com/tucker to claim your free Galaxy Samsung phone with a qualifying plan. We can tell you it's a good deal and you'll be happy you did it. Yeah, I mean, I'm I'm concerned about all of it. Um, none of it's particularly good. But there's also something which is it's interesting to me as somebody who is uh I am not a conservative. I mean, I'm a bit of a right-winger, but I'm not a conservative. Um, I'm kind of a radical libertarian, and I kind of, you know, if Tom Tillis is what a conservative is, then I'm not Yeah. Right. I mean, I mean, there are some, as a libertarian, like there certainly are some things that I think ought be conserved, you know, like I I think like the Bill of Rights and the and our traditions and I think Christianity. I think there's a lot of things that like should be conserved, but it's so bizarre to me to that now that I'm at this level where it's like I'm I'm talking or not talking to but being lectured to by like the leaders of Conservatism, Inc. and I have to explain to them that like I don't believe in moral relativism. Like I like as if this is like a new thing for them to wrap their head around. And you've gotten calls from Khan, Inc. trying to bring you into line. I've I've gotten for the first time in my career really I've gotten a few of the calls. Um but I mean it's it's I'm too far gone for them. You know if I if you were going to get me to sell out you would have had to get me a while ago. You just shouldn't have let me too late. Well it is I remember so when I this is like I want to say like 20 2014 2015 it was somewhere in there. um where I start the first time I ever got on television, the first person who ever put me on TV was Kennedy. Um who I just adore and will for the rest of my days. Sweet girl. Just like one of the sweetest, kindest, really funny, really smart, weirdly smart, but like when I say weirdly smart, I I mean weirdly smart, like knows about stuff that no one should know about and then has like a lot of information about it. But she's a wonderful person. So she was a she put me on Fox uh business and then um Greg Gutfeld and Tom Shaloo who was hosting Red Eye at the time, they started using me on their Fox News shows and so it was like the first time in my career I'd like started getting on TV and I remember a few people at Fox had told me that they were like hey there's uh like some people in management are like interested in you like they're they're taking you know some interest in you. Um, and then it was kind of explained to me, not like ever directly, but it was like, you know, you're you're a little out there for Fox News. And I remember at the time I was broke. I mean, dead broke only on just to be I put a finer point on that. What do they mean? Not in your personal life. Your personal life more button down than most people who are Well, at the time it wasn't. This is before I was married and had kids and stuff, but that's not what they care about. They don't care. I found out pretty quickly uh by just doing shows at Fox News and then going to the bar afterward with some of the people there, you're like, "Oh, Conservatism, Inc. is not exactly what you thought." They're actually pretty liberal uh when it comes down to the bar hang after the show, I would say. But but it was, you know, I was a Ron Paul guy and and I was I was younger, so I was a a more you know, you know, Ron Paul was a country doctor wearing a suit and tie. I was like a kid from Brooklyn who was like, "You're all a bunch of killers." You know, like this is all [ __ ] the foreign policy stuff. It was all the foreign policy stuff as it always is. As it's that's always what it's really all about. Um, and I don't say that cuz I want it to be the case. It's just the fact that that's always really what it's all about. Took me 40 years to figure this out. But yes, that's right. You're correct. By the way, all these uh all of these even debates today, the people on Twitter talking about the woke right, it just happens to be that everyone who's labeled woke right are the ones who are opposing American wars. And everybody who's throwing out the accusation all happen to support them. What's winced? It's a nonsense term that they're trying to say. It's it's totally ridiculous. But but let me just uh on the Fox News thing. So I remember then and this is I was broke. I mean like broke like where they're like hey let's go grab a beer after the show. I'm like, "All right, are you buying? Cuz I can't cuz if not, like, let's go grab a six-pack at the store and go back to my apartment and cuz like I just had no money." And I would have at the time when they said they were like, "Look, they're thinking about you for one of these contributorships, you know, it was whatever it is, it may give you like 100 grand a year or something like that if you get one." It would have been like life-changing for me. Life-changing. And I remember consciously at the time thinking, you know, at a time when I'm making 25 grand a year, thinking, man, maybe I just don't talk about the foreign policy stuff. Maybe I just do that. And then even in the moment I thought about it, just being like, nah, Ron Paul's my hero. My hero are the people who tell the truth. Yes. So like, I'm just not going to. But so if I didn't if I didn't sell out then, the idea that I'm going to sell out now when I'm doing really well, it's like no, that's ridiculous. Like no, you know what I'm saying? Like it's like that's that's insane. It was just funny that I think that um that Murray thought he was administering the kill shot. I think that's what it was supposed to be. But the opposite happened. It's like I I and not to brag, I knew this as I was watching it. I was like, Dave is about to become way more famous, but not just famous, more authoritative, more respected, more closely listened to than ever before. Has that been your experience? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's it's essentially just done nothing except make me bigger, you know. And were you Did you pay Douglas to do that? I did not. I don't have that type of money. The fight on purpose. I don't I wish I had that. I'm doing okay. I don't have money like that. I don't have buy off Douglas Murray uh money. I think he's I don't think it would take too much. Well, he's it it's not just, you know, one of the things that was interesting is that it's not just So, there was the debate. There was the reaction to the debate, but then what was really interesting is that then there was the reaction to just because it became such a big thing, it ended up coming up on Rogan's podcast with other guests like later on and they're all just kind of making fun of of Douglas and how ridiculous he was cuz he was ridiculous. And then it's almost like you see the realization set in with those people that oh [ __ ] Joe was what what essentially happened here, right? And this is I think for almost everyone to see is that I've been debating all these guys on Israel Palestine and I've been beating all these guys in these debates and I'm I'm not saying I'm beating I'm just saying like the reaction the Oxford style voting is that I I win dominantly and then Douglas Murray was almost brought in as the the boss dad's here right like this is the I mean Ben Shapiro is not going to do it he's not going to come debate me and so who is it who's the best guy to come do well here's Douglas Murray the guy who's just known for his pros and his rhetoric and how good he is at debating. I mean, this is what he's known for. And then he came in and couldn't lay a land a blow. He couldn't take on one argument. He had to just be resorted to like it. It was like you were debating an anti-racist college professor on what who's just going to tell you the whole time that I'm not even allowed to have this opinion. It was just that. And so then what do you think the response to that was? Here's here you have Joe Rogan who has got some of these guys on his show who clearly are making a care. goes, "All right, yeah, this is a pretty good argument that this guy's making." And he brought, you know, as much as Douglas was complaining in his his op-eds after the fact that it's so unfair that I couldn't just go on alone. I had to go on with this guy who doesn't know what he's talking about. It's like, yeah, but this was your opportunity, man. You could have blown me out of the water and then had Rogan being like, "Ah, [ __ ] Maybe I should have more experts on. like maybe I've got this comedian guy who I think's making really good points, but then this guy just came in and like totally took him on and but he was unwilling or unable to do that. And so that was the next freak out is they realize that like oh Joe just got pushed more in my direction as his whole audience did. I wonder though if there's not something a little more sinister underneath it. I mean you keep referring to this as debate but it wasn't of course it was not a debate. It was Douglas trying to scold Joe into never having you or anyone like you on his show again. It was basically he was playing the heavy a little bit. It was kind of threatening. I thought like you know you don't really know because you were a sitcom actor/ comedian/bo hunter that actually you're playing with some pretty serious [ __ ] Joe Rogan and we've been watching and maybe you should stop having these people on. I mean that was definitely the vibe I got from it. Oh, no question. It was they even used the word um when he was talking to uh Barry Weiss um you know that embodiment of expertise uh that is Barry Weiss uh they they were talking and he used the word platforming that Joe shouldn't be platforming all of these people. It's like okay so you're you're look I I'm saying this is just Animal Farm. We're at the end of Animal Farm where the pigs and the people are indistinguishable. Like if you're a conservative using the word platform as a verb. Yeah. like how long before you call me a white supremacist actually which essentially I guess white supremacist isn't the term but anti-semite is the term that they're going with. It's the exact same playbook. It's and then they have the balls to whip around and call you woke right. Yes, that's right. I'm like it's Bill Crystal calling me a you know calling for an ethnostate. Yes. It's it's all the same thing. Right. You're sitting here there we have in this country right now we have speech laws being passed you know in the name of students feeling not safe on college campuses and you get the accusation of bigotry used to shut down real disscent and real conversations and then they're going to turn around and say the other side is woke. So that's when I stopped laughing. That I mean that is um shocking to me. And the fact that the Congress had scheduled it was thanks to Marjorie Taylor Green. It was pulled off the schedule. But God bless her. But um what a weird world we're in. Where she is the savior. Marjorie Taylor Green is who that's where we're at. You know why? Because Marjorie is totally sincere. Yeah. She's actually not a liar. She's sincere. That's why I hate her. Uh but but there was a bl vote scheduled on a bill that would have made it a felony for Americans to participate in a boycott of Israel and is someone who has zero interest in participating in any kind of boycott, much less against Israel. I'm just not interested. I'm happy whatever buy the hummus and use the software. I I don't care. Um, but I probably would have engaged in one just to make the point that I'm a free man in a free country and we can't like how could you even consider voting on something like that? And isn't the most outrageous part of it or at least to me I mean I guess it's all outrageous but the most the crazy thing is that we've and we've seen this in uh in the last decade where all like Hollywood types and like big musicians would boycott red states like if they tried to pass like a six week heartbeat bill for abortion boycott. Yeah. Boycott. So you could boycott states in our own country, but you can't boycott a foreign country. It's like the the double standard there. Again, this is why I said the thing about like relativism. Um because in the same way that um you know that people will talk about constantly and the same people who will harp on, you know, anti-semitism on Twitter and like I'm not denying something's going on there clearly. Yeah, like there's there's a real thing happening here. And it's not, as I've said, and again, this isn't necessarily the most important aspect to it. But personally, one of the things that annoys me about that is like it's not helping my argument. Like, it's not it's it's an albatross around my neck. And it's the reason why every goddamn debate that I'm in, the first thing they're going to bring up is, "Well, look at all these people on Twitter who are saying all this stuff." So, I wish those people would knock it off. But you also, okay, we don't need two standards here. One standard will do just fine. Let's have one standard and apply this across the board because the amount of anti-Muslim bigotry, anti-Palestinian bigotry, dehumanizing of the entire Palestinian people has engaged in for 20 years. Yeah, that's right. And then they're going to turn around and be like, "Oh my god, there's all this big there's all this dehumanizing bigotry out there." It's like, yeah, none of that is good. Like that none of that is good. It's not good for you. It's not good for the conversation. It's just bad. You don't want to dehumanize an entire group of people. Human beings like human beings, you know, and that should be fairly obvious. But also, I I will say that, you know, Donald Trump, who I voted for and supported in this last election, and I think has done some really good things in his first 100 days or so, and some not so good things. But, you know, I mean, he he would turn in the debate and call Joe Biden a Palestinian. He said this about Chuck Schumer, too. He's basically a Palestinian. You're like, whoa. And for all the people who have been screaming bigotry for the last decade, no one ever thought to be like, hey, you know, that's not like an insult. I know it's not an insult to call someone a Palestinian. I've met lots of Palestinians who are really great people. There's nothing wrong with them. And again, like if anyone if a presidential candidate ever like stood up in the debate and went, "Ah, this guy's a real Jew." We'd all be like, "Whoa, what the hell is that?" You don't get to say that in a political debate. And so there's this there's a ton of this. You you have um you know Nikki Haley going over and signing bombs. Hard to overstate how much I hate that by the way. Yeah. Well, right. And and I mean there are a lot of unreasonable Palestinians. Of course. There are also some wonderful a lot of Christian a lot of Christian Palestinians. A lot of wonderful Muslim Palestinians. Um so I hate that. I just want It's terrible. Yeah. It's terrible. It's terrible on any side. You don't dehumanize people like that, right? Um, and so what's his name? Um, I'm blinking. What's that? The congressman in Florida, Randy Fine. Is Fine his last name? I don't know. But did you see the stuff he's posted? Like a nut. Oh my god. It's just, you know, so again. Okay. You want to talk about He's the one who's like, "We want to kill all their children or something." Well, someone basically like uh I think someone tweeted like a a picture of a dead Palestinian baby and he said like, "Good, we need more or something like that." It was something really close to that. I don't I don't want to get this wrong. Who could vote for someone like that? Well, Trump endorsed him after that. After he said it was good that a baby was dead. I mean, you know, again, I would love to have him on. Pull up the actual tweet on that cuz I don't want to like misremember it, but it was something really egregious. Um, and he's, you know, there's just look, there's a lot of this stuff is how you get Nikki Haley signing bombs that are about to go get dropped on women and children. You're like, I'm sorry. That's [ __ ] sickening. Like what the hell is that? Like it's it what are we a part of some death cult or something? I mean this is like real. And so of course then you know Douglas Murray's book is like democracies and death cults or whatever. And um which is kind of funny in a way uh to be pro-democracies while you're also making the argument for expertise cuz you would think like if you're for democracy the whole point of this the whole point of experts is to explain it to regular people who will ultimately have the authority of deciding which experts are in charge and which experts are not in charge. You know, there's a little contradiction there, but again, this is my issue. And this is where I think Tucker, in some way, we're really like kindred spirits. What a higher IQ you have than Douglas Murray. It just cracks me up. Well, he's he's he's got a very high verbal IQ. He's more talented in a lot of ways than me. I'm just I'm I'm telling the truth. Um No, no, but I mean, that's such a deep contradiction that I I doubt he's aware of. Probably not. Um, but I will say this and this is where I think in some ways this is why me and you always get along. I think we're kindred spirits in this way in some sense. But I really do I mean this I mean this so sincerely in my soul in my heart of hearts I'm a crotchety old right-winger. Yeah. Like that's who I want to be. Okay. That's I try my best. I want to be I I'm a I'm not just like a a western chauvinist or whatever. Like I think western society is better than everything else. I think it's I'm a libertarian and I think it's one of the goofiest things about libertarians in general that they kind of try to run away from that and be egalitarian to some degree. That's ridiculous. What are you talking you believe in individual liberty? Well, then you don't get to say every civilization is equal cuz only one of them respects individual liberty and that's the better one. Okay, that's the I by your own definition. That's right. So screw all this other egalitarianism is a revolt against nature as the great Murray Rothbard wrote. It's I'm I'm against all of that. I don't believe in relativism. I don't believe in all cultures are equal. I would like to sit here and look down on the Muslim world. That's what I would like to do because my society is so much better. And if anything, I'd be lecturing you. You guys got to do liberty better. You guys don't really even understand how a free society works. I'd like to be there. That's actually what that's what confirms my bias is like stuff like that. The problem is I just know too much about our government and what our government's done to these people. And not just what we've done to them, but that we've been propping up the Islamists for 40 years. Literally. And so what are we talking about here? You can't then turn around and go, "Look at them. They're a bunch of Islamists." No, I know what you did. You propped up the Islamist so you didn't have to deal with the commies. Like regardless of any of that. I just again I insist on one standard for everything. If you're going to say Hamas is a death cult, what the hell is the US government? What is the Israeli government? You get to sit here as my government has in the last 25 years destroyed Iraq, Afghanistan, Syria, Libya, Somalia, Yemen, Ukraine, and now Gaza. That's what my government's done. I don't get to call someone else a death cult. I'd like to I'd like to just look down at them as a death cult, but sorry, we're the biggest purveyors of violence in the world, not Vladimir Putin. And like again, it's just if you look at these things, you just have to have one standard and apply them across the board. This is what I've been arguing the whole time. And if you're going to say it's like, okay, October 7th was horrible. It was absolutely horrible. Why was it horrible? Oh yeah, because intentionally killing innocent civilians is like one of the most evil things you could ever do. Okay, then because people are what matter. Yeah. In the end, right? And all your your theories are valid to the extent that they serve people and when they when they hurt people then they're invalid, you know. I think Yeah, I think so. So, you said that there's this um brand new media landscape, information landscape, possibility of true freethinking and free speech. I think it's all true because the old control system has shattered as you said. So, we're living in this just incredible moment. How long can it last? That's a good question. Um, it's very hard, you know, it's very hard to make predictions because it's such a new model, right? And it's like we really don't know much about this. You know, one of the things that I find that um, which, you know, you never want to get ahead of yourself, especially these days. Um, and there's so many things that could happen that it's kind of like impossible to even know what 2028 looks like. Yes. But, so I'm assuming right now JD Vance is probably going to be the guy. Hope so. Yeah, I hope so too. Um and so you you look at this dynamic where you go okay so part of so you look at Camala Harris's campaign and say Joe Biden the same way and Joe Biden specifically because he was scenile not you know Joe Biden younger Joe Biden while he was never a very bright guy maybe would have been a little bit different politically but Camal Harris so she kind of famously infamously now turned down the Joe Rogan experience she could have been on the show but she didn't now a A lot of people uh were saying, "Oh, what a stupid move." Uh turning that down. I kind of disagree. I go, "That probably was the right move." You know, if you're if you were in if if you had no soul and you're working for the Camala Harris campaign and your only objective in this world was to get her elected and that invite came in, you're probably going, "No, no, no, no, no, no. We can't. You will be exposed. You can't go do this." The the fact is that Camala Harris, by the nature of who she is as a person and by the nature of what she was running on is not built for a three-hour unedited, unscripted conversation. You can't do that, you know, like say whatever you will about Donald Trump. The man's got a lot of flaws, but he is built for that. He could do eight hours, I think, easily. You know, like he's without going to the bathroom, right? Yeah. Which is what I heard. And Joe said he didn't go before or after. True. I've never done the Joe Rogan experience and not gone to the bathroom before or after. The midbreak leak always. Yeah, of course. Insane. The guy's not human. It's unbelievable. But okay, so going just into 2028, think about what a change this is. This is the new standard. To be a presidential candidate, you have to be able to go and do a three-hour podcast. And actually, probably several of them, right? I mean, Trump did a whole bunch of them before he got elected, and she didn't and lost. That's it. And so, that in itself just changes everything. Now we have to actually see who you are as a person, you know, because it doesn't even matter. It doesn't even matter what you're talking about for 3 hours. It doesn't even matter if you're getting grilled. So true. It's just I get to see who you are and it comes out. So, okay. No one can play a role for 3 hours, right? So, that's the new normal. You know, that's that in itself is a huge transformation. I think that has to be stopped. I think that has to be stopped. And it, you know, and I don't want to be like too paranoid, but one of the exp I think some of the the anger and the hate online is um, you know, is organic and it's rooted in frustration and facts in some cases. And I, you know, I'm not, it's not all bad, but some of it is so clearly inorganic, it just obviously is, that you sort of wonder like, is this all a pretext for shutting it down? I just can't escape that. Yeah. Look, I I I get your point and that certainly, you know, like I never know what is, you know, a pretext or what is not, but it's certainly like, oh, this is going to be used that way. So, like that's another thing. It's very shortsighted, you know, for for anyone, you know, it's kind of like nobody ever, which I get it. It's it's a little bit difficult to do cuz it's like second or third order thinking, but no one ever kind of thinks about like what the reaction is going to be to what they're doing. It's just whether they can get away with it in the moment, but it's not the fact that it's like, hey, there is going to be a correction for this and almost certainly an overcorrection cuz that's always the case. You know, it doesn't seem like any of those uh leftists ever thought about when they were pushing like all the trans and the kids stuff, they'd be like, "What do you think the result of this is going to be?" You go, "Oh, here's the result. Donald Trump winning every swing state. That's the result. So Oh, and a handmaid's tail like ultimate ultimately we're going to have Sharia law. Well, it's but it does, you know, it's like, right? No, people always like, really? How did the Muslims take over Europe? Because Europe went [ __ ] That's why, right? Right. Right. You're going to see white girls begging for Sharia law by the end. And of course, of course, there's like there's many factors involved, but there's no question that there are these these cycles. And um I do think there's there's an onus on say people who do you know want who who were against the censorship regime and were against or are against the US is Israeli you know special relationship it's like okay but if you've got the freedom to actually speak about this now understand a couple things understand that like you're getting something that generations before you they never had generations before you your career career would have been ruined. You never would have been allowed to say these things. And there does that carries with it a responsibility, you know, it carries with it a responsibility to do this in a way that like number one, you're getting it right. You're not being sloppy. You're not leading people down a bad path. Uh you're not demonizing people who don't deserve to be demonized, who are not a part of this. and ultimately that you won't be handing the excuse to the other side who obviously as you said needs to re they need these guys cannot compete in a free market and so they have to rig the market in their favor they had forever they had the market rigged in their favor for the first time now they kind of don't they still do a little bit but they don't in terms of the conversation they still certainly do in terms of the power of government but they don't in terms of the conversation it's like okay what do you want to do with that Now, the problem is that so much has been hidden either intentionally or just through kind of the a veil of misdirection um that people are learning a lot of stuff at once. Yeah. And it's frying some circuits. And I think the the thing that I try to meditate on every single day is that I am commanded to and intend to treat each individual as an individual. Period. Period. Yeah. And when you do that, it keeps you from going totally insane. And it also opens you up to the beauty of life, to the joy of life, which is being surprised by people and their complexity, good and bad, and like the capacity of someone like Steve Wickoff to like do stuff. If you'd asked me, can Wickoff do that? I don't know. I mean, I knew Wickoff before, but like, right, look what Wickoff is doing. It's incredible. I don't know. It's just treat people as individuals. You're commanded to do that. And I it's I do think it's harder to do that online. Yes, I I agree. And I also, you know, it was weird because, so I, you know, it was an interesting experience for me this last month or so because I've never really, you know, I'm I I think this has helped me in my career is that I didn't like uh I didn't blow up out of nowhere. Like I know other people who have in comedy, I know people who like, you know, just like exploded, you know, they were at open mics with me and then they got an audition for Saturday Night Live and then they got it and now they're world famous. You know, you go literally from being a complete unknown, not even an established comedian, a newer comedian who can't even work the clubs to being like world famous. I've seen people have that. How'd that work for Britney Spears? Pretty bad. Well, especially bad when you're young. That's the worst time for it to happen. It happened to me, actually. Right. Yeah. Well, that's right. You You had that. Luckily, I was humiliated along the way, so more normal, but but that's the antidote for it in a weird way, right? Because it's all ego stuff. So the antidote for blowing up your ego is destroying your ego. It's which is is very painful, but it's good. Like a hangover, the hangover is actually getting you healthy. It sucks, but the hangover is the cure. So getting drunk was the problem. That's why it's hard to become addicted to cocaine. People seem to pull it off anyway, but I never understood that. How could you become addicted to this? You feel horrible. I know it is. Well, that's right. Sorry. Sorry to say. No, but that's that's exactly right. But so okay so for me I would it was always like a like a logical progression like one step more one step more my profile kind of rose but this you know this thing was the biggest thing I've ever done in my career it was like the biggest reaction to any show or any debate that I've ever done cuz it was on Rogan's podcast and he doesn't usually do debates and it was the most contentious issue of our day. So, it became this big thing. And now I'm at a place where, you know, I'm 42. I have a great wife. I got two little kids that I play with every day. I have a nice house. My my life is like set up. Um I'm I'm an adult. this isn't. So, but when the kind of hate attack, this coordinated attack, and everyone who's attacking me just happens to have like, you know, their name written in Hebrew letters and a Jewish star, you know, in their bio, and they're all saying the most vicious stuff. I've been sitting here and I'm like, "Wow, dude. If I were 25 Oh, yeah. and I wasn't Jewish. I could very easily see my response to this just being like, man, screw these people, you know? And like now, I'm not saying that would be correct, but it's just like you feel that because that's the impulse when you're like attack, but like what you just said, I think is the key point, which is that like if believing in individualism is like a grounding force. It kind of inoculates you against collectivist nonsense. And when I say that, see, one of the problems here now is that the left, which is what they do, is they attack terms and concepts. And so whenever you think about something, you start thinking about the lefty version of it. And it's like, no, no, no, not that at all. So the left kind of made individualism. They they kind of mixed it together with like this like self-actualization type thing like oh all that really matters is like whatever you're feeling and whatever you're feeling is correct and it's correct because you're feeling it and you're feeling it because it's correct and that's like that's like the devil. That's like you do not want to go down that path. You do not want to ever say that like well if you feel something inside of you then that must be true. That's essentially what the trans thing was all based on right was this view that well if you feel it then it must be true. like that's not where you want that's that's the path to hell. You don't want to go down that path. You know, that's no that's it's not true that because you feel something it therefore should be actualized and that's terrible. However, more old school individualism like in the classical liberal enlightenment tradition is understanding that the individual is a is a unit of analysis that the individ individuals are how we exist. We act as individuals. We suffer as individuals. We collectivize as individuals. We are born and die as individuals. Exactly. And so and and that collectivism, what collectivism used to mean was the idea that the individual ought to be subservient to the larger group. Not that groups don't exist. Not that we shouldn't come together. Of course, we come we create families. We create churches, communities. All of these things are wonderful. But when you do understand like true individualism like on that like that individuals ought to have rights. Yes. Right. Things like that. It does it shields you from a lot of this nonsense. Well the question is does the does the human being have a soul. Yes. Exactly. Something that is distinct from all others. There are billions of human beings in this world. You are fundamentally different not just in your fingerprints and iris scan but in your soul. This thing that we can't quite define but that we know is real. Yes. And that's why you have a right. That's why you have right. That's the only reason. That's the only reason. I I I remember I was watching um as I mentioned earlier, I was watching you and Brett Weinstein. So I was just uh yesterday was watching this and there was one point where Brett said, and I think he was completely right about this and you guys kind of agreed, but he said uh he goes, you know, the the claim that Israel has a right to exist has always seemed a little bit strange to me. And he was like, I mean, they do exist, but do they have a right to exist? Exactly. country. Well, I think the point is almost this. Countries don't have rights. Individuals have rights. You're using an individualist term and then attempting to apply it to a collective government. That's not how it works. Every single individual who has Israeli citizenship has a right to exist. Every single individual who does not have Israeli citizenship has a right to exist. Every Palestinian, this is why people make these arguments. There never was a country called Palestine. Totally irrelevant. has nothing to do with anything. Doesn't matter if there was a government or a country. It doesn't matter where the lines on a map are drawn. Now, again, this I'm not making a lefty argument here. I'm not saying therefore you can't have immigration restrictions. Of course, you can cuz a group of people can own a plot of land and they get to decide who can come and who can't come. That's right. But the point is that if you're trying to apply rights to collectives, you're going to realize that it doesn't make sense. And the same way they do this constantly where they apply things like uh they'll say does Israel have a right to defend itself? You go no individuals have a right to defend themselves and by the way when I defend myself I don't have the right to aggress upon other innocent people who happen to be in the general vicinity of the person who I want to defend myself against. Exactly. That are distinct but equal to mine. Exactly. And that's really all it takes to kind of cure you of a lot of this collectivist nonsense. Yes. And there's there is something about the form though. I do think form matters in the same way reading a book on on Kindle is a different experience from reading one in print. It just is. Wish it wasn't. Uh there's something about the form of social media that disagregates people from their souls. And I or at least that's my experience of it. Like you can just get so pissed off um that you forget that every person what was you were telling me this at breakfast this morning. You're you're telling me about the preamble to Daryl Cooper's World War II series. Can you say that? Will you say that? Yeah, he's so he's uh he hasn't put the series out yet. I think he's he's working on it. I hope it's out soon. Um but so Daryl, as he talked about on your show, is putting together this big World War II series. And when Daryl Cooper does this, we're having him back this summer. I can't wait. I can't wait. Just also just I'm excited for the reaction. Uh, but I actually think a lot of, you know, a lot of people are probably gonna be disappointed because he's not gonna give them, you know, like it's weird going full Nazi. Well, that's the thing. Of course not. Of course. It's weirdly the only people, by the way, it's so funny because it's this symbiotic relationship that you see all the time. It's like the only people who want him to It's like the the Nazis and the Zionists are the ones who are like, "Please be a Nazi. Please be a please so that we have this." you know, everybody else is like, I wonder if they're getting paid from the same source. I I suspect some of them are throwing that out there. In fact, I don't suspect I know. I'm sure a lot of them are. Yeah. Um, and that's, you know, that's part of this new landscape that, but so he does this, um, he put out the prologue for the series and he had this wonderful part in it. Um, I hope I can kind of do it justice, but it was so beautiful the way he said it, but he was talking about like when you start to think about um, you know, the people in Germany in World War II and how there there were little three-year-old girls and 8-year-old boys and there were women and there were all the, you know, and if you start to kind of humanize them there's or if you start to dehumanize them as many were making the attempt to do, he said, you you might find yourself having two competing voices. in your head. Like on one level you go, "Well, of course there were innocent women and innocent children and of course these are people just like anybody else." And then you might have some other voice that goes, "Well, they were Germans and it was World War II, so what are you doing trying to humanize anyone?" And he goes, "Okay, that second voice is not you. That's not you. That is a spirit outside of you acting on you. And just so you know, it's the same spirit that was acting on the Nazis when they were talking about Jews. And that's and dude, it's so funny for people trying to demonize this guy. Like this is who he actually is when he's talking to his audience and he's got a message to give them. This is the message he's giving them. And I man, he's just so right about that. And it's the same thing as like when you see like some hardcore Israel supporter and then some hardcore like radical pro Palestinian and like they're going like all the Jews blah blah blah blah blah and then they're going all the Arabs blah blah blah blah blah. And you're like you're the same person. both of you are the same person. And I'm not trying to completely equate it because obviously the Palestinians have lost in this conflict. They're the ones who have been, you know, truly, you know, they've been [ __ ] over in a way that the Israelis haven't. But anytime that you're like dehumanizing an entire group of people, setting the stage to then justify some type of brutal aggression that could not be justified without dehumanizing them first. You are participating in the same exercise that is is the reason throughout all of human history that we've had genocides and wars and ethnic cleansing campaigns and just horrible atrocities. Don't do that. Whatever you do, if you ever find yourself doing that, don't do it. We're not allowed to do that. Yeah. I mean, we play you play with fire when you do that. And I and I've stayed silent a lot as I've seen it happen. And I feel shame thinking back on it when Osama bin Laden's wife was shot. I remember thinking, okay, she got shot married to Osama bin Laden. That's pretty risky proposition being married to Osama bin Laden and living in Pakistan. Got it. So I guess, you know, there are risks and she knew what they were. On the other hand, I'm not cheering an unarmed woman getting shot to death under any circumstances. And I don't I don't want anyone in my country doing that either because I love my country and I love the people who live here and they're my my countrymen. And um and I think it's bad to just stay silent. Okay. But don't anybody who encourages you to take pleasure at the death of another person is, you know, acting on behalf of forces that we should be rejecting. Yeah. You know, I said this uh I don't care who it is. I I was on Lex Freriedman's uh podcast um pretty recently. That guy's a good interviewer. Actually, he's great. He's a great interview. Everyone makes fun of Lex Freedman. I made fun of Lex Freedman probably or I heard other people do it. I didn't say anything. And then I was interviewed by Lex Freedman. I was like, "This guy's weirdly good at this." Really good. It's easy for people to look at it and think they could do it, too. It's a skill to interview somebody. And he is. Look what he gets. He gets Did he get good? I haven't seen it. Did he get good stuff? Oh, it was great. And he was, you know, he was asking me like he started really getting into the detail of like what I believe a just war is and what an immoral war is and why is that? And the example I used, which I think like I I I know you because I've heard you talk about this stuff too. think you'll agree with me, but I was like, "Okay, let's take World War II and let's say that like not only is the official narrative right, let's let's tweak some things here. It's so much more right than you know, the Nazis are, if it's possible, they're even worse than the real Nazis were. And if it's possible, they actually were going to take over the world." And actually, we would all be speaking German. Like, let's say not only were they going to take over England, they were going to cross the Atlantic and come take over North America also. and the entire world would have fallen into Nazi totalitarianism had they won the war. And let's say in order to stop the Nazis, we had a way where we could do it where no innocent civilians were killed except one. You know, we could we could literally just we could take out the Nazis, save the entire world from totalitarianism. By the way, in this model, there's no Joseph Stalin. Joseph Stalin's a great guy and the the Soviets are a free country. There's no moral questions about who we're working with. Just all of that. All we had to do was we could take out the Nazis by dropping this one super bomb. Um but one six-year-old girl would be killed. Okay, this is so I've made it the most clear-cut war in human history. Um in that scenario, I guess you'd go, look, we have to do this. We have no choice other the whole world will fall to totalitarianism or the whole world can be saved and one six-year-old girl is going to get killed. Okay, I can understand being like, we're making an impossible decision. and we have to do this. Every year on the anniversary of that war, we should all like weep to ourselves. We should all feel horrible that we had to do that cuz it's a six-year-old girl got killed. Like I have a six-year-old girl. This is the most This is the most horrible thing in the world that you would ever like kill a six-year-old girl. I mean, my god, I would set the whole world on fire to stop someone from doing anything to my little girl. And like so if that were in this very clear-cut scenario, not the complexity of real history in this scenario that I'm laying out, we should still all be nothing but pity and sorrow that it ever came to that and we should rack our brains every day thinking, was there any alternative to that? Was there any way that we could have done that without this little girl getting killed? And like people could say that's kind of like pie in the sky or hippish-ish or whatever. But at the very least, dude, when you're talking about like inflicting this level of human suffering on people, like the the onus is always on the people who are advocating for it to absolutely prove beyond the shadow of a doubt that there's no other option that we've exhausted everything else we could do. It has to be this. And if you come to the conclusion it has to be this, you should still be really sad and somber about it. this spiking the football stuff, having a Bob Hope special after a war, the stuff that America got involved in after the Second World War that became like kind of like this business of war. This this we're spiking the football. It's just like it's disgusting. And then you tell me about how some other society is a death cult. Like let's examine our own. Well, it is disgusting. And I think um you don't have to know the right answer going forward to know what the wrong answer is, right? And it's just again you want to treat you want to approach life and state craft and bureaucracy and everything in your life with humility. Like I don't always know the outcome. Not God. I have limited power. I think I know that murdering a six-year-old girl will bring world peace, but what if it doesn't? Right. Right. Or whatever. I think dropping an atomic bomb on the off chance doesn't work out chance. I think you know dropping the atom bomb will stop an invasion of Japan. Okay. I think dimming the sun will stop global warming. But maybe I'm wrong, you know? Maybe I'm wrong because I'm a person and it's when people stop remembering the limits to their own wisdom and power that things like that you get genocides and stuff. Well, also again, like I said before, cuz this is always just my it's the weird way my neurotic brain works or whatever, but I just like can't like I have this consistency obsession or whatever, but you know, I was listening to your uh your show with Matt Walsh uh the other day and I I kind of I did appreciate some of the things he said about me and the debate with Douglas. It was for a Daily Wire employee. I think that's about as nice. That's about as good a reaction as I'm I'm going to get. that he was like at one point saying that he was like, "Well, you know, so then the real important the good point that he said that Douglas Murray made was when he asked me, um, well then how do you get rid of Hamas?" Like what's your plan? So number one, it's not a point, it's a question. But then Matt Walsh was saying like, "Well, look, I can understand you saying you're against what Israel is doing, but then what should they do to get rid of Hamas?" And it it's just interesting to me to see any conservative going, "Wait a minute. So you're against these babies being killed." And it's like, "Yes, yes. Let's call this, I don't know, let me think of a term for it. The pro-life position. Let's call it that. Remember, remember the foundational principle that you've been talking about for your entire career?" But wait, hold on. So, first of all, before which, by the way, there are lots of other ways to deal with Hamas, obviously. But no, actually I don't have to solve that problem before I can object to killing innocent children, right? Like no, it is not incumbent on the pro-life person to work out a plan for like the uh um the adoption or the college or the No, actually no. I'm allowed for my starting point to be you can't murder babies, right? I mean, come on. Yes. Like what do we And you know the other thing which I did want to say is that I do think um and look by the way I I as I've saying we're both here kind of coming out against um the excesses on both sides. I'm against racial collectivism. I'm against collective guilt. Um against collective judgment even yes collective punishment for sure. Um but so like I'm not saying you don't have to like you should you shouldn't hate Jews and you don't even have to hate Israelis. I think you shouldn't hate Israel. Oh, there's lots of great people there. They're awesome. There's lots of really really great people there. Um and um and their government's just done a lot of messed up stuff, but like so is ours and so have lots of governments around the world. Probably all of them. Um probably a direct correlation to how much power they have and how much evil stuff they can do. Exactly. Exactly. You know, I do think it's a little bit of a copout for some people who I like very much. You know, like I I like Matt Walsh. I've never met him, but I like I think his documentaries are great. I think he's been an important voice in the national conversation. like a very important voice. Um, I like Tim P very much. I've done his shows lots of times. I've met him lots of times. I think he's a great guy. Um, but there are these guys who will basically say like, I'm a non-interventionist. I only care about America. I don't care about these other so I don't care. I don't have an opinion on it. And it just seems to me like that's a copout. It's kind of like in 2006, you don't have an opinion on Iraq. I don't care about Iraq. I only care about America. It's like, well, we're in Iraq right now. Well, I agree with that. That's right. And that's why I have felt from the beginning kind of like shanghide into this. I mean, I don't care on the level that I just want to focus on my own country, but if we're deeply involved in it, then I have an obligation to care if it's my job to pay attention to what our country is doing, which it is. So, right. Well, that's Listen, I have no argument to anybody who goes, I'm just not going to pay attention to politics. My my best friend in the world is Lewis J. Gomez, who came on your show and you he's the best. And literally, and this is he is being completely sincere when you asked him on your show, you go like, "So, what are your politics?" And he goes, "Politics is gay." And that's literally his only answer. And I have in all of my years, I'm literally I'm his best friends. I don't have a counter to that. I go, "That is a pretty good point. I'm married to a woman like that." Yes. Yeah. Me, too. You know, and like, so it's like I have no argument against that. If you but if you're in this world where we're talking about these things then you you don't get to just say well look taking this opinion which is the obvious logical conclusion of my stated principles but if I take them to their conclusion that will cause me grief. Therefore I'm going to say I don't really care about that. Because look here's the thing. If you don't if you do care about being America first and you care about America not getting into another stupid catastrophic war in the Middle East, well, who's pushing us in that direction? And this is not a conspiracy theory. This is like totally out in the open, right? I mean, the longest serving prime minister in Israeli history is John M uh Benjamin Netanyahu. Okay? Right? Benjamin Netanyahu came to the US Congress in 2002 and testified as a regional expert that we should go overthrow Saddam Hussein in Iraq because democracy will sweep the region. He then also said in front of a congressional testimony that we should overthrow Mammar Gaddafi in Libya and that we should overthrow the Mullers in Iran. Okay. He's been advocating, he's been John McCain, he's been Dick Cheney this whole time advocating that we fight this next war and this next war and this next war. They're right now. What was it? uh uh 3 4 weeks ago, they drew up war plans, including us, to go to war with Iran. It's only because Donald Trump, who seems to be willing to help them ethnically cleanse the Gaza Strip, but said, "That's a bridge too far for me. I'm not going to war here." And so, thank God, now we're in negotiations with the Iranians. But if you know this, then like for you to be a non-interventionist America first, it has to at least come with and hey, we should cut Israel off and we should not listen to Benjamin Netanyahu. Like I'm sorry that's just totally reasonable or Kirst or any of them. That's right. So okay, just take the position which is the obvious one. We should stop funding what Israel is doing. We should stop propping them up. It's been quite a while. The country was created in 1948. It is 2025. You can either go at this alone or you can't. Come on. And those are fair terms by the way. I mean those are the terms that the rest of us live our lives on. Yeah. you know, I mean, you you make budget decisions in your home on the basis of what you can afford. Yeah. And there's some things you don't do, you know. Um, no, all of us mere mortals have those constrictions on our behavior. Like they're the things I want to do and they're the things that I think I'm capable of doing. Yeah. Big difference. And if I was sitting here and giving like these bravado, you know, infused speeches about all of the things that I can do, but really it relied on me borrowing the money from you in order to do it. You'd be like, "Hey, maybe stop giving this speech. Maybe maybe Benjamin Netanyahu should stop going to the UN and going, there's nowhere that Israel can't touch." Actually, there's lots of places Israel can't touch. I know. There's nowhere the US can't touch. I know. I just think it's it's getting too out in the open. And and I do I mean, I guess I fret too much in general, but I I do worry now that it's like super obvious Yeah. what's going on that things will just devolve into like somewhere very ugly. Well, that's why if you have any sense about you and you don't want to see things devolve into something ugly, that's why you want to make sure we don't get into another war right now. Totally agree. It's unbelievable. It's It's so It's remarkable. I I'll tell you this, right? And I I'm somebody who has really, you know, been focused on this stuff for a long time. Um, you know, I mean, I host I do a show four days a week and I I'm always reading about this stuff and I've done all the background reading. I mean, I know a lot about like the neoconservatives and what motivates them, what their worldview was. I will tell you the first thing that really surprised me and I was I was genuinely and I hate the neoconservatives like I'm not it's not that I don't understand how evil what they believe is. I was really surprised that the Ukraine thing, the Nazis in Ukraine didn't mess with them at all. I was shocked. I was really surpris you know, I know why they support all the wars they have supported. I thought that for the neoconservatives, real deal, not even neo-Nazis, Nazis like the grandsons of, you know, the Nazis who perpetrated the Holocaust in Ukraine, proudly wearing swastikas uh tattoos and waving flags. I mean like they threw their support behind the Azovv battalion. I this was very str like this was a line to me I was like oh wow they'll really go that far. But I'll tell you I am blown away by the fact that anybody who is out there shrieking about the rise in anti-semitism is not wise enough to go we cannot fight a war with Iran right now. Because if we get into a war right now that's clearly on Israel's behalf after 25 years of terror wars which were pretty clearly at least partially on you know I'm not I'm not going to go quite as far as like Jeffrey Sachs although I get you know he's an expert and I'm not so I guess he's right and I'm not but you know I wouldn't quite say that you know we outsourced our foreign policy to Israel like I you know there's a lot of truth to that statement. Was it was it Mir Shimemer or Saxs who said I view Benjamin Netanyahu as the worst US president of the 21st century? It's pretty hilarious, but and there's there's a lot of truth to that, but it's not like 100% true. It's like, okay, but look, it's obviously, as I just said, Israel has been using its considerable influence to convince us to go to war in Iraq and in Libya, in Syria, in and all of these places. I think Yemen was more for the Saudis. Afghanistan was our own thing. that those wars particularly Israel was really on board with. And if we were to go get into a war with Iran right now, which will be a much bigger disaster than any of the previous terror wars, there's there's really no argument about that. It's Iran is just not a pushover like uh these other countries at all. Yeah, that's right. They can take out a lot of our guys and then and then what do we do after that? And well, they could also destroy Israel with conventional weapons. Yeah, there's there's a lot that they can do. Um, but if we actually go to this war on behalf of Israel, I mean, what do you think that does to the level of anti-semitism? Now, by the way, I'm not that's not the number one reason not to do it. That's like the number six reason not to do it. But for these people who are so concerned, they're so concerned about the existential threat to Israel. Well, here's the thing, right? Hamas, while they did pull off October 7th, which was by far the biggest attack Hamas has ever pulled off, um Hamas was never an existential threat to Israel. But this actually is I agree what they're doing right now in some sick self-fulfilling, you know, uh, prophecy. This actually is creating like an existential threat to them. I completely agree. I if I live there, um, and I think enough of Jerusalem that I would like to live in Jerusalem. I think it's the most incredible city in the world. I I truly love it. But I would leave because I think I think they're um, and I said this to an Israeli friend of mine recently, like I'm a little bit concerned. Not that it's my job to be concerned for your country. Lots of other people have that taken care of, but just as a bystander, it's like, whoa, this is not good. Yeah. And um I didn't, you know, he had no sense of what I was talking about, but I uh Yeah. No, I think the one area where I agree with Mark Leavin um is that Israel is really in danger. And I think it's people like Mark Levin who are putting Israel in danger. My view. Yeah, I think I think that's maybe I'm wrong, but No, I think that's right. I think just like I was saying at Douglas Murray, it's actually like, "No, you're creating fertile ground for anti-semitism by telling me I'm not allowed to criticize a guy with a Jewish last name in the same sense that you claim some Jewish ancest." But that's so low. It's so low to debate like that. You're the famous debater. Yeah. And like in an op-ed after you lose a debate or not even lose after you refuse to debate and kind of be clown yourself and then you're writing an op-ed and you don't take on one argument I made but you do attack whether I'm really Jewish as the by the way as he'll criticize the just asking questions people. Well what the hell is that? What the hell is that's me by the way. That's who they're talking about. Right. I know. I know. It's all it's all it's so funny. The first time I heard that I was like, "Wait, are you actually mad that I asked a question? Isn't anyone who's tries who's trying to shut down questions, isn't that person by definition on the wrong side?" Yeah. Well, you know what's funny? Like, what world are we living in? Well, I've lived too long. I should have died 10 years ago. Well, you know what's so funny about it, too, is that there's because there's all these different techniques for control, and one of them is just framing. like how you frame a conversation really like with the Israel thing it's obvious right like look I mean however you feel about the conflict the fact is that Israel has occupied Palestine since 1967 you know okay I know the no we disengaged in 2005 no you didn't but like whatever I'm not even like I've had this debate enough times I'm just saying this is the fact is that Israel's occupied Palestine since 1967 that's the fact and then the conversation they go does Israel have a right to defend itself and you're like well that's a hell of a way to start you know like you're the ones doing the occupying and you want to start every debate with whether you have a right to defend yourself. Okay. But with all these things there's kind of you know like this is what was interesting to me about the the conversation with you and Brett Weinstein about the you know about God versus atheism and all this stuff is that like so people it's very easy to have the framing of going like oh you're telling me you believe there's an invisible man up in the sky who created all things. That's pretty goofy right? It's like yeah if you just frame it like that sure it's pretty goofy. I'm sorry. What's your belief? You believe everything used to fit on the top of a pin and then it exploded into everything. Everything came from nothing and then exploded into This is just as ridiculous as anything anyone's ever believed. So like as soon as you look at both sides and apply the same standard to both and you know there's been a one thing is a very interesting dynamic to me. I've seen this a lot when people will try to attack you where what they'll do is they'll pull like kind of the five things you've said that seem like almost the goofiest of all the things. Well, he said this thing about like a demon attacking him. Okay, he said this thing about you know like Right. Right. But sorry, I didn't want to. No, but look but look even Yes. in itself but like okay that sounds like an outlandish claim like I'm not but then it's almost like they're trying to ignore the totality. I see this a lot with Bobby Kennedy. This has been one of the most interesting things about Bobby is that the people who attack him, they pick on the five, you know, goofiest things they can find that they think he said, you know, he blamed the wifi for this or he said something about whatever the COVID targeting certain genetics and not other genetics. And it's like, look, even if I grant you there are these five claims, which I don't know if I, you know, Bobby said some things that I'm like, I don't know if he's right about that or not. Right? It seems kind but the but they're trying to remove the central thing that he said and the central this is Trump in a nutshell too. Right. The central thing that Bobby Kennedy said is that we spend more money than any other country on healthcare and we're the sickest. Exactly. Now until you can take on that you're never going to win by just trying to knock out these other good because at least he's talking about the major thing. And by the way not only did he say that none of you have ever mentioned that. I've watched every presidential campaign. It's never once come up. Well, and in fact, everything they do mention is a way to avoid mentioning it. Exactly. But we had a whole we had a whole debate in this country about health insurance and this never came up. We had the Obamacare debate and like and no one even ever mentioned I didn't know it until Bobby came on my show. Yeah. Me neither. He was banned. Yeah. No, but I have to say the thing that I have learned really above all other things is the only way to assess a claim is on the basis of whether or not it's true. Right. Right. not on whether or not I want to hear it, on whether or not I've thought of it before, whether or not I'm shocked by the fact that you asked the question. The only thing that matters is, is it true? Now, can I know? Most of the time, no, I can't know. But I want my orientation, the way I approach each question to be the same every single time, which is, is that true? And the second I stop caring about whether it's true, then I'm acting on behalf of evil. Right. It's that simple. Right. Right. Yeah. No, I I completely So when Bobby Kennedy's like, "Oh, CO's, you know, targeted on the basis of genes." I was like, "Really? Is that true?" Yeah. Well, I kind of felt I felt the same way. Um, and I and I think particularly what and I think it's very similar to talking about the 9/11 truth or stuff with Jesse Ventur. It's like what what ends up happening is that after you're kind of redpilled about so much, yes, the claims don't seem quite as outlandish. That's not saying that they're right, you know, like and I've I, you know, with with the 9/11 conspiracy stuff, I've never been like completely sold. I think there are a lot of people who jump to conclusions that are and like actually the evidence isn't nearly as strong as you think it is. You're kind of you're doing what everyone does where you start with a conclusion and then you work your way backward from there. And there's a lot of that, but at the same time, it's like the people who go, "Well, our government would never." You're like, "No, that doesn't work anymore, dude. Sorry." So yeah, they totally would. They actually totally would. I'm not even saying they did in this case, but they totally would. Or it's so painful to reexamine the worldview I've built on what might be a fake assumption that I'm not going to do it. I'm going to yell at you instead for challenging that worldview. Like that doesn't work either because it's already happened. I've You can only lose your virginity once. Right. Right. And once you realize that the Warren Commission really was a cover up. I mean, it just was. And on the base of evidence, I've concluded that. Then it's like, okay, if if the US government will hide details about the murder of a democratically elected US president, then there's really nothing Yeah. that they wouldn't do, right? And then if you and then the Nixon one is a big onetwo punch, you know, because you realize that like, oh, the guy who became the villain, you know, like the guy who was like supposed to be remembered as the most corrupt president was actually the most popular president who was totally set up was was, you know, and you're like, okay, well then we're just not living in the country that So I came to that independently having known a lot of those people. I know Bob Woodward personally and I I lived in that world for my whole life. And um Nixon had the highest popular vote percentage of any president in American history. I didn't in 72. I just didn't even know that. And when I found out that Bob Woodward was a naval intelligence officer detailed to the Nixon White House and then the next year gets the biggest story in journalism history handed to him. And how old was he? 30 28 something like that. That happens a lot. That's totally That's totally normal, right? And throw was the deputy director of the FBI and the guy they installed as president was on the warrant commission. Yeah. Yeah. I never liked Gerald Ford because of the withdrawal from Saigon on April 30th, 1975. I just thought that was like everything about that was so ugly. But whatever. Yes, I agree. So, it's not enough to say I'm not allowed to think something, right? or that or or once you but once you recognize those things it's just impossible. It's impossible to reconstruct the image of America that you once had. You're like, "Oh, that's not at all what and that doesn't make you an anti-American bigot any more than saying like criticizing a government does not make you a bad person." No, this is it's this is um what's it? It's Frederick Bastiot stuff. Like this was already figured out a long time ago. uh society and the government are not interchangeable things. They are different. You know, criticizing Joe Biden is not criticizing America. I'm not criticizing the hills and the lakes. I'm criticizing this one scenile criminal or my neighbors or my relatives, people I love. There's so many of them. So, last last question. You made reference to uh the Brett Weinstein conversation we had last week about um creationism versus Darwinism, etc., etc., the existence of God. Do you find in your life, this is a quiz I give a lot of people, more people you know personally talking about God than you did say 10 years ago? Yes. Um and I am that person. I mean I was an atheist 10 years ago. What happened? I had my daughter. Yeah. Um that's you know is I found God the day my wife delivered our first uh child and um which is a fairly common experience. Uh I know other people who have had the same thing were atheists until that moment. And um what what can what changed in you? So all right so it was uh basically so I met my so you know it's fairly normal story but I I met my wife and we got engaged and then um we got married. Um so my wife's like the most amazing chick. She's just great. And I know this is it's always a thing to say it's like my wife's better than your wife type thing but everybody who knows my wife and I don't mean you. I've never met your wife but but she is better. And just kidding. Uh, no. I don't I don't hear people compliment their spouses enough, actually. I don't think everyone always says that. I wish people that more often. Well, I do. You know, it's not me. She's really just the best. Everyone who knows her would agree. I mean, like, it's just like she's like the most amazing woman. She's just gorgeous and she's really super smart and she's really sweet and kind. Um, and she's just like she she puts everyone above herself. She's like I I really hit the lottery with her. And I was never, you know, I was like habitually single. I was never a relationship guy and I never really wanted to get married. I kind of always had this view of like, you know, women are trying to change you or trying to control you. Every girl that I ever dated always wanted a relationship and then they always wanted me to not do this or not do that. And my wife was just she just had my back. She just always like wanted to make my life better and she did. And I just I fell in love with her and I I was like I'm going to spend the rest of my life with this woman. And so then we uh when she got pregnant, I was just very excited. It was like, you know, we just got married. I got a a baby on the way. Um I was just like, "This is going to be this is the best. Like I'm really excited to to do this." And um and I was right. It was the best thing I've ever done. And so the uh the day that uh was um well, she was over her due date. So then they they scheduled to come in to induce pregnancy cuz they don't let you go too long these days. Um which I guess is maybe they're right about that. I don't know. But anyway, so we go to the hospital. They get the ptocin out. Yes, that's right. So, we're at uh Lennox Hill Hospital in the Upper East Side of Manhattan. And um by the way, I should I should add just leading into the story over the I had been like a militant atheist when I was younger. I had started to open up my mind a little bit to being like I I was seeing some of the holes in the atheist arguments, but I still was not like a believer in God. And so, we were at Lennox Lennox Hill Hospital, and this is this was the first one. This is how it started was um the uh the anesthesiologist came in to give my wife an epidural and at Lennox Hill or at least this guy they asked me to leave the room. Um they said they ask the fathers to leave the room when they do it, you know, cuz they're they're putting a spinal thing in and they have to be very very precise to see it. Right. So like and and they don't want I guess they don't want you there to react cuz then she might react and so they don't want to so I go at and she can't see what's happening. Right. she can't see, but she could see you seeing. And so they want people with a straight poker face who have seen this a lot of times and are not watching it happen to their wife and baby, you know, so it's a reasonable ask. But so I go I go out and I'm in the the hallway in the maternity ward at Lennox Hill Hospital and I'm just and it just hit me. It was like for the first time I guess I had not really thought about this. I was just so excited to get my family started. But for the first time, it hit me that like something could go wrong and that I could leave here alone, you know, like something could go wrong that I could lose the baby. I could lose my wife and it's totally out of my control. And like as this started hitting me, I started like really getting emotional. And um it's like I'm out there and I'm like I'm crying in the hallway of this maternity ward and immediately I just started talking to God. Um, and I just started uh not just talking to God, but like negotiating with God. And I was just like, you know, like like, dear Lord, if you if you make sure that they're okay, I'm going to do like I'm going to be the best husband and the best father and I will do this and you know, like all the different things in your life. Have you ever prayed before? No. Never once in my life. Um, and it all, you know, like all the things that you know you're supposed to be doing that you're not doing that well, you know, like I was like, "Okay, I'll clean this up. You know, I'll call my mom more often. I'll do this thing. I'll do." And so anyway, so I just started like praying to God and not just praying but like negotiating. So anyway, everything was fine with that. But my my wife, this was the first of many times she had a very there were a bunch of complications in the pregnancy. Everyone came out okay, thank God. Um but so I ended up talking to God a lot that day and then just like as the days went on, it's so interesting. It's organic lifetime of not believing and then yeah just start and so this is almost like what intellectually you know converted me later was I was like hey what the hell was that I mean I could I can't look back and just ignore that and um and there was one you know like again I'm I'm almost a little uncomfortable talking about these things cuz I like talking about things where I have like a real tight argument that I can prove is irrefutable profound argument actually it was something where I was like look so in the moment when it was really all on the line and out of my control. I wasn't thinking maybe God exists. I knew for a 100% certainty unlike nothing I've ever known in my life that not only did I know that God existed, but I knew what he wanted from me. Like I knew what my negotiating power in this was is that I could pro, you know what I'm saying? Like I could promise I'll be a good person. I'll do So not only did I know God existed, I knew that God wanted me to be a good person. And there was and look this is something that people who have found God know and people who don't believe in God maybe will not accept but there is something to when you open yourself up like that to God like you find out that he's real and it's not like he speaks to you or he hallucinates I don't like see a fiery bush and the words of God started talking but like he fills you like you when you open yourself like that to it you get filled by it and there's No, there's no more debate in your mind over whether that's a real phenomenon or not. You're like any more than like if I were to leave here and someone were to be like, "Do you believe in Tucker Carlson?" And like I'd be like, "No, I know for certain like I know for a certainty that Tucker Carlson exists. I was just with him." It's it's like that. And so it was um and it's never it's it changed my life and ever since I'm I regularly pray to God. It's something I'm conscious of every single day. No way. Um every day. Every day. And always I don't even pray exactly. Um I don't ask for things ever. I ask for one thing ever from God. Um which is that my my wife and my kids are healthy and safe. It's the only thing I ever pray for. I don't ask for anything. The only other thing that I do is I I um I express gratitude. Got like I just say thank you for everything I have. So that's but that's the extent of it. But I think that I cannot overstate how much I think that's made me a better person. Really? Yeah. just it's it's very very good for you to constantly remind yourself how lucky you are that you have all the things that you have. It's it's very easy to get away from that and that's where that's where you you ruin your inner happiness, your inner joy is if you start you start taking the things you have for granted because once you like you know once you when you think you could lose everything you already have and then you don't that's when you really appreciate it you know you really appreciate what how lucky we all are. Well, not to be like too blunt or too personal, but you're on the cusp of like change in your life on the basis of what's happened in the last month in your life. I've just seen this story so many times. Yeah. So, to be vulgar, your income in this year will be higher than last year. I'm just telling you that because you're way more famous and you're also on the right side of history, I think. Yeah, I hope so. And uh and certainly on the right side of popular opinion. So like that. Do you think I mean the danger in life is getting what you want and finding yourself unhappier? Are you worried about that? No, I'm really not. Um and I do just think that it's because again, if this was happening to me at 25 or at 30, I would be very concerned about that danger. Literally, like what I just told you is kind of already happened in my life. I know who I am as a person. I kind of know what money actually means. Like there's lots of nice things. I'm not downplaying money. It's it's very important, particularly in my position. It's very important for me to be able to protect my wife and kids that we have some money, you know what I mean? So that I can do that. Um, but no, I'm not I'm really not worried about that at this point. I think I've kind of like my wife herself is a very grounding force for me. She's the person whose approval I seek. She's the person whose opinion I really care about, you know, and so like that's and and she keeps me very grounded. Also, just as you know, you know, having these little kids just keeps you grounded because they're uh they're they just don't care at all. At all, like literally at all. My my six-year-old the other day, we were out to dinner. Um and so we're out to dinner. We're sitting down. My wife, my my six-year-old girl and my three-year-old boy, and the uh the owner of the restaurant is like a fan of mine. So, he comes over the table. He goes, "Oh, thank you guys so much for coming. I just wanted to shake your hand. I really appreciate everything you're doing." And I was like, "Oh, thank you so much. I appreciate that." So, he leaves. And then my daughter, my six-year-old, who's kind of 17, but she's six, she turns over at me and she goes, "Why'd he come over and say hi to you, Dad?" "Cuz you're famous." And then just looks and then just turned right back to her menu. I mean, it was like she could not have just undercut me more than that. I was like, "I guess I'm not really that cool." All right, I But that that stuff helps. I'm really lucky that I didn't have this moment 15 years ago that I had it now. So I think I think I'll be good but then you know you cut back to me in a year I come back here I got like the shades on or something it's totally ruined me pelo not per Dave it's it's wonderful to see you no matter how many times you've been here I hope you will return I hope to to be again um and can I just say by the way just the last thing I'll say and then uh we can end but I will say that you know a big part of like the reason why I'm able to do what I do and be kind of protected because I'm not like I'm not vulnerable. At least I don't think I hope I don't live to eat these words, but I don't think I'm going to be ruined or cancelled or anything like that. And a big part of it is that Joe Rogan and Tucker Carlson have my back. And you kind of can't really cancel someone in today's world as long as those guys have your back. Okay. And so, no, but I'm saying you're providing a lot of cover for people to be able to tell the truth and know that like, oh, you're not going to be able to like shut this person out of the conversation for the crime of telling the truth. Well, the money thing is important to that extent. Money does not make you happy, but being dependent on other people's money can make you enslaved. And not having um debt, not having investors, we don't have debt or investors. That makes a huge difference in my life. and and I and but you also have like actual skills like you can just go do shows for the rest of your life. Do you know what I mean? And I'm quite happy to do that. That's what I'm saying. So actually you were talking about Matt Walsh who who I really do like and I and I thought for you know to the extent that you know he said what he said kind of impressive considering he works at the Daily Wire. He still works at the Daily Wire however and I know I'm not mocking him at all. I worked at Fox News for you know 15 years and you do have like in the back of your mind like oh can I say that or you know you self censor even when you're not aware that you do but if you're if you're truly independent then you can be independent. Yeah. Which is the best. The best is really just so great. Well I I think you're funny even if Douglas doesn't Dave. Thank you. Thank you Tucker. [Music] So, it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking. With everything that's going on in the world right now, all the change taking place in our economy and our politics, with the wars we're on the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's immoral. What can you do about it? Well, we could whine about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it. A way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think, is to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way, you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So, we hope that you'll do