The general gonna experience. Oh, God. Can you, like, minority report of, like, legitimate serial killers? You know what the problem with that would be if you could go, like, if you were with a baby, and you said, because of this baby's life and where he's at, this baby will one day be a serial killer. But I'm gonna try to figure out how we got to just being with a baby with a scenario. I'm just hanging, it's not even your baby, but... Well, you're at a hospital. Maybe there's some, like, some future prognostication tools where they did, like, zoom in on a baby's brain and see exactly where it's gonna go. I mean, there's gotta be something to having some sort of consistency with the neurology of serial killers. A serial killer. I think it alters with life. I think it's many things. And obviously I'm a moron, so I don't really know. You say you're a moron. I'm sitting watching this beautiful sign lit up behind you in this gorgeous building. You are not a moron. I'm definitely a moron. You're a total moron, but you're a very smart moron. You're a very smart moron. You're a smart people. You need to trust me. I'm a legit moron, but I have a way of looking at things. It's a little freer in my associations because I don't worry about being fired, right? And so I haven't worried about being fired for a long time. So I have a certain freedom in the way I look at things, but that's not intelligence. But my point is that, I don't remember my point. What were we talking about? We were talking about serial killers. Yeah. If you could take that child and raise it differently, would it turn out to be an amazing person? See what happens to a person? You know that the concept of determinism, do you know that over free will? Free will, meaning that you have control of your destiny. Determinism is like, hold on a second. It's way more complicated than that. Who you are right now is a combination of many factors that are outside of your control, particularly when you're a child. Abuse, violence, and trauma. Those shaped a child in very horrific ways. And neglect. One of the things I was watching a documentary about the Unibomber. And the Unibomber's brother, Ted Ksensky's brother, was talking about how when Ted had a condition when he was a child, they brought him to this place to treat him. And they let, he was a baby. And they left him alone for like months. So during a critical period of his life, like he had no love, no touch of his mother, like this is like really important stuff. I forget how long the period was. I want to say it was like two months, but even if it was like two weeks, like what is that due to a child? It's got to be detrimental. See if you can find it, Jamie. It was in the documentary that is recently on, I think it was on Netflix. He talked about it. You know, so he lived in this shack in Montana and he would point guns and people and not kill him. And then he starts riding this man of Festo and then he starts sending bombs to people. But there's so many factors there. Here's one besides the fact that his parents left him in this place. They definitely left him in this place for a period of time that I think was pretty extended. I think it was at least two weeks. It might have been two months. Jesus. He was also part of the Harvard LSD experiment. Oh, shit. So in Harvard, during the 19, I guess it was 50's, not sure when he was going to school at Harvard. They were doing these LSD studies. And I was like, I'm K. I'll try this. You don't know, right? I would say, yeah, no, I don't know. They must have had branches. They had studies helping them fuel their own study. I don't find a time, but this is what it says about it. Okay. When Take as Insights, at a tender age, he got sick, was taken to hospital with hives or swollen red bumps that appeared on the skin. His family said he was isolated from his parents. His doctor tried to determine what was wrong with the infant. Mom always faulted the hospital. They would have been there every day visiting, but the hospital said no, David Kuzinski said in the docuseries. It was kind of like we don't want parents to be in the way. We've got our work to do. We have our little baby to cure. So keep your distance. They were only allowed to visit him two times a week for two hours. Oh my God. It's insane. I mean, so then you think about looking at the bottom. Are we going to create serial killers? I mean, we're going to be able to create a little bit. But look at the bottom. He come out and he'd never been the same after that. She said. So it changed him as a toddler. So you got that. Okay. So this horrific neglect that he experienced as a child through no fault of his own. So free will. We have to look at free will. Like what does that mean? Are you saying he has free will? Like this guy with a broken brain because he was ignored as a child. Or people that were sexually abused as children. For years and years and years, by a close family relative or family member and no one believes them, that that's real too. Right? How much has that changed you? Then he goes on to be a part of these fucking Harvard LSDs. And then you also have to factor in check. You have to factor in gender. I'm pretty sure that's true. But you know, I'm wrong a lot. Don't you think you have to factor gender in a little bit? Him being a man. Yeah. I'm sure anger. He was apparently like super his brother talked about how he's super angry when a girl would reject him. He would get furious. And I'm sure with testosterone that is affected differently than some somebody who's female with estrogen being the leading hormone. Like there's got to be that has to factor into it a little bit. Unibomber in the Harvard joke experiment. I mean, you got to admire the outfit though. That's style. That's me in the airport. Does it say anything in there? If psychology day has it too. Okay. Where's it say that he was there? Oh, what's a part of the. The entailed your product. It lies. Yeah. Where does it say about Ted Kuzinski? Does it say that in there? I'm 99% sure he was a part of the study. I wouldn't be surprised. I mean, if. What can Manson was? It's like they had like the NBA starting lineup of serial killers. Just Google line Ted Kuzinski. There it is. Analysis of the personality of Adolf Hitler. And that's a thing like how what are you think of the circles of psychology and how many overlap. How many are overlapping with people like Hitler and Ted Kuzinski and all of these? Like what are those common denominators amongst them? Because that's what we have to figure out as people who study the brain and study behavioral patterns. That's really going to tell us a lot. But you're right. Like will and what was one of the two factors you were. Determinism or freewill. And I used to think much more that it was free will because I'm a stubborn person. I used to think fuck you, we figured out bro. Like when I was younger in particular. I get that. But the more I talk to people that really understand the concept, the more it, it let me relax my grip on my opinion, which is very important. Right. When you you have an opinion about something, it's very important to examine how much of a grip you have in this opinion. And whether or not this opinion is connected to you judging your own intelligence, are you in a like a game with people where your opinions better than their opinion? Are you married to these ideas? Well, it's hard for people as well because of cognitive dissonance. Like we have a natural reaction to learning new things. 100%. Well, we have, we like things to fall in line with whatever we already are. Yeah, we're very assumed as our ideas. So this is the study. And it says another ethically problematic, and this is a fucked up story. Ethically problematic study was conducted by Henry A. Murray. Murray was a professor at Harvard University and had worked with the office of strategic services, the credit sets. The CAA, they didn't just name you. What are we going to call it? Just strategic services. Put it on the on the door. What sounds better? Central Intelligence Agency or the office of strategic services? Strategic services is too hard to say. It's so hard to say. It's too cumbersome. Neither of us have said it correctly. The whole time. The whole time. That's true. Yeah, but strategic services. Like it sounds like you've got to go here. What are you doing here? I'm for the office of strategic services. You have two strategic service men in your office. Yeah, I agree with the name CIA. It's a better name. I'll say, okay, so during World War II, he wrote analysis of the personality of Adolf Hitler, which was a psychological analysis of Hitler. It was used. I can't just come up with a better word. Why is psychological so long? The mind of analysis of Hitler. It was used by the military. And during this time, he also helped develop tests to screen soldiers conducting, conducted as tests on brainwashing and determined how well soldiers could withstand interrogations. So what they were trying to do is break people. So they took this is what's crazy about it. They took these students and they would do things to them. They would interrogate them and fuck with them. And they would also dose them. And so the interrogation studies that says included intense mock interrogations on soldiers as part of assessing the limits of their psychological breaking points. Okay, that's a little perverse. Right. He conducted such interrogation studies on Harvard University undergraduates. Theodore Kizinski, who later became known as the Unibomer, was one of the 22 participants in Murray's study subjected to several years of interrogations designed to psychologically break the young man. So why aren't the people who have run these studies under the same interrogation that the soldiers of World War II were under, where we went after the fucking Nazis. We should be going after people who ran these terrible tests and basically created some of society's most prominent and infamous serial killers. That's a nightmare. You're right. And it's a nice way of looking at it that he deserves punishment. We deserve revenge and all that stuff. Not him, the people who have jumped him. Yes, and all the his victims deserve revenge. Yes. But what I'm interested in is that this man, like if karma is real, if that's real, if like what you are today is this long chain of lies that you live that have brought you to this. And you're thinking of yourself in this incarnation because it's the only one you've ever known. But in reality, you're the process of this long line of beings that has gone on since the beginning of life itself. Hey, if all the ancestry in you, what did that guy do in another life? Think about if that's true. I'm not saying it's true, but imagine if it is. Let's just as a thought experiment. Imagine if it is that you're going to come back as a guy who is ignored in this place because they're treating you with some grando disease that you got that most babies don't get. See if these horrible hives, they keep you in this place where they take care of children for weeks. They don't let you visit them a couple of times a week. To avoid a problem. However long they kept them there. I don't know how I don't remember. I want to say it was two months. And we know your numbers are a little off. It's thinking it's going to be an hour. He was there for 45 years. He was there most of his life. They let him out in college. So he gets out of there and then his brother would talk about these moments of rage that he would have. That would be terrifying. Like a girl rejected him particularly. He would write horrific notes to them. Really mean, mean notes. And then this guy goes and does these Harvard studies where they fuck with him. Relentlessly and they're trying to break him. It's almost like they knew that this was a guy that was unusually broken. It's acceptable to breaking in the way that would benefit their study. God. And especially like when you think about the male brain and the formative years go well into your frickin' 20s. Yeah, like 25, the frontal cortex. I think it's females too. I think maybe you guys are a little quicker. We're a little bit quicker. We're like 18, 19. But you know, still like he's on the heels of his brain barely being. And the docer was acid and trying to break him cycle. And in doing, like mocking alone as a child on the playground, although I do think it's a necessary passage into adulthood is to deal with adversity. Mocking alone is brutal. And then you add it to this study with LSD being thrown into the mix where your brain is not on a solid ground. The way it's going to process everything is obviously detrimental to who you become. And it changes your brain chemistry. I think there's like a problem, a real undeniable problem with having secrecy. What do you mean? If you're like an organization that has ultimate power, like the CIA in the 1950s, and you can run these studies and no one knows about them. And you're giving kids acid and you're trying to break them. That's why I said it for first. It's crazy shit to them. Who knows what they did to them? Is it really for your fucking study? Are you guys just bored? Or do you just get to do this? Right. It's something you get to do and you're just pushing the ticket because you can and you're funded. That's so demented. Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan Experience for free, only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips. Easily, seamlessly switch between video and audio experience. You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data costs all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan Experience.