Oh, you dirty bitches. We're live. This is a woman playing the background. It's a band called Honey Honey, and it's a song called The Angel of Death. And I'm in love with this church voice. I heard this like an hour ago. So many posted on my message board, and then I just listened to it. And I've listened to it like 10 times. Such a pitch. I'm such a bitch for like a hot girl's voice. A girl with a beautiful voice man. There's like a weird harmony that it connects to inside yourself. You know, I don't think... I bet women won't understand it. You know, I don't even know... I don't even think this chick knows what she's doing. She knows how to do it though, but the impact that it has on the male is astounding. The Joe Rogan experience podcast is brought to you by the Fleshlight. If you go to Joe Rogan.net and click on the link for the Fleshlight and enter in the code name Rogan, you'll get 15% off number one sex toy from that. There's no other way to say that. You gotta come up with a better way Brian. You gotta come up with something creative. Speaking of which, your fans have been known. Yeah, they've been saying that I have to get you one. Do you want one? I'm missing out on life otherwise. If you want one dude, I got one for you. I just sent me a big box of them. And I brought one for Studio Fleshlight. It lasted less than 24 hours. I brought it here. And I was just going to use it to show it. Just in case people ask about Fleshlight, because everyone always asks about what's like, what's this best like. And so I had it for less than 24 hours. I was like, dude, please can I have one? See hearing. So see stole your Fleshlight? I can't hear you. Give it to him. He's fucking it right now probably. Yeah, I give him the black model one too. Nice. Well, look man, it works. Solid product. Yeah. We wouldn't do it less if it was good. It's a funny thing to get behind. People find it very offensive and pathetic and juvenile. Why? I'm not sure, but I like it. I like the fact that people are bothered by it. And it's so stupid. It just highlights how fucking ridiculous we are. Completely ridiculous. We would care at all about pleasure. You know that we care at all about like a device. It's really good at extracting sperm. That's all it is. You know? What's your fucking problem people? We're also brought to you by on it.com. O-N-N-I-T. Makers of Alpha Brain. The cognitive enhancement supplement. I didn't take mine today. I hope I don't sound stupid. I got some right here if you want to. I would say a nigger, but I'm not that confident. Beautiful. If you go to on it.com. O-N-N-I-T. All of this will be explained. What it is is essentially nutrients for your mind. It's not going to make you a genius if you're a retard, but it's going to enhance the way your brain works. It gives you like a feeling of mental clarity and energy. There's a lot of people that don't understand Neutropics. I don't know what Neutropics are. I suggest you just Google. It's N-O-O Neutropics. It's all about vitamins and nutrients that help your brain function at a good level. There's plenty of studies that have been done on this. You should research it before you buy any of this stuff. Also, I want to say that if you see on its products and you want to try it, you're not sure if it's going to work for you. Try it. The first 30 pills are 100% money back guarantee if you don't like it. We want to make it as easy as possible for you. You don't even have to send the stuff back. If you try it and you don't feel like it has any effect on you, then send the pills back. Don't even send the pills back. You have to do shit. You just get your money back. It used to be as many as people ordered, but unfortunately a bunch of people decided to just buy a bunch of it, get all the money back, and then sell it on eBay. That old story. It's not even a story. It's a fable. It's true story. I've said it so many times. That's the problem, but it's always ultimately true. It's a fairy tale. You think so? Yeah. Now it's a fairy tale. It's a trolls. I've said it too many times. It's become like not real anymore. Yeah, you're right. It does. It changes a little bit every time. Well, they bought a bunch of them. They bought like nine orders and they sold them on eBay. That's the story. That's all I know though, dude. Next weekend is going to be Amazon Market Place. I didn't make this up now. I'll be in assholes. Trying to do a commercial here. You're going to help him, Brian. We're also going to make Shroom Tech Sport, which is a course that's mushrooms supplement. It's got B12 and N2. It's great for any really, really hard workout people. If you're in a crossfit or anything crazy like that, it's a great endurance enhancement supplement. It really helps you push in the points where you would ordinarily be fatigued. Yeah, I wouldn't suggest any of this if you're not someone who works out though. There's also Shroom Tech Immune. All this stuff, if you're fascinated by it, a far better description than I can ever give is on on it.com. That's ONNIT. There's also an enhanced science of alpha brain where we've updated due to some criticisms updated. We hired a science advisor and updated the way everything is described. Everyone's trying to be as above board and cool this is possible. That's what it is. If you're fascinated by new tropics, go to ONNIT.com, ONNIT, enter in code name Rogan, and you get 10% off. Not just the first order either. Now it's as many orders as you want. We fixed that shit. All right. Powerful. Danielle LeBola-Eliz in the house. What is it? Experience. Join my day. Joe Rogan Park. Yes, my night. All day. Brian, you're like a 12 year old DJ. That's the kind of sound effects. I would be really into if I was a DJ and I was 12. Yeah. Or it sounds like a sports broadcast. You know, like this week. Yeah. And this is sports. Yeah. A lot of those sports guys are hard to handle. Yeah. You're intense. Yeah. Well, there's a special breed of guys that like shit on athletes. You know, there's like some of them that are just sports broadcasters. But some of those dudes like you do them and they're like, he's a bomb. He's always been a bomb. He'll never get off the bench. And you're like, whoa, like you're talking about like a professional athlete there, son. You better settle the fuck down, man. You're getting a little crazy with your insults there. Yeah. You fat guy in front of a microphone. How dare you, you know? I like that insult shit. Right, Danielle LeBola-Eliz. My friend. Step in the ring or shut up. Exactly. So, brother, you are a scholar of religious history. Right? I mean, you are essentially. Why not? Yeah. I mean, that's the best way to describe you. You're actually a professor on it. Yep. How do you think that it is that we live in 2012 and we have this incredible depth of religion that's still controlling our lives? It's impossible that something that seems so like it seems so if you're rationally looking at it, we go, okay, maybe there's some truth behind any of this. Maybe, maybe there's truth behind the origins of the creation of the universe. But clearly this shit has been written by people. And we're going to base our lives on this. This is fucking bananas. People, when they say, base our lives, most people say they do, but then of course, when it's convenient. Not just like, let's conveniently forget a couple of passages. But aren't those the safest ones? The ones that stick to the code, those are the most dangerous. The ones that went through a rocks that you were dancing. A Christian girl that is sluts around every now and then. That's like way better. Absolutely. Someone who completely sticks to the code. But I mean, some of the things are because they boil down to eternal type of questions that no one has an answer to. So the fact is, unless people always say, oh, screw early during the case, we go for science and reason and we need to be rational. And not that we're wrong. I mean, reason is a great tool. But if it doesn't give you answers to the things that scare the hell out of people, people are going to want some answers. Whether they're bullshit answers or not, doesn't matter. It's like, give me some answers because otherwise it's too damn scary. Is religion then a tool to allow people to psychologically adapt to the next stage of revolution? Like something like a placeholder. I mean, I think it's what people need to deal with the fact that they can deal with uncertainty. Is it possible that all that any of it is based on reality? I mean, no, it sounds ridiculous. So does the universe itself. The universe itself is pretty ridiculous. The big bang is pretty ridiculous. I don't claim to know shit. Who knows what's up there. I don't believe or disbelieve anything. My attitude is there's what I have experienced and there's everything else. Yeah, what I've experienced, I kind of know. And everything else, who the hell knows? I mean, it piece me off when people assume that stuff that they themselves have an experience. They've already somewhere that's the ultimate truth and everybody needs to believe that. It's like, what the hell? Why? How nuts would it be if you died and you really were at a date in the clouds? How psychedelic would that be? If you really did have a dude, St. Peter, who's like the FBI, he's just been following your life since you were a baby. And he's like going over day, why'd you do this? And why'd you do that? Like, fucking really? That would really, that would work as a a pure and then you get to a moment. Is that what they're, are they envisioning a moment of ultimate enlightenment? What is the idea of the heaven? Where is it coming from? Is it coming from the need for the next level? What would be the best possible scenario? The best possible scenarios? All loved ones, it'd be in the clouds forever and forever. But really, how fucking long would that last before you were bored as fuck? Could you imagine if that's heaven, you're just hanging out in the clouds? Right. You can't drive anywhere, you can't go to the movies. It's just everybody's up together in heaven. What the fuck is that? That's ridiculous. No flashlight. Yeah. We all have wings now. So we just flying around up here. You know, what do we do after a while? You get bored. Where are you getting your food? You're in the clouds. You know, you eat in fucking cloud fish. What are you doing? Where are you getting your food? This is ridiculous. We don't need food anymore. Oh my God. What is it to live for? That would be my question. Our dark flesh lights in heaven. Can you fucking have it? How about that? How about that question? You know? Can you fucking have it? If it was heaven, would you be like that? What if it was just like a smokeier place? The whole thing is just smokeier. You know, like you're just sitting in a lot of smoke, you know, all the time. So like you can have full relationships, you get girls pregnant, you can still get a driver's license, but everything's just like really smokey. Yeah, that sounds like a sense of a... What the fuck are you talking about? Because you're in heaven. It's like super clouds. So it's like real life but Seattle like. Maybe it's Seattle. Maybe heaven is Seattle. Exactly. What's up? Could you fucking have an old health space? Fingers versus Seattle. I'm definitely going to Vegas. Oh wow. I don't think Vegas is in hell. Vegas is some sort of purgatory. No, that's definitely hell. No. It's like in their local state motto. That's hell. That's Vegas. Hi. Where hell is that way? I think it is. What you know what? There's something about human behavior, man. When you get them in that frying pan, that frying pan that is Las Vegas, you know. I hate it now. I just don't even want to go there. Just one two days ago and Jesus just that drive there. I was like, oh, I forgot how bad it is. Yeah, but it's fun too, man. It is. It is. It's the best place to go see fights. Yeah. It's like no other place. You know what it's like? It's going to the best club, like a bar one night and then you're hanging out there for a couple of days. Yeah. It's a weird town. I like Vegas. There's a lot of things I like about it. There's plenty of cool people in Vegas. It's just the reality is when you get people and you just let them go free like that, you give them 24 hour free reign, go drink, and you just wind up doing ridiculous shit. That's what you thought. You know, because you see these people that are going home. Why do we know this crazy shit? You know that they are the ones who are at 9 a.m. Or that's what I'm talking about. Yeah. You're like, yeah. This is the car in the mouth for this lady, you know? It's the... I know. It must be a fucking grind. It's trying to go back to work after a weekend or that. But people who live there, man, they must get an extraordinary view of humanity. Yeah. They have like, they would be like great psychologists, people who live in Vegas. They probably understand a lot about people. You know, if you work at a casino, say if you're like some dude, you could be like a guy who's like a real crafty dude who lives in Vegas could really describe humanity in a very unusual level. Probably. No, any of you. The angel and just see them at the roe at stake. Yeah. Because I've got just the idea that you would get people and allow them to drink through hours of the night. Think of drink whenever they want. Like nobody ever tells you to stop drinking. It's so ridiculous. They just drink to there. You need to drink. You're like, why? You can still drink. This is crazy. It's just that alone is nuts. You know, we're just... No one's used to that shit. That's a weird thing. Alcohol removes inhibition. And then you have... So it's like just that alone is what makes Vegas a fucking completely insane. I mean, you want to freedom? Here you go. You got it. Let's see how it goes. At this time was the first time that I actually was anywhere out there than on the street. I was like, well, there are actually people living here. This is weird. I thought he was just... And although these now I'm there, I love it though. I love the fact that there's a place like that. I love the fact there's a place where people can gamble. I don't even gamble. But I love that you could just go gamble at three o'clock in the morning. I don't do it. But if I was into it, I would love the fact that I could just do that. You know, I just... I hate the fact that you can't... You know, you have to go somewhere for something like that. You know, that we restrict that sort of behavior everywhere else. That's speaking of religion. It's one of the things that piece me off the most. Because I mean, people being religious. I have nothing against it. If it helps you being nicer to your neighbors or whatever, good for you, that's stuff that piece me up. To no end is when they want to impose their own morality on you. And so the victimless crimes law. No gambling, no prostitution, no drugs. No... But is there a positive message in trying to control some vices? Is there anything you could say as far as like social engineering, like man, if you wanted to have a really safe environment, maybe would you make prostitution illegal? Would you make drugs illegal? Would you try to suppress it? Or would you... Do you think the safer thing would be to just decriminalize it and let people figure it out for themselves? Yeah, I mean, I have a minimum of regulation. Kind of like the way they have the... The most traditional... Yeah, exactly. Where you have some safety standards or is good for everybody involved. You limit the damage that people can do to themselves and to others. And then that's your choice. Yeah, you do it with your life. Yeah, it's a weird thing, man. It's a weird thing. Just the idea that you can control what other people do. But only to a certain extent. Like we don't say that we can control porn yet. Although there was a thing about Newt Gingrich and Mitt Romney and... I guess Rick Santorum told them all of them were going to go after porn. Yeah. Was that who it was? Yep. Was that... It was at least two of those characters were going to go after porn. I think it was Gingrich and Santoram. I don't think Romney... Well, not everybody makes much difference because those guys are, you know, different shades of gray. But there's so much... There's so much art, man. It's so weird. The fact that anyone on Earth could vote for Santoram scared a shit out of me. A lot of people are voting for them. They love this guy. What do you think they're connecting to? I mean, as a person who, like... I mean, he's obviously the message quite a bit of it is religious. It's a big time. I mean, that kind of stuff. It boils down to somebody who will give you the image of what you would want to have. Where we promote. All the good guys will be rewarded. All the bad guys will be punished. We stand for morality. We squash anything else. And the thing that makes some of these people feel good is we'll squash everyone else who doesn't agree. We're leaving life the way we do. So we can pose our happy dog, Mount everyone else. Because that ultimately is the kind of shade that he stands for. And it's... People like it. I mean, it's not just their vision. If you look even outside of early-gen people voted for Eteller. It wasn't just purely taking power. People like Nazism. People like the hardcore form of communism. They like certain things. They like somebody who puts up a strong face. And it's like, I'll stand for all these values. I'll clean up. That shit and simply, my life. That's scary to me. Yeah. It's really scary. Yeah. Big time. Because... I mean, it's not real. Yeah. It's based on numbers. Yeah. And he must have a belief. He must have a belief. I mean, there's no way he could be talking this much if he doesn't have a belief. But anybody who believes something that they can't really prove and believe it to a point where, you know, they're willing to base their lives on it like that. And you want to just run the biggest nuclear arsenal in the world really? Look what you're banking on. Yeah. Look what... Look what corner you're in. You're in the corner of fire and brimstone for real. You're in the corner of gays shouldn't be allowed to get married. And what are you doing in 2012? Why do you want to give a fuck about what gay guys are doing? You weirdo. What kind of weirdo gives a fuck about what some gay guys are doing? Like, oh, we have to stop that. Birth control is bad. Yeah. Birth control is bad. It's such a fucking crazy. It's like, he's like pulling us back in the 1960. Yeah, but I mean, his... Birth control is awesome. You can shoot loads in the chicks and I don't get pregnant. You stupid fuck. You fucking dummy. You fucking dummy. Have you ever tried the female condom on a girl? Yeah, was that like a dental dam? Yeah, it's like a dental dam. But like, you could just come as much as you want into her. Like, it's amazing. But you have to change it because it's like a vagina diaper because it gets really full. Oh, my God. So... That's the image you just gave us. It's the birth control lever. Somebody was the first time. She had a diaper that just killed my foot, son. See it, it's late. Yeah, who's gonna be all excited? You like my vagina diaper? It is. God's still fucking if you have a vagina diaper. We don't care. We can get over that real quick. You know, for a woman, that would be a... That would be a... That would be a deal breaker. Yeah. You know, he blew off a diaper. A bunch of goobers in the bag. If a girl had a diaper on, she'd shit all over it. She was really hot. And you had a bunch of napkins and, you know, some hot towels. What you'd clean her ass and then fuck her. Yeah, it would even bother you really hardly. You know, like whatever. I just got to deal with it. Wiper-ass clean. Baby with big tips. Yeah, I mean, but for a girl, Phagai had like shit's mid-open. It was balls and dick. And his pubic ass, she was like, that's it! It's over. Women don't want it nearly as much as we do. I agree. Will clean shit. We will clean your shitty ass. For real, right? That's an also-covership. I'm glad we started this. It's true. I don't know why. We're freaker. We're freaker, right? Is that in the Bible? Yeah. Do you think that the Bible was initially created just to try to keep people in line? Do you think it was created like, look, and these are some stories. This is some lessons that we've learned. And then it just kind of like got out of control. Like, I think it goes both ways. Sometimes you use it as a tool to control people's behavior. If you feel that they are too fucked up, but also it's an internal thing. I think it's not just, I know this is bullshit, but I'm going to feed it to them just so I keep the crazy thing in line. I also think that some of the people themselves who start some of these things feel it needed. They desperately need it to the point where they will, they are going to be the first one to stick their own lives on it. And that's, I guess, the santorum thing. You know, you want to leave that way. I mean, I think you're nuts, but whatever. It's your life. You should be free to do whatever you want. When you want to impose it on everyone else, that's when you piece me off. That's when it gets scary. Yeah. What's just bizarre to me? Anybody who really absolutely believes something that much is bizarre to me. Yeah. Like, why do you believe it? Where are you seeing this? You really believe that book? Is that what's going on, man? This, that's how, that seems crazy. Right. That you're banking it all in one book. There's a lot of books, man. Don't worry about it. A lot of shit has been written, you know? And really the shit that's the weirdest is the oldest. You can't, that's nonsense. We need like a new behavior standard guide for humans. That's what we need instead of a Bible. Just a behavior standard guide. So we can all get through this world. Like these are the rules that we agree to. Right. Instead of bestowed upon us by a higher power, yeah, you definitely shouldn't do most of this shit. The Bible says, it's something that I have to do. Don't be killing anybody. Right. Don't fuck your neighbor's wife. All that stuff. That's all good. Yeah. You really should. Right. That's these are good. But we need some more of those. And we need like a comprehensive guide just based on what we all know to be right. We all know. I think this is the best time ever to do something like that because even though people are complaining at times they're tough and unemployment is bad. And it certainly is. The economy is in a terrible position. But it's still better than any time in human history. Right. There's really been no better time as far as like safety, as far as like the access to get food and medicine. This if there's ever a time for us to get our shit together, like on paper, now is it. Like together as like a group of humans. Instead of, instead of bound by some crazy words that were written first in ancient Hebrew, first of all they were, they were told as an oral tradition for 1,000 years first. Right. Yeah. It's not for 7 or 11,000 years. God. Can you imagine what the fuck happens to a story when you tell it for hundreds of years before somebody figures out how to write things? No. Whoa. That's the store, Bintus, I don't know. That's nuts. What do you think about those Dead Sea Scrolls? Do you know much about that? Yeah. I mean, it's all the things. There's what are your official scriptures of every religion are one tiny part of what used to be out there. And then people, I mean you get to the cases of Christianity where literally they get to vote on which books are sacred and come from God and which ones are not. Can you believe that? It's like somebody sit around the table. It's like today right now we pull out some book and go, okay, what do you think, Brian? Is these gods or not? Okay, next. Let's try the other one. How about this one? It's like, it's really that arbitrary. Yeah, I mean, really? That's amazing. How many books were left out? Are those available? Who knows? Because a lot of these are burned. Are they in the books? I think this is the indie Bible. A lot of these was because they wasn't like, oh, we decide these is God's stuff and so all the other stuff. Well, really, if you want to know, it's like we have to burn it because it must be the devil. And so it must be terrible and horrible and we need to squash any possible other alternative and so let's burn them out. Wow. And so when something else pops up that shows a different side to it that wasn't made a part of the official canon that it makes everybody feel like what the hell is going on? Like, is so we can base our life on these or can we? I mean, most people are going to ignore it anyway because otherwise in masters would they occur, regardless. But that's that's basically the attitude. What a weird time. I mean, think about like the concept of fate. That's the basics of Judaism, Christianity, Islam. Think about like the story that they all reveal. They all think is a great idea. God shows up, tells Abraham, I really think you should kill your son. And they're like, well, I don't want to kill my son, but if it's God speaking, well, in that case, sorry about Khan, let's go. Is about to kill him and then God sends an angel saying, no, no, wait, just kidding. Just testing your fate. You know, just checking you past the test, you did very well. And now you're very worried for it. You know, last time I checked when you hear these embodied voices telling you you should kill people, least then into that is now what should make you the guy, everybody looks up to one thing. What a great example of fate. You know, I was like, what a crazy story. God wants you to kill your baby. Yeah. What the fuck are you going to kill your baby for God? And now it's the right thing to do. And God said, it was just testing you. Holy shit. That's a sign that's a good job. You pass the test. Yeah. Is that old testament? Yeah. Old testament is about his wonky as he gets, right? But they said that the Dead Sea Scrolls were even wonky. Like, you know, there's a lot of Dead Sea Scrolls stuff that hasn't even been, I mean, include that. That is the oldest written version, right? Right. I mean, just because it's not part of the official canon doesn't mean that it's all good stuff. Right. Or I think it's not like it's easy to fall into the pattern of, oh, this evolved bastards manipulated the things put on these horrible things in the books. And so everything that God's squash must be good. No, not really. You know, some other stuff that God's squash is probably even worse. Who knows? So I love the fact that Dead Sea Scrolls has always linked to a crazy shit. Oh, yeah. It's people always like, it's always UFOs and mushrooms. And it's like every wacky, crazy story is linked to Dead Sea Scrolls. You know? Yeah. Even the fact that they found them, you know, one of the coolest things is the science of putting together the pieces because a lot of them are in leather. One of the ways they put together the pieces was they did genetic testing on them to find out which ones came from the same animal. So they knew that it was a piece of one skin. Incredible stuff, man. That's amazing. Amazing stuff. It was really incredible. And they're still putting that fucking thing together. You know, people are still trying to decipher it. Which probably over the last 2000 years they found the mantra of those things. But 500 years ago somebody would have looked at it. It's like, you know, maybe I can start a fire with it or something. Yeah. Yeah. When you're starving and you have to cook the book. Yeah. You cook the book. That's when you need something to light a fire. Are you going to fuck that book? Light it on fire. We're going to die tonight. You know? Bazzi, karik. Yeah. Fuck. Yeah. How much stuff was lost in the burning of the library of Alexandria? Something is odd. I mean, you're talking about thousands and thousands of volumes. It's very damn scary. Yeah. It's amazing to think that human beings can be so fucking creative and then so destructive. What people understand is there was some sort of incredibly advanced society that was that it created ancient Egypt. I mean, to this day, there's a bunch of puzzles when it comes to the immense construction, of the fact that how much just actual mass was moved, the size of some of these old blisks. I mean, it was really incredible society and they knew a lot of things. And all of it was wiped out in a fire. I think it was like two fires. I think there was two different times they were attacked. Yeah. I'm sort of like, man, how much further would we be if we knew all that shit? Yeah. But it's the same kind of stuff that I've been doing in other places. Because like when the Spaniards came over out here, when they conquered the Aztecs and the Aztecs were one of the indigenous people that had big libraries and dead books and other Eastern language and the whole thing. And the Spanish approach was like, well, does these look like the Bible? No. Well, in that case, screw it. We can burn it. No, they just burn it all. It's like, right. Hey, that's nice. So if it wasn't the Bible that he's burned it? You guys are not Christians. You must be a devil warship person in touch. We should burn everything you've ever done. Because it's all crap. Did they burn any Mayan stuff? Yeah. I mean, basically anything that was in the audience. Mayan's ink games, anybody? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, they're still fine in Mayan temples. That fascinates me, man. They said that there might be as many as a thousand unfounded temples in South America. That's crazy. But then again, when you hike through the jungle out there sometime, or you can see how that that could be. Because you could be there and you wouldn't see it. It would be then feet away. And it's so damn thick that you have no idea where they are. Fuck an incredible culture that existed here. What a bizarre, strange culture that made these cities that were like aligned to astronomical points. Like really amazing. Like the way the sun would come out through some doorways. It was like perfectly built. It's incredible. Like the stuff that they had figured out how to do. It's like, how did you do this? This is amazing. One of the pyramids at the bottom of the pyramid, there's this gigantic stone head of a snake. And he's like, where the hell is the body? It's like because the one day of the year when the sunrise, as it eats the shade of the steps in such a way that it looks like the body's coming down here. I mean, it's like, can you imagine like building the whole thing? And then you have like shitty weather that they studied. That is really suck. Yeah. And if the calculations involved, I mean, is it possible that some of them could be coincidental? I guess the snake thing could be. It's possible. But there's so many of them. There's one in the temple of Luxor, I think it is, where the light comes down this corridor and like illuminates this whole room on one day of the year. Civil but there's so many of them this one in the temple of Luxor I think it is where the light comes down this corridor and like Illuminate this whole room on one day of the year. I mean these guys are awesome It's incredible what they had figured out they'd figured out some amazing shit them in the mind It's like so much stuff was lost in the past would have been so fascinating to really know what it would What what like how much knowledge really was around during the constructions of the pyramids We what did they really know how much how much has lost in just the sand and erosion and how much has gone and fire What the fuck did they really know? I mean if you know got 99% of the human population today with mother technology and tell them build a pyramid Yeah, of course Yeah, everybody like makes it like it's no big deal. Can I not hear it's crazy? If you were off by just a little bit anywhere as I think it's the top it's fucked Yep, it's amazing and they used to be covered in smooth limestone too He used to be actually like shiny and then there was a gold cap on the top of them God damn that must have been magnificent Yeah, seriously and what happened if people don't know you've looked at the appearance why they're so fucked up That's because people stole the limestone they chipped it off of those buildings Those gross disgusting rat people chewed away at that beautiful construction one of the most amazing things a human being has ever created and they chewed away Just pulling chunks of beautiful stone off and building their shitty houses with it fucking crooks Rat people see are in a good mood today. What what kind of a human being would be face the pyramid? They there were rat people to do that Terrible human beings. I mean could you imagine man? What kind of a person would fucking chew up the pyramid and steal the stone? Jesus Christ go get your own limestone bench, you know can you make a house out of wood? Right even the three pigs had options They knew some shit though, huh? That's a fact. It's perfect What kind of religions were around in ancient Egypt like what did they worship? It was all like I mean around there You see the transition from tribal religions that tend to be more male or flexible because they are not written down It's relatively small society, so there's a lot more flexibility about the beliefs So they're generally mistyxam andistic kind of beliefs But then when you turn them into a big society with like millions of people living in it They become you still have a lot of the stresses of that stuff It's all about spirits and these and that but then they become much more Rigid of fish elders a clergy there's becomes a business there's the temple and you know so it's Kind of a more structured type of an amazing that in my mind kind of Pretty much eliminates whatever is moved about an amazing to begin with you were tweeted a Robert E. Howard quote the other day I love that guy. Oh me too, man. I was when I was a kid. I was a huge What was the exact tweet it was a Conan quote? Yeah, I was a Conan quote. I forgot what it is But it's basically Conan going off. Yeah, I find it because I'm about to realize yeah it was Conan in it was one of I forget which book But it's a famous quote where the fuck is it I live I burn with life. I love I slay and am content As it gets women are like that's so gay For a man, you know the Sumerian culture like what a what a fucking crumb what a hard-ass god He was right people don't know Robert E. Howard was his bad mother fucker It was an incredible author who created he created was called the conqueror and Conan the barbarian It was all these crazy fantasy books. They're amazing. They're fucking really fun to read when I was a kid man I became hooked on on the Conan novels and he was he was a Really nutty dude and one of taking his own life right? Yeah I don't know if he's thrown off by the legend as it that he would say that At night he would see this he would get there to write and suddenly he would see the shadow behind him and He wouldn't turn but you could tell that it was Conan carrying a giant tax ready to chop his head off unless you're old tonight And he would stay there and like swear the right right My morning he was gone so he could finally pass out and sleep This corner would be back in the choppy set of wow That Conan was the coolest fucking Character in any book ever written. Yeah, you know the people like like Conan the barbarian with Arnold Schwarzenegger That was pretty cool and everything like that, but really the real if someone got ever figure out how to do the book Justice and make it really put it together right like the last one was kind of corny the dude was pretty badass Yeah, he was that dude was a good Conan he he seemed to me like what Conan should look like no look great But this green writing was the screenwriting was bad, but he was good his fight teams were great He looked like Conan, you know, I think he people were hating because he's too fucking good looking That's what it is the dude is just way too good looking He makes dudes super uncomfortable But if you if you're not a hater I meant to do he was super cool Yeah, and if you're not a hater You go look man. He got lucky. He's born six foot five fucking perfect chiseled face You just got to deal with that bitch. You got to deal with that But guess what that's what Conan's supposed to look like that fucking guys Conan They just need to do it right man. He's the fucking writing was all corny like the ending was all corny What if Michael what if like Michael Bay did it what dude? Yeah something like that or swords blowing up horses spinning around You know who would do it right? Quentin Tarantino. Oh, yeah Only got to do it right We fucking do it right he would dig into that bitch and if you can get Quentin Tarantino to do it right Conan movie God damn son That would be badass. Holy shit. That would be good. Let's get him to get him to write the screenplay Put it put together like one of the one of the better books. There was so many good books, too I got to give you I've been Tarantino would be a fucking dream But but I like I have to say I like me lose the original Conan Yeah, oh, that was good. Yeah, and I find it interesting that then he's the same guy who comes up with some of the concepts for UFC You know how the graces had brought over because he was one of their students Oh real is one of the students of the graces and he was the graces They had art devi and they were nearly as kind of a creative Director into the first UFC You start a coming up with some of the ideas that then somebody else designed for the octagon and all of that and I'm like I love that guy pick created Conan the barbarian and was at the beginning of UFC. That's incredible I didn't even know that that's interesting. You have some UFC trivia that I didn't even know I can go almost satisfied now. I'm my war is done Rampage Jackson's mad at me. Why? I don't know. It's a lot of you. It's an interview. Oh, yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah Well, I was watching those just they used to call me fake ass and we were saying that shit really yeah We're saying that all I want him to do is throw low kicks and Reason is doesn't throw low kicks is because he's fighting a wrestler you dumb ass and you look man You know, I don't I'd love ramping I don't mean to be rude when I Assess things. I'm just trying to objectively try to figure out how this guy could be doing better than he's doing When I look at a guy like ramping I'd look at a dude with he's fucking first of all One of the most exciting fighters of all time you go back to his fights and probably the Ricardo or Rona fight or the or the Kevin random and knockout remember the random and not god damn The slam on a row and I mean so many he had a lot of great great fucking fights in pride You know rampage I like him a lot I like him as a person I enjoyed hanging out with him. I did a thing with him for the UFC once it was There was a show that we did like I think it was called Ultimately, was it UFC ultimate insider or something like it was that the one we're doing now I don't even remember the name of it. It was it was on spike. Oh you Fuck what was the name of it? You have seen no you have seen unleashed as Michael Goldberg's What the hell is it called any idea right now? What time at UFC whatever it was I don't know what else We we drove around in his try he has this giant monster truck with his face on the side of it and shit It's fucking awesome hilarious. It's all lifted and shit. We drove around and I even trained with them We went to the gym and trained and we filmed everything we went and got chicken together and I Yeah, we went to Popeyes He's cool as fuck. I like him. I don't mean anything when I what I'm trying to like what I'm Judging of fine or what I'm not judging a fight, but what I'm when I'm doing commentary in a fight All I'm trying to do is sort of objectively assess What I think someone could be doing differently to try to get themselves out of a spot if they're not winning or you know It's I'm just trying to commentate. It's not I'm not like critiquing the guy's soul I'm not like breaking down who he is as a person. I like the guy a lot You know, but even rampage himself had meets that he was more exciting back in the day when he was impried I mean it doesn't have to be anymore. He's a great fighter. You can do it over the fucking once When when I'm doing what I'm doing commentary is just my objective opinion. That's all it is. It's not that I don't like the guy Why do you think he stopped because in pride pretty much every fight he would somebody up? Leave them up in the air's land. I mean it was like his thing He did it every fight. Yeah, no love aside than never again. I'm like what the has happened I don't know. I mean he has a lot more tools now. He's you know, it's it's hard to tell Also, he was finding people to ring more wonder if that's different Well, I think it actually be easier to pick people up in the cage Exactly because they're upright You know, it also you could get fucking after doing that for a long time. You could get It's possible you could back hurt your back. You can have like issues like a lot of wrestlers What a really powerful guys. I don't know if he does. I'm just guessing right a lot of guys Eventually have like kinks in the neck and shit T does had two Disgrapers. Yeah, and T does wasn't even lifting people up to shoot in straight Yeah, he lifted some people up to he knocked out Evan tan Yeah, that was a big body slam and when he was younger he would hoist guys up a lot You know, I think as you get older you get smarter as you get smarter you fight more conservatively, right? You know, but I just wish the guy wasn't mad at me You know when I tell him to throw leg kicks is just because he has awesome leg kicks Oh, yeah, you know, it's you know, he's like, you know, I'm fine to wrestle with dumb ass like I know I know I'm just saying man He landed a few and his leg kicks are fucking badass. I would like to see that if I was in his corner, you know That's when rampage is mad at you is that something that you should be worried about like if you're out and you see him somewhere I'm like oh, hi, I would talk to him and I think we'd be cool instantly I'm not a I'm not a bad person. He's not a bad person either He's just he's just upset and he's sensitive And he's also got the toughest fucking job on the planet. There's a lot of pressure and a lot of stress Involved to be in a fighter, you know, and the last thing I want to do is add more pressure and add more stress All I'm doing is trying to just I'm analyzing the fight. That's all it is Right, it's just I have to be objective. I can't you know, I can't protect someone's feelings You know, I think it's a sense of doing what I'm supposed to be doing which is sort of analyzing what's going on You know and some people say I'm biased and he was saying that I'm biased towards Jiu Jitsu guys Oh, yeah, I like it like a second dick. That was cute. That was funny It was funny it was good. He was animated in shit. You know, he's he's funny guy, man I like rampage, but if anything I'm more biased I always say towards like really aggressive strikers like van der Lee Silva's my favorite all-time fighter Really? Yeah, I think so if I had to pick like one guy like the van der Lee and pride he because he was so wild man Just every van der Lee Silva fight you know exactly what the fuck you were getting into it was like a Tyson fight And that then that same sort of feeling right you know when he was on top You know when when van der Lee was you know just smashing dudes When he was at his like he's very peak. He was so wild Yeah, it was a wild guy. Well, it was an excitement You know as a fan like holy shit van der Lee is about to fight You know what I mean what van der Lee was gonna fight man Everybody would get right up and still to this day like that calmly fight proved it right still to this day He's got that, you know, yeah, so my all-time like favorite kind of style of fighting is really not Jiu Jitsu right I you know, I I like strikers to watch I like I still like watching beautiful Jiu Jitsu technique I absolutely do but for the oh shit moments for the oh shit It's like almost always chaos right it's almost head it's headkicks It's like Merco Crocop was like the king of the oh shit moments first You know his his left high kicks van der Lee, you know I those are the guys that I always like really enjoy watching maybe the most if anything I'm biased towards those guys But I just you know I appreciate all of it man. I appreciate wrestling I think wrestling is one of the most important aspects I always say that that's the biggest base of the pyramid, you know, and I was never really a wrestler I wrestled for one year in high school, you know It's I don't have a bias when I'm looking at it I'm really trying to look at it as objectively as possible and it changes all the time or what's important It changes all the time because different levels of guys will enter the game And that's when things gets weird like gets we things get weird like when you get like a really high level striker That all of a sudden learns how to sprawl and is really good at wrestling Maybe we rest with a little bit in high school and then all said boom He's in the UFC and you got to deal with this like you know, right You get to like a really high level professional Moy Thai type fighters who have really crisp striking one of those guys One of those really top-end guys the one of those are Nesto who's like in his prime one of those guys steps into the UFC Everything changes in that division make them and everybody has to figure that guy out now You have to you know everyone has to either evolve around his skills find a way to be able to stand with him right Hoping it's beat up in the gym Shooting before the fire It's constantly changing what's important what's important is constantly changing where we sing like a new version Like oh, and then whatever what if one of these guys shows all right now It's not you got this John Jones version this new thing How do you fucking deal with this you got some young kid who's really confident? very smart and has Unbelievable strength comes from wrestling background and has the longest reach of any fucking human being on the face of the planet Yeah, and it's blasting you and you can close to him and he's getting better every day every every time he blanks He's getting a little bit better, you know, it's ridiculous And also he's creative because there are a lot of guys today that are awesome athletes They're great fighters, but they are kind of boring to watch because they do what everybody else does and some Don't get me wrong. It's like all the respect in the world because you're doing something amazing But it's not that you'd watch somebody like John Jones or you'd watch Anderson see you've already watched some of these guys There's like it's a master at work. He's maxing. It's like she's just what's gonna do now, you know He's an artist there's a reason why it's called Marshall art. Yeah Marshall artist that's that is exactly what he's doing. That's artwork right when you watch like his show gun fight Watch the John Jones show gun fight if that's not like a symphony That's like a beautiful work of art, you know what he did is he he destroyed one of the best fighters on the planet He made it look easy Yeah, it puts out in perspective because you know fucking No, no, they didn't have some six four do it trying to punch him in the face while he was painting his masterpieces I absolutely believe if you watch the John Jones Leo to machitify that that is a work of art I absolutely believe that that's artwork. That's fascinating the finish was so beautiful Everything about it everything about the fight is incredible the fact that the old oh tagged him a few times Leo to look great But he just he caught Leo though got him on the ground a days them on the ground and caught him in that standing guillotine and god damn Whoo, but you put it all together like as far as like it's entertainment impact you cannot That's a work of art man. I absolutely is a different type of art I like watching some time Somebody's entire career kind of rendered and watching a bunch of fights from different people like watch one guy And watch back to back fights of their style Yeah, you see the evolution of their style and you really see a style there at work, and it's awesome Yeah, that is a fascinating thing to watch guys evolve, you know, I remember Anderson Silva's first couple of fights When you first start fighting in pride, he was primarily a stand-up guy and he right submitted when he went to the ground like Takahashi I think it was got him in a mounted triangle and then With wrestling shoes on I think he did was it Takahashi now somebody else no Some dude who had losing record of all things the same guy. Oh, no, no, no, you're thinking about My real chon-in you think it'll be a bit before before There was a little bit before Is the same guy who beat Carlos newton by the season in one of the Bushido events? Takahashi that's a causa. Yeah, okay. Not that's That's what yeah, and so he mounted them and got him in a triangle and then real chon-in got him in that lazy flying heel look that's if you never see Anderson Silva lost in one of the most spectacular Finishes of all time doesn't get that he bet there than that this dude reo-chon and fluid him sideways Tied his legs up together in the scissors like a movie. That's like some shit from a movie That's like some shit from a pro wrestling, you know show and then he got him in this flying heel hook and Anderson like Immediately tapped in screaming and pain, you know, that's really the best summation I've ever seen crazy There's anything that can see my craziness and on top of it. I apparently Anderson's foot was fucked up when he was going in that fight It looked like yeah, the second detachas him and there's an is already topping and I'm going crazy Apparently, yeah, he went into that fight with a fucked up foot. That's why he wasn't Wasn't moving so well, man. That's what it looked like so that guy goes from that and then all of a sudden he fights in the UFC against Chris Leibin and now you see this master Yeah, you know you see like wow like the way he took Leibin apart like this is a master You know the way he moved the way he like everything Leibin through he's like shut down of the way and countered bam bam bam These just precise counters and Leibin's charging forward and he's passing them with kicks and knees and punches You like god damn is he good? Holy shit. His fight for as good a fin. I mean dude What the hell can you say well? You know you know one interesting thing is that forest I had an interview with him about that. He told me that he had gotten knocked out twice in training camp before that fight Mm-hmm so right right away. He probably shouldn't have even been in it, right? You know right I mean if you get knocked out on a training camp like two times Yeah, how many concussions are you allowed to have like really close back to back right that? Yeah, it's probably our disclose to somebody touching it right away and yeah Well, there's been a few fighters that have had that happen to them and they both got knocked out exactly the same way One of them was there was a dude who was fighting the UFC for a while Marvin Eastman Marvin Eastman got knocked out he was he got caught by Travis with the fuck's his name a little there Travis loot of course Jesus Christ. How come I forget that guys name? Who's a sick to jits you got but not really known for like being like super powerful a striker a real strong guy I can't believe I forgot his name Travis. I'm so sorry. I love that guy actually I just had too much weight The weed as way too much weight and really strong. Yeah, I've been sitting here stone like a crazy person over here Yeah, it's not good for your brain stuff terrible boy Anyway, Travis looter caught Marvin Eastman with a right hand and just like at the end of the punch and Eastman went down like he got shot Yeah, like he got sniped from a from a fucking tower It was he had gotten knocked out twice in training camp as well, but he was a knocked out once I think by T door T's accident we like ran into an E and Knocked down another time when it take down attempt So you know when that's happening man, you know, you can get knocked out super easy Let's begin a family man. I'm really John That was one of my favorite moments ever when Eastman lost a fight to hit or Bellford in that crazy knee and And then they have the cameras in the post fight interview on Bellford saying Thank you Jesus for giving me the strength to do what I do and then they pan on Marvin Eastman and his face is like he's so That is pretty open. He looks yeah I think you said if I remember correctly you said he looked like a goats vagina, which I something along the last line the best lines However, but it's really pretty unfortunate. I actually said that you see you thought that just kept it to myself And you see Bellford going out about Jesus giving him the strength that you see somebody's open means pleat with blood everywhere They're like really that's what was going on, but I thought it was pretty funny But then again, that is back to Vtor good guys Yeah, I think I'm on the in but I think a lot of fighters really like to believe in the Lord and like to you know To be on a good path because first of all, I think it helps their fighting I think a lot of guys who are Christians, you know, they have a little bit of extra faith They have a little bit of extra calmness right extra belief in themselves if you truly are a believer There's a benefit to that it's like a logic you would as a tool right? That's why it still exists Yeah, by the fact that sometimes it doesn't look like it makes sense But that's why it exists because it believes you would benefit it helps people be disciplined stay uncertain paths You know helps people you know stay on If you if you really truly believe in a higher power, you know, it's much more likely that you're gonna have At least some sort of a code that you're living by Right, so it was that makes sense. Yeah, totally What is it possible to live life like and be really nice without that I mean is it possible to convince people to live like like you know Live like a free person but also live within principles of decency and just abandon everything else. I very much think so but it takes It takes special people because not everybody can handle it because a lot of people unless you keep the mean a little cage They'll go crazy and do all sort of messed up stuff It's kind of like the Taoist. I love Taoism because you see them They are the first to tell you it's like our stuff is You need to be smart you need to be sensible you need to have all these tools that you don't have so go to take Confucianism instead is better for you because you know you won't faxing sub too bad They'll give you simple rules to stick to Limit how much damage you can make Confucianism is better for you seriously just go there our stuff It's to you know, they are a little stop usually they are a little bit with this But so is life, you know, not everybody's gonna get it. That's how it is You know it takes a hell of a human being to live with no rules and still behave in an amazing way but that doesn't mean it can be done and So in that sense I find you know all the rules giving religions useful for Segment of humanity, but then if you want to talk about Full potential of human beings. I feel like no you can do better than that People have a real hard time with that though when you start segmenting human beings and saying that some people are more worthy or some people are more Capable or some people more even evolved, you know, I'm an evil asshole, so I don't care But I mean to be let me explain this. I don't have too much like a vessel, but it's I Believe in being nice to anybody. Okay, I don't care Mars to be whatever you should treat everybody Giving them opportunity, you know, it's like prove to me that you're not a more on great I'll give you all the opportunities in the world But at the same time I can be delusional and expect that everybody's gonna be amazing Liz mart and you walk in tiny room and you can throw it's like I kind of expect people to suck But I'll give them all the opportunities in the world to prove otherwise Right, and I feel like that way is a healthy balance between being realistic about it and being Without donating to a jerk, you know Um, so you think that if if the government came out and said hey listen We did some studies it turns out religions totally bullshit And we got to start from scratch Because we don't know what the fuck is out there What what percentage of people do you think we just go completely bat shit crazy and rioting the streets Will be any would anything change at all? It's not based on evidence anyway So doesn't matter what anybody tells you but a lot of people would be marching to the streets That would be one way where people would like really show how much they believe they would march they would start marching to the streets Right, they would have to they would organize. Yeah, they would really put out a message But that's all the cool things about living in us today. The in general in the Western world you find A few not even that long behind their 200 years ago. They were you know Burn people on the public square kind of thing if they disagree Today even the hardcore from the mentalist they got old right up They got peace, but they are not the Taliban, you know, they may think like them But they don't act like them. Yeah, but we were trying to stop it from getting any further than this Anybody that has that much faith in what they can't see That's that's that's a disturbing thing. Yeah, and then you're willing to die for this. Yeah, that's an issue We're willing to die. Yeah The part of worries me is you're willing to kill. Yeah, really to die whatever. You know, it's your life Well, it's in four-seer ideas. Yeah, it's like the one that piece me off the most of the things is the euthanasia debate the fact that today in 2012 with the technology that we have we you could let people die in a good way You could let you know somebody say look when I get to that point I want to be able to you know, you should mean injection you put me to sleep you give me the other one That puts me out without pain. Yeah, that's their damn life Right, nobody's saying that you need to die that way Right, you want to go in whatever way you want to go good for you But you really want to tell everybody else how they die I think it's a tricky thing man because it's gonna be a lot of people that have cranky old grandparents And they push them what the fucker did that bad and go look he's been delusional right now But he's been telling us to kill him for a couple days Go ahead do this, but there's that double thing you have either people should do when they are young What do you want to do in X amount of situations and sign it and deal with it? And unless they change their mind that's what sticks or they pick somebody that the same way as they pick somebody to manage their bank account They pick somebody who can make those kind of decisions Wow Because otherwise really you are in the position where today you have a sick dog You can take them to the vet and they are gone in no time with no pain But for human being you have to suffer every step of the way seeing your body go to crap And we're very uncomfortable giving someone the power to shut off a life. Yeah, we're very uncomfortable with it, right? It's tricky and in my mind is that's You know when you love somebody you care for somebody and you see them go down that path and that's what they want That's the biggest thing you can do for them is let them die the way they want. Yeah No, I see what you're saying. I mean I agree with you But I think people like I said are very uncomfortable right with the idea especially religious folks Yeah, it's all the uncomfortable God decide when you got to go so let you waste away for six more months in order But essentially they do kill you anyway with painkillers, you know a lot of people when it went towards the end Yeah, it's fucking up keep flooding you with painkillers. It's not pleasant Because it's not that they don't feel anything or they don't realize anything they do realize I know to feel like she didn't realize it so it's like It's not a pretty way to go fuck. I'm off the school of thought just You know just what happens when they cure that what happens when people don't get old How many goddamn people are gonna be here if they figure out stuff people from getting old and dying? We might have a real problem we might not even we might have to build spaceships See it as well there are too many people. Yeah, but I mean at that point there will be more and more and more So if we stop dying and keep people kept fucking right that would be nuts Jesus Christ at that point is where you can have the UFC of You know give a sword to some dudes put them in the cage and have them go at each other for any show You know, you have that these agreements with anybody or for anything please Secondly with swords in the cage. Well, it sounds really stupid to say you know that people would devolve to that level but when you get like a lot of people together They sort of devalue each other when you have too many of them Yeah, and you add that to poverty right in the future Radiation sickness and who knows what the fuck's gonna be going on. Yeah life becomes cheap people It's kind of like even in the ancient world where people die left and right all around them People are a lot less sensitive about human life Yeah, like where you could have the gladiators and people clap and think it's cool because it's like they see people dying left and right all the time Yeah, hey, at least you got to die after you train a bunch of mons You look like a hero. Yeah, you got your hedge-up off But hey, you know, you're gonna die anyway in six months in some other way So fight as well. Isn't it amazing when you really stop and think about it? Isn't incredible that people ever got past ancient Rome We ever got to today Look think how nutty those assholes were the people were finding lions with swords and shit They were throwing lions at people. Yeah, god damn. What a bunch of crazy assholes two weeks ago some Gei emails me from the history channel and say are you by any chance an expert on Caligula? You know the Roman emperor. Yeah Not really. I mean I read my Roman history and stuff, but he's like perfect just come on The way did you reach my email? It's like yeah, yeah, you're some great Come on. As you know if you get a book that you looked at once So it was an expert on Caligula. Yeah, the history channel is awesome for that was but it was cool Actually, they did their homework. I read all their stuff. They it was all on the spot You know nothing funnier than the history channel when they got to do the comes on to Sasquatch expert But it was cool actually they did their homework. I read all their stuff. They it was all on the spot You know nothing funnier than the history channel when they got a dude that comes on to Sasquatch expert right? Like what Yeah, that's brilliant. Yeah. How so so what how much did you have to know for them to use you? You know I was actually surprised that I knew more than I thought I did But you know it's not like The experts I went to hell I read something, but then I was like hey, man I remember all this stuff. Did you have to re-research it? Yeah, the lady more I was like oh shit I better do my homework. Yeah, so I did the re-read the whole thing and everything and to make the connection faster So you don't think about it for five minutes going mmm, you know, but Caligula man, what a crazy motherfucker that guy was I know once for a while. I mean, Caligula was sort of You know to the 10 power by Roman culture in general Jesus Christ this guys were violent with point I mean, you know today there's the You shouldn't kill people in ways that are cruel and unusual all over there all about you know the more Violent painful and public we can make it the better you will make a statement to the fed that you Don't fuck with the state Sure, that's bizarre That was funny Ladies and gentlemen that that break in the podcast was Brian got locked outside He was banging in the door Brian you silly goose the comedy club has like these automated locks when they're closed and so I went out to go Because we're not supposed to shit in this bathroom So because it shits and makes everybody smell the shit right, but no one's working today There's there were some people here. Oh, they were okay So all right, so where were we? Crazy romance. Oh, yeah. How how amazing that culture was. Yeah, much savages people got through that That's we are ancestors of people, you know some some was our least of people that lived there Yeah, so how many people went extinct back now far from it. What a weird time now has been huh? What a shit roll the dice that is getting born and you're living in the ancient Rome Oh, it was funny When UFC started both the people who hated it and the people who loved it compared to gladiator They just have a gladiator opening. Yeah, yeah We just abandoned it new one is fucking crazy. I've seen the new ones amazing Yeah, but they the the gladiator opening was for a long time Ever just like who's this gladiator dude? What is all this about rubbing dirt in his hands and shit It was like what you know what the Italian music, you know, and then it's the opening onto the The new opening is wicked though. Yeah The gladiator so what was colligulous deal it quickly was completely out of his fucking mind. Yeah, basically Was he do you think he was like clinically insane or you think it was just mad with power? No, I think he was not to begin with then of course you grew up in an environment where you know your Anco key also of your family or brothers and sisters and that your mom be top to the point that she loses an eye and then gets her to Start to that, you know, that's the environment you grew up around Even if you're totally saying you start going a little on over the edge. Why do they do that? Because they are mean bastards and They protected their own power and anybody that they felt could be a threat to their power They would get rid of them in fairly nasty ways No, it's no different than any gang or any you know It's human nature that way where at its wars. Yeah, because there was no rules essentially they were they were calling a shot Right it's amazing that people ever get to a point of royalty. Yeah, that people allow that hustle You know, it's a very strange hustle that even though there's no fucking food everybody's star right? No one you know, there's no prosperity. There's no books people are so silly They'll believe that this one guy is worth more than everybody else right controls their armies and he's their noble leader But that would that would be a cool job. I sign up for that I think very few guys pulled that job off and and you know, and then somebody would kill you at a sword I think today I started well. I started saying how most people suck and I have this I want to be the king of the universe said that would be great at the date. Yeah, I think you think you as well That's every smart person thinks that they would be an awesome king I would be different listen. There's a lot of kings would be assholes or I was the king. That's how every cart gets Cold good started right some guy comes long goes listen these other cults. They don't fuck their dog Where I would do the whole needs really right really nice and as long as I'm in control trust me I'm really really honest objective about this When is when are we gonna fucking figure this out? So I got my results back from my physical Joe and You had a physical I got a full physical they they took tested blood Every day right and they said that I'm like a hundred percent everything's fine my cholesterol is exactly perfect Like the only thing that was bad is like just take a little bit of D You don't get out much to you and I'm like no, I don't go So he's like just get some like over the counter D. D you'll be fine, but you're just a slight No, that's good. That's good. And oh STDs my first age test Yeah, I've been reaching this you know off of age test test, but you got a real one. Okay, really? Congratulations, I'm glad you know that That's awesome. Yeah, that is good. It's a that's a monkey off your back, right? Totally That's and you know I I kind of feel like I eat somewhat healthy like what I'll do is I'll eat healthy And then I'll have a shitty day where I eat fucking pizza, you know, so it I think I have the good up and down Isn't it crazy that your what your body actually produces of vitamin by looking at the Sun? Yeah, you're out in the sun your body produces vitamin D. That's why when you see like George St. Pierre when he's fighting and he gets tan That getting tan like that is actually actually makes you perform better. Yeah, then that's that Yes fucking crazy getting a tan actually makes you perform better of the fighter Like what what is the bad part about having a Not much D though like like if you were just not in case would you just be like oh, I can't yeah You'd be fucked. It's really bad for you. Yeah. Yeah, I think that's an issue with the people that live in really cloudy climates as well Yeah, yeah, I bet they have a problem. We keep going after Seattle today Called them heaven and the hawk sea cock Seattle's a cool place. Well, how dare you yeah, I like yeah beautiful up there You know by the way that somebody told me they just got back again from Tempe or Phoenix, Arizona Went to that new club in Arizona. Yeah, it is the most amazing place ever and then you would love it It's you know 600 seats, but they have they have like a person that follows you around That's like your own like hey can I get you something like you each have your own image individual person? Sam trippily went there and just had like a crazy party He said it was the he saw somebody doing shit in the elevator like this elevator walk up and then people are having sex and then stuff It was He says it's awesome. It's a party So check back real it's though. You know the one I'm talking about right there having sex there Brian fuck you talk why no I didn't give away Sam's story because he hasn't said it yet because he has a naughty set tonight So he's gonna say tonight. I think so. How many podcasts are you doing in this day three three today? To me how how are you gonna listen to other people talk it's impossible? How can you how you gonna do this? You're gonna you're gonna shut your ears off after a while. Do you know numb? Just no, it's just like kind of meditate while listening to it. Mm-hmm. Yeah It's a lot of podcasts Daniela Bill early we need to have a religious question and answer podcast with you. How about that? That's the hell do they shit wouldn't that be fucking badass have people that have questions to religion They contact you and then they could buy your books, too What is what is your the one that you published recently on Decentra? What is that called? It's called the 50s things you are not supposed to know religion and the genesis of this was kind of interesting because Originally a pitch them a different book about religion and it was you know this big take heavy book and they are like Yeah, you know that's sweet about wearing the business of selling books So give us a think you know what is the big thick work? What was that gonna be about it was It's kind of looking at all Basically what the approach that Bruce Lee had to martial arts I was trying to play adaptive to religions sort of like taking from a bunch of different religions to look at what all the big questions are Look at what some of the answers that are out there to make up your own thing as you go Hmm, and because ultimately to me that's the only thing that anybody does, you know, it's Makes up the way I'm sort of a camera on Call it religion call it furloughs of your colleague. Whatever makes you feel good But bottom line is a way of life Right And so I was like do your own work see what's out there and come up with your own answers that way and Actually now that we did this one They decided to go for it So I think I'll publish the other one toward the end of the year, you know in end of 2012 So this would be a really big book? They asked me to cut it a bit and this is probably good idea because it's probably too much stuff and people will be like halfway through Like I get no more but so yeah, I'll do that one cutting it a bit and so that one I was super excited about but back then they were actually smart because they know that this kind of stuff sells because it's Quaker funny weird random informative stories in and out, you know, you read one next, you know You don't feel like you like that one boom you jump to the next one, so there's 50 of them and But yeah, I was it was weird because when I originally signed up to do it I was in as now I'm really happy I did it when I started as I Yeah, I need money. I guess so sure what the hell why not but in my initial mom and then it was in a shitty period of my life because I signed on it. It was like January 2011 or something and I said sure I'll get it done and they're like do it by April Okay, that's a little tight, but sure I can do it Then that's when everything went to shit with my wife six weeks in the hospital horrible things and then the second Oh, that was over. I'm now responsible for a 90-month-old baby to deal with her all the time and I have a month and a half Left to write this stuff and I'm like shit now that's intense and But the thing is generally I mean I break more lows than I can keep track of but I one thing I don't do is I don't break my ward ever and I told them in while get it done They were even bit nice about it. They were like, you know, we can push the deadline But like no man, you know, you wanted it done by then it even gives it's good for me It gives me something to focus on right so rather than being there, you know Contemplated my name of thinking the word sucks. I have something to do and not only that But it has to be funny light-hearted at a time when my life is really not neither funny or light-hearted and so it's It's actually good was awesome therapy for me because I could You know while I'm giving my daughter meal come thinking about what the hell is the next line and I have to make it snappy fast, you know, you're a good fashion but funny Best thing I could do for myself because you know, I said you write while you were holding the baby I literally got to the point where I would dream about what I was gonna write at night I would fall asleep It's like I finish writing I pass out I dream about what I'm gonna write when my baby wakes up I'm like holding their feeding air and like okay, look at that thing over there But for the next line, you know, and then the second she would sleep that's an outright the most of course And so I would be like go go go go go okay pass out next day. Wow What a crazy fucking schedule. How long did you have for that? There's a couple of months. There's maybe two in the month months. That's how I took a look Yeah, what so it's 50 things that you're not supposed to know about religion. Let's just call yeah, give us one of them What's a good one? Let's see what's fun. Let's take a peek Mmm Man coming up with the titles was half the fun and wrecking myself I've upgraded them. I have one chapter I think it's kind of the stuff I was telling you earlier is called if you are too stupid for Taoism You can always try Confucianism. That's always would make me popular in China Oh, this is great. There's this guy The title of this one is God is wearing dragon robes. I want you to kick Confucius This is an awesome story is in the 1800s this one Chinese guy became converted to Christianity and He started saying that he was Jesus younger brother that he had this vision of God that was wearing dragon clothes and told them that Buddhism and Confucianism are all crap and it was his duty to stamp them out So he got a rep all this followers started preaching in the countryside getting all these people They became so powerful that they carved out their own state within China and they said this was going to be Forget how it's called is something I have to find because this is too good, but it was called something along the lines like The heavenly kingdom of everlasting peace or something Well, they have only kingdom of everlasting peace and that with the debt of 20 million people in the course of civil wars Between the Chinese government. I was pissed over this guy is trying to break away and this kind of weird version of Chinese fundamentalist Christianity fighting against this guys and Eventually when they laid the siege to his city. He was telling his followers Don't worry God is on our side and of course he died shortly thereafter by eating some poison was served by mistake and And that was that when we hear was this all going down. I want to say me dating. I think 18 20 say it in 30s And how many people died in this conflict 20 million 20 million? Yeah, so one dude came along saying that he was Jesus his brother Yep, and 20 million people died as a result of this one guy is that essentially what you say? Yeah typing good about you in 18 58 64 and yeah, but that's That's why is 50 things or not supposed to know you know he's like weird never heard about that That's such them. That's an immense number of people that died. Yeah, I mean What they take the number with the benefit of the doubt is maybe 50 million who the hell knows? But you know that's what some people speculate that the number was and is yeah How would they know right 20 million people's a gas back then, right? Of course and But his brutal civil war wrecking China for a bunch which is one of the reason why a bunch of Chinese people migrated to California at the time when there was the gold rush is because South China was getting a wreck left and right Was this dude's name again? The guy's name was Hong the Samsung Me see that's gonna be a lot of people gonna want to play that guy on like video games. That's gonna be their name Go on as this bad motherfucker Convince the bunch people use Jesus his brother. Oh shit. I have no idea how to pronounce it That's a high-level pimp game right there. So I'm Hong is huge one. I have no idea You know, it's hard to pronounce I make it up. How do you spell it? It's age well Chinese is spelled two different ways depending on how you But the one that I've using was h. Oh and g that's one word and then the next word is x iu qu a n Wow, no good luck mixing punch ion swan swan It's really fascinating the way the Chinese have their language You know, it's phonetic obviously because if they have totally different characters that we have right But the way they've expressed it in like the letters that we used so it's bizarre really some of the words are really strange Especially like with exes and a man shit. Yeah, I mean my wife my wife was Chinese and she was trying to teach me some Chinese I mean I couldn't say it because she kind of hated Japanese people, but I was thinking Jesus couldn't you just be Japanese is so much easier Japanese is easier. It's the way you read it is kind of the way you pronounce it It's only one tone. It's easier Chinese is the same exact word with tiny different acts that means completely different things There are like four different acts since for each word. Oh no It's just like oh no, can anybody say anything Wow, so you think it's more complicated than English They say English is a hard one to learn enough for some reason. I mean, I'm sure if you that's where you come if you speak Chinese or something Yeah, English must be a fan in yes, but for anybody coming from a big little acting base background or any any of the Western languages trying to pick up China any toner language like Chinese Vietnamese some of those is just like Right that's This pretty fucked up that we all speak different languages How many you know I mean how many problems would be solved if everybody spoke one language that would be not that solve anything? Sort at this point in time with it people hate each other from your tour vines So you know you don't have to but it would out you'd be better than nothing That's for sure it is pretty crazy how different languages are too I mean the difference to you like Chinese and Norway, you know Norwegian and Chinese like is there a bigger difference Is it even possible to get something more or Chinese and you know? How about Chinese and African? Yeah, they're all those try by languages. They're all they don't have noise The latter level the clicks. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Awesome. Fascinating man. It's just so Incredible how it evolves differently in different areas, but it all evolves, you know How many different languages are there Are there hundreds thousands? I'm gonna go on some bullshit guys and say well surviving today. Yeah, because of course They're I guess we have languages But wait wait, but let me bush it first. Let's try Serve I win today. I want to say 250 I'll say 176 I'll say a thousand I think you're actually closer the more I'm thinking about it because there are a bunch of Dragon languages World oh my god there between 6,800 and 6,900 distinct languages in the modern world Holy shit where we off. Yeah, holy shit where we off you are the closest dude. Yeah, but I thought I thought I overshot it Yeah, I thought I was probably around 900 right holy shit. That's incredible Well, I mean 90% of that our languages that are dying that are like 30 people in a tribe still speak and yeah We are clicking noises There's one that's for clicking noises well Help us ours it when they have places like there's some spots in the Amazon that they're you know Just just recently I sort of discovered people in these tribes. Yep, and they this is the first contact They're having with the modern world and they're in there with their own wacky language They said I went over the few guys who had some contact with them. They promptly killed him So they're good luck making contact again The someone made contact with him. Yeah, there was one guy was like in India from a different tribe So he kind of understood their language Uh-huh, but he also was you know more in person the modern world and all of that So you're kind of like in transition between those two words and they yeah, they killed nobody knows why but yeah They walked him well. I think they probably heard that shit goes down when the loggers move in and you know that that is what happens to these people Probably yeah, there's folks don't know is there's there's a bunch of people living I mean they are people. Yeah, they're living like people used to live thousands of years ago. I mean they're they're essentially essentially You know Living an ancient tribal lifestyle that we didn't really even think existed anymore right? They they have their own handmade tools and weapons and you know They're wearing like fucking crazy leaves on their dicks and shit and animal skins and It's there and they're still in there and then these people who are logging are going deeper and deeper into the forest And they're just cutting it down into astounding rain and there's all these incredible Medicines to be found there and all these different plants and animals that haven't even been discovered yet And insects that haven't been discovered yet and who knows what the fuck's in there And they're just chopping that shit down left and right and these people oftentimes are getting caught up in this where you know They had they'd live there in that forest in the deep in there for thousands of years and then all sudden One day they wake up and they're fucking they're watching trees fall Yeah in the distance you know what the fuck is going on? It is coming towards you. It's an inevitable swarm of tree-eating machines and all these people these greedy people behind them and they don't want to move around you and They're gonna they're gonna chop your fucking trees down get out of here Misey go to yeah Yeah, they're looking at them like you're looking like a fucking you living like a savage on you fuck you doing They're chopping your shit down. People all those people had a wild life for a long time Who's to say their life isn't more interesting? They're just doing ayahuasca and fishing and shit, you know It seems like if you're pretty dope. Yeah, you know me if you get used to living in the jungle It's a hard hard life there, but there's a lot of food there, right? You know you could be comment you could become food My fuck up that too. Yep. He's big when you should have zagged There's a thing called a Brazilian wandering spider that kills you by giving you an erection until you die Yeah, it's fucking it has something to do with nitric oxide and Which is like the same stuff that's in that the works in like Viagra and stuff that makes your dick hard and apparently this This spider hits you with it and it causes some crazy fucking reactions Neurotoxin it's the most powerful neurotoxin of the man and your whole body just Completely stiffens up and horrifying agony and your dick gets hard as fuck so hard It's like breaking like your dick is engorged and breaking and even if you survive it Which most people don't survive? Yeah, but even if you do survive your dick will be destroyed Your dick would be useless. It'll just be a bag of bruises That's just from one bite from one bite. What if it just licked you and then you just had really hot Boner all the time you know like doesn't work that way. They've just got a little bit It doesn't work that way But I do believe the pharmaceutical companies are like investigating Probably the the effect that this thing has on your body to develop new hard-on medications. Yeah, you know There's developed something that gives you a hard-on for a year That's they're gonna do that's the next thing You know like Viagra's like it's not effective enough. What if I want to fuck 12 hours from now I need I need something a little with a little more kick to it. Then they came up with see Alice They'll have like jeans will have these new pockets there these tubes that just kind of go up to the side where you just put your dick in Well during the day because you have a rock part You know you know you're gonna have a boner every day tubes You know like you'll have like a little pocket to put your dick in like they'll start sewing new pockets in there Like a little strap right so I can move around with you. Yeah, it's like a cargo pant pocket for your dick Now you're gonna have to just point it up towards your belly button Over the top Everywhere I'll already because I'm gonna have belt buckle marks Paris goops They're gonna start forming different that might be actually the most comfortable way to rock it if you just rock it straight up Yeah, yeah, just some sort of a tent put a dick tent over it. Yeah, you know Exactly like me That's in the jungle though, maybe the maybe these nice loggers are savoring these people for life of perpetual hard-ons Yeah Death by hard on in the jungle You ever see that movie big river man. No documentary about some crazy guy who swam the length of the Amazon River Disgusting why did you got all kinds of fucking parasites and it's skin is body And it was breathing and drinking that water taking it in and oh my god It's because he's crazy. He was just this is really really funny crazy guy who liked to swim and like do these swim endurance things And you know he would do a day after day after day and he would he's getting delirious and shit It's a really strange like documentation on this guy He had done a bunch of different endurance swims before and you know like I get all these people behind them and It's a documentary that's taken by his son. It's really interesting because his son You know is like watching this guy do all this nutty shit and sort of falling apart and all the different parasites He's getting from this water and oh Fuck and crazy man. I can imagine that you're you know, that's your father and you keep it a camera Yeah, going for the next 20 days as the guy's just well Not only that he would like jump off the boat into the night in the middle of the night and start swimming And then after follow after and what spotlights and shit this crazy asshole is with this crocodiles out there This guy is swimming in the Nile River and he survived them. Yeah, he survived. Yeah, fascinating You know and he actually kind of looked like once he cleaned up and dried out and everything like that He actually looked like he made it through okay, which is even more crazy Yeah, there's just some dudes out there man But I mean that's the randomness of it all you know You can fucking die in the safest place in the water because a brick fall on your something or you can swing The Amazon for thousands of miles and come out fine Yeah, it's a weird thing that people have for wanting to do difficult things Yeah, you know, I've always felt that way about like Mount Everest right Just I had a joke about it like that's just because something's hard to do doesn't mean it's good to do Yeah, see you know It's people get a little confused it is because it was the difficult things to do in this life usually come with reward Yeah, you know your risk you're so you know you leave your job You start your own business and that reward is that it worked and now you're making it financially Gradually, it's your success. There's a risk and as you reward. No In that case, that's not That doesn't look like our Lord is It's not worth it. No If you could stop Put letting if it is there a way that you could ever say that anyone running for president cannot talk about religion It's almost like even if you believe It's almost like you shouldn't be allowed to talk about it in the political process. It's almost like a cheating You know, it's almost like you're not you know, you're you're going after your people, man You're just trying to get your people to vote. That's what we'll do it. Of course That's how good chunk of Europe is there's you know, it was supposed to be that way that wasn't it? Yeah, for your long time Yeah, but I mean I think honestly what happened is that Europe got so could be in blood of early Just wars for so long that the people got really Anoid, but yeah, it was like I'm done, you know enough of this shit They were chopping each other's balls over the fact that you would read this book and I read this one about you You know, do whatever the hell you want. Let's keep religion separate for politics right and be done with it, you know And so today in a lot of Europe you go to churches and they are two research attractions You know in the countryside know people are still into it, but in most of the cities it's They really are not most people don't go US Different game. I think it's the only Modern industrialized country where there's this level of insane import and toner digital I mean today there's no way that a taste guy could ever even bother running for president. Is there ever been a time when atheists could have read for president? Not in US. No never I mean some guys where weird like you take a Thomas Jefferson or something he basically He did the Bible by cutting up all the stuff that he thought was crap which was most of it and saving you know Like he took out out of the gospel He took out the virgin bird the mirror calls the all of the stuff that in his mind was a bunch of crap But really he saved up the parts of Jesus that he likes and He's a sweet guy. He tells you to be nice to each other. I like that part We keep that part and that became the Jefferson Bible. He said he did the verse. Oh, how long was his Bible? 50 pay yeah pretty much but no for real. I don't remember all of you as well You know and what a cocky dude. Yeah, yeah, it's a viable But at the same time the use a deck is I mean it's probably a dick But at the same time Come on man. You can't edit that thing, but you know what you don't get to edit by yourself The fact is everybody does They just don't tell you right because you know everybody highlights the party like and they completely skip on the part They don't like it and so they come up with their own thing anyway at least the guy had the guts to say Hey, this is exactly what I'm doing. You know everybody else does it. They just you know well There's always there's so much contribution and I'm about religious tattoos. Yeah That's like strictly for him. It takes me out to your body, right? No, that's crazy Is that in the Bible? Yeah, you get the you get that in fact I love for example out of Jewish people note that who is not on the you get You can't do things like that's why Jewish girls with tattoos are hot Rona ties there's one that I threw in there that's What did I call that one? Oh, it's gonna title the Christian from the man at least I would love to introduce you to my pet King Cobra And there's actually reason for that because the in the Gospels There's this story of Jesus telling you that if you really have faith in him if you are a true Christian and the Fate and all of that you could take poison snakes could assault you and buy you and you'll be totally fine and I was like wow You know if that's what Jesus is saying and if this is what you guys believe Hey, let me bring out the snakes. Let's have it a try and this is like one of two things are going on either you know That the stuff you believe in is crap and you don't really believe it or You know that you are that there are no good Christians because sorry, that's not the way works today I don't care how much faith you have is like nobody can survive taking the most poisonous stuff on our right or You are telling Because sorry, that's not the way it works. Today, I don't care how much faith you have. It's like nobody can survive taking the most poisonous stuff on our own. Or you're telling me that that line in the Bible is crap. And it was in there by somebody else, but it's not real. In which case, it doesn't exactly say great things about the reliability of the whole thing. But there's no getting out of it. It's like, how do you get out of that? I had a conversation with a guy recently that was telling me that there are people that believe so much that they can drink poison and not die. And I was like, oh, man, what a crazy conversation we're having here. I doubt that. You know, if you see, this is not scientific, this is not something that's been proven by studies. Like to someone say that they absolutely believe that someone can take poison and not die because they're believing themselves. It's only one way to tell homie. Yeah, that's my question. Take that poison. Like, hey, I'm not saying he's not through. Let's try. Convence me, hey, if you are right, do it. You have zillions of people following and you'll be the greatest asset to Christianity ever because you made a million converts. And they're actually to tell the fact that some of these guys really are serious about it. There have been a bunch of people who are particularly in a lot of Carolina, and I see a few places where there was this tradition of snake handlers that they would have lead poison on snakes by them. And quite a few of these guys died miserable deaths. And then some of them were poison wasn't that much. So they managed to survive and all of that. But I'm like, damn, really? Jesus Christ. Yeah, literally. What a way to go. Yeah, but I love it. When you have things like death, I'm like, hey, I'm not telling you it's crap. I'm not saying he's not through. It's there. Let's test it. That just, let just have it that way. People need something, man. They're always going to need something. What are they going to need? Liberalism, conservativeism. They need a path. They need someone that just chop out the brush for them and point them in the right direction, whether it's Christianity, whether it's atheism. I've met atheists that might as well have been religious. Oh, doctor. They're just, they're so anti-religion that it's a religion in and of itself. I had a chapter that was supposed to go in the book. That was basically saying that eight days then the hardcore fundamentalists are doing separated a bird because they are both based on a certain time to you on how the universe works and all of that. But then my publisher decided that you already are offending people of seven million different religions. You want to sell some books about this? Keep the atheist chapter. Let's, when they both have in commas, they would all shit their pants if they saw an alien. That I think everybody is that. That's the Trump card is the aliens. If a real fucking alien battleship, like all these stupid movies that keep coming out, there's another stupid movie coming out where it comes out of the ocean and they fucking go to war. They're American military. They shoot cannons at this fucking crazy, robot monstrosity thing that pops out of the ocean. Damn, I miss the jewel of chinamatography. It's not out yet. It's coming. Oh, it breaks good. I think it's in a march. But whatever it is, it's like, that is a never ending theme. It's never anything with someone way smarter than us coming down and just fucking our world up. You know, hurling missiles through buildings, buildings, explode. It's like a standard vision. I have this Chinese doctor when nobody could, there were all these weird stuff going on with my body. Nobody could figure it out. This guy was amazing. He just fixed me like that. But the last time I saw him, he spent half power telling me about there's our mother sheep scamming at the end of the, of 2012 who knows whether they are nice or not. He was really going into it. I was like, what if he's right? Seriously. He was right. When all the mother fuckers with their degrees and in Sutantah, all the top doctors from Kaiser and all of that couldn't figure out anything out from him, this crazy ass dude in the, did you use acupuncture? Yeah, he did acupuncture. He gave me herbs. He was, I mean, I was desperate. I'm like, I'm gonna try anything. But the dude is literally in this hole in the wall. He's wearing five watches. I don't. That's why you're anything. Because it's where all his baby mothers are staying all over the world. Yeah. So like how the, this is, but what do I have to lose at this point? And then what? The guy fixed it. That's amazing. He told me it's your back. I could punch her with a fixed your back. And then you have an infection. I'll give you the herbs and you'll be fine. Wow. An infection. What kind of infection? Yeah, no idea. But it was like this stuff will basically whatever it is, we'll get rid of it. Really? And if you're enough. Because I mean, they did a Kaiser. I did like seven gazillion tests done from memorized to blood work, to everything you name it. They couldn't figure out anything. Was this stress related for the situation? I'm sure. Yeah. I mean, but stress can cause real stuff. Right. Not just psychosomatic. Right. Right. Really fucking specific ways. Yeah. So I mean, yeah, he was stress related, but it's like who knows specifically what it is. Nobody could figure it out. And then crazy Chinese guy saved me. What's in the wind telling me about UFOs the whole time. And that's what I mean about me. So while he was, while he was fixing you, he was telling you about UFOs. Yeah. It still worked. Absolutely. So that's almost like eliminating the placebo effect. She's just like, guys, you're like, this guy's fucking crazy. Yeah. Be talking to me about UFOs. Yeah. People love the idea of UFOs. It's a fucking amazing idea for them. It's fun. It's so exciting. You know that they're out there and that they're watching, and they're coming in. You're going to know whether they're your friends or they're Kielio. Yeah. I just, I'm not saying that they're not real. Just like, I'm not saying that there's not really a guy in the clouds. It's just, it's, I'm not seeing anything. I don't know anything compelling. It's possible. Sure. I mean, I leave it open that it would come, but I'm not seeing anything compelling. You know, not even the birth of a child. Yeah. That's not what we're talking about. We're talking about UFOs. You fucking just tuned out and tuned back in. It's still working. It took my words completely out of context. How dare you? But if the aliens did land, that would be, that would be the end of everything. If there was something way smarter than us, we would just have to give up. Yeah. Right? We would have to. We would be, we would be so stunned. That's when the cults would just rise up. That's, that would be a dark moment. Right. A real alien culture did come here for another planet. You know, people would really get frantic. That's when people would really like to stop, stop up on food and 50 caliber guns. Yeah. But what, that's gonna do with, you know, if you are dealing with something that's so much more powerful, so much more powerful. So I'm like, I think it's possible for a society to get smart enough to be able to travel through space and, and go and fuck with other people on another planet. I mean, look at the stuff we looked today. If somebody asked if he was possible 50 years ago, it looks like magic off of the stuff that we're always like, one fuck up away from blowing each other. Yes. That one doesn't rule the other. Yeah. Doesn't rule out the other. You know, the fact that you can be incredibly smart and come up with all these awesome stuff doesn't mean you are wise enough to know how to deal with it and not fuck everything up, which is humanity right there. Yeah, that is humanity in a nutshell. Yeah. It would be such a fucking shame if we library of Alexander this whole thing. Yeah. I just would boom just towards this whole civilization. And we had to really start from scratch. Yeah. I would see it as little in my day, I think. Well, that is the one sort of, I don't want to say justification, but the one sort of argument for having one powerful military that dominates the rest of the world. That's a good, is that by doing that at least they keep everybody else from blowing everything up. Yeah. Keep your military from growing to the point where you are able to make the same decisions that we can make. We don't want that. Yeah. There's an argument, I guess. If you look at this statistics, what people are like, what the potential for people to behave is like? Yeah, I'm not a big fan of the US government, but when I compare it to a lot of, there are a bunch of places and governments that I would like, but there are many others that I'm like, Jesus Christ, give me George Bush again. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. Just give me the worst crap in the US ever and be still like a better than the Taliban, you know? Yeah, no kidding, right? Isn't it funny? Yeah. But it's amazing the spectrum of different regimes that exist at the same time. Like what's going on right now in Syria and while the Americas are complaining about the National Defense Authorization Act, which takes away a lot of civil liberties, nothing compared to what the fuck is going on in the Middle East. So the riots of Arab Spring and what's going on right now in Egypt and the power void in Iraq, there's parts of the world right now that are fucked up. A lot. Yeah. A lot. I think we as Americans can barely even wrap our heads around that. It doesn't even seem real. Of course. Because unless you leave it, what the hell, it's like something you see on TV for 30 seconds. That doesn't mean shit. That's like the one argument for a powerful military right there. It's the fucking rest of the world. Yeah. And I'm, you know, people always say that I've been accused of being a liberal. I've been accused of being anti-military, which I'm absolutely not. I'm always anti the people that are point and military in certain directions. Yeah. That's what I'm anti. Yeah. I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm anti a lot of, a lot of the people's decisions at the very top of the heap. But as far as like having a military, yeah, you better. You're fucking better. It is like, it's the rest of the world does. Yeah. Yeah. It's good to have a military. It's very good to keep an eye on all these crazy assholes all over the world too. Yeah. Because yeah, there's people that's I think people in the US, they grow up with everything about the countries amazing and wonderful. And then when they find out that it's not all amazing and wonderful, that's a bad shit happened. They go to the extreme opposite. And it's like everything that's American is horrible, terrible and the US is responsible for everything that's evil in the world. And it's like, no, that's not it either. You know, it's more complicated than that. Very complicated. It's very good. The economy in and of itself is very complicated. And a lot of laws that are in place are very complicated. And one of the reasons why they're in places because getting rid of laws, get rid of jobs, or police officers, I don't like that. It's one of the big problems with drug enforcement. Drug enforcement as a business, the drug enforcement agency, it's a business. Drug enforcing is a business. You're spending money. Jobs are created. This is how ridiculous it gets. In Florida, they had people that were pretending to be high school students. You know the story? Oh, yeah. I read it. I think you do. Yeah. I tweeted it recently. And I mean, there's been more than one case of these. One of them, they arrested 28 kids. And another one, this woman was hot. And she was 25. And she was flirting with 15-year-old boys. They became Facebook friends. They were texting each other. And she was flirting with him, asking him to get her weed. So he got her weed. This poor kid is poor. They're love-smitten kid. Got her weed. And he said he didn't even want to take money for it. He said it was a gift. She couldn't give him money. And then they arrest him. Another going to charge him with fucking, you know, a potential nine years in jail or something crazy. You know what? What an asshole thing to do. What a crazy, ridiculous asshole thing to do. And that goes back to that point. He's like, why the fuck do people feel the need to tell other people how to live? You don't like who it is. Don't smoke it. That's what we're talking about. It's a business. There's jobs that were created in that sting. You know, they created a sting. They went into high school and they got kids to sell them weed. And they didn't like, such a sneaky fucked up way. The fact that a 25-year-old woman could ever have a position where she talks a boy in that room. Anything and have that boy responsible for it. Dude, a boy, a 15-year-old boy has no idea what the fuck is going on. He just sees tits and skin and lips. And she's touching his hand and his dick is hard. And he can't even believe she's talking to him. He can't even believe she's talking to him. I'll get you weed. I'll get you whatever the fuck you want. Yeah. He can't believe she's so hot. She looks like a woman. She has a woman. That fucking bitch is totally cheating. She's not 15. She's not a fellow high school student. She's a 25-year-old cop. Assholes. How ridiculous. But that's the thing. I get it. There are jobs in that. Yeah. I get it. But unfortunately, it's possible to figure out the way to, like, they don't want to get shot busting out a meth lab. Yeah. Isn't there enough to get to? The meth labs are hard to break into. Isn't there enough to real estate going on where people could work to solve real problems going on? Yeah. You would hope. You would hope. But I don't think it's that logical. I think it's a money grab. But I think people go where the money is. And there is money right now in enforcing their current drug laws. There's a lot of jobs that would be lost. If we just said, all right, pot's legal. Sorry. You know how many fucking people are going to be out of jobs? That's a real issue. And it's something that should be corrected too. There should be a bill that addresses that as well. And says, listen, we're going to replace these drug enforcement jobs with the jobs where they're doing something more helpful. Whatever the fuck it is. Border security. Whatever the fuck it is. Something that makes more sense, border security, terrible example. Put them in torpedoes or submarines rather. Get them to patrol the ocean. These aren't really well thought out ideas. But if you were trying to come up with a good bill, a good bill would be make marijuana legal, make it readily available and sellable, and then take the jobs that we lost in drug enforcement, and put them into something positive. Whatever it could be. The forestry, whatever jobs. And then the issue would be those people wouldn't be qualified for those jobs. So how do those people benefit from it? Are those people just going to be shit out of luck? Not all over the whole new career. Not all jobs require you to study for 20 years. I'm sure they could be a period of training where they still get money as they are getting trained for the job. But what if you were in drug enforcement for 25 years, which a lot of guys are? And then all of a sudden it's banished. Kind of sucks for them. Yeah, it's not their fault. It's not your fault when you're a young cop, and you think that this is, well, it's the law, it's what it is, but it is. It's almost not your fault. You're suckered into doing something that's actually immoral. It just seems like it's OK because it's behind the wall of something written down on paper somewhere. But the reality of it is it's pretty fucking immoral. When you're locking a kid up in a cage because you caught him with some plants or some fungus, that's absolutely, it's reprehensible. And everyone knows it inherently. And they know it inside. And if you don't, you're fooling yourself. It's really that simple. It's just, it's amazing that we still have to have these conversations. And not only that we can deal, because if you look at the political scene, nobody, not Republicans, not Democrats, I mean, nobody was a shot at winning. Let's put it away. We would even bring up this topic because it's political suicide. It's like you're soft on that. You really want five year olds to be shooting it or you know. It's like the problem is those dangerous drugs, man. Those problems, those drugs that fucking suck. And we need to really get it out there to kids. Like don't fuck with heroin. Don't fuck with meth. Don't fuck with all these dangerous ones. There's a lot of, and if things were legal, like if cocaine was legal, you would actually buy real cocaine. You would go to a pharmacy or whatever the fuck you would buy if it was legal and you could buy real cocaine. You're not getting real cocaine now. You're getting real cocaine to Joey Diaz bought and chopped up. And you know what I mean? Most of the stuff that you get. I went to America too. I once met Albert Ofman, the guy who created LSD. And one of the things you was telling me was most of the stuff that goes for LSD around the world is not LSD. Because the stuff that the way I make it, it uses certain compounds that are so rare that there's no way that it could support such much production. They're just easy to have all that stuff. So you say whatever they sell out there, I have no idea what the hell it is, but it certainly is not my stuff. And he argued, who knows, maybe it's throwing me or not, but he argued that his stuff would give you kind of all the benefits of LSD without all the crap from straight out of LSD. And so street LSD, though, is still giving you the same benefits as the stuff that he produces. Well, it just wasn't as taxing in the body as I do. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, they made that shit illegal too. Yeah. Too much. She was actually, you see these guys like a Swiss chemist. So very serious. He was a little doo, very, now he's been dead for a while. But he's, and he was originally looking for a cure for headache. Like he was working on a headache pill, and he came up with LSD. That was pretty funny right there. Yeah, do you come up with it and not even realize it? It actually got it in his skin and it was riding home on his bike and just tripping his fucking balls off? Yeah. Not knowing what he did. Yeah, that's pretty. Yeah, they had no idea what the dosage was back then. Because LSD, like the dosage to body ratio has been compared to an ant demolishing the Empire State Building in 30 seconds. Like literally, like that's how powerful, like a little tiny drop of this shit is. He didn't know that, man. He probably just was drinking glasses of it. No, let's call it acid shots. Yeah. Yeah. He's probably doing shots of acid. Oh my God. But I have to tell him, I met the guy in his 80s and he seemed perfectly coherent and thought that he launched the steel and all of that. So maybe he was right. There's a different look that those old guys that have done acid have in their eyes. Right. It is a different look. You know, there's a weird thing that you get sometimes when you're talking to one of those old acid dudes. Well, you might have seen some shit that's not available anymore. Right. They might have seen some limited production view of life through acid. You know, acid in the 60s, I would have loved to have seen when it was like the flower child children of the San Francisco early 1960s. You know, I watched that 100 S Thompson documentary, Gonzo, the Life and Times of Doctor. And it's a fucking fun documentary. But one of the things it talks about was the utopia of the acid culture of the early 1960s in San Francisco. And they show all these people running around, holding hands together, tripping their fucking balls off. And it's really interesting, man. That was a that whole fucking part of the world. It wasn't illegal yet. And that whole part of the world was just blossoming with all these new ideas and new music and this new like sort of wild psychedelic culture was all like emanating out of this one place. And they fucking threw the water on it and squashed that shit. Yeah, it's amazing. Even if you just listen to the music alone and you listen to what was in the 1950s and then you switch to the 60s and like, what the hell just happened? It's like it's a whole other universe right there. Yeah, they came up with some fucking incredible shit. And that it's, yeah. And it all happened. I mean, a lot of it all happened in that area of San Francisco. Yeah. You know, there's there are moments in time, man, where if time travel isn't possible but time recreation is, they ever figure out a way to recreate. Like, would you just go in and peek that would be the whole? Like, remember those things that you had when you were a kid, the view sliders? Right. And it was like dinosaur and you would click, and it would like be the next dinosaur. If there was something you could put on some goggles and just take a view as to what life was like in a certain area, you know, five million years ago, be like a fucking security camera on the wall 100 million years ago in the jungle and watch dinosaurs run down track and things. That would be pretty darn fun. I wonder if that would be eventually possible. I wouldn't if you maybe you can't have travel back in time, but you can't have a view. Or even if they just had some amazing computer simulation of what had happened. Yeah, I saw that. I think I could. But yeah, what the fuck? We were lucky. We were very lucky. We were living in 2012. We would have been dead at any other time I had to say, we're too weak. We wouldn't have been able to deal with the caveman era, the Babylonian empire or the Sumerian days. When was going, it's supposed to take place? God, that kind of is funny because he actually used us a lot of history, but then he argues that he makes up a lot of crap, of course. So you are a real history? Yeah, Robert Howard did. What would he use? A lot. If you look at his maps, they are based on many of the cultures in his sort of fantasy world are based then on cultures that eventually evolve in real historical times that we know of, but it's supposed to predate all the stuff we know. So he argues that there was a transities and is super powerful civilization and that collapse and the war went into this hardcore barbarism and then civilizations were rising up again and that's when Conan sets in and then the history we know of that comes down the road. Why is it so appealing for men? I mean, the guy goes around chopping people's head off, grabbing all the most beautiful women in the land. Do I need to go on? He drinks all the time. Yeah, but the era like that, that, I mean, that, not that era rather, but that genre, the the sorcery and the snakes and the monsters, he's always fighting and Conan had the coolest fucking stories. What is it? I mean, it literally essentially taps into them, young male fantasy, especially that as you become older, you're supposed to, I mean, my 40s. I'm supposed to drop that. You know, I'm not supposed to be like into like the next Conan movie like someone get it right. That's ridiculous for postures. I'm a father and a grown man and I'm in the Conan the Barbein. I know. But it becomes, I mean, there was, it's, it's, it taps into like a real out of lesson, childhood sort of fantasy genre thing in our heads. I mean, who doesn't walk down? Right. What was in the movie? What's best in life, Conan? Yeah. To crush your enemies, have them driven before you to hear the lamentations of the women. Is that what is lamentations? My, I used to say lamination. My, yeah. Yeah. You know, it's funny. I actually grew up, I watched Conan a million times in Italian. Yeah. And so I never really heard it in, in English. And when I heard, Arnold speaking it, I was like, oh Jesus, this is a whole completely different movie watching it. Listening. What was the original voice? Like, hey, come here. No, he was just this manly tough guy, but nothing particular. Taught your eyes. You know, but yeah, very long. No one ever gets it right. When they do like a voiceover, they hardly ever get it right. Yeah. But that time, maybe because I listened to that one first, I was like, oh God, the English person sucks. It's painful. Really? So the English version would Arnold wasn't as good. How dare you? Does it make you laugh? This is his voice. Yeah, especially when you don't expect it because I was used to seeing Conan speaking like a regular human being. And then, and I'm saying he might wait with the tikikikas and tikikas. Yeah, exactly. You're ragged at his accent. Listen to you, man. My accent is great. Our daughter. Well, your accent has a certain amount of classical flair to it. The Italian accent. Welcome to the Olive Garden. The role to a ton. Say that. Right. Welcome to the Olive Garden. Welcome to the Olive Garden. Yeah, see how it's awesome. He's gonna use that for a video now. That's my new ringtone. Fucking weird. Oh, he's got a love affair with the Olive Garden. It's his religion. Yeah, he didn't go with Judaism. Somebody tweeted me yesterday that I was supposed to tell him that I saw him at the Olive Garden. What a weird, stupid, running joke. It will go on forever, too. He will not let it go. But you're interested in your never saying. Speaking of people tweeting and stuff, I wanted to mention your fans are fucking awesome. I've never been around people who are like after the first podcast. I got a million different people on Facebook. Now I started Twitter and stuff. You know, every single person I've run into has been really smart, really nice, super polite. I'm just gonna check out their pages and they are all like really interesting people. Weird, but funny and smart. Man, I'm happy that there are people like that out there. I think if you put out that sort of show, you put out that kind of vibe and have people like you come on the show and other people that have had that people really react to like Graham Hancock and I got this Sam Harris cat that's coming on soon and having really the intelligent, interesting people on the show. And putting out your own, your personal philosophy on things. So people just fucking be nice to people. Stop being content to each other. Everybody can be cool. Everybody should be generous. Like, surround yourself with a bunch of people that you really like. And don't tolerate any bullshit and negativity from being removed from your life. Remove that shit from what you're doing for a little. Push yourself in the direction that you actually want to go in. And when you put that out there, people respond to it and they start, it starts to become a part of their vibration. It starts to become a part of who they own as a person. And I think that's what's happened. We have this crazy group of people that are super cool. I'm not delusional about this. It sounds completely ridiculous that I would even say, well, there's a reason why my crowd's cool. But if you go to my shows, the waitresses are always saying that. if you're so nice and that they're so generous, I think it's just you put that out there, man. I think it's good for all of us, man. I didn't figure this out all of my own. I had a bunch of people that started behaving like this. I had to meet people that had their shit together that impressed me that were nice and were positive and that impacted me. And I learned from the way they behaved. I think we're all doing that for each other and these conversations and these subjects that we're having, these subjects are unusual that you would have someone who knows as much religion in your life as you do to sit down with and go over this kind of stuff. There's not a lot of opportunities that people have to talk to a big group of cool people. That's one of the best things about this podcast. It makes me happy because I'm a judgmental little bastard. So I see a lot of people where I'm like, I don't like you so much and all of that. So for me to say Jesus, I'm blown away by the quality of people that I've run into after that. That's awesome. I'm not one who's always like, oh, you know, everything goody goody everything is great and one and far from it. So I was really, man, it's hard to keep track of so many good conversations with some people who touch base with me after that. I was really, really impressed with it. That's awesome man. Like I said, I think if you put that out there, man, put that out there. It's what you're going to get back. You put out there in the universe. It sounds completely corny and hippy and ridiculous. But I think that we all can do with sort of absorbing a good community. We all could do that on the internet. And I think that's one of the big powers that the internet gives us. It gives us the ability to form communities. It gives us the ability to choose who you associate with and connect to people in a way that it's never really been possible before. Next, because that's the funny thing. You probably get the message from the guy in Iceland somewhere where he's like the weird guy in the village or another. But he's looking at him like, what's your problem? And now he has a chance to realize the shit. There are other people out there who actually can see the word the way I do one day. On my message board and on Twitter, there's always people from Norway, Sweden and Iceland and all throughout Europe and all throughout. I have people that post from China. It's real, from islands. It's amazing. The idea of Twitter, the idea of anybody from anywhere in the world is like syncing up through this thing. And then there's going to be something after that. They're going to figure out some next step after Twitter where things are going to get really strange. I hope for Juan they pick a better name because he really just took me forever to get on Twitter because it was really do I want to get on something called Twitter. I want to say tweet it's like James Christ. I'm south of respect. Yeah. It sounds ridiculous. They should have called it Conan. Then I would have respected it. That would have been cool. Today's episode is called Conan. Yeah. We got a little silly today with Conan. I think I think we might have over Conan people. But what Conan and Thusius get together sparks fly. That's what it is. You never read any Robert E. Howard in your boy? I read the comic. I didn't read the books. Oh man. You got to get the books. To this day, you'll enjoy it. If you're not going to read a book, why don't we even say that to you? It was last time you read a book. Actually recently it started reading the Steve Jobs books, but I never found it. Yeah. You like to read biographies. You read like Steve Martin's, right? Oh yeah. Also. What did it say about Steve Jobs? What did he do? I didn't finish it. I was just kind of wondering his, his, you know, everything. It's stuff I already knew stuff for the most part. These are guys. He sort of formed a little cult. A cult of technology. Yeah. Yeah. Fucking slick. I got a little f**king fanboy. I used to, I was a f**king fanboy. Did you hear about the Steve Jobs? I was excited and watched his little speeches and shit. We bring out new laptops. So dumb. Did you go though? Are you in that controversy about the Steve Jobs doll? No, I haven't. There's this, Steve Jobs doll that it was made and I think China and it looks so realistic and it comes with like all these like little things like, hey, this is for presentation. So you can kind of play doll with them. Apple was like, you know, season desist and so now it's like on the day. Are they calling it a Steve Jobs doll? Oh, yeah. I'll show you a picture. It's scary. It's really scary. Cause it looks just like them. What if Steve Jobs dolls became the new crucifix people who are. How did the f**king crucifix come about? How did they start carrying around the one thing that killed Jesus? That's what an unlikely choice. And speaking of which can you imagine? Because up until not that long before one of the choice form of that penalty was people being impaled. Yeah. But if that was the case, people would have hang it around their legs. A spike. A spike. Yeah. That would be nice. That's how the original story that Dracula was based on. Vlad the impaler. Impaler. He used to eat his lunch and there's photos of him or not photos of him. The originator or the original story that Dracula was based on. Right. Vlad the Impaler. Impaler, yes. He used to eat his lunch. And there's photos of him, or not photos of him, obviously. Right. The drawings, rather, of him sitting at a banquet table while these people are on spikes, writhing around him. And that's how you eat his dinner. Speaking of you, one makes me look silly. Can you imagine somebody thinking, let me figure out how I can sharpen this giant pole with somebody's ass, but missing all the internal organs, so I don't kill them. And then they get as lowly. It's like, oh my god. Fuck, think of that. Horrible, man. Just what a terrible way to die. Yeah. Jesus Christ. It's hard to even wrap your head on. And it took a long time for those people to die. It took a long time. That was the goal. Jesus Christ. Yeah. And apparently, the Vlad the Impaler story was a guy who's particularly ruthless. And one of the things, because he was outnumbered. So he set up a lot of these bodies outside the perimeter of his town just to scare the fuck on anybody who would come near. And it was more like he was like back up against the wall and had to take some crazy chances. Right. And yeah. I mean, he became the Racholas. And then he started getting into it. Yeah. Imagine that, man. They make a fucking monster movie about you hundreds of years after you're dead. Yeah. That's what an impact you had. Yeah. That's when you know you are a badass. What a crazy asshole. Yeah, seriously. But yeah, can you imagine if that was instead the punishment in Jesus' times now, Christians today are a dirt and just crossing themselves and stuff. You just mean he could. You make the pull up, yeah. That would be the thing you would do instead of the cross. Oh my god. People enter church. Oh, could you imagine? Oh, that would be so ridiculous. I mean, it's just as ridiculous as nailing yourself to the fucking cross. I mean, what are you doing? You're making the points of the cross? I mean, it's such a bizarre symbol. Lenny Bruce said it best. He's like, he's like, in 100 years from now, it's like people walking around with electric chairs around their neck. Right. And I fucked up the joke. I forget how he said it. I forget if we get exact wording. And then Bill Hicks had another one. It's like, it was really variation on the joke. He said it was like Jack Yunassus and walking up to her with a rifle pendant on. Thinking about John, you know, really kind of the same joke. But really is true. They killed him on that thing. And people carried around. How that tradition gets started. Back too much weight earlier. I don't remember. You don't remember how that tradition got started? How they sort of nailing people to cross? Oh, no, nailing people to the cross. How much time did you get? You got a little too high before the show, didn't you? Yeah. You got a little too high. You go in and out. The weed's that's rocket fuel sun. That's not great. It's problematic. It's a wave. Sometimes it crushes you under it. Then you got to get back up when you're shortboard. I don't really have to be happy anyway. So it doesn't really matter. Some moments I'm on and I'm excited. I'm like trailing somewhere in a picture. As long as you're happy. Yeah, that's what counts. But so why do people start carrying around the cross? Yeah, I mean, it was one of those punishments like impaling people. The idea was how can we make you suffer the worst possible in a very public way where people go by and they will see you slowly die in there for 30 days? And it goes back to this desire of rulers in certain states and the Romans were perfect example of this guys. But there weren't the only ones doing that who got into it because it was a way to make a statement which is don't fuck with us because if you ever even think of rebellion against us, this is what's going to happen to you. And every time you go down the street, you see somebody there and think about you being there, you may want to think about the plan of rebellion that you are. How often would it crucify people? And I mean, you don't have to do it that often to have an impact on people. I don't think you need to deceive them. Many people crucify for it to stay in your head. But by your cases like when the Sparta was rebellion, where after the rebellion they grab like thousands of ways and nailed them one every so many hundred feet between Naples and Rome. That's a long fucking way to end the entire way people on crosses. Oh my God. Holy shit. Sorry, Cor. Woo. That is terrifying. And how the fuck do people go for that to wearing one around your chain of diamonds? Yeah. How did you go for one of pea ditty, big ass bling bling crosses? So, Jesus was up. And that's to what I love about editing the scripture. Yeah. Like Jesus, don't like him. But the guy was very hardcore about economics. One of the thing he says is easier for a camel to go through the eye of an adult and for a rich man to get into heaven. Wow. Car marks doesn't go that far. What I mean. Yeah. It's like, it's easier for a camel to go through the eye of an adult than for a rich man to get into heaven. God damn. Jesus was dropping some poor man science. Yes. I mean, here's probably a bit in that. It's probably totally a bit in the crosses. So explain to me again. Where this? I'm going to write this down. Where did the crosses? How far did they last from? Oh, the people picked up on crosses. Ah, shit. He wasn't Jewish. Timies definitely Roman. He was in paradise. Well, I want to say he started in paradise. But the people that were pinned off in the cross, along with the dark. No, the road that you were talking about. There were like, 1,000 how many feet was it? Were people were on the cross? It was between Naples and Rome. And by the way, it was that. How far is that? It's like Roman centrally studying Naples. It's a good chunk of seven, over 100 miles. I can remember. So for 100 miles people are in the bar? It's six. Yeah. Whoa. Whoa. Whoa. I forgot how many feet they separated. For 100 miles, people were strung up on crosses? Well, they had some thousands of prisoners following the fittings particles. They had literally thousands of them. And so they decided to execute them all by sticking them all on crosses between Roman Naples, where the whole thing went down and make a very public statement about others leave thinking of their balance. It was on the road. That is crazy. Yeah, Naples is actually, it's more than that. Because it's not an hour or two hours. And then they went from that to do that. At the Emmys, we're in big ass, fucking platinum cross, with some nice diamonds on it. Maybe white gold. Yeah, and that's awesome. Exactly. You get all this rich thing. All in the doodle to tell to that rich people will know. It's like, what the hell is? Or the big cross tattoo, there's another one. Right. So I mean, I get it. I get what you're trying to do. But if you've really thought about what the cross was used for, Jesus Christ. Not only anybody knows that, I think very few people knew that there was a time in history where people were strong up on crosses for over 100 miles. Yeah. How many actual total humans was that? I think it was about 5,000 if I remember correctly. He was in the thousands, that's for sure. Why would I say five? Oh, good. Roarsed. Yeah. But I mean, that's the Roman, you know, that's the one other thing. In Roman times, they had gazillion slaves and yet hardly ever any rebellion. Well, you know why? Because the one time when they do it, they get strung up on crosses for hundreds of miles. And other power lines, they were replaced with power lines. The same visual of like these creepy, you know, things in the streets. Power lines are not as creepy as crosses, Brian. Well, no, I mean, like there's old ones, like those old ones where there's like a million wires all attached to this like little old ones. Like I have one in the back of my house. I just look at it every day. I'm like, oh, that's not good. Yeah, what about those? We drive like in the certain towns and they have these giant fucking enormous ones that they home when you pass by them and they feed, you know, like towns or like miles and miles away. Those are, they can't be good with the next to that, right? No. That's gotta be fucking with your system somehow or some form. Yeah. Is it, are they ever proven that? I don't know, but there's a lot of houses even in Burbank because Burbank uses still uses those power lines. And there's like humongous ones and their houses blow it. And you just kind of feel eerie, it feels eerie because of how that area because there's just humming above you like the humongous power. Well, there's different ones. Like, you know, there's certain areas like really rural areas where you pass by big fucking giant ones. I don't understand much about the science behind providing electricity to cities, but you know, there's obviously a lot of, there's a lot of energy going through those goddamn things. If your house is just like sitting there. Yeah. Hello. Well, the thing is just whoo-whoa, right above you. Is that fucking with some things that you can't see? I think so. Do you think so? I should be a jigglow, or something just talk about that. Well, what would I do with power lines, cancer? Probably, yeah. Cancer is always what you look for, right? Yeah. But yeah, that's the thing today that nobody knows. It's like hmm, we have gaziliums, because it's cancer, but we don't know why. And you know, there are all these many many many things in our environment that are fucked up from the stuff we eat to the stuff Yeah, power land to all sorts of things that we don't really know what to what the grid they do or do not contribute But the fact that MSG is even allowed to be used today. Oh, you mean it drives me crazy delicious though Huh, it is but it's so unnecessary. It's a bad for you. It's proven to give you cancer My restaurant restaurants use it all the fucking time though that they don't tell you really yeah That's that's kind of like hey, thanks You might want to say hey, there's something in here that my cost cancer guys tell me this why I smoked say Rod is a Chinese food ain't gonna kill you bro Unless you're eating Chinese food all day every day that monasterium glutamine Who do you know that we had a food or for your friend because monasterl would be Well, yeah, but my man was living large I know nobody had this Chinese food addiction. He just could not kick yeah, but who knows though You've definitely known people that died of cancer that just just not bit linked to MSG But how do they know that it is it calls cancer and rats or something like that? Just proven yeah, we're not rats. I think we can rats can eat some shit that we can't eat, you know We shouldn't you know we shouldn't really go by that Yeah, but yeah, I'm sure I'm estuis terrible for you. I think it's like a it's just a flavor enhancer, right? Isn't it like accent or something like that there's a couple different like brand names of it? I don't know because I worked on a restaurant when I was a kid worked in like a Newport cream ring. It's like a hamburger place I think we had MSG This power line cancer thing. I can't get a fucking straight answer Everybody wants to make you read things just answer my bitch in India because of a study of 134 people with stomach cancer who are avid consumers of which food can contain MSG the fedderate Federation of hotel and restaurant owners in eastern India has asked its members to refrain from using MSG There's like a website called MS truth dot org back slash cancer dot h.m. And it's just all these reports of like where MSG is like No, it's seriously not why are we serving this? Where are we allowed to do this? Do you you concern with it for real? Well, I don't think it's necessary here's the reason why there's a really good tie place That's in Hollywood They have I don't want to say the place but palms right but it but they use MSG And then I had it once with MSG and then the next time I return I'm just like looking at the menu going Jesus Christ they put MSG in their food and they did they have it right here on the menu that they they just like hey By the way, we use MSG so I go Can I have no MSG and they're like oh, yeah, I sure no problem and so I got the same shit I got last time it tasted exactly the same it was delicious. It was amazing. It wasn't like like oh wow That there's definitely a night maybe every government man maybe they're trying to kill people but give it a Man-mastery or allowing it. That's just weird that that's not a big. I'm gonna Google is MSG good for you What if it turns out it's good for you? Maybe they told you that sure no problem. No MSG on this one Yeah, get the white guy. Yeah, I get them the same shit. You didn't die. Yeah Yeah, I gotta take a chance. I give you a superior product by cutting it out. Yeah, I'm good shut up eat it I don't know man. Is it is it really that bad for you? Yeah MSG is good for you. Okay. I'm reading something I'm gonna see is good for you an article on Forbes magazine argues that MSG monsotyum glutamate May actually be good for the world. What okay? Sits the onion daily U.S. Health nuts avoid it like the plague but many parts of Asia It sits on the table along with salt and pepper to enhance the flavor of meals leading expert MSG senior scientist company named blah blah blah insist that the definitive link between MSG and headaches Has yet to be proven for the more his own research has shown that the hospitals patients Hospital patients who have lost their appetite more likely eat their meals when sprinkled with MSG This he postulates could help elderly and sick people improve their appetites get nutrition they need and live longer or smoke weed Yeah, smoking weed would do better than MSG Maybe smoking weed MSG together is the motherfucker. I could put some Moth poop on that shit. Well, I remember it being a big deal. I remember people were you know Always saying avoid MSG like it became a big deal. I don't know where right? It was something that people is like great on kind of I think like even one day there like oh shit You know there was this like news reports saying that MSG is bad for you And then it kind of blew up like right on how did people get like wacky rules as to like what you can in canny and like biblical days Like you know like the cloven hoof things right pork. What is that? I mean a lot of it makes sense It's probably there are certain you know any modes that are freaking dirty that are more likely to carry diseases People will still eat them and well this freaking disease is still gets spread around So let's just say that God said you shouldn't eat it and we're done with it like chicken noces Shit like that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I mean I'm sure it boiled down to real factual things that people said you know We need to make a hardcore rule because otherwise people don't respect it So let's make it that God said so and you know let's have everybody stick to it And then of course then they stop making sense when hundreds of years later Thousands of years later the conditions are different so they no longer you know the animals could be in cleaner conditions or whatever But then the rules stick around when some of them are really nuts. You know like At a certain point in time. It's not it isn't based on health anymore It's just based on this strange tradition. Yeah, there's that. Yeah, and then your guilty If you eat like the pig and the swine like that's the big thing about Muslims I don't eat swine right you know that they'll tell you that like I remember that was like a cool thing for rappers to say like back in the 90s They don't eat swines. You know what you don't eat swine. Why not delicious? You asshole Crazy you don't eat bacon. Well you're hard because you don't eat bacon. What? You know it's just the idea that your religion would keep you for bacon. That's all you need to know They're not looking out for you. They keep you from barbecue pork as well. We get the fuck out of here The you're relating keeps you from spare ribs. They're assholes They must be assholes if you go to dr. Hoggley woggles and van eyes and have the spare ribs and tell me that that's not heavenly That's not a gift of God. There's a reason God made those ribs taste so goddamn good, right? I'm not with your religion. I would need you put it is like if I really jump doesn't let you How did you say about bacon? It was awesome. Yeah, if you religion doesn't let you be bacon They're not looking out for you. I like it. They're their assholes. I like nuts. I think that we need to make a new religion Are you willing to put this together when you do your new book? That's we gonna construct a new religion? The work entitled is create your own religion so so you're gonna pick out all the best stuff Yep, that's the idea. Does it have to have any basis in any previous stories or I mean how can it be substantiated? Is there any you know like you could use Scientology is what I mean? I mean it's not based on fate so it's based on you know what makes sense to you what seems to work and then you know Try it and if it doesn't work change it, but when you're including religions, are you allowed to include ones? Do we know somebody made up? Yeah, I mean you can't you? Scientology actually don't you? I don't you? I don't you? I don't you? I feel like it's no Why is it I mean why isn't it any different than what had happened with that one guy with a dragon suit that's right? I think people died by says Jesus's brother. I mean if Scientology was sensing that Greater number of people took extremely seriously than I would say sure let's play with it I would agree with you if I hadn't met so many actors, and I think that's why I haven't been so yeah I haven't been so it seemed like you know the world of acting. It's it's a hugely popular Yeah, usually popular monks successful people as well Right, I think it gives them some sort of a framework in which to think and behave, you know and a framework of positivity like You know everyone seeing that The Tom Cruise right and indoctrination video. I was talking about a car accident. I can skate Yeah, if you haven't seen it folks you have to look it up Well if they haven't pulled it from the web. I hope God. I hope they haven't pulled it. Do you think they pulled that? You know the only one Yeah, cuz you're a scientist. They so fake carries man. I can it's like God He's so good at it. He would be an awesome cult leader. Oh, thank you. He might have to do it too He might have to step in, you know, they have to also step in my because it's too, you know, he's not high enough to organization no, no, I mean literally high. Oh Do them they have to bump your mouth a little too much. You think so man. I think he's so charismatic Get away with it. Just make sure you keep my podium. Don't see if you're gonna know But then again everybody has always seen you know camera You can always make him look taller when you if you see these do it as like I don't remember Maybe it's not that short, but I thought for what I heard that is like he's probably like hobbit It's probably not nearly as short as everybody says probably they probably want to make him seem like more of a loser Yeah, yeah, probably good. He's doing probably probably I mean come on when this is got like Tom Cruise It's been how many goddamn blockbuster movies over and over and over again massive success over and over and over again You're gonna look for flaws. Yeah, he's fucking short. He's gay. That's all you ever hear is gay short Yeah, I'm sure there's an envy level of like yeah, I want your life So you must suck for some other reason. Yeah, I wonder how much of an effect Scientology has on his success Yeah, I wonder how much of you know how much of what he pulled off He would have put wouldn't have pulled off if he wasn't deep in that the throws of some I think you're on the other way to convert to me It sounded cooler and cooler by the second now maybe man, maybe it's the way to do it Maybe we need to all join like a reasonable cult right a cult that really hasn't shit together I bring it this over and over again. People think I'm fucking serious. I want to be clear right now No, I'm not starting a cult for real just fucking around all right We're just bouncing ideas. No, I'm not really gonna set up a compound where people can show up Because if you did man This is the time of the of the world where if you did do that you said listen We have 6,000 acres. It's in Wyoming Anybody can sign up. We do a background check on you if you're in build a house come on in and we start a town Did you imagine yeah, yeah, they would do a shutdown now? What do you think my guess is if we did that would you be willing to go and be our religious advisor Want to be the keep everybody on the same page You know I got to crucify them if they don't know you can't do that you can't do that. We're gonna try to avoid that What we're trying to do is just get a bunch of people together that we don't really know that much just Suved them out of their their current dogma. Okay. I like that. That's all we just you know So you you'd be the guy that under like they can't argue with you. Yeah, let's say you're having some areas come up Let's have a final match in the cage between myself and some areas and see what gets to get after the top spot and the Samaras no the guy you're doing to say Sam Harris. Oh Sam Harris Promise some I should For me Stars on call break off in its own direction. He's called to be smarter than our cult. I just read that he started training Drew Jeet's yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I better get oh for a while. That's well not not that long Okay, good index is taking private lessons. He's gonna come on. I think it's March 8th It's gonna be on we're gonna talk about I should take him on while it's still learning. Yeah before he gets to go What level is is your game? Are you a purple belt level? What levels are you? My game is weird because I roll for the longest time Not in formal classes So my way is weird because I'm lacking some pieces of the game that you should learn when you're fucking white belt But then I have other ones. Yes. Yeah, I don't put my weight I don't put an after a shirt on top I don't do some of the stuff they are supposed to do that you learn as basics But then at the same time I have like weirdass movements that I can tap people who are insanely better than me Really is it's kind of weird is I can do storially shitty people and I can be really good people So it's hard to gauge it the same way Yeah, roughly give or take somewhere around there somewhere somewhere around the purple belt range, but his Is not regular, you know, I'm better than a purple belt in some way and I'm way worse in others And so it's my game is a little weird that way. That's interesting like what What style was it that you learned? It was like the first style. I mean as far as grappling goes. Yeah No, I did play it was basically you know grappling with no geese So it was who did you learn from I started out with this guy Tim Cartmel was one of the black belts from What's his name the guy was started copa pacifica? Kleber the channel, okay Cartmel was awesome. I really like his game He was amazing grappler and he showed me some stuff and then a lot of the time I would just roll with people somebody their garage there their jiu jitsu guys come over and we would just throw So a lot of it was not the real send formal learning a lot of it was learned by doing and Which as it advantages and disadvantages, you know, so I'm missing a lot of stuff that I should know But then I have other things that like one thing I used to death or neglects like locks are my game is like I catch Very dangerous man. So you know what if you're not an ass and people you're rolling with know what they are doing You don't have to crank them like crazy. You catch somebody and then you some cases when the guy is not tapping I would just tell him like dude. Yeah, you know the scariest guys who's a more Paul Harris for that reason. I know he's He's serious. He's terrifying even because he catches there's no I mean so strong or competition So if he doesn't do it the guy's gonna step up and family but he just doesn't give you a chance to You barely ever chance to scream in an agony. Yeah, he tears guys knees apart. Yeah Terrifying so strong too when he jumps on it. Yeah. He's a really unusual terrifying guy. Yeah Like there's a first terrifying guy that rips legs apart I can't remember a guy who's so consistent at doing that and you know high level MMA. It's really kind of an Is rare characteristic that guy emanati the John is the one he's one of those Yeah, those two guys are like neck and neck for the best leg locks I'm even are he's terrifying. He's so good at wrapping guys. Oh my god He's horrifying. He's got it also an amazing Alma plot to submission Called the emanari where you go like you have a shoulder lock and then you grab an s grip underneath the guy's face and You lean back and say and it just snaps his neck. It's terrible. It's a terrible It's because his arm is twisted and you're pulling his neck back. It's nasty He's submitted a couple guys with that. He gets it all the time now. In manati is one of those guys I like his style, but it does seem a bit of a dick because he likes a mission like he really is just He just rip your leg apart and he just sees dancing around all the how well you have me to finish guys off I mean you kind of have to I mean the reason why he's so good and so feared is because he does that Yeah, that's true and then people will tap early next time. Yeah, I mean I get it It's an advantage. Well, they're gonna try to take his conscience away. You know Is they're gonna plant his head. That's true. You know, yeah. I don't know. It's it's fucking hard game Yeah, it is you know, that's why like when this rampage thing happened a rampage is upset at man like look He's doing a way harder gig than yeah, you know what what he's doing He's a sensitive guy and he's got Literally one of the most difficult jobs to manage on earth, you know, he's gonna be irritable about shit I'm sorry if I pissed him off all I'm trying to do is assess things It's martial arts and mixed martial arts fighting is Gotta be one of the hardest ways to make a living humanly. Yeah as well Other than being a soldier, you know, it's it's right up there. Yeah, right I mean even psychological going into the game knowing that somebody has spent a last year training Just in order to rip your part. Yeah more effective fashion Especially when the guys start getting super emotional. Yeah talking shit to each other and they get in each other's faces at the way ends You know things get really I met when I went to Vegas I met I went because I was meeting a radical tour and so I got to a guy with him a little bit And I never met him before and I was really blown away by the way you see Montevis the same way you see him in reality I'm so Calm is like the opposite of what you expect like I kept asking him about fear, you know going into it and being afraid And it was like a foreign concept to him It was like I think he wrestled so much as a kid and got over the fear of performance the anxiety all of that as a kid Mm-hmm that as an adult He just looked at it as a problem to be solved and there's no big deal and it's another day of office and I'm just like How the fuck do you do that? Just fucking super See it really is it how do you manage that? That's I know and you know he fought some of the toughest fighters in the world with that I remember one time I don't remember who it was that he fought whether it was Tim Silvia or maybe it was Maybe it was Brandon there. I forget who it fought, but he was on the the side of the octagon and I was looking over at him before The fight started looked over at me and winked It's kind of so relaxed. You just look at you and wink right before he goes to war Yeah, he was so calm about it. That's one of the reasons why he was able to keep fighting, you know In later ages he was so calm in there Preserve his energy so efficient and experienced You know and that Greco Roman man he did the ability to control guys apparently Everybody says it ran to go tour was one of the nastiest guys like when he would grab a hold of the back your neck Like the control was so nasty you like would there's dudes that have like different levels of control and you really haven't felt it yet And you so you heard sort of have like a lot of times you view if you train with people that only have a certain level of skill And then all of a sudden you train with someone who has a very high level of skill. It's baffling to you You literally aren't even aware that someone could be so good. Yeah, it's it's staggering to you and that was a Apparently a lot of people's assessments of Randy's clinch that he would get a hold of you That's why he was so sure like dirty boxing guys like when he fought V-Tor Bellford That's amazing. Yeah, the first V-Tor Bellford butt fight especially they fought three times But the first one especially when he beat V-Tor when V-Tor was not just undefeated He was this fucking phenom. He was tearing guys apart in the first round and and Randy stopped him and it ran He stood a lot of it was like that dirty boxing man He was so good at it just controlling the back your head and and pummeling you with shots and Enforcing the cage and taking the right angles and that was that was the birth of Randy that was in third fire If I didn't you have said how the hell do you go from zero to fighting V-Tor Bellford and An animal he's an animal and a great guy. Yeah nice guy to be around, you know really nice It was around. I was really very impressed With him. I was like man this guy says good as they say I'm bad. There is like really a cool guy I'm excited because they asked me to Write a book on his career. I think who else you do this? one of the guys that is a joy vernor he's one of the guys that one of the trainers for the trinko tour and so he said that's work on it together You know, he wanted to do it and then write my writing so he's a hopping and will write it and do this thing about Randy because you're saying you know most of the MMA books are out there are autobiographies Which are cool? But then in an auto biography you can only go you know you can only hype it up so much because he sound like an ass if Right, he's legendary fighter right right Whereas doing it as a turperson with a lot of the voices from his opponents Right, kind of like a facing elite type of thing where you got multiple person right right right It's the it's a different way of doing the great documentary term And that's the planning factor to do it as a book and then to shoot the interviews I was there for his very first fight against Tony Hall. Yeah, I think it was 1997 or 98 it might have been 98 was 97 thank you and Tony Hall was this giant fucking pro wrestler dude and Randy could tour docked under that dude's big punch Got him took him down and strangled his ass And I remember thinking a whole leash shit. Look at that like that was the difference in like one guy was like his big strong Sort of pro wrestler type character, but the other one had that that stupid grappling strength I remembered from some freaks in high school. Mm-hmm when I wrestled in high school, you know when we were in You know a certain district and I went to the thing was like the regionals and I forget what it was called But you know the the guys who won like certain tournaments would advance to other tournaments And so I got to see like the state champion wrestlers and I got to see like some of the really high high level wrestlers And I'll never forget there's the way that really good wrestlers could manipulate guys like just toss them and throw them around I remember thinking Jesus Christ like there's like just like anything else There's there's guys out there that are taking it to a very extreme level unless you go and see it You don't know that that's possible So when I first saw Randy in the UFC and he took down that Tony homo guy that's immediately what it reminded me Right immediately what it reminded me of is the first time that I've ever seen real good amateur wrestlers and went whoa Like this is this is some shit to deal with right here. Yeah Did you think you had a chance when he fought the bitter like because it mean he did be told But those guys were you know the first two guys he beat weren't that good caliber for the ice and then when he stepped up to five It was a big leap. It was a big leap. It was a third fighter is fourth fight third fight third. He did that one night I see beat wearing that good caliber for the ice and then when he stepped up to five eight or did you do it? It was a big leap. It was a big leap. It was his third fighter is fourth fight third fight 30 did that one night. So yeah, two guys and then the next time that's incredible That really is incredible if you stop and think about that. Yeah, I you know I don't think we knew what he was capable of but it was really clear early on that he was just his force of will was just too much Right, Randico Torre had the most amazing will ever you know you look back to the first Pedro his or fight dude Pedro his oh hit him with some of the most Horrifying leg kicks that have ever been landed in MMA fight it took him six months to recoup his legs to re Re-evilitate his legs after that fight. He showed me he still has a whole in his leg. Yeah, the muscle died in the spot The muscle died think about that Pedro his oh kicks you so hard the muscles die forever in certain spots on your fucking leg So Randico Torre got through that and then rehab for six months and they talked him into a rematch You didn't want to do the rematch. I don't want to fight this fucking guy. So they give him a rematch and he beats him down again Yeah, well, I think you just knew there's no way I'm getting leg kick this time It just became it didn't become a you know I think when you fight certain guys you you start thinking oh, I can take a leg kick or right Then you fight Pedro his oh you really know you can't know you can't that guy man people don't even know one of the reasons why I have such a fetish for leg kicks like people always saying wrong you're so fucking on go But look it's your queer for leg kicks. They are it's because I've seen Pedro his oh fight live And I've seen what's possible. I know what's possible when guys are good man. Yeah, I definitely call for them too many But it's because they're awesome when they land. Yeah, they are not they are scary Yeah, so if people want to buy your book, what's the best way to get a hold of it through disinfo.com either there or Amazon Amazon and it is the 50 things was the same 50 things are not supposed to know a religion and Danielle And if someone wants to get a hold you want Twitter, what is the Twitter address? Oh shit I want to say it's that debo la lee if you see a picture of a dude if you're new awful dinner, baby Yes, it's debo la lee. Okay. Oh L E L L I Thanks for coming out again, man. Always cool talk to you. We'll have to do it again. Yeah, I love it I think some other yeah fuck up part of the history of religion or something to harp on Let me let me yeah give a shout to one of your one of your fans who are There's this lady. She's going through a lot of heart shape And so I feel maybe make our date. We are name on the one and only okay Jorogam Park has this lady Angela Murado, so you're cool human being you'll get through it Look at you man spread in positive positive love and life through the podcast So what is her name again? Angela Murado Angela Murado all right Angela. I hope you feel better Thanks for tuning in. I hope you enjoyed this podcast. I'll everybody enjoyed it Thanks to our sponsors go to you Jirogan.net and click on the link for the flashlight enter in the code name Rogan get 15% off number one sex toy for men Yay, I'll get you one day. I'm the only one. I know what I'm gonna do it tonight. Yeah, okay And thank you to honest calm oh and n it and go to joeroggan.net Click on the alpha brain link and enter in the code name Rogan and you will get 10% off Not just the first order now for any any future orders. All right. We love you guys. Thanks for tuning in and we will see you tomorrow Who's on tomorrow Brian? I don't know hold on a second. It's it's home girl Amy Schumer Amy Schumer We've been trying to get her on for a while. She's the hilarious chick from the Charlie Sheen roast who fucking killed it dude Some of her lines and she was going back and forth with Mike Tyson. I hope we can play some of it I don't know if we can but either way she's hilarious. So she's on tomorrow That's it. Thanks everybody. Thanks for tuning in. Thanks to It's all you find folks out there in cyberspace and we'll see you in about 24 hours. Bye bye Daniel Balailly