I'll speak for myself. I never thought that I would be offering an apology to Jeffrey Epstein. I think of all the times I've maligned that guy, all the times I'm accused of crimes, black mailing people, of trafficking children, to powerful figures around the world on behalf of global intel services. And then I learned yesterday from Attorney General Pambandi, that's totally untrue. The guy killed himself after 30 days, 36 days in prison. For no reason, there's a billionaire. He had no clients. He'd done nothing wrong, other than get like naughty massages 20 years before. And the guy killed himself, another pointless that. And then his best friend, former girlfriend, she laid Maxwell doing 20 years in prison for no crime. There are no victims. Yes, it's a victimless crime. They're obviously persecuted by the state. They're political prisoners. It's a, the hate should come in and do an investigation, or we're watching one of the most systematic government cover-ups of all time. Something that you say that always resonates with me is I don't want to be lied to. And I specifically don't want to be lied to by the very people who built careers, and I'm talking here specifically about cash, Patel, Dan Bonjino, and many others who now work for the administration, who fed mega and the American people and promised them to get to the bottom of this, only to turn their tune immediately upon assuming office lying before Congress talking about, this is an obvious case of suicide going on the Joe Rogan podcast and effectively asking for some level of trust that I wouldn't, I don't give to any government official FBI director cash Patel said, if I had this information, don't you think I would release it? No, I don't, because actually your actions now just in the last couple of days only vindicate the idea that this is not only a systematic government cover-up at the highest levels, not only involving sex trafficking, but going all the way up to the top levels of the US intelligence, the Israeli intelligence community, implicating powerful people, billionaires here in the United States, former prime ministers of Israel, the prime, you know, the power current president, former presidents of the United States, and for them to come out on the day, very day, or I guess the day before, that the Israeli prime minister is visiting Washington for the third time of this year. What why exactly, you know, can we go over that? Last time I checked, this is a country do about 52 billion in bilateral trade with, equivalent to like Singapore and Chile. I don't remember the last time that she lay in or Singaporean leaders were in Washington for three times in the last six months into who we give 3.3 billion to Switzerland. These are all countries I love, by the way, I visited all three that I just listed. I love them. Would I, you know, would they serve Israel? Yes, you went, did you have school in Israel? That's right. I did six weeks in Israel. It's a great country. I like it a lot, but it's not about that. This is about my country. And so watching this all just get perverted and then used and hijacking our government is just particularly offensive to me. Not only just as an American, but I feel particularly not only deceived by the people like the FBI director and the deputy director, Dan Bonjino, but the attorney general who went on camera after assuming her office on the White House lawn. These are supposed to mean things and said, thousands of victims, we have the client list, we have the flight logs, she held a little press conference, whatever event with so-called influencers and which she gave them the Epstein files and infamous photo that was released. It turned out that that binder actually had redacted information in it, which was already public just to demonstrate how they were turning the South, they're turning the White House effectively into a performative show and making, you know, light of the fact that there are hundreds, if not thousands of underage victims and it's just not the victims. It's the fact that it extends to the highest levels of the elite, the transatlantic elite and possibly even beyond that from some of the richest men in our country, presidents of the United States, a press former prime ministers of Israel. We're talking here about Bill Gates, Leon Black, Leslie Wexner, the richest and most powerful people in the world than no rebel committee at the scientific. I mean, the community at Harvard, MIT, the tentacles through which this operation had its hands in and stretches all the way back to the 1980s. It is one of the most disgusting intelligence operations I think in the United States and intelligence history, rivaling some of the things, you know, eventually that led to the death of President Kennedy. And the thing is, is around this time, it's just like Kennedy, we all know the truth. We know that this document released by the Trump administration is complete bullshit. And I guess that maybe just like with the Kennedy assassination, they expect us to just get over it in a period of time. And I, and I genuinely think it's incumbent on anybody who was either supportive of the president, any United States citizen to say no, we demand like absolute and total transparency on this case and particularly of these government officials do not use your platform to enrich yourself on these podcast platforms and constantly talk about Epstein and the Epstein files, eventually assume office change on a dime and expect us to trust you that is not how this works. And in particular in that document, I think it's one of the most disgusting documents ever released by the United States government because it said there was no blackmail. There was no, we're not releasing this information. Cash Patel has this new line about how we're not going to re-victimize women ask the Epstein victims themselves. They have been begging for this information to come to light specifically to implicate the powerful men that victimized them and through which they were, you know, and they were basically used for trafficking purposes to ensnare them in this high level US intelligence Israeli intelligence operation probably run in conjunction and that the trail of this entire thing just it enrages me. It actually enrages me as an owner. I don't think you're alone. And I do think someone voted for the president campaign for the president a lot. I'm not attacking the president, but I think even people were fully on board with, you know, the bulk of the maga agenda or like this is this is too much. Yes. Yes. I'm saying that with love and I hope that they're listening because I think this threatens to blow up the whole thing. But let's just back up a little bit and pick at some of the inconsistency here. So you're saying that Pam Bondi said on camera, we have a client list. On the White House line. I've seen the client list. And then yesterday she's saying there's no client list. There's no client list. And there was no systematic blackmail. That actually might be the most preposterous line in the document. But it doesn't, I mean, it just makes sense. So they've said that there were thousands of young people in some cases minors underage children victimized sexually victimized. Are they saying that Epstein single-handedly had sex with all because actually, for whatever it's worth, I don't think anyone that I've never seen anyone make the claim that Epstein had sex with anybody. Yes, that's right. Well, a lot of these allegations revolve around like group activities and they around like masseuse and being, I mean, look, the way that Dershowitz and others would claim it is I kept my underwear on and it was all a, you know, very above the board massage information. There's that famous photo of Bill Clinton and the airport terminal with one of these young victim who herself says she was a victim of the Epstein entire machine. So you're exactly right. So like for these thousands of women, where they victimized entirely by Gailene Maxwell and by Jeffrey Epstein, because by the way, that's not even what the Gailene Maxwell Jeffrey Epstein court documents and other things that we already knew that we're in the public information. That's not what they say. That's not what the testimony of the victims of these people say. And so again, even this client list thing, I do think people can go down the rabbit hole too much and think that there is, as you know, you know, there's no ledger as in that client had sex with so and so and we in, you know, because of that supported Israel, like that's not how it works. So the term client list itself is misleading. It's misleading because really what we want is a full list of the victims of the people who flew on the flight logs. But the most important is the money. And I think a lot of people actually missed that in the Epstein story. Jeffrey Epstein came to power largely because he worked at Bear Stearns and effectively was like a high finance money laundering expert. That's effectively what we can learn from his background. That's how he came involved with Leon Black. Leon Black is one of the most powerful men in New York. Mrs. The head of the Apollo group. He paid him $170 million. They're various shell corporations for tax advice. And when he was caught doing that, he was said actually, it wasn't even useful because all the tax advice was actually in the public domains. What? I mean, Leslie Wexner in the 1991, I believe, signed full power of attorney over to Jeffrey Epstein. He was one of the richest men in America. I think it was the richest man in Ohio at that time. Jeffrey Epstein becomes the head of the Wexner Foundation funnel some $2.5 million to A.U. Barack. The former Israeli Prime Minister. I'm putting these things out there because I want people to know that the money is an integral part of the operation. And to the extent that the sex trafficking and all that is linked, they are fused together because they were used primarily by the intelligence community. Both, Epstein was a conduit of high stakes money laundering for things like, you know, to not Iran, country specifically, but let's say like funneling arms from Israel to Iran. This was also how he met eventually Robert Maxwell and became a snare with his daughter, Elaine Maxwell. The money laundering is actually more key to his intelligence rule. It's real to Iran. Well, this was a key part of the Maxwell story. Robert Maxwell is a very sketchy character, Elaine Maxwell's father. People focus on the tabloid. That's actually not all what I'm interested in. What I'm interested in is the fact that he's this Czechoslovakian, he's this Czechoslovakian, Orthodox Jew who like escapes from the Nazis, the event should becomes a highly decorated soldier. You know, actually, I think he won the second highest medal in the UK for his operations during World War II. From that point forward becomes very, very enmeshed with the Zionist community inside of the UK and propping up the newly formed state of Israel. From that point forward, he basically serves as a high stakes like almost an entity in and of itself. That's where the Darryl Cooper has described him is like a sovereign wealth on almost, which with together brokers, all kinds of deal cut out deals between Israel and Iran. And actually Epstein himself when he was just 28 years old met, you know, flew on a private jet, I believe to the Pentagon with somebody who we know is directly linked to these, you know, previous intelligence operations and funneling money and weapons into many of these conflicts. So this stretches back decades and that's a very, very important part of the story. So please just do not tell me that there's no part of a systematic blackmail campaign. It's so preposterous and it actually just makes us want, it makes me want to tear my hair out. And I guess the only good news is that just like what the Kennedy assassination, we do all know the truth. It's not the Kennedy assassination broke this country. I really believe that I know you do as well, but it broke something even more fundamental and opened up what they called the credibility gap under the Johnson administration where prior to the 1960s, Americans trusted their government. It was actually a beautiful thing. It was bad in some ways as well. We're taking advantage of by the dullest brothers and a lot of other horrible things that are doing the 1950s. But it was beautiful in the sense of social and civic trust. And there's something was broken with that with the Kennedy assassination. And then it was extended of course into the war in Vietnam. And we've never been the same sense. And all the Trump, you know, the Trump administration elected on the backs of a lot of these people want more transparency and government saw a lot of this corruption to just turn around and do the same thing. It's just too much. It's too much for me. And I think it's too much for a lot of other people. So we want to brag, but this has got to be the most pro dog podcast on the entire internet. They're almost always dogs actually just off camera. So dogs are non-negotiable. Dogs are the best and people who love dogs really, really love them. We can relate. And so for that reason, we are thrilled to announce a new partner called Dutch Pet. It's the fastest growing telehealth service for your pets. It's on a mission to create affordable quality veterinary care at any time no matter where you are. They'll get your beloved pet what they need and they do it at a high speed. And by the way, if you ever brought your dog to the vet, the dog doesn't like it. They can smell the darkness sometimes. It's true. Sometimes you have to go to the vet. But if you can avoid it, you should. And you want to and Dutch.com has vets who can treat over 150 animal conditions, which is 10 minutes on the phone. You never have to leave home. You never have to scare or upset your dog no wasted time enough to wait weeks for an in-office appointment. And you don't waste money unlimited visits and follow-ups for no extra cost free shipping on all products for up to five pets. Membership starts as little as 11 bucks per month in Dutch.com saves most customers nearly $1,000 a year. We use it. It's awesome as dog owners. It sounds too good to be true probably, but it's absolutely real. Visit Dutch.com slash Tucker to learn more. Use the code Tucker for up to 50 bucks off your veterinary care plan per year. That's a year of unlimited vet visits for $82 a year. Your pets and your wallet will thank you. This is going to change the game. And we're proud to be partnered with them. I remember thinking when Epstein killed himself, I never met Epstein, but I mean, he knew everybody. I mean, I will say, I mean, in the defensive people who got caught up in this because they went to dinner at Epstein's, like that George Stephanopoulos, for example, who I disagree with on everything, but like, I know George and I don't think George is having sex with kids. Epstein was, you know, just part of like the social fabric, right? And Trump knew him for that reason also. But when he killed himself, I remember thinking people like he didn't kill himself as a prop kill himself. He knows in jail, whatever. His brother Mark called me a couple days after he killed himself. And so began this like three or long conversation with Mark Epstein and looking into it in, in a way I never thought I would. He didn't kill himself. He was murdered in his cell. Yeah. And I think that's really meaningful. It's the most secure federal lockup in the United States. How can that happen? Well, you have to put that state actors involved. That's right. Look at the story that we were told at that time. Part of the information down here by the administration is some hours of footage. We were told that footage didn't exist. We were told that this was some guards who were off to think they were. They fell asleep. They fell asleep. This was, none of it exists. And actually, you know, it was all part of a screw up and the camera angles wouldn't even be able to show anything. But that's why they're relatively confident. So where did this camera footage even come from? Well, the camera footage doesn't even, first of all, it ends before they take his body out. Why can't we see that? And the angle on it is absurd. But the real question just not to be pedantic, but the real question is who are the other inmates on that cell block? So no one came in or out of the cell block. I think that's fair. It was the most secure cell block in that federal lock of him and hadn't. But who are the other inmates? And I went to Department of Prisons, which is part of DOJ and asked, like, what are their names? Oh, we can't for privacy reasons. Really? These are people who can't vote or own a firearm. Yes. You know, for the rest of their lives, but somehow they've got like a HIPAA law or something around who's a federal inmate? Fuck you, actually. Yeah. It's right. It made me so mad because of course, if Epstein was murdered and it's very clear that he was, he was murdered by another inmate. That's right. And we know that a bunch of them were transferred out of the unit right after he died. Who were they? Where are they now? Like, why can't we get an answer to that question? So the whole thing that this tape shows, he didn't kill himself, it's like a joke. But worse than that, it's a joke that we all get. Like, they're not fooling anybody. So I feel like we're at a dangerous point now. Yeah, I agree because the lie is more in dick. It's the lie at this point is not even part of trying to convince any of this is true. Yes. The lie is a signal to everybody else involved in the scheme that to the, to the ultimate ends, the United States government will go to protect all of you. Yes. And that's the quote for that smart purpose. Can you say that again? Okay. It's, I'm sorry, it's a signal. The lie is not for you and me. The lie is for those implicated to say no matter what we will protect you. And then we have to start asking the question why as in why is the purpose of this entire thing? Why does it matter that it happens right before these really prime minister comes to Washington for the third time. As you said, what is the linkage here between those two and the linkage is the fact that even even a surface level view of Jeffrey Epstein of the case of the entire public record reveals Alex Acosta who said he belonged to intelligence. He said that the person who was responsible for the sweetheart 13 month deal. Alex Acosta, who was the US attorney said, I believe he testified this under sworn testimony, said I was told he belonged to intelligence. That was a key part of why he, the charges were dropped against him. And you know, he got some sweetheart Palm Beach County jail situation where he was allowed to leave on the weekends and why even though I know you'll forgive George, but I actually won't. I don't have dinner with pedophiles. I'm not sure about you. I'm generally aware of the people who I am around. And if I can get invited to someone's house, I do cursory Google searches. That's generally what you know, I think that's normal. Don't want to be in the presence of people who I think are genuinely evil. That's what I said. So for me, I actually can't forgive many of the media figures and the, you know, the presidents, people like Bill Clinton, Kevin Spade, all these other high profile figures, specifically because it was all out in the public record. And then in particular, all of these high flying Wall Street finance years and Deutsche Bank, remember, they were fined. I think it was the New York financial services. I read that entire report. It's one of the most extraordinary reports I've ever seen because they specifically talk about how the bank ignored almost every single one of its own procedures that it would apply to any other client. And that at the highest levels, and remember, I think is the Barclays CEO. He's already been in trouble for this for covering up much of this in one of the largest financial institutions in the entire world. You know, for example, if you and I keep going to the bank and withdrawing $9,900 in cash and we do it for a couple of weeks are banking institutions are supposed to call, you know, both the IRS and the DOJ and say something is going on. And they will, and they should, right? That is what this is done for a reason. He did this for years. And the classification that the bank accepted was it was just for tips. This is this is what I mean about the highest level of the cover up and what the what the cover up means for the system itself. And something you and I were talking about recently is I really believe here that I never believed it more that in a sense, you know, for elected government and for all the benefits of our Republic and of representation that elites actually have always mattered. And of course, they're the ones responsible for channeling public energy. This is the way that we're set up into law, into policy, etc. And so this lie was a signal to the elites. It was a signal to Versailles. It was a signal to the court that the court will always be protected no matter what. And it's raging at a moment when the court has never been more reviled by the public. It's not just a spit in the face of the public. It really is like a late, you know, it's a late 1700s kind of signal to the court that we will protect this institution no matter what. And it's really a question for the rest of us as if we're going to continue to put up with this. I wonder what our recourse is. None of us is paying very close attention during the summer. The news cycle calms down, families travel, people relax, you're at the beach. It's all great, except the people in Washington never stopped. It gives them a chance to advance their agenda without you noticing because you're on vacation. That means new regulations, more censorship, to continue the erosion of the Bill of Rights, the values that built this country. We want to talk about something that can help reverse this trend. Beams, creatine. How is this connected? Well, beams creatine is clean. No fillers, no synthetic garbage. It boosts cognitive function. It supports muscle strength. And it helps protect brain health as you age. People in charge don't want you to be strong, clear thinking, independent. Of course, because a population like that is a threat to their control. So now's the time. Beam is running a sale for our listeners for prime day. For the next 48 hours, get up to 40% off the whole store. That's everything. They're best selling creatine, of course, but also the rest of their excellent products. This is their biggest sale. The biggest sale they're going to have, the biggest you'll see anywhere. It's only for our listeners. Go to shop beam beam.com slash Tucker from up to 40% off. Shopbeam.com slash Tucker up to 40% off. And can I say one thing that I was britting about this morning? When the Epstein thing first happened, when he died, and I was, I'll plead ignorance and lack of interest. I was like, distractors. Let's stuff going on. I get a call from someone I know who I like, who's a true hardcore neo con. Many of whom I like to personally, who's writing a book on Epstein, two people on you together with this book on Epstein. I don't want to name them. I want to be mean or anything. But they're like, we come on your show. We want to, we were written a book on Epstein in this whole scandal. So I read the book and it's very sophisticated and it's like Epstein super bad, but the Epstein story is really limited to Epstein. This mad guy who died. And there's no, we, you know, there's no evidence. It was part of anything bigger than anything to with other countries. And they come on my show and I interview them and they're like, no, yeah, there's all the stuff, mysteries. We couldn't get to the bottom of it. But, you know, Epstein's really, really bad. And I looking back, I'm like, that was all, but like, that was by design. Yes. Right. It was like, wow, we're exposed here. And we need to, you know, we need to like throw, we need a warrant commission actually. Oh, you're right. Except a real one at this time. It didn't work because, you know, vanity fair to its great credit, wrote a couple of pieces and they stopped covering and I noticed, but they kind of got to the wexner thing. Who's this wexner guy who is this next? And what ties to these guys have to foreign intel services, which were deep. I mean, I think it had Barack like a lived Jeffrey Epstein's place on fifth. That one is playing 30 times, lived often at his, his townhouse in Manhattan. Yes. One time the largest residents in the history of New York City transferred to him by deed, by Leslie Wexner for what purpose we have no idea. He invested in a Ud Barrack's defense intelligence startup. And I think the defense intelligence part there may be even as interesting as the fact that his a former Israeli fat crime minister and former former head of Israeli military intelligence. I mean, we, this is what I'm saying about the money. The money is so important to the story because we already have, you know, documented cases of CIA Israeli and others buying up private corporations, which poses, let's say cybersecurity firms that sell to the government or other governments and use those as back doors. So look, if you're A.U.ed, Barack, you've probably met, you know, some of the richest people on the planet. Why do you need, you know, these investments from Jeffrey Epstein of all people, a tax advisor to the super rich. What did Bill Gates get from his repeated involvement with Jeffrey Epstein? Why did Melinda Gates, you know, divorce Bill Gates after years and obvious knowledge of his philandering in the past? Are we really to believe it's about philandering, you know, from 20 years ago, which was well known apparently within Microsoft? No, it's because she probably started to get a little aware, or perhaps there was something else going on there as to the extent of what that relationship was. And, you know, the fact is, it's even from public reporting where it told that Jeffrey Epstein was seen by Gates as the conduit to win the Nobel Peace Prize. How for what purpose, how does he have all of these ends with the highest level of the intelligence or the scientific community? And then, of course, I mean, it doesn't take a genius to see the intertwignment between the scientific community, the academic research industrial complex and the intelligence community. So all of these pieces, this is the unfortunate part. And, you know, even returning, like you said, to him being killed himself, let's our him allegedly killing himself, let's not forget Michael Biden, who I think is a very authoritative figure, you know, he reviewed all of the documents he had to see, etc. So this is not a case of suicide. I talked to him about that. Yes. And it's like, let's remember, I mean, he's one of the most, you know, what probably the most famous forensic like for the biologist. Yeah, pathologist in America. And his research has been very, or his, you know, diagnosis has been very important in a lot of other previous cases, which turned out to be true. And so when he looks at this and we have that evidence, when we have the cover up here now at the government, I'm just, I'm appalled, you know, that this is happening at the highest level. But my only conclusion is just to return is it's just a signal to the court is don't worry about it. We've got you. It doesn't, the people don't matter in this man. I think this for a bunch of reasons, it's so obvious, it is salacious people have followed it for years. The president promised to reveal the truth about this, Pambandi, as you said, one of televisions that we have the truth we're going to give it to. Yes. I think this is kind of, I think this is a big deal. It's a really big deal. It's bigger. I hope so too, actually. So let's just assess this logically. They're covering up the DOJ, the current DOJ under Pambandi is covering up crimes. Very serious crimes by their own description. Why are they doing that? Yeah. So there are really only two potential explanations that I can think of. Maybe you've got another. The first is that Trump has involved that, you know, Trump is on the list. They've got tape of Trump doing something awful. I don't believe that for two reasons. One, I've touched Trump about it a lot. And I know him. He's not that, you know, for whatever his sins. I don't think he's that guy, actually. I don't think he likes creepy sex stuff. That's but moreover, but more, I think convincing is that this is all information that the Biden administration had. And if there was evidence that Trump had been involved in a legal sexual activity, you think that people who made up Russia, would never be hit. Come on now. So the only other explanation, and I could think of it again, maybe you've got another is that Intel services are at the very center of the story. US and Israeli, and they're being protected. I think that seems like the the most obvious, have a history of this. There have been multiple documented cases of pedophilia inside of the CIA perpetrated by CIA officers documented that in many of those, I believe over a dozen cases, this was a BuzzFeed news piece years back where the CIA specifically did not want to prosecute those individuals in federal court for fear that they would reveal sources and methods if they were pulled into open court. And they basically just made it go away. The only time they actually prosecuted somebody for child pornography was whenever he'd already being prosecuted for mishandling classified information. Well, when they want to crash, they put kitty porn in your computer. Why don't have a computer? It has no known why if you're in a poor person, you should be. No computer. This is an important thing though is that we already have documented cases of them covering this up with, I believe the CIA inspector general. I forget the exact quote, but he said something along the lines of he wouldn't even believe the amount of child porn, you know, that I've seen while I'm on this job. I mean, these are depraved. Look, I mean, it's a large organization, a small percentage of the US, you know, we can make that argument. I think there is like something pathological, you know, kind of in the minds of the people who excel in this type of environment. Of course, it's based on lying. Yes. And lying is the gateway drug to every other sin. Of course, in the veil of secrecy, they protect CIA up to an including its budget, which we can though makes all kinds of really evil behavior possible. In fact, it inspires it. If you felt if you have the cloak of invisibility, would that improve or degrade your behavior? Yeah. Everyone knows everyone knows everyone knows the answer to that. Of course, you'd be like, I'm invisible at some point. You're going to have to go up and like, you know, no, you couldn't. Well, and they see doesn't make you a better person. They see their own colleagues getting away with it. And it's a permission structure. And so look, I mean, that's a small case, but it's just shows us that it's obvious. And it's something that has been in multiple intelligence communities have been ensnared in this. Again, I highly recommend Darryl Cooper's episode on the entire Epstein saga, because I didn't know about this case in New York. My legs listen to that. Oh, right. I was more incredibly informed by Mark. It was a Holocaust denier. Oh, I mean, words are supposed to have meaning, you know, and ask about the nail cons who are, I mean, keep in mind that it was J. left, who's Bill Crystal's lawyer, who represented the weekly standard when I worked there, who was an Epstein lawyer. Yeah. And so like, where's Mark live in on Epstein? I noticed that all these very valuable people who do not hesitate before imposing their opinions on the rest of a suddenly don't have very strong opinions about Epstein. What is that? Every accusation is actually admission. So, but why is Mark live in covering for Epstein? Yes, that's weird. That's a great question. And in particular, when he's going to accuse you of being funded by the Kateri government. And that's only right. That's what I mean about the accusation is the mission. The accusation, you know, they can concoct all these wild schemes about how Seabewick cough or me or you or anybody else is funded by the state of guitar. When in reality, I mean, as you know, it's like, we're really, you guys want to talk about foreign funding? Let's go. Let's take a look at your C3s and release release all of the data. I would be happy to take a look at it for you. I found out last night at dinner. I went to high school and because I did. Yeah, they love to use that one. I went to high school my last year American school of Doha. By the way, I don't think the Kateri government likes me. I found out last night at dinner. I went to high school and because I did. Yeah, they love to use that one. I went to high school my last few American school of Doha. By the way, I don't think the guitar government likes me very much because I've talked quite a bit about how a lot of migrant laborers are abused there. But of course, they still find that as a tenuous connection as some sort of, you know, admissions, supposedly I'm funded. They won't be able to fund me or my business and the people who are prescribed burgers, which is great. And that's part of the reason I can speak the way that I am. I literally dare them to disclose their donors and those ties to the Israeli government and the Israel lobby. I dare them to do it and they never will or any of the other foreign governments that directly prop them up. And this brings us to Epstein. Why, you know, the Epstein, well, I see Wexner Foundation under Jeffrey Epstein paid a UBrock $2.3 million to write two papers. I believe he did not even finish the second one. This is a non-profit funnel, you know, of money. Really? What's going on with it? Yeah, that sounds like a great gig. You know, for anybody out there struggling with their bills, money is easy. Okay. Whenever you're willing to engage in a lot of sherry sketchy behavior, and this is an pattern I've noticed all across Washington is that they ignore strategically the Epstein's story because it's inconvenient. And it's not or not even really inconvenient. I think it's just so deeply in mess here. And I just bring it back to Alex Acosta. He told us the truth once, which, or it not us, he told them the truth once. won't testimony. It he belonged to intelligence. And we've never, I mean, with Maxwell, who we have all of these documented ties to Mossad and to the intelligence community and all these sketchy dealings. And then his daughter working with Epstein. We have the Wexner Foundation, which we know is highly involved in Zionist interests here in the United States of America. We have Epstein as well, who's been linked to some of these organizations, or at least through funneling money via the Wexner Foundation. We know about his past, you know, with money laundering for what purpose that is the crux of the intelligence community's ability to move things around and to pay for off the books, extremely off the books activity. It traces back to the line. As you said, that's part of why we can't have the truth around you probably heard about eighth sleep. Lots of people are talking about it. It is a company with one mission, improving your sleep. And it's changing the way people do that, the way they get a good night's rest. We just got word that their team is launching a new product. It's called the Pod 5. It's an original and innovative mattress cover plus a blanket that uses precision temperature control to regulate your body's sleep cycles and give you the perfect sleep, which really, really matters. It can range all the way from 55 degrees to 110 degrees, meaning that you're covered no matter what. It's like electric blanket to the next level, but also a cooling blanket. So it makes you sleep better. Temperature is a massive effect on the way you sleep. By the way, it also detects snoring. And then it adjusts your bed position to reduce or completely stop it. So there are a lot of ladies in America who are going to be grateful for this product. Everybody who works here will tell you because they all use it that there's no better way to be alert, productive and happy than by sleeping well and eight sleep really does help. Visit eightsleep.com slash chucker use the code Tucker to get 350 bucks off your Pod 5 Ultra. If you don't like it, you return it within a month. That won't happen. We think you'll love it, but you can if you want, eightsleep.com slash Tucker. Why can't we have a country that is sovereign that can make its own decisions in nice and restore health to our international relations where we have allies, hopefully many more than we currently have. We don't have enough allies in my opinion. I'm hardly in any way. We're the wrong allies, but the number is dwindling. So it's right. Only a couple of real allies left and I'm not even sure they're allies, but whatever. But why couldn't you have at least conceptually a situation where you know, you act in your own interest and to the extent that other countries share that interest, there's a union set of interests. You ally with them, you know, transactionally. In other words, we're both for that we both want to build a real pipeline somewhere. We both want this shipping lane open or we're both mad at this other country. You know, it's like, why couldn't you have that? It's so difficult. I mean, that's why I mentioned Israel previously in the example. I think it's really important. I mean, if you were to listen to Fox News, you would think that this is the greatest juggernaut economy in the history of the world. I mean, I had chat, GPT do a mathematical analysis and I said, give me five countries that best resemble the US Israel trading relationship. And it was Singapore, you know, countries like Singapore, Chile and Switzerland. And I love, like I love those countries. I have it, I love those places. Yeah. Frankly, I think Singapore has a better, you know, if we're talking about grand strategy and all that, I'll be list that would put that one higher than any of the rest. But we don't talk about this in the terms of actual transaction because then people might actually start to ask a lot of questions. I mean, I remember this with Ukraine. I was like, we barely do bilateral trade with this country. It's one of the most insignificant countries in all of Europe to the US trading relationship. We can talk at, you know, the way they blow up these real relationships. Israel does our dirty work for us in the US and like, well, are they doing our dirty work? Or are they doing their own dirty work? And then basically passing the buck and the bill all the time. Why would we be able to do these work? We're not a state anyway. Exactly. And so then it comes down to all these questions, like you said, of national interest. And even in the exception that we make for this country is just so unbelievable. I mean, let's take the case of Jonathan Pollard, who is one of the biggest traders in the history of the United States for passing classified information on to the Israeli government. They were caught out in the open. Prime Minister Netanyahu used to visit our soil and actively campaign and urge our presidents of the United States to pardon Jonathan Pollard for betraying our country to his country. You have an idea what they did with the classified information. Yeah. Well, I actually have no idea about what I do. We gave them to the Soviet Union. Oh, that's right. That's right. And this was during this, during the 80s, during the Cold War in 1985. I remember it well. I lived in Washington. My dad worked for the government. And that was a, you know, that was a very serious, whatever you think of the Cold War and retrospect. But at the time, the full focus of the US government was focused, you know, was in opposition to the Soviets. And the Israelis gave a lot of that class of information from the US Navy to the Soviet government in exchange for allowing refuse next, you know, Jewish Soviet citizens to move to Israel, which I'm totally for. I mean, I'm glad that they got out of the Soviet Union made it to Israel. That's great. But they took our secrets and gave them to our main enemy, our really only global enemy. What? Yeah. And have the audacity, well, then how can you have a relationship after that? Yeah. And have the audacity to come to our country and to lobby in seriousness to the presidents to visit this man in prison to grant him Israeli citizenship to grant him basically the moment he's on parole immediately moves to Israeli received a hero's welcome and it remains there to this day. I mean, we would not allow that for him. This is not a healthy relationship. This is not a healthy relationship. Exactly. And that's an important thing for Americans to understand. One of the many tragic byproducts is I think it's destroying the right. And I say that if someone's been on the right my whole life and my whole life, I've been on the right and I really truly believe in the basic ideas and I'm not a liberal. No, that's for sure. In fact, I'm way more conservative than Mark Levent. That's for sure. But it's like the problem is the promise of maggot is America first and the contradiction is just too obvious. Yes. So if you're Joe Biden and you're, you know, senile and that's being run by a bunch of sinister shadowy figures in the background and you do something like this, it's like, of course, they're doing it. But if you get up and you say, we're going to restore greatness to this country. We're going to do it by putting our own interests first. That's what every country does. That's kind of natural, it's organic. And then you put the interests of a country of nine million people above your own in a way that's just insulting. People can't deal with that. But their brains start to explode. And I think this is blowing up the coalition. I hope I'm wrong. I support the coalition. I always people are like, you're not maggot really? Did you campaign for Trump? Right. Yes. That's right. I mean, please, you know, I'm liberal. Okay. But I'm sorry. I worry about that. I feel like that's happening. I think you should be worried about it. And, well, look, we can parse these things at a variety of levels. So there's, you said maggot and I think that's important. I think the vast majority of people who are self identified as maggot, they supported the Iran strikes and they generally support President Trump and they have a lot of trust in the man. What I keep trying to tell people is people are saying, oh, there's a split in the Mac, but you said it correctly, the right. And I would look at the right as the coalition that delivered Donald Trump the first popular vote. Since 2004, the margin of anti-war support for Donald Trump is his entire electoral margin in the state of Michigan, the entire electoral margin in the state of Michigan. Yeah. And I think that his ability to win Michigan twice now, three and three races is pretty very damn important for looking at the so-called realignment of the white working class and of this new coalition. Let's also look, I actually on our show, our producer went to the Bronx, AOC's district and interviewed people who were AOC Trump voters. And the number one reason that we got from them was war. It was, it was the promise to bring an end to the war, both in Israel and Gaza and in Ukraine because there is something visceral, let's say that you live in the Bronx and you're having problems in your neighborhood and watching these countries get tens of billions of dollars. Three carrier strike groups of the United States of America were present in the Middle East, specifically to backup Israel during the 12 day war. I, you know, you asked Ted Cruz a very important question. Do you know how much that costs? I looked it up, you know, it's actually public information. It's about a quarter, it's a, I believe it's like a quarter billion dollars per group, per month for deployment. That was just for the deployment. The, the April operation. That separate from weapons that sep in from all the way. And by the way, that number, which they will never release is in the billions of dollars. And then let's take opportunity costs. We basically used up, you know, a massive stockpile of US interceptors, which are critical for our bases in Qatar or for everywhere else around the world on behalf of this foreign nation, which we were told repeatedly the reason we give it 3.3 billion a year was so they can defend themselves. But they can defend themselves. Then why did it take the full deployment of the US empire to basically shield it? And even then, in terms of its shielding as you, I mean, I'm sure you felt the same way. I've been to Tel Aviv watching that city get rocked by rockets was a shocking experience. That was not what we were, I hated it too. I've been there. It's a beautiful city. The people there are great. And to watch their cities, I mean, that's some London level, you know, photography from the world war two. And so the fact that that happened and that also, by the way, we just increased the defense budget to $1 trillion for what purpose I can't exactly tell you, because even with that money, I'll spend in the past. It doesn't seem that we're all that competent at building interceptors at ammunition. Russia, I believe, is a defense budget like more than what is it? One quarter or something like that of the United States produces like more ammunition than all of NATO combined. How do these things happen? Right? So we have right for a corruption. The point is is that magga and the right, let's say the non-magga right, people who voted for Donald Trump in good faith on a variety of good promises. I think for those people, and especially younger Americans, there is a visceral disgust at watching the level of tension and obsession over this foreign nation. And it's particularly galling because we have people like Ted Cruz who say why are you obsessed with Israel? And it's like, what did I just describe here about this? Calling you an issue. It called me an anti-Semite, like 10 minutes in. It's disgusting. Everyone wants to feel safe in an increasingly dangerous world. And for most of history, people assume that good locks and a loud alarm system are enough to do the trick, but they are not. The more time that passes, the more stories we hear about actual home break-ins, home invasions that happen despite these tools being in place. True security requires more than that. And that's why we trust simply safe. Safety Safe is a preemptive security system. It prevents home invasions before they happen rather than just scaring people away once they show up at your house or they're in your house. It's cameras and live monitoring agents to Texas fish sex cities around your home. If someone's lurking there, they engage in real time. They activate spotlights. They can even alert the police who will show up. It's been called the best security system of 2025 over 4 million Americans trust simply safe to keep them safe. Monitoring plans started about a dollar a day. There's a 60 day money back here in T visit simply safe safe. S I MP L I safe dot com slash Tucker to get 50% off a new system with professional monitoring plan. Your first month is free that simply safe dot com slash Tucker. There is no safe like simply safe preemptive safety. It's so exactly what liberals do. So exactly the woke rate. I mean, it's bewildering and it's dishonesty. I'm not engaging. I give up but it's so revealing. It's like wait. I just voted against this. I voted against not just the argument but the style of argument of the left, which is to not engage with the points that you make at all to tell you a lot past them ignore them and instead attack your motive and your character. Your racist, you know, you're getting paid by Russia. We moved seamlessly from that to like Mark Levin saying the same exact same thing. Your race is dreamt. It's like you're hanging around with Holocaust and I was what you're paid by a foreign country guitar. I still find hilarious for the record. Of course, I've never taken it off from anybody. I don't even have investors but whatever. But it's go to motive rather than as rather than engage with what you said. I saw this all coming a mile away. I'm heartbroken to see it. Well, you should be. This one you've been successful because you're smart. Well, I mean, I've taken a lot of it's cost me a lot of personal problems. I could tell you that. But I remember I believe it was right after October 7th Bill Ackman and a lot of other prominent Wall Street financiers who are very pro Israel. Well, Ackman's done a lot for our economy. So that's right. That's right. I'm walking down publicly traded corporations and shorting them. That was herbalized capitalism. Our investors doing I would just ask people to go and take a look at those books. Whatever. Let's take a look at Ackman. It's very patriotic guys. It's done a lot for this country. So keep that in mind. OK. Well, this patriotic American and a lot of these other pro Israel billionaires were literally compiling lists of students who were protesting these really governments response to October 7th. Many of these were American citizens compiling lists and basically saying don't ever hire these people and circulating around the highest levels of Wall Street finance of technology, getting people fired from law firms that they had to offer. Because they criticized America because they criticized Israel. What about America? Yes, that's an important question. But what I noticed and I said this at the time is for all of these people, it is now obvious that they never were really opposed to DEI. Of course what they want to pay for it. Yes, what they want. That's great point. What they wanted was they want their interest group Zionism in particular in support of the Israeli government to be included within the DEI regime. And that was a very important point because eventually that became fused somehow with MAGA. And that's how explains a huge level of a lot of very high profile, very, very rich people in technology industry and finance who supported the Trump administration. And the promise effectively that has now been delivered is that by using this newly crafted like DEI style regime, which basically uses the state and the police state as effectively a force for a political party in Israel. That's another thing that I love when you say this as well. It's not about even Israel at this point. We're talking about the likudnik interests in the United States. A guy who got 30% of the vote. 30% of the vote who is under investigation for taking money from who? Qatar. It's amazing. He's literally fired the head of his own FBI for bribery allegations from Qatar money in his government and has the goal to have his interest groups here in America accused people like you and me in taking money from the very same government that he's been incredibly accused of taking that. Listen, I don't know. Trump says he's innocent or whatever. Pretty tricky. I would say it is cheeky. To bring it back, I guess, is what you said is about America. And the fact is is that we're watching the weaponization largely backed by a lot of these people who have hijacked, I think, a large part of the American. Maybe they didn't hijack it. Maybe I'm the idiot, right? I could be the idiot for believing some of these things. Why did I read Christopher Caldwell's book and listen to Christopher Rufo and others about the civil rights regime and all of this criticism correctly of the Ibrahim Kendi and the Department of Anti-racism and the enshrined of DEI and the civil rights administration just to watch it get turned around. And again, not even be used against people who are anti-American, but people who are supporting a boycott of a foreign nation, a country here now where students could burn an American flag and be fine. But if they protest Israel could be liable for either deportation if they're not a citizen or denied federal grant funding, the current Trump administration is suing using the civil rights title six, title six of the civil rights act, Harvard University for not protecting Jewish students under the indifferent standard. Now that same standard was used for some of the worst accesses in the 1970s and others of the civil rights. These are things we're supposed to be against. This is DEI, you know, run a muck. And yet we're watching this happen in our own government. And I don't see, you know, there's so many people bench there. There are a lot of bias against Jewish students at Harvard. Oh, no. I'm not. Last time I mean, I guess what I object to is lying, of course, above all, but also I object to these kinds of identity politics. Like I thought the whole point was were Americans by citizenship. Yes. Citizenship matters. As it did in Rome, I mean, it did. Paul's on trial in Rome and he's like, hey, I'm a Roman citizen. They're like, whoa, they back right off because like that really meant something and should be. It should mean something. And they're continuing in this weird leftist frame where certain people have more rights than other people. That's right. And that's that's what we're watching. I just couldn't object to that more. And no, every American should. And look, you may not like these people. I probably wouldn't get along with a lot of these people. But let's sit here and talk about Harvard, like you said. I mean, to watch literally, it's been 10 years ago. I was sitting with my friends in the daily collar office, which was very kind to hire me into. And we were watching Ben Shapiro humiliate, Trigley Puff, right? We're watching leftist students get triggered and cry when Ben Shapiro would visit campus. And we thought it was hilarious. Yeah. 10 years later, I watched students, literally crying at a podium with the house of representative speaker, Mike Johnson, next to them talking about how I didn't feel safe while I was on campus. And it's like, well, why didn't you feel safe? Because people were shouting slogans of again, protesting a foreign government. Now that's actually a lot more about the psychology of you. But regardless, I mean, did we not live through a decade of snowflake and fuck your feelings because I was there for that? And I'm not going to sit here and watch people who made millions of dollars, Shapiro and Dave Rubin and all these other people making fun of students, leftist students, only to co-op the same level of identity politics. And like you said about Harvard, OK? Like, this is important. What is the problem with Harvard? To me, the problem of Harvard is it took our most elite institute, and Harvard is a whole Ivy League, our most elite students, it crippled them with debt, and 41% of graduates now work in finance, consulting, and tech, OK? Some of the worst industries that are directly extractive of the American consumer basically getting rich on their backs, addicting them to find crippling financial products, technology, console. I don't even know what a lot of people are consulting do. Apparently, they make a lot of money doing it. Is that a productive industry for our country? And then say Harvard University admitted the same, actually, less students in the class of 2023 than it did in 1981. The US population has grown 110 million since that point. Now why do they do that? It's for ultra-exclusivity. It's to jack up prices for their tuition. So it admitted fewer students than in 1981. And the US population has grown 110 million since. That's how it has their administrative staff grown? Of course. And actually, you're not even asking the right question. What about their endowment fund? They're basically a private equity firm with a small education department. And this is, they lobby against the endowment tax through Congress. The endowment tax says, hey, increase your student body size, relative to your endowment, and you don't have to pay any tax. But they don't do that because it's all about artificial constraints saddling these kids up with debt, basically taking the best and brightest of the United States of America and turning them into cogs of managerial capitalism. That is not the Harvard University of the early, let's say, the World War II period. That is not the MIT. They're all doing the same thing. Those universities were our crown jewel and got government money from them so that they could set up and go work in industries that were productive and beneficial to our country. That's my current critique of Harvard. I think that's one most Americans would agree with. I think that's my critique of higher education in general. It's not the Middle Eastern Studies department. It's not suing them under the Civil Rights Act. To just watch this weaponization right now by pamper. It's such a lie. What is a lie? If you really want to play the demographics game and who's getting shafted and who gets into Harvard actually, let's see the numbers and does that reflect the US population? In fact, let's get even radical on the subject. Let's measure it against IQ tests. You can say, well, the American population is not all qualified. I'm okay. Great. How about let's use SAT scores as a proxy for IQ? Is Harvard letting in the smartest people? In fact, there is a serted effort right now to drop or abandon SAT or any other quantitative measure specifically to enshrine more of this DEI style. Who's actually getting discriminated against? Exactly. It's too much though. I don't even want to have that conversation. I know the answer as I know the numbers, which I'm not going to repeat here. I don't want to add to the identity politics stuff because I think it's a dead end. That's not what we're about. I don't want to be about that. We want to live in a more equitable culture. That's an issue toward it. The problem is when you lie that aggressively and you use my government to do it and all of its armed institutions to do it, then you force me. You're making people radical. That's a stuff. Yes. They should be. They're forcing when the DOJ, when the Congress passes 22 anti-Semitism resolutions in the last few years and there's still a lot of bias in America. There's still a lot of problems in America. They're totally unaddressed and they're getting worse. You turn people radical. I'm worried about that. One of those resolutions they pass through the house actually conflated anti-Semitism with anti-Zionism, which is, they're literally saying it is anti-Semites. Anti-Semitic as in... It is a crime to criticize before and describe a foreign country or even an ideology which believes in the existence. Why are they doing this? Why are they doing this? Well, I mean, let's bonkers. It's bonkers. It's bonkers. It's beyond bonkers and I wish money were the answer. I'm not saying it isn't just a critical part of it. It is a part of just this propagandistic campaign to convince that this is our greatest ally that actually we would die before we would let any of them die. And a lot of it is enshrined and fortunately in like a bastardization of Christian and rabbinical phi-athiology as Ted Cruz revealed. I mean, actually what really revealed to me was he didn't even really know what he was saying. No, he was quoted. No, I didn't. But he was taught. He didn't know what he was saying. But that's legitimate belief. I mean, that's in the Bible. That's how we end up with Brian Mass wearing the uniform of foreign country in my Congress. And that's what offends me more than anything is the only uniform, in my opinion, that United States Congress person should ever wear is that of the United States of America. Well, yeah. And I would say to the, you know, to maga voters, this is the program we voted for, the one that puts our country where we were born at the center of the conversation at the top of the priority list. Yeah. So those are the rules. So like anyway, where does this? I'm worried that the contradictions are too obvious. The lies are too transparent. It's this is too insulting. You can't, I can't even deal with it. I feel like I'm the least radical person. I know. I just am happy to not talk about certain subjects. This we can all get along. I'm a wasp in the end. I don't want conflict. Okay. I know when things I'm like, I don't hate conflict actually. But they're forcing this on all of us. And I feel like the system is breaking as a result. Yeah. I mean, feel that? I do. I don't think Marx actually said it, but that in accelerationism, it's about heightening the contradictions. It's a Marxian theory. And in a way, like I do think that that's what they're doing to all of us is they're forcing people who are sympathetic who want to see our country first, who reject a lot of the premises of the left, it spent the decade of our lives. For in my case, you spend multiple decades of your life fighting against many of these forces, which we found repulsive, which we blame for the destruction of our country. And then watching that get hijacked and again, maybe I'm the fool. There was plenty of evidence that could go this way. I didn't think it would. I didn't think in particular it would go this far. But it's one of those where the breaking is happening at a voter level. And in particular in the platform that you and I are speaking right now, I mean, as you know, I mean, I began my career by just going on Fox News is how I got trained in television. Obviously you started. I didn't even have all these platforms. We could not even have this conversation. No, I would say 10 years ago. I don't think that the distribution and the audience and just the entire network that enables this possibility was there, but it's been felt at a deep level in the way that Oliver Stone's JFK film released something in America in 1991. It's always been inside of us. But now we have the voice. We have the words. But next is the tools and a lot of people thought we had that tools with this. As soon as it's paused right now, so I should just say you alluded to it, you worked for me not directly, but for a company that helped start. And then at like a really young age, you decided to point you were one of the very first people I knew personally decided to punch out and go independent because you had this really clear and it turned out correct. View that the two party system, all there are differences between the parties, but fundamentally they were aligned on the big issues and that a lot of voters didn't agree with their position on the big issues, mostly the economy and war. And you kind of moved out into this independent media world at what age? I was 28, I guess. That's crazy. 28 years old. So if you don't mind, if it's not too many, I asked you a bunch of very specific questions about it last night because I'm in that business. What happened? Like how you leave the daily caller, you go and fox a lot, you're like a young pundit or whatever. So embarrassing. I did it too. I know it's so embarrassing. And then you just decided to go independent. What happened? Can you just give us that brief story because I think it says a lot about the moment. Well, I owe a lot to the organization you started and to Jeff Ringer saw all to Vince, to Neil Patel and all of these guys. And the reason why is they put me in the position that made me have this realization and what it was is being a White House correspondent. What I discovered as being a White House correspondent, I mean, I don't want to my own horn. I think I was good at it. I interviewed Trump four times in two years. I asked several, you know, multiple questions for the record, multiple different foreign leaders, you know, got stories, scoops, et cetera. But what I came to understand in the White House briefing room is I would watch. So for people who don't understand in the front row is all the networks, the major networks run by the White House correspondent's association, which is a cartel, a non-governmental cartel, which runs the entire, I can get into that later. We would like, but I would watch every single person from the network ask some version of the same question, which was about Robert Mueller at the time. And I said, no one gives a shit about Robert Mueller. And I would always ask a question, not about that. What I came to understand was that they were actually all performing for themselves. And what I really came to understand eventually was that the entire mainstream media is about performing for each other for social and for career purposes. But even more broadly is that the mainstream media is a trade publication and it's a trade publication for people in Washington and for people in power. There is a boomer legacy element to this, which obviously exists. But broadly, it's not actually about informing the people. In fact, you know, in terms of the journalism that I did, I tried to always ask questions that I thought were relevant to the actual voters, but I didn't realize how counter that was the entire philosophy of a lot of the people who actually work and cover the media professionally. Then I came to see that Fox, CNN, MSNBC are all vital parts of this machine. It's all part of a machine where Washington as the imperial capital speaks to each other. media professionally. Then I came to see that Fox, CNN, MSNBC are all vital parts of this machine. It's all part of a machine where Washington as the Imperial Capitol speaks to each other. Their conduit for information which is relevant only to an individual node within the nexus. The voter did not matter in that equation. So what I decided to do is I had this opportunity to go to the Hill, currently the Hill.com and co-host the show with currently my co-host, Crystal Ball. And what her and I really bonded over, and remember the first segment we really bonded over was just about the opioid crisis. And I was like, I think that this is one of the most under-dressed issues in America. I think it's lip service, you know, at the White House and others. Nobody's really doing anything about it. That's of despair. Our life expectancy at that time was going down. And so we just, you know, that's that was kind of the evolution, like you said, of realizing that where the two parties agree and the media in particular focuses on is really the exact opposite of where most people are. If you spend a lot of your time with people who are not political, they don't care about Robert Mueller. They don't particularly care about most of the scandals in Washington of the day. They're like, hey, my mortgage is really expensive. My kids' college, really, if I was lucky enough to say for $5.29, the inflation has gotten so out of control, I can't do that. I'm really worried about the loan that my child is taking out. One of my friends, kids recently died of a drug over. These are the things that animate, you know, the kitchen table, and about the concern, the feeling that our country is being taken away from me, the southern border. And it's not just a feeling of this uncontrolled chaos at the border. There's a feeling of the collapse of social cohesion in our country. All of us can feel it. If you go to another country like Switzerland or Japan with controlled immigration, you will realize how radical it is actually. And those are both very radicalizing experiences for me. But I just returned to the point of why I wanted to go independent fundamentally is I wanted to cover the news in a way that I felt was actually applicable to the lives of everyday people. And I noticed a burgeoning movement on YouTube and in podcasts where this distribution platform basically allowed me to talk as long as I want to in the way that I am with you. And I mean, the most frustrating moments in my career, 24 years old, young embarrassing pundit is being invited on Fox News at 11.55 PM for a three-person conversation about nationalism. And I got to speak for maybe 45 seconds. I can't articulate on my thoughts. I'll subject and they're actually really important. And that's where the fruges, the elements of all of that, it became too much. And I just felt so much more free. And by the way, as you know, at that time, everybody told me not to do it. They're like, what are you doing? You've got your career set, your White House correspondent, you can go work in any of these other companies. A lot of other companies were trying to recruit me at that time. This is your an idiot for going to this unproven concept. You don't know if it's going to work. And it was, I mean, the greatest bet, I guess, of my life because we took this small channel, Crystal and I, of some 6,000, I think we had 100,000 subscribers in three months. And we had an audience of, you know, millions basically by the time we'd left less than two years later. But that was the confidence that I had to go independent was I to do the technology. If it was working. Well, the knowledge basically it became irreconcilable to be attached to a mainstream media organization. And I've talked about this publicly, but the owners and the people who work there, we were starting to become so popular that our comments were causing problems in Washington is that people were getting upset at the things we would say advertisers or members of Congress, they would call our bosses and pressure began to come down to kind of change the way that we would talk about certain subjects. This is by the way, happens in every mainstream media operation. It's part of the reason that being the way we set our business is so the vast majority of our revenue comes from subscriptions. And it's because we don't want to be accountable to any advertiser or anybody else. We don't even read ads on our platform specifically for that reason. And it's all to insulate my ability to be able to come here and talk the way that I do about a subject I feel passionately about. Let's say Israel and free speech, which I know already, every word that I'm saying here is going to be dissected is going to be used as an attack vector. And in the past, that could have cost me my career. And at the end of the day, that's why I decided to leave. It's to be able to speak the truth. That's why Crystal as well was the level of control inevitably, even with the freest hand possible, while attached to these behemoths, mainstream media, it's irreconcilable. If you want to tell the truth, you cannot be attached to any organization, which depends on insider access and on insider money. You have to separate yourself from that entity. Well, yes, that has been the experience of my life. What were the red lines to do? I'm so you're young and you're as you're hosting this show on a brand new medium, you know, this weird setup where you're working for the Hill, but you're doing an independent show, you're learning what you're not allowed to say. Yeah, can't criticize the age of membership Congress. How did that work out? By the way, conversations around age can't criticize TikTok, the Chinese government. That was a big one. Can't criticize or talk openly about Israel. Can't criticize. My favorite was CNBC, Jim Kramer. Realize Jim Kramer. Which is hilarious. If you go on Twitter, there's an entire inverse Kramer index of people getting rich. People get rich. Jim Kramer is so stupid that people get rich. Take it to the opposite advice. I still laugh about that one. But what happened? God, I said he was an idiot. And you know, you're boss. You're boss. Yeah, no, we can't say things like that. But no, but Kramer's very smart. What's the harm for a pharma? I forgot pharma. We talked a lot about big pharma. That's, you know, that's one. I mean, you look, take a look at the ads. Really, but it's, it wasn't that. Because I didn't actually change anything I said, but I can't sit here and not lie to my audience, and say that it was never, it was always in the back. Oh, yeah. Oh, first. You don't even realize how, how present it is in your head until it's not there. Look, I mean, I was young. You know, I need to correct to eat. You know, I've salary. These are realities that I'm just laying out for. Yes. And as, you know, as free and as ethical as I try to uphold myself and a crystal as well, we couldn't, we just could not stay in that environment. And that's why we decided to go. So then you decide to go and you basically take a version of the same show totally independent on the internet, relying on subscriptions, mostly subscriptions, rather than advertising for the reasons you just so well described. What happens? Yeah. I mean, it's wildly exceeds our expectations and the very first day of launch, both on the first day, the first day of launch. I mean, they basically enabled us to run the company for a year, which was insane. I mean, in other words, you made enough. We made it very first day yesterday to run a debt free to run the company. How many investors did you have? We had zero investors. The only investors quote unquote were my credit card account and her credit card account. So we took, it was a gamble entirely of our asking what did it cost to launch it? I believe I'm probably like 50 or 60 thousand dollars if I had to guess, but that was it. And the whole enterprise, the whole enterprise just to launch and it's not to run in one day, you got a full year's operating. What we were able to do and actually enough so that we were even also able to hire like at the time we needed a sound person. These are all important things, lighting, an entire technical technical team, the ability to make sure that we're distributing faster. I was, these are all more boring things for the audience, but things that we may not ask you is because your story describes how low the barrier to entry is. Yes. If you know what you want to say, if you have a point of view, if you're committed to honesty and independence, you can actually do it. You can do it. That's why it's so thrilling. That is why it's thrilling. I mean, I was taking a look at your setup this morning and I was talking to some of your tech guys and I said, isn't it amazing that we couldn't even do this 10 years ago? And I'm looking at your equipment. I have much of the same equipment. I mean, look, it's decent money, but it's not a lot of money. Oh, no. Actually, no, no, no. And especially compared to, I mean, you and I have seen those, the Fox News, D. Hork control room. I mean, it's like being in the international space station. It's crazy. Oh, and they fired me. They came in and sent their guys up here and rips. I did my show from here for years and they ripped out all their equipment, which is fine. It was their equipment. And so we're like, and we have a full studio that, right, you know, we built with their money, you know, my guys built it, but whatever. And they put all their tech in there. And then they took it all away. I wasn't mad, but I was like, okay, we have to pay for this now out of my pocket because I'm unemployed. And we just moved to our dining room table where we're literally our family dining room table we're sitting now. And it didn't cost that much. Yeah. So I think that's the only, I never talked about money or business or because I'm not an expert in either one, but I just think it's so exciting. You know that you can do that. And I hope that's inspiring to people. Yes. Yes. I think really what it comes down to is not only audience, but the ability to say what you actually think. Yeah. And what I have found is that some of those miserable people in all of media are the people who work in these corporations. Yes. Because they know, they know and want to say many things I'm not saying. And they'll tell us privately, of course, they'll never say it. And I don't really know how much money that's worth. But beyond that, I don't really know how as a human being, you know, you can just continue to get up and everything. Well, I agree. And I empathize because I was a TV anchor for most of my life. I empathize with the guys who like get the guest read out, you know, they sit down before the show. Yes. We interviewed today. And there's Mark Levin on there and like nobody likes Mark Laven. And he's horrible television. He's screechy. And what he's saying is like deranged. And even if you sort of agree with Mark Laven's point of view, you can't have Mark Laven on TV. Yeah. It's just an insult to the audience. And it's insult the anchor. And having to see Mark Laven and turning off camera. And be like, this fucking guy, why are we doing this? And they're going to be like, oh, the second floor told us to do it. Even if you're totally on board with, you know, killing every Muslim or whatever their program is, that still has got to drive you crazy. It's like an assault on your self respect every single time. But what I found, and I'm sure you find the same, is that what I saw for them is they started to believe that proximity to power is power itself. And what I found really gross about that is they sort of fetishize like the most ridiculous things as in who gets the first rope line when you get to ask Trump a question. I mean, the amount of actual physical fighting that happens in that scrum people would genuinely not believe. Or I got hit in the head once actually with an elbow from a photographer for taking his spot, even those no one assigned spots. Again, these are minutia. But what I'm saying is it's a level of psychosis that takes over because in the White House press corps, everything is about access to the president. And so everybody is jocking in a zero-sum environment where everyone is trying to get the interview or going to schmooze this person or that person. But the problem with that is they turn from practitioner starting to believe that they themselves are important and this vital conduit of information. And what you turn into is basically an apparatic of the state environment that I'm talking about. And so for many of the anchors and others, they live for the Black Tie War White House correspondence dinner or getting invited to a cocktail party or a book apartment. This is the currency of Washington and of New York. It has been for decades. But you start to live, you know, you start to fill that emptiness inside of you with the knowledge that you get the FaceTime with a sub-cabinet appointee at a dinner and you can use that information because Senator Schumer knows your name. These are all very important things, you know, for the social capital. And this is pathetic. I want people to know this is pathetic. And I watch people live their entire lives on Capitol Hill and the White House press corps in television and other for all of these like imperial-level events that are put on to just make them feel special and continue on in the machine. And I actually didn't realize how radical it was for people like you or people like me to say, I actually don't care about that at all. I don't care if I ever go to another cocktail party or another Black Tie dinner or any of these things simply to be in the presence of people who are actually powerful. I would rather just critique them and say what I actually think. And the irony, of course, is as you have found out when you say what you actually think and you are critical of them in an honest way. They take you so much more seriously. They laugh at you when you're one of those people who cares about cocktail parties or any of that. You're one of the most useful cogs in the machine is the people they can't control or the people who they call because they're the inconvenient voices. So that was interesting. So those my next question. So the whole process of covering the White House being in the White House press corps going to the briefings and the gaggle and all that going to the parties. Are you actually getting information? No, I've never gotten more information than what I do right now. I actually during 12 day war, I literally never got more information from inside of the entire apparatus than I ever did when I was covering the White House. And it was because I was so critical of the Trump administration of the direction that they were taking. And many of the people who I spoke to for the record actually were not almost none who I knew personally, almost all simply saw my commentary and agreed with me and wanted a conduit for information to be able to get out of there. And that was that's a great lesson by the way for any white aspiring journalists or others who listen is you need they will take you much more seriously if you hit them in the face. And hitting them in the face makes them kind of shocked because it's so counter to the way that the machine works. When you work in the machine, they can call your editor, they can call your boss, they can call your advertiser, they can put a significant amount of pressure on you. But when they can't control you, they start to freak out. And that is one of the most useful lessons of my life actually in terms of coverage and in terms of journalism and the ability to speak out. Speaking out can get you is unfortunately such a differentiator from where the entire like traditional system really starts to work. What's the downside? Well, the downside is a you know, a freezing out of the entire social movement of professional Washington is that professional Washington protects its own. It's effectively is a jobs network for each other so that people who are in and out of government always have reliable sources of income. Implicit within that is that hey, this is what we think about Israel. This is what we think about X, Y, and taxes, you know. These are, this is what we think about the care and interest loophole. We don't talk about that. This is what we think about cutting social security. This is an accepted fact, you know, we need to accept this. That it's acceptable, you know, to kick elderly people off social security or Medicare or food stamps. And we just take this information and in exchange for that information, we get a job for the rest of our lives. If I hadn't gone independent, I could have easily relied on working in Washington till the age of 65 within the machine. That would have been actually very doable. And you know, this was the risk actually saying what you actually want to say. That is the riskiest thing you can do within the system and in exchange, you will no longer get invited to these dinners or any of these other things. You have to be okay with that. You have to be okay. I think with something that you have found as well by being denounced by people who you knew personally or people who, you know, who you would help in their career. People who you, you know, in many ways you're like, I would personally never do that to you. I can't really believe it. And the reason you're doing it is we all know what it is is you're being controlled by a broader and a bigger either financial or foreign law to interest. I've had this experience. This is the red line for you. When you call people and you're like, I can't believe you said that about me, you know, calling me a big hit or whatever. When you know that I'm not. And I don't even go on the internet anymore. So I have no idea what people are saying. But I, you know, several years ago in all this began, I remember calling a couple people and you know, one person I said, well, let's have lunch. No. No. Okay. So when you and independent, you've been in DC because you got there for college. You've been for 10 years. You know a lot of people got 13, right? Yes, 15 years. So you know a ton of people. You're a social person. I happen to know. So you are going to tons of events and you have tons of friends and all of a sudden you're going off in a direction. You're not spewing hate or bigotry at all. But you are saying things that other people are not saying how intensely did people you know try to bring you back? Yeah, almost immediately. There were a lot of warnings about, hey, this is dangerous or I mean, they're close really? My close friends knew that they supported me, but it was really like the professional friends, people who you're broadly acquainted with. They're like, what's he up to? You know, what's this deal? What's what's happening here? And it's incredible how small, how rapid that shrink can happen in terms of not being invited to these things anymore. Or, you know, just being as a social outcast or your phone stops ringing to various different things. Did you feel that right away? I would say I wouldn't say immediately, but it did happen like quite rapidly. Six months, maybe a one year period. Israel was actually the final straw in particular after October 7th. That was almost an immediate cut off from the entire professional network. Why? What did you say? Well, I said that I think the way that Israel was conducting itself in Gaza was not the fitting of a civilized western nation and that the United States didn't have a compelling interest in what was going on there and that we should just focus on ourselves. I said all the same things about Ukraine and many of them agreed with me then. Apparently that was the red line, you know, for them. But what kind of reaction did you get? Well, I mean, a lot of it is calling people my social circle asking why I'm so anti-Semitic now. Why? Yeah, actually? Yes. Yeah. No, that actually happened. And a lot of it is also just generally a freeze of communication or discomfort, you know, being in presence. And I think people should hear about this because what I just described that social capital, when that's everything, this is how those norms are enforced within the system, even if you've never received any money from any of these people, which of course most of them have. And so you put all of that together and you really watch this like professional nexus and others where you're just almost immediately rejected from like the inner sanctums of the Imperium. But I mean, something that traces back to like wanting to go independent was this knowledge that outside of the Imperium are all of these other rising, you know, almost revolutionary forces of the Joe Rogan podcast, Dave Smith, Darryl Cooper, Andrew Schultz, Theo Vaughn, all of these individuals. By the way, many of the comedians, I listen, don't even consider themselves political, but it's because they're not connected to the system that they're able to say and observe truths. Nobody in professional comedy or Hollywood connected comedy or and he's other ever dare, you know, be able to even give a voice to these types of ideas. And so I chose the latter, you know, over the former. And did you think of that? So I know all the people you just mentioned, and I think so much of everyone of those, you might add Tim Dylan to that like, of course, wonderful person. But um, the now I'm being bitchy. I can't control myself. The quality of the people, so you get expelled from you, you leave, but you're also shunned by your former world. You enter this new world that includes all the people you just listed. How would you compare the quality of the people? It's a night and day difference. And if we disagree, they just don't care. There's no, you know, professional, frees out. There's no, you know, there's not as many hard feelings. There's a good look. Look, right? The things you just said that you believe so deeply, I think, are stupid. And he'd still go to dinner with you. Of course he would. I disagree with Dave on a lot. Most economics, I don't think it cares at all. Oh, you know, we talk all the time. Yeah. And that's that's a really important point. Right. Exactly. There's ever boat and issues and the enforcement of all of that is part of why a lot of these people have found the tremendous amount of success that they have. And that's that is what still gives me some hope about where we are. I totally agree that there, you know, I believe in God. And I do think that there's like an upset, you know, you're suffering, but there's always like a redemptive quality to it. And in this specific case, like you find the new people, you know, you do as friends. Have you lost friends? Yes. Unfortunately, yes. Yeah. And I still am sad about it. But boy, the people you meet are like the most honest, interesting, decent. Like the quality, I'm sorry to reduce it to this, but the quality of the marriages among the people, you know, who are telling the truth versus the quality of the people who are paid to lie or who are too afraid to tell the truth. Boy, they have just happier people. Yes. Better people. Of course. Well, I mean, what kind of person who has small children in home would want to leave them for four out of five nights a week to attend book party. Once you've left. I mean, I have been into drink five or six nights. I mean, this is literally the life that a lot of these people live. And if you're a dog and a machine, then you're like having Mark Lavena on night after night, even though everyone knows it's like your absurd. How can your wife respect? I don't know. Yeah. We're getting up at 3 30. I'm in the morning. I'm sure I used to in the morning show gig and having to read from the prepared package for yourself, you know, good luck honey out. The kids are okay in the morning. And then, you know, reducing your life to all of that for what for what purpose? No, it's totally right. And that, you know, and these are mechanical, but they're macro and important. I honestly put. Yeah. So I want to ask you about the politics of all this because I feel like so it is what's the date Monday, July 7 things are moving so fast that, you know, who knows where we'll be when this airs, which I hope is soon. But as of this morning, Elon Musk is out there using the cover up that Pambandia so clearly engaged in to disgraceful, disgraceful cover up. And I like Pambandia personally, but I'm ashamed as an American to see what they're doing. He's using that to say, Hey, we need to need a new political party. Like everyone's involved in the Epstein cover up, which is true. We needed America party and I'm running it. Where does this, is he serious? Where does this go? I'll do with the FEC. I would give some caution to Elon. I talk to you and I've seen a lot of rich people come and go in Washington. Yes. Consultancy you come in from a mile away. Mr. Fiskley conservative socially liberal. I'm just going to put that out there. The bipartisan policy center and all these other people, they've rolled up that entire market. They have plenty to sell you power points about ranked choice voting and a few other things and all that. So for all of them, I wish you the best of luck because you're all put to get filthy rich off of you. Okay. Can you explain a little bit? So I can do so. I know what you're talking about. But for people who aren't what exactly are you saying? Well, I'm saying that there is a long fetishized idea of an American third party, which is fiscally conservative, which is socially liberal, which is moderate on immigration and which is very comfortable with oligarchy and that those forces are extremely well funded and they have a lot of research which could back up whatever your preclivities are and they will happily sell it to you for 10 times market price and sit with presentations to convince you that this is a great idea. And actually, I mean, the irony is if Elon's politics more reversed in this sense, I actually think it would be onto something. So my belief is that both of the parties actually do have not answers directly, but directionally to this fundamental problems of our age, immigration, and I think the Republican Party obviously is solid or has come a long way on the issue of at least the base. Let's say that voters on the issue of immigration from the gang of eight party and rebellion to where we are today. And immigration, I still believe is one of the most central important issues of our time. But let's put the other side and we can take this one big beautiful bill as an example. We increase the defense budget by 150 billion. Now, I will not get into the actual specific Medicaid cuts, but I think it's everything in Washington is about priority. So we extended the tax cuts from the tax cuts in jobs act of 2017. The vast majority of that benefit largely accrues to people who are already rich. Most of that in particular accrues either to the high W2 income earner. I saw somebody point out correctly that most of those people are Democrats. It's a little bit ironic. If you're just thinking purely in terms of politics, we didn't have any interest in closing the carried interest loophole. We didn't have any interest in looking at the step up basis and looking at financialization. And there's so many areas. Tens of billions of billions of dollars ripe for the taking without having to touch a single benefit to an American citizen. And instead, we started, and instead rewrote the way that Medicaid and food stamp programs are going to work, which could potentially impact tens of millions of Americans. Now, again, I think there's legitimate criticisms around work requirements and welfare and all that. I don't necessarily criticize that as opposed to this fetishization that I saw from GOP congressmen who were like, yeah, it's good that people are going to lose their health care. And I said, look, whether these people are working or not, it's not good that anybody loses health care. And so that's what I mean about where if Elon's politics were flipped, I think the Democrats at least rhetorically do have correct focus on issues like health care and around or at the very least the way that our economy is structured. Now, they may not mean it. I don't think they mean it in practice, but at least rhetorically. So if you were to marry those three issues about immigration restriction, about focus on quality cost of living health care and also just broadly about restructuring our economy for productive purposes that distribute not through socialism, but through a well-ordered and a well-regulated capitalism that distributes the benefit across all sectors of our society. Now, that's an America party I could get on board with. But there's no funding for that, right? So there's someone that up and said, I'd like an economy where you don't have to hire an illegal alien to raise your kids, your wife can stay home and raise your kids if she wants to. And those women do want to. For the period when they're little, I mean, they want to. Those women want that. And every survey shows that. So if you were to say that, in other words, if you were to respond to the desire of the majority, probably be shot to death. Like it's better to raise your kids than to work in a bank. Oh, right wing extremism. You know, let's just seal the borders till we figure out who's here and restore meaning to citizenship. What racist? Maybe we should stop giving billions in aid to the, you know, stop trying to run the world when we're not good at it. All in just preserve our fundamental national interests. Isolation is Nazi. It's like, or in socialist when we talk about healthcare. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I, yeah. I do feel like there's a huge opportunity for someone who would talk like that. That's a real America party. I mean, in his at his best, the 2016 Donald Trump campaign was what I just talked about. I did not recognize that at the time. I was telling yesterday that election night broke every, every political conception idea. And which is the best thing that ever happened to me because it allowed me to free my mind to read all of these other people who I had never considered, who I was told were illegitimate, you know, within professional Washington. And what it came to the conclusion is that professional Washington is illegitimate and has no idea what it allegedly its own voters. Why did so few people do I have this interference? And but um, which it was hard for me because I've been there for so long, but it was so liberating and I'm grateful for it and I'm grateful to Trump for that. But why did so few people do that? Because asking those questions, yes, you know, that is not asking those questions and coming to what I think are the right conclusions about our economy and about this restructuring of our entire political base. I mean, the way that voting patterns over the last decade have changed is unbelievable. And when you actually answer a lot of those questions, you come to them that are very, you know, inconvenient for the empire. You know, the empire currently runs on cheap labor, which is immigration related. It runs on war abroad, you know, military industrial complex, if you want to call it, but all of these foreign entanglements and and pushing billions of dollars, you know, to policing the ends of the earth, something that the I always want to come to the architects of the American Empire, generalizing our general martial generalizing power in particular said it would be a failure if American legions acted as Roman that were deployed to the vast ends of the earth, policing it his vision for the American empire was to set up well ordered states in Europe and to them let them handle it from that point forward, general martial and others. I mean, yes, they had the Marshall plan, but the idea was about creating self sufficiency that could allow America that could return to where things were broadly in more than 1940s environment. But I'm more what I'm saying is that if you look at all of that and you start to speak against it and what these are what the voters want, you start to come up against the most powerful interests in the world. Health care is 20% of our GDP with the worst health outcomes in the developed world. That's insane. Why, you know, it's not because our health care system is not working all that well. It comes down to immigration, we talked about cheap labor with war. That's the foreign governments. It's the ideology of the Imperium, which is all about basically transnational loyalty as opposed to loyalty to your own citizenship and really to your own country. And then broadly about oligarchy and because where we we look at the way, how do you become rich in America today? A few years ago, I went to the Forbes Billionaire list and I just restricted the list to the number of new billionaires that were added to that list. The vast majority of those new billionaires in America were people who worked in hedge funds and in finance. And this is why in some ways the left is wrong. They often criticize like, let's take you on as an example and Elon is a complicated figure. But, you know, look, I have a Tesla. I encourage everybody to get in one at least once because it's like getting an iPhone for the first time. It will change your entire conception of what a car is. Now, if people were getting rich, creating an American car company, I would be ecstatic. But that's not what they're getting rich from. They're getting rich from extractive, addictive capitalism. Let's say in finance, right? Basically creating, you know, unproductive trading systems, which are only enriching themselves and then rigging our tax code so they pay lower taxes than small business owners, maybe the like URI or the average person on the street who gets taxed at a higher rate for his labor. Let's take, you know, other examples like the more, you know, all the so and small business owners, maybe the like URI, or the average person on the street who gets taxed at a higher rate for his labor. Let's take, you know, other examples like the more, you know, all the companies that's so-called great companies coming necessarily out of Silicon Valley, you know, the vast majority of that money, as Peter Thiel famously said, you know, where promised flying cars all we got were 140 characters. There is something deeply true about that, about the experience of the technology industry has largely been about extractive capitalism and addiction on our phones, and about industries that rely on that as opposed to products that make our lives better and make more. Boy, they lecture you about that. I have friends there. Oh, yeah. This will, I'm the tax business who I really like, who I consider so smart and interesting, but, and I guess we all get pretty about, what we're doing with our lives. I mean, I get pretty excited about turtles. Turtles, where here, there's all the truth. Yeah. So I'm trying not to be too judgmental. On the other hand, I don't see technology over the past 80 years. Oh, what about any products? The polio vaccine, okay. But in general, net net, as we say, in the dish bag industry, I don't see it as a net plus at all. I don't see it as enslavement and a total disaster. Like, but you're not, but they're like, what technology is making our lives better? Really tell me how? I mean, let's say, I know you want to talk about sports gambling. It's the perfect example, right? So it's something that's been enabled by the phone and has led, in my opinion, to what is the next opioid epidemic that we will see in the next 10 years. So in 2018, literally just 2018, this is a Supreme Court reversed a rule of decision that restricted sports gambling to the state of Nevada, New Jersey immediately, Chris Christie, by the way, is the person who brought this lawsuit, which legalizes sports gambling eventually. She's on the side of sports gambling. Of course, he was the person who brought the suit. Well, what happens from that point for Roest. Ever. Well, you and I are sitting here today in a country where 40, 40 states plus the District of Columbia sports gambling is legal. You have these sports gambling companies, fandule and draft kings, which basically have legal monopolies from the states, from the gaming commissions of these states, where they are allowed to operate, and it's not a free market because of the licensure and the way that it works. Yes, not everybody can just become a game. I want to talk about this, because I'm totally ignorant of the subject, but I keep hearing from young people who are related to, or who work for me, about people getting in trouble with sports gambling. Yes. And so how did this all happen? So in the span of what it's been seven years since that happened, 40 states are now legal. I just looked it up this morning. Several hundred billion dollars were gambled by Americans in 2024. One hundred billion dollars were gambled in 2024. The gambling revenue was some 14 billion dollars. Just the revenue they were able to extract. That is larger than the motion picture industry, the box office industry, and the United States of America. The vast majority of that revenue, a study that came out shows comes from a three percent of gamblers, three percent. And the reason why is the gambling addicts make up almost 50 percent of the revenue. Three percent make up 50 percent, because they literally cannot put it down. And what makes this story even crazier is a fan duel of draft kings have the legal right for in the way that they run their business, where a Tucker, if you or an I were actually good at sports gambling, they would effectively ban us from the platform. They would no longer allow us to place bets larger than let's say $1.20. And the reason why is their algorithms are detectable for anybody who is actually gambling smart. And so they immediately will ban you from being able to bet any sizable portion of money. Meanwhile, for those gambling addicts, those three percent, they have an entire VIP host directed service where draft kings and fan duel shower these people in free gifts, they call them every single day. They basically operate on the phone to make sure that there's no track record because they're not supposed to do this. They're not supposed to enable gambling addicts according to the law. And what they do is they encourage them with free promotions or whatever to keep gambling their entire life savings. More recently, there was a man, I talked about it in my monologue on the subject, who gambled away over a million, I think $1.4 million, he never made more than $200,000. His wife is suing draft kings, because he gambled away as children's life savings, college accounts, his Christmas gifts, everything. Everything that he owned, he'd never gambled before 2020 and he gambled away everything he owned by 2024. Draft kings used to call them every single day, they used to say, what else you got? They violated their own policies according to the lawsuit. According to their lawsuit, the lawsuit brought by the wife, the income, if they tried to verify it, they would have seen that he was using all of these different assets, which are obviously not from a W2 income, which is apparently violated their policy. They would have seen, as they admit in many cases, he was a gambling addict, and they didn't care. They allowed him to basically gamble away his life savings and not only enabled it, but not encouraged it. So, you know what I'm thinking is you're telling me this amazing story, what I'm really afraid of is Sharia law. They hate us for our freedom, Sucker. They hate us for our freedom. Sharia is the threat. Maybe they had something going on gambling. And, but my point is, this is on your phone, this is on my phone, this is on everybody's phone, it's on almost every young man's phone in America. It's part of the social fabric right now, of male culture in the United States. And all of it, and I didn't even get to the craziest part, which is that the bets that they're making are these things called single game parlay bets, which are basically contingent, multi contingent bets, about four or five different things happening because the odds payout is much higher. You will lose with such regularity. Like in the state of Illinois, 60% of all bets were that type of fact. You can give me an example. My ignorance is astounding on this subject, so I just- So I'm not very well versed in sports, but let's say we're watching a football game, we would say that this person is going to rush more in 200 yards, the quarterback will score two touchdowns, and at the end of the second half, the Packers will be up by seven. So you would bet that. And so you pay out on a $5 bet could be $1,000, and that's why it's very attractive. But what people don't understand is that it's priced that way, that $5 for $1,000, because you're almost certainly not going to hit it. And that's the vast majority of the bets that Americans are making today, because it's fun. But my point around the fun is that the gambling addicts are the only people who enable your fun. And if you're actually any good at this, you'll get banned. It's a totally unfair- How can they ban- How can they ban- Well, that's totally a big- Yes, the same way, but- Big is the same way of how they back off people who are good at card counting. That's where the custom, what was legacy granted, into the sports gambling houses comes from. Regulators don't care about any of this, and legislators. Why? Because they're getting filthy rich revenues off of this from the state. But my contention is if you look at the social cost of every single state where sports gambling has been legalized, we've seen an increase in bankruptcy, particularly young men. We've seen a rise in domestic violence, intimate partner violence, largely in best lose. So a man will lose, and he'll take it out on his wife or the kids that are in the house. It's horrible. We've seen actually statistically significant rise. They're almost directly as a result of sports gambling. We are watching the social costs of our brother, our cousin, or whatever, go bankrupt, or lose hundreds of dollars, get normalized into this environment of taking insane risks, which you don't even really understand. It's getting enmeshed. If you go to any bar in America during a sports game, you'll find somebody there with their phone. And if you're talking to them, they've got money on every play of the game. They'll be like, oh, I had $20 that he would, you know, throw a touchdown in the very first quarter. Soon they're rolling out products, which make it so that you can bet like every single play of the game. And they're doing it live, so you can do it there all on your phone. I mean, that's basically, to me, that's an emblem of where we have become, what we have become as a country. We use a smartphone as an addictive platform to enable one of the worst vices that we've always recognized in American history. And my solution is simple, is okay, it's not fair that Nevada had sports gambling. Let's just make it in person. We have to introduce friction into the system. We do that for alcohol. We do that for cigarettes. By the way, cigarette companies are not allowed to sponsor and spend billions of dollars in advertising at the Super Bowl and pair up with professional sports lit betting leagues. You know, I've spoken with professional athletes, NFL athletes who told me they have faced harassment from people who lost bets because of them. They'll be like, hey, the kicker, you idiot, you didn't make that and I had $1,000 on some. It's ruining the game. The gambling companies and the leagues are coming together. Tens of millions of Americans are borderline addicted right now. Hundreds of millions are actually making bets. And all of this is just like a sleeping social revolution in the country where parlay betting and the lingo that used to be known to the most degenerate guy who lives in Vegas is now common parlance in American culture. And people call you Nanny state or any of that. I just said I don't even oppose necessarily the ability to sports gamble. I just think we should treat it like any other vice and make it so that you have to. One of us just say it's disgusting. I think it is this is predatory. And by the way, they're praying as the crypto people who are sorry on the frustration and sadness of young men who know they're never gonna be able to afford a wife, kids and a house. Exactly. And they sell you the dream. All the advertisements are you can get rich with your knowledge. And as I just said, if you actually do get rich, they'll just ban you or if you have the potential to. Business wasn't always the sleazy in the United States. They were self restraints. I mean, I've never been that into business or never participated in business actually in my life. But so what do I know? But I have been here a while. And I remember people had like, they were just feeling like, well, that's just wrong. We're not gonna do that. Yes. Taking advantage of people was bad. Well, there was actually a short people. Like payday loan was a really sleazy business. Charging 30% interest on a credit card. I mean, your neighbors would judge you. Yeah. And they should. But that's the problem with the collapse of social trust is that there's not a lot of policing. Totally a moral predators to control of our society at every level. That's exactly right. And now the government is in league with them. Their grant, it'll be legal in almost all 50 states, probably by the end of the decade. And all of this will lead to mass bankruptcy. Like I said, all the social attendant costs of this. But I think more importantly, it shows when you have that collapse of social enforcement within your society, you can just see how rap. I'm talking about a seven year period. This is not long ago that this was even not a thing that we went to bigger than the motion picture industry. And you and I are talking before a football season, all forecasts say that draft kings and fandrel will make more money this year than they have ever made before. And 2024 to 2023 was already at 23% rise. Why are people paying their gambling debts? Why are people paying their credit card bills? I don't understand. I mean, it's like so one-sided. It's like you're a college student and you get credit card offers free credit cards and you get lured into something like this. You get destroyed by it, but you still have to pay your debts. So it's all upside for them. And then people wag their finger in your face and like, oh, you a communist? My communist, no. No, I'm not. If you say like, why would you pay your debts, why would you ever? It's easier. It is. And they're the ones who should be ashamed. Not just ashamed. Our legislators should do something about it. I really do want to start a political party. Don't pay your credit card bills. Do not pay your gambling debts. I really do. It'd be a general strike against our student loan, honestly. But whenever, but what they do, and it's the same people, they take the frustration, the people who are benefiting from DraftKings and City Bank, they take the frustration that people feel with a stupid new mayor of New York and they move it into like race hate. They basically take that momentum and they shift it into a safe direction. Like just hate each other on the basis of the way you look. Yes, of course. And that's very safe for their backers. But I'm just waiting for the guy who's like, no, no, the real criminals are the ones who are loaning you money at 30% interest or getting you to go bankrupt on a sports gambling app. Like those are the villains. Why don't we go after them? I agree. I have been waiting. Will you run for president on the newspaper credit card bill? For the president. I will send you money. Well, I've been waiting for somebody. I talked with a guy who's an expert on the history of political parties. And he said, you know, one of the most popular issues that I think that would resonate is banning people employers who schedule closing shift and opening shift. It's called clopening, right? Like people who have to work until midnight and wake up at 6 a.m. A lot of these are the most precarious people in our economy who are basically screwed around with by their employers getting paid minimum wage and feel the deep frustration of no power in their lives from financial institutions to their employers. He's like, I genuinely think just an issue like that would resonate so deeply. And then I started thinking I go, why is that not even the thing? And I go, oh, well, it's because most people want to watch them don't even know about the term that I just use. Of course. And it's about the everyday life of somebody who is worried about being able to buy a house. I mean, let's even put buying a house out of that. That's the American dream. I'm talking about let's just making rent. I'm talking about being able to fill up your car. The large percentage of this country is a blown tire away from bankruptcy. A literal blown tire away from complete bankruptcy. Economic precarity to a level which is shameful, whenever we have the richest country in human history. And you talked about Sauron and what I really appreciated for him is look, we don't like Sauron. I'm not pro Sauron. I get it. But when he says, hey, I'm just worried about the rent and I don't care about Israel because I'm going to stay here in New York. I loved it. I loved it too. That's what we need. That's what all people really want. I remember when Trump first term withdrew from Paris and he said, I was elected to be the president of Pittsburgh, not Paris. And I was like, wow. So that's the problem. That's the same thing. The problem of the DOJ decision yesterday to cover up the crimes of Epstein, which they are doing, is that it leaves people at the very end of their electoral options. It's like I voted for this guy. And I'll speak for myself. I voted for this guy precisely because I'm really distressed. I want justice. I want honesty. I think secrecy of bets evil. I want someone to focus on my country, like all the basic things. And I think Trump wants all those things too. But when you allow something like this to happen, people are like, you know what? The system itself is beyond reform. There's no reasonable step I can take to improve this country or my own life. I have to do something crazy. Like you're creating true radicalism when you do stuff like this. Because what's the option? Well, that's why in a way I want to hold a lot of these leaders to a higher standard is because if you're elected on that message and you betray that message, in my opinion, you're more culpable than let's say the idiots like George W. Bush and others. Who really believed it, right? They believe whether they destroyed our country. I agree. But at the very least, they didn't lie to us as much about wanting to address the very problems that they created. But when you have people like Obama, Biden, and Trump who are elected, right now on the backs of fixing the most catastrophic presidency, probably in American history, George W. Bush. But then to return to many or in many cases, even go further and not actually address those. I think you're very culpable in that. And you reap what you sell. I mean, you said you're not a radical. I'm similar in disposition like I don't want to see mass violence or any of these other things. Well, you're a Mary's father. And you're like, I am too. Right. Totally vested in the future of the country. Exactly. I don't want that to happen. No, as an analyst or as somebody familiar with history, somebody who has an audience and can pick up on social trends. People are mad as hell right now. They are angry. Too mad. Angry. Too mad. You know, I agree. I'm legit. That Epstein thing, something about Epstein, I can live. I think I know what the Epstein thing was. Everybody knows what it was. I think you porn is the same thing. Yes, they're collecting information to blackmail people on you porn. Do you think a foreign government doesn't have access to the back end of you porn? I think they do. And so I get it. I understand everyone knows what's up. But to insult the population by saying, no, you're a conspiracy theorist. It's like I think you're really playing with fire when you do it. Well, especially when you said the conspiracy and then you know it's too much. It's too much. No, it's too much. Do you know? I mean, can you call Pam Bondi and say, think Pam Bondi is under a ton of pressure. Again, I've always liked Pam Bondi. I know her. I think she's under enormous pressure. I don't know how good she is under pressure. Trying to be nice. But I don't think that she's like a sinister person who is doing the work of Leon Black and who'd Brock on purpose really. But I wonder if they know this is a real thing here. They have to know. And the reason why I think they have to know is that the breadcrumbs that got us to this moment have already been sprinkled. Cash Patel testified and said it was suicide. Went on the Joe Rogan podcast and said, if I had that information, don't you think I would tell you? He killed himself. I mean, that was basically this was an enshrinement of many of the things that they already put out there. And the criticism and really the outrage over each of those individual comments. But let's say the so-called Epstein files released with many of the influencers. There was outrage at every step. So they're not stupid. But how can you say that thousands of children were raped? But I'm not going to find out who raped them. How can you say that? I agree. I agree. They said that. By the way, when Pam Bondi went on television said I have a video tape of kids getting abused, I fall this case closely. And I know a lot of the people involved as I've told you. I had no idea. I didn't know that. Really thousands of children got raped. Who raped them? Where are the rapists? Like, why aren't they in jail? This is the apartment of justice. Yes. That is so crazy. This is honestly one of the craziest things I've ever seen in my entire life. And I just think it's very dangerous to play around with this stuff. Like, very dangerous. Well, I don't want a revolution. But if you wanted a revolution, this is how you would act. Yes, yeah, it is. Because I gave Versailles an example. When you pick the court over and over again, and the people start to wake up to that, bad things can happen. And this is something that I find really disgusting about American elites is that for a long time, the American Republic and the elite system has been one that can actually cycle at least some of the wants and the needs of the American voter to basically placate it and keep it from going down the path of fascism and our socialism. But when you continue to just double down on the Imperium and on what fuels the empire itself, and you would keep ignoring all of these things, I mean, I do think this bill is an important part of that. Like, we're increasing defense spending. The empire is not even good at what's supposed to be done. No. It's causing chaos abroad. The military industrial complex is not even good at creating weapons or ammunition. The global financial system has been revealed as a complete ruse. We sanctioned Russia to death. Remember, we said that they will never rise. Their economy grew and they were able to increase. I tried to tell that story. And I went to the Soviet, or Soviet Russian grocery store not because I want to live in Russia. That's really nice. But to point out that like everything you said was going to happen didn't happen. Yeah, they're doing fine. And what's the lesson in that is that, you know, the ability to produce the goods that you need, the ability to produce the energy, and to at least have a few allies who also reject the Western global financial system is all you need now to stand against the American empire. I think that was actually one of the most important things that has ever happened because we threw it all at Russia over the most significant conflict involving the United States. And what has China been doing now for the last five years? Just studying, since Ukraine, they have been studying this. And we did it because this small group of foreign policy and government officials deeply care about Ukraine. They really care about Ukraine. Okay, that's great. I deeply care about Sweden. Yes. You may be deeply care about India. Yeah. But you're not driving or foreign policy. You know, they care about Ukraine for whatever reason. But they're imposing that on a country 350 million people. Like, are you joking? You can't do that. You humiliated us really in the eyes of most of our average. Oh, I'm aware. The day that Russia can increase its GDP and can increase its ammunition more than all of NATO while subject to the most devastating sanctions, supposedly in the history of the United States, that shows that it's all fake. And then that's Russia, which is much smaller and less much of the threat to the United States, let's say that any other country in the world. And all those other countries are studying this with the fine-toothed comb. It's a sanction proof. No, so when the time comes that were really affected and this affects me and you and my kid or your kids, that we're going to have a real problem. I couldn't agree more and to spend a trillion dollars than something that's not working. I mean, I guess of all the money you can spend spending the military decent people in the military, some good, really good people in the military. They actually went to them and they'd be fine, but it's not as you and I know. I read the other day this analysis from someone I know who's really smart and it was in the question was, will the United States use nuclear bunker busters in Iran? Okay, so that would for many reasons be, first time nuclear weapons have been used in 80 years, kind of a big deal. So I don't think anyone wants that particular Rubicon to be crossed. So I was like, wow, I wonder if that's gonna happen. So I call around and the answer I got, which I think is true, we don't have any nuclear bunker busters. And because we're not good at building anything, we're not gonna have them for quite some time. Now I haven't verified that, but I got that. I mean, I think that's true. That's insane. Now I don't wanna use nuclear bunker busters at all. And apparently it was George W. Bush who said we shouldn't. So there's a rare win for the Bush team. Thank you, George W. Bush. But if that's true, you spend a trillion dollars and you don't even have a nuclear bunker buster. I mean, that's the least of our problems. We don't have basic Emmy. You know, I'm aware it's like the level of dysfunction is so overwhelming that, and that's the military, which you gotta assume is more functional than say the Department of Transportation or Energy or Commerce or Interior. It's like gotta be one of the most functional departments, at least they actually pass a marksmanship test occasionally. Then things are really in disarray and we actually need reform. Yes, like immediate reform. Because I mean, I just think, I don't know, I've almost come to the conclusion. It's like we're either gonna have to hit a financial crisis or a war. That's really the only time. I think anything changed. So what, where do things go politically? That a lot of that depends on Donald Trump and how he handles his meeting with Prime Minister Netanyahu and the next coming years. Because, and this is why I was so concerned about Iran and I think you were too. And also why the people growing victory, in my opinion, will look stupid, is we, and I listened to your entire interview with the President of Iran, is very important in review. At the very least because whether he means it or not, he's trying to telegraph for peace. Of course. And not only trying to telegraph for peace, naming Israel as the prime, as a prime provocateur, wanting better relations here with the United States of America, but also concerned about the fact that at least according to our President, diplomacy was at least used in some way, either afterward taken credit for, or at least the perspective was given, it was used in as a ruse, which will undermine our ability to future negotiate. Let's say you are Iran, which in my opinion, what I took away from this is despite all of the, their genocidal terrorists who wanna kill us all, they act in highly rationally. They only struck Israel. They have fired 14 bases at the US, or 14 missiles of the US base. They gave us pre-pre-unpreemptive notice. They immediately then called it off, willing to sign a cease fire. He seemed at the very least his ability to telegraph rationality and his interview with you. What I take away from that then is rationally if you are the country of Iran, and you look at the history now and the context in which this has now happened. I don't see how 30 years from now, we either don't have an actual nuclear armd Iran or regime change. Because every single time, let's even look at Israel's operations. In 1981, I'm sure you remember, Israel took out Iraq's nuclear program, or at least that severely, a reactor. A reactor. Now that was sold as it was a one-time operation. By the way, do you remember that the Reagan administration did now set? And then we actually paused shipments. I believe in that 14s to the country. Why? Because we saw it as an outrageous move, which was destabilizing, destabilizing relations. We're all Reagan, everybody. Not some known anti-Semite, but of course we're not allowed to know our history. The point though, is that the preemptive strike in 1981 did it stop the United States from invading Iraq in 2003 for an operation and regime change sold on the lie of WMD? The point is, is that it actually hardens the DOM's resolve to at least create the impression of having nuclear weapons. And for a time, actually amassing other so-called weapons of mass destruction. And hardened the want of Syria in 2007 when they did something similar. If you look at the history here now of the so-called preemptive strike from Israel, known as the big endoctron around nuclear weapons in the Middle East, every time there's a strike, eventually at least a regime change. So Iraq, regime change, Syria, regime change with Libya, of course they had all kinds of stuff going on with the Libyan program. Gaddafi did the smart thing at what he thought at the time, gave up his nuclear weapons. And what happened to him? He was literally sodomized on camera. It was what eight years later by the United States of America. So the history of that in the region should really, you have to be very stupid not to look at every single one of those instances and say, yeah, I don't know about whether dealing with the United States or Israel here in this context is one that I can trust. In fact, I should probably just go get a nuclear weapon. Let's take the only a member of the Axis of Evil today. There's never been bombed by the United States of America, North Korea. I saw a book about Kim Jong-il behind you and I've recently had this theory. I'm like, is Kim Jong-il one of the most vindicated men in history? He was seen as an insane person. Remember the movies and his liquor. Very well, yeah. His fundamental insight in 2002 was no, we don't trust these people. We have to sprint to a nuke. We're getting the H bomb, we're testing underground. We will establish a credible nuclear deterrent. He dies and his son immediately pours all state resources into creating an ICBM and a credible nuclear threat to the United States of America, capable of hitting the United States homeland. And he, in my opinion, my belief is Kim Jong-il will die of natural causes in his own bed because of that decision. That is the only way to assure that the United States will not mess with you. And now, actually, what Israel has created is the situation where the highly rational, the highly rational decision after your entire military infrastructure has been infiltrated by Mossad. You've watched with impunity. You've seen diplomacy used as a ruse. I don't see how. We can't either go down the regime change path again and or we'll have a nuclear Iran. Now, on top of this, of course, is Israeli action. Prime Minister Netanyahu, according to Jerusalem Post, which is an Israeli media outlet, they write the prime minister Netanyahu, one of the chief things he wants to secure from President Trump is the ability to conduct preemptive strikes any time he wants on the Iranian nuclear program, which, of course, we were told was destroyed. If it's destroyed, I'm not sure why we need more preemptive strikes. But he wants a rolling green light for the future to be able to go in and take any of things out at the time, which, of course, would only harden the strategic resolve of that country. But it can't be done alone, of course not, which they proved. They actually proved that to us. When they said, we need you to come in and finish the job. We end to protect our homeland from ballistic missiles surrounding down on our cities. So any Israeli, and by the way, I come at this. I feel like you have to say it because you don't want to be called a bigot again. But just in general, I approve of and certainly understand every country's obligation to act and it's not interest, including defensively. So I'm not even contesting Israel's right to be worried about Iran. They probably should be. Whatever, every strike by Israel on Iran, by definition, requires the involvement of the US military. So we're getting signed up for an endless war with Iran. And at that point, it's like, no, this is my country. Yes. No. But I'm getting to see this. This is what I was saying about radicals. This is the kind of thing that could make you radical. Yes. And it's for us. It's also bad for them. I mean, let's take the April operation. A lot of people forget this. Why did Iran in April of 2024 launch all those ballistic missiles at Israel? It's because Israel bombed an Iranian embassy in the middle of Syria. Now, according to them, it was an IRGC command center. Maybe. I would say there are CIA officers present in every US embassy in the world. So I don't particularly want to open up that bag of worms. I think there's spies in literally every diplomatic mission, including in Washington, which probably cross paths with many of those. I don't think those are legitimate targets. Nor should they be. We shouldn't open that up. Well, it was because of that action that they knew would invite an Iranian response that Iran then launched those ballistic missiles against Israel. But who shot down all those missiles? A lot of bomb people's embassies? Yes. That's, well, according to them, as long as you designated a terrorist base by your own definition, I don't even know if the United States are actually technically signed off on that analysis, you're able to do that. There have to be some limits, mutually agree upon limits to behave here. You can't just shoot someone for pissing you off. Right. But you can't shoot up. Analysis you're able to do that there have to be some limits mutually agree upon limits to behave here You can't just shoot someone for pissing you off right, okay? But you can't shoot up churches including the church of the Nativity in Bethlehem and you can't bomb embassies or else your embassies in your churches Or you're sending objects or your mosques or whatever they're all fair game And you'd be right on a living that world right it would be rightfully to analysis terrorism if that were done It's gonna be some limit. What's the limits and even more big than that? What I said at the time was one of the reasons I didn't want us to defend Israel is I know that if they didn't think that the US would come in and defend them then they never would have done it in the first place Is that it would have restricted their freedom of action and the freedom of action of the Iranians and the most likely outcome between that Was probably some sort of diplomatic solution if they were actually forced to deal with this problem on their own terms without the big brother United States or at the very least the big brother United States Equally distributed to both parties in regards try to bring peace and balance to the region But it's our unending and unquestioning support which enables Israeli-belidjarin action in the region which then invites blowback both on them But also on us, okay? I lived during the 12 day war With the United States government warning me about terrorist attacks in my homeland that is like 2005 red terror levels remember flying back then very well and and that is a psychological toll on our population which was literally being done for a foreign country and Worrying about every US citizen there are millions of United States citizens who live abroad who were told that they had to be careful and going about Their daily business in whatever country they happen to be in now. Let's say that's in response to 9-11 I think okay, we can justify that in terms of what the United States is doing as after being attacked on our homeland But for another as you said, it's too much it can lead to radicalization I'm trying to resist that pull and I'm what I'm trying to do here on my show as well It's to talk all about this in a rational way That's why I talk about Switzerland and Chile just to put it in context who this country is and what we allegedly get out of it Let's remove all of the veneer and the the smears and everything else and let's just talk in our own terms And I have found that to be the enemy of the Ukraine discourse of Israel discourse of so much of the way that we orient ourselves I mean, you know, I always think about the Munich security conference. What why why are we obsessed with the Munich security conference? Asia is 50% of GDP in 2030. We should be going to the Singapore security Confidence and that's the only one that actually should matter But why do they all go to Munich? Oh cuz they like Munich. They like Europe They're like going on vacation a lot of them have studied there. They have this cultural affinity I get it. I'm not saying that shouldn't matter at all But you know our forward lead our forward-looking leaders even back in the 1930s and 40s Always had a very clear-eyed view of the ability to balance what was actually in US strategic interests And I think we really lost that from the 1990s Unipolar moment onwards and I'm watching it happen again So you know you asked me where this thing goes. It's all basically It's on Trump and his relationship with BB. I think I actually think he's gambling his entire presidency I agree with all of that right now. Yeah, and you know, I have no idea what's gonna happen I believe their meeting as we're speaking I know them both and I you know, I bet I don't know but I've got to say of all the kind of Filthy disasters in the world the one that I would want to stay away from With the most enthusiasm is Gaza. Yeah, so how is it that it's America's responsibility to unfuck Gaza? Yes, and that was the plan from day one and what's happening? Gause is is not defensible It's too much. I mean these regrets said 17,000 children have been killed in Gaza 17,000. I had to read it toys They said that so I you know, I'm just citing them. There are lots of other estimates, but we'll just go with you Let's go with the Israeli press which are often more critical than ours right exactly their way more Yes, but um, but let's just go with that I Think that that's immoral as a Christian. I'm very offended. They're were by the way Christians among those Killed there. They did nothing wrong. I'm offended by that, but even if I Supported that which I don't I would say I don't I don't think I want to have anything to do with that I don't want to be tied to that. Why should I take responsibility for your crime? President Biden sent to see Manitarian aid float show remember that quas cost probably at least a quarter billion dollars that entire deployment almost did nothing Currently American contractors. I'm sure you saw this are involved in this food aid scheme Which appears to basically just be like look I mean I have to be honest here. It almost seems like a literal trap like there are hundreds of Palestinians who have literally been killed Trying to get this is the one run by an American evangelical preacher I believe so I mean it's these American contractors and this is set up through the United States government and all these private Foundations and I know this can get difficult by the way even talking about this I recently saw referred to as a literal blood libel is to mention the fact that people who were coming for aid Were literally gunned down and murdered that supposedly a blood libel Against the Jewish people like again remove your rhetoric and let's talk in the realm of facts your own Newspapers are reporting the fact that Hundreds of civilians were killed trying to get aid in Gaza I'm repeating what you're is really processing I'm repeating what the independent press is saying what the you know people in Gaza are saying as well to the extent that there's any Independent oversight of this whatsoever and let's return to the question of I think we're both of our orientation Is is this good for our country? I would say no you can you know you can talk in the realm of Spiritually I would also just talking the realm you we can talk in the realm of spiritually and like kind of what that means To normalize saying let's kill children like congressman Randy fine or other member who are like openly Celebrated and then think it's like a good thing But we can use some talk about what we said about national interest is it healthy is it normal? to be obsessed with The way of with defending supposedly the most moral army in the world when almost every counter-terrorism and Iraq war veteran I know would be ashamed to have fought this way in the global war on terror with American troops Look we made a lot of mistakes But you cannot fault the American soldier or the American Marine the American airman for not at and many times putting their own lives on the line and many Losing them to protect Iraqi and Afghan civilians in fact often that was a core part of our mission and they would you know Look I don't think it was worth it, but When required they were willing to do so and I haven't seen that in a way that this war has been I have an either but I I don't understand Why we would take responsibility for fixing Gaza. I mean that's We can't fix Baltimore For really like you're right what yeah Why should we and this has been the plan from day one? I want that's what I was gonna say is remember back in November 2023 Even shortly off of October 7 is really can exit members and others were riding in the Wall Street Journal Actually, it's the United States that should take in people from Gaza after we expel them or People are so dangerous every person in Gaza including the children they're all terrorists because it's genetic Right they've been saying that it's genetic What are we even talking about like what kind of what is this it's genetic? I can think of a Widely discredited political movement in Europe that used to talk like that. It's genetic whatever anyway But there's too dangerous to live next to we can't even have them in the region You guys you guys can take that is the purest expression of contempt for the United States I can imagine and that was step one step two was all of these broad plans by US peacekeepers now It's broadly evolved they're mostly trying to pass it off on the Gulf But as you and I know there's no Gulf military that could potentially occupy Gaza It would of course either have to be fully funded by the United States of America or probably result in some sort of US True presence in Jordan serving as the supply mission with some sort of never-ending deployment that would put people at risk Just like our current occupation in Syria where we continue to have hundreds of troops for what if anybody thinks you and I are Conspiracy theorists let's not forget that after this Israeli backed al Qaeda takeover of Syria Which was is I guess US and Israeli backed al Qaeda takeover of Syria that the current There are current negotiations for the Israeli and US government right now This is out in the open about the United States actually filling in areas of Syria That were taken over by Israel and occupying them as some sort of safe zone between Syria and between Israel I mean again first of all this is a government supported by Israel and I guess by the United States now at this point So why do the troops even needs to be there? Also, we were told that we have to stand up against countries Causing territory like Putin and Ukraine. I literally watched the greater Israel project march forward You know in the in the last two years It's into Syria of course of West Bank And now with Gaza and the the expansionist behavior there which we just don't talk about here at all It's it's like the violation of our norm. I was gonna it's it violates every norm that we have about the way that a civilized Nation were to conduct itself. It's what we condemn and saying that why we're fighting Russia Exactly and that's where the hypocrisy of it collapses in and of itself and the only way It's justifiable is earlier what we refer to this like bastardized Christian and rabbinical Theological doctrine my favorite was the former US ambassador David Friedman trying to lecture you about Christian theology Yeah, right and and you didn't learn that much from you didn't learn much right but it's like what what and I mean my final point Actually on that too as you know, you know, there's probably no more contempt than by a lot of the pro Zionist movement for the actual Christian evangelicals who for whatever reason are so broadly supportive of Israel They use them as pawn they laugh at all if they knew yeah, I wish they knew I know a lot of them listen to you Yeah, I hope nice people good people I you know if you go if you ever go to Israel Probably 80% of the flight is gonna be people from Alabama or you know from all across This is how people yes who are going to the holy city which is great You know that's awesome But while they're there they're subjected to all of this end times propaganda about why it's so important to support the state And I think what's really sick is that the government the Israeli government uses them as political pawns in our country When secretly they have nothing but contempt and laugh at them about other like oh look at these you know gross people in our streets or any of that There's no actual appreciation. I remember asked Benjamin Netanyahu. I mean over 20 years ago when You know terrorists were occupying the church of the Nativity in Bethlehem, which is the city in which Jesus was born so it's you know arguably the most important church in Christendom and the IDF shot fired into the church killed of I think a bell ringer I think may have killed among anyway killed Christians in a Christian church in a Christian city of formerly good stronger Christian city Thanks to his occupation, but I'm and I just and I was totally for Israel I've never been against Israel actually which is the lariest part, but I Remember saying to him like you're using American weapons to fire into the church of the Nativity This is on CNN at the time and boy it was like Well, you did I semi no I don't want to fire into the church of the Nativity like how is that okay, right and why does everyone think it's okay? It's not okay. It's not okay And it's I mean we were talking yesterday about in the you know the the recent settler violence that happened against the Christian bill I mean part of why I feel upset about this is not just about the you know We rightfully if your Christian you should also care about other Christians But it's like guys This is just a normal behavior in the in the way the act in this region and supported by the Israeli government now again As somebody who cares about my own country. It would all be Bad things happen all over the world that's a fact of life But we us funding them it becoming a major political issue in our country Unfortunately, you're turning people like us who I don't look I nap Israel is never my number one. No never No, no, no, I really did not particularly care. Oh spent time in the country I liked it and that was kind of my brother. I said yeah, this is fascinating thing It's kind of messed up but whatever, you know, it's their business. This was always like a lefty issue all these right people You know who you were you don't agree to them and anything and they're running around talking about genocide That's just stop I had no Desire like the last thing I want to do is getting more I felt the same But I felt compelled once I saw not only the level wolf I saw the level of which the likud interest started basically Becoming a part of the mainstream American right. Yeah, became even more concerned when I saw likud interests running state laws Passing BDS laws on the books of multiple states in the United States restricting the free speech rights of American citizens London Santos signs of censorship law a You know a blasphemy law in a foreign country right in a foreign country I like to Santos that was the point where it was like you're disgusting I can't say in this who banned critical race theory Then basically starts affirmative action for Jewish students in the state of Florida that I can't genuinely think of a better Representation of the modern American. But hey just destroyed Ron DeSantis And I really liked Ron DeSantis I knew him pretty well I always tried my best in my limited way to promote Ron DeSantis because I thought he was a true marvelous job during COVID in Florida I was in Florida for part of that and I was like, oh, you're great and he was totally destroyed by this one issue No, I got it because it was totally in it was utterly inconsistent with everything else He was saying it's like wait were against affirmative action were against blasphemy laws. I thought American we have a first amendment. How can you travel to a foreign country and sign a law restricting my speech right? You're exactly right the University of California system the largest state in our country is now saying that any Organization that supports BDS will have all any federal grant money pull. I mean listen this is insanity Actually, yes, that happened. I think it happened a couple of days ago They're warning students not any boycott the United States. Can you boycott other states? Of course you can of course you can And that's my point is that it's genuinely all just about a foreign nation and it's in one political party's interests And then hijacking it in hours and I guess I should give the disclaimer as you said like you do because I already know the inevitable I'm not an anti-semon I spent a long time in Israel. I like Israel I have people who I would consider genuine family who are literally Israeli and Israel I love them. It is not about them. It's about their government. It's about their party and more specifically It's actually about my country's relationship with them. I wish them nothing but the best and I actually I just wish we just treated it Like any other country. I have affinity for Switzerland, Japan, India I'm having all over the world which one of the great blessings in my life And I just want I want to look at our relationship with all those countries on a relatively equal basis and just say Okay, what are we getting from this and what are we getting from that and instead? I've watched this religion or when both around Support for Israel, but Ukraine and NATO. I mean NATO is a religion as you know it's it's transformed itself into a Religion and not a defensive alliance and who watching that happen has been one of the most frustrating events of my life Because the consequences in both of these cases are so dire for the people who elect a lot of these Representative's power and I mean where is we got lucky that the 12 day war ended when it did But to say that that's the final solution is ridiculous because again Israel bombs Iraq in 1981 mission accomplished yes or no Israel bomb series reactor program in 2007 mission accomplished it said it stopped there Godaffi gave up his nukes. It's is it only just about nukes of course It's not about nukes. It's about regime change. That's what they want. They're open about it And you know, please everyone watch Israeli television there are a lot of people who translated they bragging about this stuff out in the open About killing gosons about regime change about the way that they manipulate the United States They say in Hebrew ask your friend. They're a lot of Hebrew speakers here in America. They can translate it for you It's sickening it's out in the open. I mean they make Fox they put Fox news to shame a lot of these people Which is hard to do which is why I yeah, I just I'm praying for Trump I'm praying for that this is the last political solution to our problems. Yeah, and I think we I all my hope is in Trump and I hope that the administration course corrects And and does it really soon? Yeah, I think they need to on that issue with Epstein and broadly You know you're elected on a message about America first and just so blatantly putting another country's interests ahead of our own Is not gonna go unnoticed by a large segment of the American public and specifically younger people who are suffering right now The US economy right now is a disaster The ability to buy how rates are very high from the fact that's one thing he's correct about Trump You know especially on the Federal Reserve about high interest rates about the fact that we have like a collapse of social trust I spend a long time talking about gambling. We're watching extractive industries get richer and richer on the backs of a lot of Ordinary and working-class people their lives are getting worse probably every single year and you know just touting GDP and oh tax cuts for the rich You know, it's a I I don't think people can put up with all of that together I grant and and you have three and a half years left You know you can still make a change if you want to for people who aren't familiar with your show Where do they find it breaking points breaking points on YouTube Spotify wherever you find it Congratulations on your well-deserved success. Thank you, and I hope you're in inspiration to many others Well, you're in inspiration to me. I hope a lot all my career to you And so I do I have to say that. Thank you very much. Thank you for getting media and do anything We've tired a lot of people at low wages would change. I guess is kind of what you're decrying Great to see it worked out. Thank you. Thank you So it turns out that YouTube is Suppressing this show on one level. It's not surprising. That's what they do But on another level it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now all the change taking place in our economy And our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now Google has decided you should have less information rather than more and that is totally wrong. It's a moral What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it a way that you could actually get Information that is true not intentionally deceptive the way to do that on YouTube We think it's to subscribe to our channel subscribe hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information So we hope that you'll do that