The general gonna experience the wildest ones religion go on Did their tax free? Oh the amount of money in pasta like Joel Osteen is raking in tax free Does he have to pay any taxes? Does he have to personally pay taxes? How does that work? Find out I believe that your limited salary if you if that if your church is incorporated But having churches pay no taxes is why but that speaks to Stability where it's like it's the it's Kahoot stability. It's like the the bill of rights and the Ten Commandments They're not exactly one to one, but it's all kind of the there's no coincidence there Where it's like everything that they it's another wing of the it's a I I used to refer to God as super cup Vue like we can't be there, but You should not steal you should not even if there's no cameras Don't steal don't hurt us. Don't is nuts. Wait cuz it's not intelligent got it. Oh Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, they they sued they sued the federal government and they got tax exempt status and You know that's wild because you know the guy who wrote it Yeah, one specific guy who is the not just The most he's the most prolific author in human history Mm-hmm. You know that he published more works of fiction, but not that that was all real No, I mean that's what guys gonna take the day off and they get no taxes this pretty wild I mean if you're like a small Lutheran church and you you know You serve the community and you put on charities and do a bunch of great things and you're like a real asset Yeah, there's a lot of those churches and they should be tax exempt. I don't other than like the seagorg Slave shit. I don't care about Scientology. Do you know what I mean? Like I don't think that they're They charge for classes. I don't know they kind of make you give them tithe at Churches seems like it's working out for Tom Cruise. It's working out for a lot of them. So really working out That's why I was like I don't care Just don't put people's don't slave people don't do that don't kidnap Kelly, Miss Gavitch and all that shit, but like the rest of it. I don't care about the rest of it's not any different to me than any It seems like it's real similar to what goes on in a lot of religions in a sense because there's a lot of religions that force people to work As missionaries and there's a lot of religions that you know ask things that people and you have to tithe And have kids don't use birth control like that's pretty significant Very significant. Yeah, yeah, and there's gay people. Yeah. Yeah. There's a lot of weird stuff from religions that we just accept Yeah, we didn't you say that I think you said this that when you had a psychedelic experience You kind of stopped being an atheist. Yeah, I was I was an atheist and then I was gonna Journey number four No, turning number three. Oh, I'm in the president guy I'm just in it now and it's not big. I mean again, this is what I experience so it's not true or false, but It's a that's our central creation force that I experienced there was you know It didn't say it didn't have any rules or laws or did you get a sense of what this whole thing is supposed to be like What are we doing like if there's a central creation force and you interact with it like what is it what is it want? What is it want from us and what is it doing with like life? I My experience this was from the Bufo Not I lost go which I is amazing. Bufo is just too rough for me I was drowning on incomprehensibility I don't think it's comprehensible. Mm-hmm. What the purpose is My that's my experience. I don't I didn't even get love from it I didn't get hate any good fan of yeah, I just got indifference. I just got like super powerful just power force Yeah, just force it felt magnetic in a weird way. So is Bufo five methoxy Yeah, five it yeah, five. I mean. Oh, yeah, that is a very different feeling That's a very different experience. That that that one. I really thought it was gone. I thought I died. I mean Dude, I didn't even when I was here at last time. I wasn't totally. Yeah, recovered. I feel like there's some sort of trend in life and in in the cosmos of things getting more complex and you know, I'm not the first person to point this out either But with human beings in particular everything is about technological innovation and things becoming more more complex and Information being more more accessible and being more more connected with each other. It seems like a really really obvious trend And if you play that trend out You know a thousand years a hundred thousand years a million years like where where is that going? Is that going on all over the universe and is that what God's doing is God all about this constant state of improvement That it goes on forever Until you reach like literally like a god like being Yeah, yeah, that's the thing with with I had a few kind of rapture Experienced like ish raptureish I just get the feeling that if if like When if there was a rapture or whatever. I just think people will go wow, this was we fucking Were really worried about the wrong shit For sure like beyond even our Comprehend like Beyond or be so far past what we were like not even worried about Fucking or war or any of that stuff. It's like dude. It's just about this energy field that I Couldn't make heads or tails of in terms of like we're supposed to well if you think of amoebas If you think a single-cell door organisms they eventually become multi-cell door organisms they they develop the ability to move around and They come on to shore and they evolve and change and this goes on forever and ever and ever and ever and then one day in 2022 there us that's what we are where the most advanced form that we're aware of of that thing If that keeps going Maybe that is what creates the universe itself Maybe the universe is making itself through us We're just in this amoeba stage and we can't even comprehend it with to us It's like what are you talking about? We're gonna change the world like imagine an amoeba being born in the bottom of a volcano Silo, you know in the bottom of the ocean so I felt like an amoeba on Five I mean yeah, well you basically probably are I think we probably all are a version of that in comparison to this ultimate thing that we're gonna become If we do keep evolving if evolution is a real thing and it did go from single-cell organisms to what we see now in human beings if you just keep going that should That should get to some place of impossible Energy and power and maybe the universe itself like maybe that's what it's made out of maybe that's how we make things Like stars and maybe the universe itself is born out of this and we're just this really tiny stage This amoeba like stage that will ultimately become the God force of the universe maybe that's our ultimate transition between a physical being into this thing of energy and love and light and power and and In in difference in many ways to our own flights because it's it's Necessary to achieve this purpose like all of our bullshit and maybe all of our struggles Maybe all of our debates about things and trying to figure out what's white and what's wrong? Who's philosophy is correct and whose behaviors correct? Maybe all of that is just trying to get us to that ultimate stage where we're gonna be and that's what happens everywhere in the universe That's the universe creating itself everywhere all over the place when things get and they have a certain amount of Troubles that they have to deal with whether it's tribal invasions or super volcanoes and Figure it out get to a point where you can become the next thing Yeah, I mean on and on and on and on forever. Yeah. I mean that's I would it my especially my my five me a Experience was about having no sense of order whatsoever Meaning I was in a meba. I didn't know what breathing was I don't know what direction was I don't know what site was I didn't know Fuck in Anything yeah, and I was I was drowning on I don't know any I don't know what a thought is It was really Incredibly different like it's hard beyond and so that's what I've come away from One of the things that come away from it with is is this sense of like we're just trying to order things more than anything like that's our number one sort of human priority because it's like the best way to survive Yeah, and I feel like we're ordering for the wrong stuff a lot of the time, but it's inevitable