Hey, I'm Luke and we're in Tampa today. I got to make this quick because there's about five SWAT guys behind me with HE trigger fingers they got non lethal bullets and pepper spray and they're not afraid to use them So I'm gonna go ask some people some questions today and see how they're feeling about everything that's going on in the world Where are you out here today? To support a concept believe it. What is that? Fighting for black lives matter and fighting it's not believes brutality. It's capital murder And we all need to speak up and we want to change so what are you hoping to accomplish here today to show them That we care and that we're here and that we want our voices to be heard and that even though I can't understand Every day what it feels like to be a black man or woman in America today It doesn't mean I can't emphasize and I'm gonna stand here like my voice be heard because there's orange and That's why I'm here. Thank you Todd of this madness happening to our black young men and Sons I have four sons and one go to the University of Something and I do not want this to happen to him. So listen We're tired of talking no more talking it's time to get it together if either you're with us or you're against us Period, so no more talking. It's time for action. Nope action. You'll see What do you hope to accomplish out here today? You know what time it is It's injustice all over this world and all y'all care about especially for the Hillsborough County Sheriff you said that you are not gonna tolerate all of the looting and all of this What are we not gonna tolerate you shouldn't be tolerated all of you against all of us again? All of the black people in America you shouldn't tolerate that that's what you should have something to say about you worried about property That shit can be replaced with insurance. You hear what I'm saying. That's what insurance is for We don't give a fuck about what y'all got going on down here. We care about lives That's the only thing that matters here. It's about black lives and y'all don't give a fuck about us We don't give a fuck about y'all room of remember that Thank you so much I'm protesting for equality. I'm protesting for justice. I'm protesting so my brothers and sisters stop getting killed That's what I'm doing. I'll get to know. So are you a part of the organization? You're up there and you know, you're making a lot of really great points And it was like really passionate and I want you to get some of that passion here for us. I'm in no organization My friend Lea right here. She told me one day. She hosted a protest and I told her I wanted to be a part of it that I wanted to lead it I wanted to be a part of her and I just came out here with a megaphone and some passion and I spoke my truth I just have a megaphone that's it. I have a megaphone and I got balls and I'm not scared to go up to them That's the only difference but they everyone that's out here is doing exactly what I'm doing They all sweating they all fighting. I'm not doing nothing more I literally just have a megaphone that's it like that's it Thank you for your time and I appreciate it. I hope you accomplished what you guys are out here to do We now don't stop till we do and please put this everywhere. I want people to see it. Thank you Well, I'm out here because you know this is just outrageous, you know We have enough of you know bad police stepping out there and using their Privilege and power to Kill the minority but it's not just about the minority. It's about you know all all life matter Because you know this is just enough. This is America We say this is the land of the free, but we don't see freedom when another man can need taking me on another man Nick, so this is just one Drop that you know overflow the bottle. So we have enough of that That's that's the reason why we are here today. What do you hope to accomplish out here today? Well You know a lot of time this happened. This is not the first time the first murder You know we actually feel like sometimes when we step out at least they can hear our voice and they reminded that The power is to the people not to them just because they got the uniform and the belt holding the gun The power comes to the people, you know, we adhere to let them understand that if we keep going You know what you guys have? Probably seen in other state it not gonna stop us But we're not here for that We're here for peace and we want them to learn that we want them to understand that all lives matter You're here for equality and you're here for each other That's exactly what we hear and why we hear and you can you have seen it's not just black people But it's all people is all people that have had enough and we are all out here to remind them that There are nothing but people just like us so they they may have that little privilege with the gun and the the badge But the the life don't matter More than anyone out here No problem man, and I appreciate you guys being out here Are we allowed to ask you guys any questions today? You're not you can't do interviews. Okay. What's about to go down? They're about to start throwing tear gas in about five minutes Seven thirty as soon as the clock ticks seven thirty Things are gonna be very violent and it is not going to be this way toward them It's going to be the opposite because it always is the opposite Do you think that's what typically sparks the violence Is when the cops react at a peaceful protest like this once they start throwing stuff that's what sets everybody off stick around and find out I mean, I was Hey with pepper spray and tear guys. Luckily there were people that were like first responders out here protesting So they had milk and stuff like ready to help people I saw one guy get shot three times rubber bullets and he had cuts like he just threw like a bandage over them like people were prepared today That's all that I personally saw. I mean they did throw it to your guys. I saw one protester pick it up and Throw it back out What did they do to provoke the police to do that? I mean, I don't I don't know it seems more like a leaded question I don't think they provoked the police to do anything like that It seemed like the police were openly antagonistic and that's obviously a chronic problem that we have here like since the police don't actually live in the Communities that they're policing. There's always this mindset of other which is like why we see this harsh mentality I mean even if you look over now like there there's already an increase in the militancy I don't need it to all of these When you come out here like you're showing your true passion for like what you stand up for you I'm saying and Like me I like talk to some of the officers to see what's on that harsh of minds I'm not gonna go up them and say oh your racist because you're a police officer because that's ignorant I'm not gonna come out here. I'm educated. You know, I'm saying about what's going on and just Just you know, I'm saying be ignorant. So I mean you just talked to some of the officers to see what's on their hearts and minds And you you protest about whatever you stand for and whatever you stand for you believe in it no matter what it is I don't see color like we're all one. I Don't matter I have friends at every race so it don't matter we're all one. I treat everybody equally By no matter what your race is we all went so Cool, yeah, I appreciate it man. Thank you for taking the time. Yes, sir Man look man I'm more on the ignorance. I man. They got us fucked up out of him Man, I almost got pepper spray a whole bunch of times. I'm gonna got shot with a rubber bullets That shit line no joke man if it's supposed to be peaceful why y'all making a violent?