Joe Roman Feynch. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. Is that hat? Your croissant. Yeah. We're croissant. Bro, those croissants are real fucking powerful. Bro, the shit. I was going to eat one bite. This is what it was like. I was like, oh, a bite. They're so good, man. Two buttery. Well, how can a guy lose as much weight as you lost and then open up a fucking bakery? Because I started with him when I was so fat. It was perfect. Like I fell in love with that place when I was close to my fattest. And I was like, this is a match made in heaven. How big were you when you were your fattest? The most I ever weighed was 265. Holy shit. Yeah. And what do you know? 187. That's insane. Yeah. So that's like what? 80 pounds. What does that feel like? I feel like I need joints. Feels great. I feel so much better. I feel so much better. Of course. I'm lifting four days a week. Wow. Yeah, I just lifted this morning. Do you have a trainer? Do you go and toll low? No. Yeah. It meets me there every day. Right. Every day that I'm. You do that for accountability? You know, I just realized that I mean, I've trained enough now where I can do a good workout on my own. But I always feel like it's never as good as when he's there. It's all, you know what I mean? Like it's always a little bit harder. And I always feel like it's a better workout when he's there. Yeah. Yeah. He pushes me, Sean. So you've been with him for a while? I've been with him for a year for years. The other difference, the big difference is that I've been. I dialed in not with croissants, but I've dialed in my nutrition a lot more. Like I eat four times a day now. And I'm on top of my macros. You know what I mean? Things I've never done before. You bought eat four times a day. This nutritionist just gave me this plan and I've been just doing it. Interesting. Yeah. So I eat 50 grams of protein at every. At each of those four, you know, four different meals. Okay. So I end up getting 200 grams. So you, you do smaller meals that are lower in calories but high in protein. Yeah. And then I also, I carb cycle. So I know on a, and like if today was legs, I know that it's a more intense workout. I'll do the full portions of these carbs, which sometimes the sweet potatoes or white rice. But on a day, if I'm like, if it's a rest day or I'm doing like less intense workout, I'll dial back how much of those carbs I eat. Hmm. Do you take a pre-workout? I have a pre-workout meal every time. So like in the morning, I get, I've been getting up at 5 30. So I get a what? Yeah. What the fuck are you doing, man? I mean, because I've been in the writers room on my, on season two of bad thoughts. So I've been, I've been getting up at 5 30 and my pre-workout meal. They're these like, I guess it's like musally kind of like grains, you know, with, with some honey, a little bit of almond butter. And then I have Greek yogurt with a scoop of whey protein. So that's my pre-workout. And after that, I go to the gym. And then during the workout, I sometimes have a, I get intro workout shake. Sometimes I just, yeah. Yeah. But I mean, I feel much better doing it that way. Yeah. And then, and then I eat again about an hour after that workout. So that's my second meal. Then a few hours later is three. And then my fourth one is like around six. So you have your second meal by the time I was like 8 a.m. Maybe like 9 30. Yeah. That's so great. Yeah. What time are you going to bed at night? Well, that's, that's the key to this whole fucking thing. That's the key to the whole thing is that you go to do this. I got to do this. And to do that, I got to do that. And to do that, I got to get up early. And the only way I can get up early is by staying on top of when I go to bed. You know, when we met, I was going to bed at three o'clock in the morning. Normal stuff. Yeah. And I could get up at like 11. Yeah. Like a normal person. And then I would say in the last decade, a lot of my bedtime kind of shifted to like around midnight. And then it shifted to like a little bit like closer to 11. In the last few months, like sticking to this plan, I've started to go to bed sometimes at like 10, 10 30, which for me is like very early. You know, it's very hard. It was, it's the biggest challenge for me has been to get to bed. That's hard for me. That's hard. That would be hard. But I also, I don't think I'm going to be getting up at 5.30 forever. This is just writers from stuff. This is just writers from stuff. Normally you get up one, eight. Uh, seven. Between seven and eight. That's reasonable. Yeah. And I don't have to go to bed at 10 to do that. Yeah. Well, my kids are in school. I get up at seven. Shh. And then yeah, usually between seven and seven, 15, depending on when they have to leave. And then when they're not in school, right now, today I got up at eight, which is pretty normal. Eight feels good. I got up around 730 today. If I don't work out first thing in the morning, though, it used to be, I really used to like working out at night, because in jujitsu, I'd always like doing at night morning classes were tough, tough to get in there early in, in train. And also you don't feel warmed up and fucking feel like everything's going to get hurt. Yeah. Uh, but nighttime, I can't work out anymore. I can't do that. I've completely changed. It's really too busy. I used to say, well, I will say that like, I feel like my strongest between like 11 and one, like the middle of the day is when I, if you were like, drop an ideal strength time, that's when I feel like I'm like, oh, that's when I'm at my best. Why do you think that is? I think you're, you woke up that, yeah, you woke up, you fired up, you've wound up. And you're ready to go. And I feel like a little food. I feel good. I've pivoted to now really enjoying these first thing in the morning workouts where I feel like my whole day is set when I have those workouts. And I also realize that if I don't, I feel so much different throughout that day. Right. That's a good, that's a good factor. One, you get that first big win in the morning. Yeah. You got it done. You got good momentum going. But also you're more calm. Yeah. That's the big one. That's the big one. And focused. Right. We were all doing crazy cardio. One thing you said to me that really rang true is like it totally silences all that internal chatter. Yeah, it does. Yeah. And I think, I think one thing about the writer's room is that, you know, you have to be alert. You have to be focused. Right. You can't have all this shit like the noise going on. Right. So it was a great way to show up to the room is like, you have that win. You've done something hard and now I'm ready to work. Yeah. For me, it's not just a hard workout, but generally has to have some cardio in it. Really? Yeah. Cardio is what really shuts off all the chatter. It is different than the weightlifting. Yeah. Weightlifting is great. Weightlifting makes you feel better. Like you feel like energized. You feel like, oh, I feel good. But cardio is like, I don't think we will fuck. Yeah. Like when I want to have a really hard cardio session. Yeah. I don't go fuck. I don't go fuck what's going on. Everything's fine. Between, because I was doing 45 minute cardio sessions and when I opted to an hour, the 15 minute difference for me felt like another hour. Mm. Like pushing it 15 more minutes was really hard. Oh, yeah. Well, that's when it's hardest when you're tired already. Yeah. You know, when you're extending your cardio capability, that's fucking hard man. That was hard. It's so important. It's so important to do. Oh yeah. It's everything. We want to wonder why so many people are out of their fucking minds. That's a big part of it. I got so obsessed with some of these data and metrics about this. Oh. Yeah. It just becomes a problem. Well, I don't mean that I have to put just the data that people are talking about as people age of if you're not lifting and your bone density goes down or your VO2 Mac. Learning about that stuff and going like, if you don't start thinking about that at a certain age, one day it will be so out of your grasp. I was just having this conversation with Shane Gillis. I was like, you have to realize like 20 years goes by so fast because I'm 20 years old in him. And I'm like, 20 years ago, I like that happened. It was yesterday. Yeah. And all of a sudden I'm 58 and 20 years from now, I'm 78. Yeah. That's dead. Yeah. Like, and you can either be almost dead and look like RFK Junior or you can be almost dead and look like Trump. Yeah. So that kind of same thing. Yeah. It's a same neighborhood. And you have a choice. Trump's only seven or eight years older than RFK Junior. They don't look like it. No. Yeah. And that guy did heroin for 14 fucking years. Who did RFK Junior? He did heroin? Oh, yeah. He was there. His dad was assassinated. He was a heroin addict? Yeah. No shit. Yeah. When he was young, he people give him a hard time about it. Like, hey, yo, his fucking dad got shot in front of him. Yeah. His dad who was running for president got assassinated. Yeah, that's a whole thing. He was a little kid. Come on. You wouldn't do heroin. You have no idea what you would do. And his uncle got shot in the head in front of the whole world. Yeah. I mean, he's not in front of the whole world. It wasn't in front of the whole world until several years later. But he looks incredible. He looks great. Yeah. He did 20 chin-ups in a row. I saw that. At 70, whatever the fuck he is. That's very impressive. That's insane. Yeah. Modern science for the win. Yeah. Now, yeah. I mean, yeah. I think about it all the time. Wait, 20 years goes by real fun. Like that. It's so fast, dude. Yeah. Before you know it. There's guys that never got going with their life, or they got distracted with stupid shit, and they never really focused on whatever it is they do with their careers. And then you see them 20 years later, they're late 40s, and they're fucking scrambling. And depressed. And friends with so many of them, dude. Oh, it's a problem. And friends with so many of them. Yeah. I mean, that age pocket where I like a lot of my friends are... in that like... They never did anything. Yeah. They're really scrambling. Yeah. And they're really desperate. And then they want help, which is like, hey, I can't fucking hold your hand. Exactly. You did this to yourself. Like, you should have paid attention to what we were all doing all those years ago. It's unnerving too. When some of them, like I have friends who are like, dude, like we're in our 40s. Yeah. And the thing is, the worst part about it is you realize how much of it is dictated by fear. They're just scared to do things. It's like someone who's scared to step in the gym or something, right? You're just scared to take that step to do something. Scared to be uncomfortable is what it is. Yeah. Yeah. That's the thing. It's like most people are scared to be uncomfortable. So they're scared to sit down in front of the computer and write. They don't write. Because they're scared to be... I don't... The writing thing is the weirdest one. Fear of the unknown. Because I don't understand why that's even uncomfortable. But it is. I get it. It is. I come home and I really should write. But I could watch YouTube. And then I'll fucking sit in front of the TV. I'm like, I earned this. Yeah. And then I'll watch YouTube. Anything to not do it. You look for distractions. The nights that I come home and I write though, I always feel way better. I feel better going to bed and I feel better getting up. I'm like, I did what I was supposed to do. Yay. Everything's going good. Yeah. You're right. Yeah. When I just watched some fucking random YouTube video on ancient history, it's like... Why am I falling asleep into the morning? I'm forcing myself to finish this fucking hour and 50 minute document. I'm serious. I do it fucking all the time. I'm like, here's another murder doc. I'll just watch this. I don't watch those. Oh my god. I did. You really found out too. I found it in the writer's room and I didn't realize this until I talked it out. We were talking about... Because sometimes you're like, what about this idea? Right. And someone will be like, well, you know, on that episode of like 30 rock or something. And I'll be like, I never saw that. I go, you never saw a 30 rock? And I'm like, no. And then they go, oh, well, you know, like on the office. I never watched the office. Like you didn't watch the office. And then I started talking. I was like, oh, I've never watched any of these shows. And they're like, what? And I go, yeah, I guess I just don't like comedy. And they're like, what are you talking about? I was like, dude, I've never seen the office 30 rock, sunny. All the huge comedies of the last 20 years, I've never seen them. I haven't seen them either. Well, so I'm like, well, I go my ration. Now my thinking is not that I don't like comedy. Instead, it's like, you know, you, I'm on stage all the time. I'm doing comedy. My friends are comedians. We're talking comedy. When I get home and I want to watch something, I don't want to watch that. I want to watch something else. I'm exactly that's exactly how I think of it. I want to watch dramas, thrillers. Something's interesting. Yeah, yeah. Stranger things. So I just end up never. And they're like, this is pretty crazy though. You're in a room of comedy writers and you've never watched an episode of comedy. I'm like, yeah, I guess that is kind of weird. I watched them when I was on one. You know, I watched other sitcoms to see what they were doing differently. Yeah, sure. Because there's kind of a new thing for me. Yeah, that makes sense. But after I was off news radio, I swore off sitcoms too. And but then I did start watching some of them with my family. One of them I watched that I really used to shit on and I was wrong. It was a big bang theory. Really? Fucking good show, man. I mean, it was a massive hit. I was like, how is this stupid show a massive hit? But it was because I had seen clips online that were like retakes that they did without the laugh track. But if you know, if you ever worked on a sitcom, you know what retakes are. Retakes are brutal. Like you didn't get it right or the writers decided to change something or whatever reason you do a bunch of them after the audience leaves. You know, so I saw those without the laugh track and I was like, what is this? This is not funny. Yeah. This is terrible. I'm like, what is this like mundane, boring fucking drone you to sleep? When I watched the show, the actual show itself was like, oh, this is a really well-written sitcom. Yeah. And it's interesting because the main guy is autistic and he's like totally socially retarded. Yeah. And it's funny though. But it's all about nerds. It's like, it's a good show. It's a good show. Something that has that, something that gets to that popular. Yeah. This has to have something. But that's like stuff that I watch with my family. Like there's certain shows that I only watch with my family. Really? Yeah, that's one of them. And the kids is they started, you know, they had their movies that they always watch. And kids, little kids have just a capacity to rewatch the shit. Oh, yeah. And they were like, Jesus Christ. I watched Frozen like 80 times. Oh my gosh. Suddenly fucking times we watch it. Let it go. We watch Home Alone. Fucking 145. That's right. Which is, I think a lot of people do. But then all of a sudden we were like, oh, here's the Simpsons. And what we did was we started with episode one of the Simpsons. Oh wow. And what I was so surprised by, because I was taken by just how good the old, like we're watching season one and season two, like the really old ones where everything, where it took 18 months to produce an episode. Right. You know, they had to hand draw everything. The writing and the jokes and them are so good and so funny. And you're watching these little dudes like get the jokes and they're, and it's really funny. I mean, it's really good. But we start from the beginning. How many episodes is the Simpsons still on the air, right? I think so. It's like season, fucking 42 or some shit. That is so wild. And no one gets old. No. And characters are just cartoonists. And now they can do them timely because of technology. So now they can like produce it in a week or something. Oh, that's crazy. Yeah. That's crazy. Because they don't have to hand draw everything. Well, didn't they like farm and all out to fucking, I think South America or some shit? Probably. I'm sure. Yeah. I think they did. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there's something also that like you appreciate about the old animation. That's cool. The trunk clunky. Yeah. It doesn't exist in the, but it's still, it's so funny. Like the first South Park. Yeah. The first South Park was super clunky. Yeah. What would Boring? Bortano do. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And then they also embraced that it's supposed to look this certain way. Right. Like that whole thing was like it's, it was, they embrace that like the look is not like slick. Right. Yeah. I mean, it's also you can get away with so much more when it's not even remotely realistic. Yeah. Like the time that gay teacher stuff Paris Hilton up is asked. Like how could you do that on any other show? I mean, if you, you said we're going to do South Park, but with CGI and real people, they're like, fuck are you talking about me? Can he's going to die in every episode violently and everyone's going to laugh? Yeah. No, it does. Yeah. What is brain splattered all over the concrete? Oh my God. You killed Kenny. What? Yeah. And it has to be fake. Fake. Yeah. And it has to be fake kids. Totally. Cause kids are kind of bounce off stuff. They get hurt. It's kind of funny. Yeah. And they do. Yeah. They just fucking, they don't get hurt as easy. When they get hurt, it's like not that big a deal. They banging at things. Whereas an old person falls in the bathtub. They break a hip and they're dead in the ear. My youngest like slow falls all the time. And we're like, fuck it. He's practicing. Yeah. He's just like, I need some. Yeah. Well, they're fucking made out of like, they're, they're, they're, they're, they're, they're flexible, pliable shit. Yeah. The way they, even like the way that kid can sit and you're like, how are your legs doing that? Yeah. After a while, shit gets stiff. It gets real stiff. Do you ever do any yoga? I did. Well, remember when we did it? I do. I do. That was awesome. And then a few like a year or two ago, I started doing some yoga here. And it was so challenging. I was like, fuck, this is really hard. Was it the same kind or different? Just like, no, it wasn't, it wasn't a hot yoga. It was just like, you know, you're going through all the positions. I don't know how to even describe it poses. Yeah, all the poses. And I was like, man, I was, you know, shaking in, in certain poses. And I was, it was really challenging. And I have not done it in a while. I probably should do it again. Was it the same kind of yoga though or the poses different? No, the same kind of poses. The same kind of, yeah, just not hot. Hot's the way to go though. I thought it's rad. Yeah. It's harder. It is. I remember, I did do a hot yoga here in Austin, like in July. I was like, this isn't much different than outside right now. And I remember feeling so relieved when I saw somebody tap out of the room before me. I was like, I can't tap out first. Just watching people and some guys. I was like, I was like, all right, I'm going to get out of here in a minute. Holiday football has arrived. The regular season's wrapping up. The playoffs are on deck. And every win matters more with drafting sports book and official sports betting partner of the NFL. The unexpected can turn game day into payday from fierce rivalries to playoff pushes. Nothing beats football this time of year. First touchdown. Anytime TD live bets when your team scores you score. And don't forget draft Kings has your back with early exit. If your player goes down in the first half, you still get paid in cash with draft Kings. You're protected through the entire first half. Why bet anywhere else? New customers bet just $5. And if your bet wins, you'll get $200 in bonus bets instantly. Download the Draft Kings Sportsbook app and use the code Rogan. That's code Rogan bet five bucks and win $200 in bonus bets if your bet wins in partnership with Draft Kings. The crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1 800 gambler in New York called 877-8 open wire text. Hoping why 467-369 in Connecticut help is available for a problem gambling called 888-78777-777 or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly. On behalf of Budhoe Casino and resorting Kansas has to have per-wage or tax may apply in Illinois. 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction, void and Ontario. Restrictions apply. Bet must win to receive bonus bets which expire in 7-8. Cinema Moms required. For additional terms and responsible gaming resources, cdkng.co slash audio. Limited time offer. I remember the first time I did and I was like, I can't believe it. Hard this is. I can't believe all these little low ladies are walking into this thing with this rolled up foam mat. You guys think you're working out? Yeah. Meanwhile, they're working out way harder than me. I was literally getting strangled and it was easier. I was going to Jiu Jitsu and I was getting fucking arm barred and that was easier than going and fucking stretching my feet out with these little low ladies. And seeing how these mothers, you'll see somebody who's like physicality is not like that note. They look fit, let's say, but you're not like holy shit. Look at this person. The way that they're holding themselves up on their hands and their whole body is sitting on, you know what I mean? Like their knees are on their elbows and you're like, how fuck are you holding yourself like this? Yeah. Very impressive. It's a weird, impressive thing that you only know. It's impressive when you try to do it. This is what my head theory that everybody should try things like that Jiu Jitsu, a boxing class. Even if you go one time just once to have just so you have an idea of what you don't know. You know what I mean? Because like every dude thinks he can fight, you know? And I'm like, I know my limits so much in that regard because I've been in classes. I've done classes. So I know so much, I'm not an expert, but I know how much I don't know. I mean like, I've rolled on, I've done Jiu Jitsu classes. I've done boxing classes and I'm like, oh, these guys can fucking kill me, you know? But you don't know that before you do it. You don't know how hard that shit is. You don't know. I mean like boxing is a funny one because people think they're like, I could throw a punch. Like you don't even have the fundamentals of how to throw a punch. You don't even know how to throw a punch technically. Not only that. How many can you throw it before you're totally exhausted? The exhaust is real crazy. You got 10? 10? A lot of people like throw, they throw haymakers and they think they're throwing it. You're like, that's not even a punch. Oh, it is if it lands. I guess, but it's not like, it's definitely not a punch that would really have that much of an effect on somebody who knows what they're doing. I mean, you could probably land that on someone who also doesn't fight. You can land a lot of things on people if they don't know you're going to punch them. Yeah. That's why sucker punches work. Yeah. Whenever I used to teach martial arts, one of the first things I would tell people is you have to realize that action is so much faster than reaction. So the reason why a sucker punch works is because you have no idea that this person is going to do it. Yeah. And then by the time they're doing it, it's too late. Too late for you. You don't react in time. That's why people get punched like that. I'm like, you can't ever let anybody get close enough. You can't ever let anybody that's threatening you get into position where they think, like you think that they can hit you and you don't know what's coming. Right. Because it can happen too fast. So that's why you got to have your awareness to that somebody approaching you is already a threat or 100%. Yeah. Like remember the time I got in that stupid thing on Fear Factor? Yes. That guy. 100% my thought process. Well, this guy could punch me in any second. Yeah. See, I have to act. Yeah. I had to grab him. But it was one of those moments where I was like, alright, this is a very angry person that's already irrational. What's most irrational? Sucker punch in the host. Yeah. And also this is like, you got to think of reality TV. What is everyone trying to do? Everyone's trying to go viral. They're all trying to have a clip that gets played over and over again. Yeah. They're all trying to get everybody to watch the show. so they're all acting in the most outrageous way possible. Yeah. I think it's like between that and social media, it's been like poison in our civility in our culture. The way people communicate, the way people view like famous people is totally different now. Because used to be famous because you're Amy Winehouse. Like, oh, I love your music. Yeah. Now it's you're just famous for whatever the fuck reason. You'll be famous for you acting a fool. Like just being a complete dipshit. Yeah. Being some guy who's famous for stealing people's hats. Yeah. Just run up and grab people's hats everywhere. That's for TikTok. Or yeah, you go up to people and like you whisper in their ear when they're at the thing. They're like a home depot. And people are like, did you see what Andrei Arlofsky got into it with these fucking influencers? I bet they didn't know who he is. Yes. I did see a clip of that. Yeah. I bet they didn't know who he is. They started fucking with former UFC heavyweight champion Andrei Arlofsky. Yeah. Not a good move. First of all, he's fucking gigantic. Yeah. He's one of the baddest motherfuckers ever. Yeah. That guy just recently retired from the UFC or was released, I should say. He's not even done fighting. He started fighting. He was one of the UFC title, I think in 2005. Yeah. That's 20 fucking years ago. And the guy was still beating people that are like elite fighters just a few years ago. And that's how you go pick on? You go pick on that guy. That's not. I think he beat Travis Brown in like 2016 or 17. Travis Brown was super legit, real dangerous. Yeah. Arlofsky was a bad motherfucker dude. I went to a Travis Brown fight once with you. Travis Brown was a bad motherfucker. Travis Brown completely changed the way people look at the clinch because he elbowed so many people into oblivion. If you got a hold of a single on that guy and your head was right there or a double, anything where you're trying to take him down against the cage and hit your head is right there. That fucking dude. Boom. Yeah. We literally called him Travis Brown elbows. Yeah. Because everybody does it, but Travis Brown did it better than anybody. That in those, those forearm shots that people take, you're like, oh, yeah, it's brutal. It's such a brutal sport. It's so crazy. That is so fucking crazy. Yeah. I would not fuck with somebody. I mean, I don't fuck with anybody, but like if I saw that guy be the last guy, I'd be like, oh, so many people out there in the world now know how to fight. And now as a kid, almost no one knew how to fight. There was like wrestlers, never fuck with wrestlers. And there was like, oh, the guy, he's golden gloves boxer. Oh, don't fuck with him. Yeah. Like everybody knew who you couldn't couldn't fuck with him. Now everybody knows something and kids, they learn just by what, they'll watch the Charles Olivera fight and they'll practice in their fucking living room. And next thing, you know, they know how to do a real triangle. Yeah. Like you can watch a lot of shit on YouTube videos and learn without even taking classes. And kids are like learning some athletic kids, like a kid that maybe is really good at baseball, really good at soccer or something like that. You can teach him some moves pretty quick and he's going to know how to deliver it. My oldest does it twice a week and he's athletic kid. He's got some proficiency and he keeps moving up, you know, and killing him. Well, we're going to have to start with those. We also start, we fuck around because he's a two little boys. This dude will immediately like go just put me in an arm bar and I'm like, yeah. And the only thing that like saves me is that I'm still so much bigger, you know, and stronger. But I'm like, you might have to start taking classes or something. The clock is ticking. When he's like 16 or 17. Oh, no, no, no, no. That would be a problem. Well, that's also a weird problem too because all of a sudden you can do things to men. Like I remember thinking that when I was like 16, 16 and 17 when I was competing, I also not can beat men up. I was like, this is crazy. Yeah. This is weird because all my life men were terrifying. Like men were men get angry, men will hit you, run from the men. And now I'm like, how fuck this cool and ass man up. It was crazy. It was a crazy transition. I can see his wheels turning down. Right. So he's going to know he can do it now. So he's going to want to do it. Come on, dad. Yeah. What are you going to do, dad? Yeah. Like you're fucking grounded. Fuck you. I'm not grounded. I'll choke you out. What? And you're in the fucking hallway. You can't even get away. Yeah. And he's 17 now. He probably weighs a buck 80. And they kind of ripped. He's got abs. They get embarrassed. Oh, yeah. He called us and they're like, hey, he's really good. They're like, he's really got a skill with this. Well, Jitsu is athleticism is massive, but also intelligence. It's hard to be dumb and get really good at Jitsu. He's a smart kid. The other thing that's very different. And I think you see this when you have more than one. Because you have two kids or more. You start to see that like, oh, some qualities in people's personalities are innate qualities. Right? Yes. Like you just, especially because you have your one, you're like, oh, this is what a kid's like. And then you're like, oh, the other kid's not like this. They have these other qualities. Right. And one thing about him that you just pick up on by being his parent is that he's like, he's very competitive, very, very competitive. And so he's intelligent, he's competitive, and he's athletic. And so you go like, oh, yeah, he's just very driven. You know, but you should probably compete. Because when you're young, if you learn how to compete when you're young, oh my God, it has so many benefits for the rest of your life. Because it's so scary. And then you overcome it. And if you could become successful at it, you kind of feel like you could be successful at anything. Yeah. Because you've been successful at something that's scary. Exactly. He got into it. He got into running. Oh boy. So like a couple of years ago, I was getting ready. We were going to do a 5K and I was way out of shape. I was like, I start running. So the first thing I did is I ran a mile and he tried to run. I mean, he was like, you know, let's say like seven years old or something. And I ran the mile in like, I don't know, 930. It was, I mean, I was dying. Right. I was like, fuck, oh my God. He couldn't quite keep up with me in this one mile run. He's the seven year old kid. This year, he ran two miles in 1238. Whoa. So he ran six and six. Cause he didn't like the fact that he wasn't good at running. He just fuck and he would get up and be like, I'm going to go train. I'm like, oh, Jesus Christ, you got a psycho. He's a psycho. He's a psycho. He's running up hills and shit. And I was, he's like, come with me. And so like, I have an adult with me. He's just running up and down this hill over and over. like, yeah, he's like very, but it's self. It's not me going, you got to go run. Right. You know? Come with me and so like I have an adult with me. He's just running up and down this hill over and over and over. Like yeah, he's like very sad. But it's self, it's not me going right. You got to go run right. You know, it's inside his head. It's in his head. Wow. Yeah. If I was a coach, I'd be like, get that kid. You know, yeah, crap. Grab him. That's what we want. Yeah, yeah. Which you want. It's an intelligent psycho. Mm hmm. You know, intelligent, driven, hyper competitive psycho hyper competitive. The other kid, my youngest, will walk up a flight of stairs. He goes, my legs hurt. And like, what? He goes, I want to go rest. And like, he just walked up a fucking flight of stairs. He's like, I know, but my legs are killing me. Like, it's completely different. So funny that that that is such the case. Yeah. It's such the case. It's interesting because there is this thought of like what a personality is. Like where does it all come from? It's like a combination of so many different things. It's a combination of nature, nurture, genetics. It's everything. You're right. My answer is like, suppose to things that bring that out of you. Yes. Like imagine if he had never been exposed to the running, never done Jiu Jitsu, never done anything. Then what happens to that? Yeah. The other kid, he's like, you can tell he has like comedians mindset. Yeah. He's a complainer. You know, like every like funny person complains. Oh, yeah. Like the other day, I was in the writer's room. I ate something. I was like in the writer's room, but my stomach was like fucking me up all day. I was on a toilet. I was like, it was like brutal to get through the day. I get a little macro. So I get home. And I, he's in my room watching TV. And I lay down. I go, can you turn that off? Because like, I want to rest. Like my stomach is bothering me. And he goes, oh, you want to snooze? I want to see seven. Because you want to snooze? He goes, I almost fucking threw up today. What? He goes, yeah, my stomach's my, dude, I've been on the toilet for like three hours. Please. And he goes, all right, why don't you have your little snooze? I'll go out here. He's like very animated, you know. And hilarious. And then he's somewhere sooped. This is insane. He's something where it's suit. And I'm like walking out of the house. And he goes, hey, I go, he goes, where's my suit? I go, what? What? And then I'm not kidding you. He goes, I look like a fucking asshole. I go, what are you talking about? He goes, you're in a suit. I look like an asshole. He goes, get me a suit. And I go, oh my god. You don't need a suit. And he goes, yes, I do. Why do you get to look like that? I look like a fucking asshole. He goes, all right. He's always, yeah, I mean, he's always like complaining. That's hilarious. And it's just funny. Because we really like, an amazing sitcom scene. I know. You had a kid like that? It's, I look like a fucking asshole. That would be an amazing scene. We call him Joe Pesci. He's always talking like that. He's always bothered, you know, he's always hot. And you're like, this is not a big deal, man. He's like, yes, it is. That's all there is. It's just fired up about shit. That's hilarious. But that's also in him. Right, I mean, it's part of his personality. Yeah. It's weird. It's like kids get something from you. They get some genetics. And then they kind of get whatever that gift the universe gives. Totally. That kid is not like either one of us. Like where'd you come from? Christina thinks that he's, every time he's like fired up about something and we're like, look at this kid, she goes, that is you. Yeah. I went, she goes, yes. Well, you have a little of that in you. Yeah. You definitely do. I remember one of the most impressive things about our sober October thing was you got the flu. And so you were out of it for like a couple of days. And so the moment you got back where you felt good, you ran like 15 miles. And then you were like, yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Probably we were all going nuts. Yeah, because I was like, I can't be like, dead, dead last. You know what I mean? Like I was like, I just can't. I was in the gym at the old studio with Ari. And Ari is like, could I use your dream? I'm like, of course. He's like, after the podcast, I'm going to work out. I've got to get my numbers in. And so I was hanging out with him while he was rowing. And he's got a fucking six pack. Yeah. I was like, this is crazy. Go, Ari, you have a six pack now. I go, you're ripped. I go, you look great. You look cool, thanks. And he was just fucking rowing. He rode for a full hour, man. It was that was a chest trap on. Like, racking up his numbers. It was the same voice in his head going, don't be dead last. Because we all knew you were crazy. The ass was going to be going like totally psycho. So we were just like, we can't be dead last of the rest of us. Ari was trying to beat me. Yeah. 100%. I know he was. Yeah, but you were like pissing blood. We were like, guys, guys, this guy's a little too crazy. Well, I decided one day to just take it, to do the, I wanted to see like, what can I do? That was the day I did seven hours of cardio. I think I'd set off my alarm in my gym for my sweat. Jesus. I set off the fire alarm from just being so hot. Video of it. It was a video on Instagram of the puddles on the ground are the most preposterous thing. I sweat puddles. I think your wife too, right? Because my, she was like, I do this anymore. She was like, what are you doing? Like you're not spending any time with your family. You're just like so obsessed with this thing. It was like I, I remet an old friend. Yeah. That's what it was like for me. It was like, oh, I forgot that guy's in there. Yeah. I don't necessarily like that guy. Yeah. He scares me. It's like I don't like something. Scares me not not not being dramatic. This is what it is that that could derail your life. So you could, that obsession could take over again with something with anything. And then I won't be doing anything but that thing. Like, it's one of the reasons why I like to do a lot of stuff. It's because I don't want one obsession. Yeah, I don't want that one, that brain to focus on, it's not good for mental health. It's really good for success. Like if you're really, really gonna get really good at one thing, that's the thing. But for overall happiness, I don't find that to be appealing. I don't like that feeling. Like that sober October feeling was kind of crazy. This is kind of why I feel like I, I'm trying to embrace a lifestyle that's not, that's accessible but not dramatic. Like I could go and go, I'm gonna do, you know, two and a half hours at the gym every day. Right. And I'm sure my results would show. Right. I want to look like Iron Man or whatever. But my problem is like, is like, it's like not, that doesn't feel like, I'm gonna run out at some point, be like this is unsustainable. So I'd rather- It's gonna take from your other things. Yeah, exactly. I gotta do it where like, I'll do an hour and change of training and then try to dial in eating and like, that's, you can keep that. Yes. That's sustainable. Right, exactly. Yeah. But it's like, what are you trying, it depends on what you're trying to do. So like we both have families, we both have a lot, you know there's a lot of people in our lives. You can't just be a maniac and focus on one thing. You can't. Ten out. Like Gordon Ryan, that's his Abu Dhabi belt up there. Oh yeah. He trains 365 days a year. Yeah. He doesn't take fuck you for Christmas, fuck you for your birthday. Oh, it's easier to- That's his exact. Well, that's how he became the best of all time. Like, if you really wanna do something- That's the sacrifice. But he doesn't have kids. He's not married. He's only, you know, now he's 30. But he did all this when he was in his mid 20s. That's also the age to be that obsessed with him. Exactly. Especially if you wanna do this one thing that everybody else's work and really hard too. You gotta figure out how to separate yourself. And it's like, if you're running an ultramarathon and you have 200 miles to run and you take time and you're running and you're running at a really good pace, maybe even a faster pace than other people, but then you take naps. You take a nap for an hour or two hours or three hours. And then you say, they're gonna be better this way and then I'll be revived. I'm still really ahead. That guy who's not gonna take any naps is gonna beat you. Yeah. Cause he's just gonna keep running. He's gonna keep running. And before you know it, a lot of these are ultra's. Like the guy who wins, they win by like 10 hours. They win by nutty. Courtney Do Walter, the lady who was on our podcast once, she ran the Bigfoot 240, I think. And I think she was like eight hours ahead of the second place. I kind of don't understand the mentality that the ultra people have. Like the dark. Yeah, I'm like, I don't get it. It's dark. How do you actually get there? Well, you have to be a complete nut and then you have to wanna test yourself to the point of almost death. Because that's what these people are doing. They're running like goggins. He ran one of these fucking things. Got wrapped. So wrapped on my locus was when you worked out too hard. Your body can't recover and you start pissing brown. Real bad. Your kidneys are breaking down. He had to go to the hospital. Went to the hospital, got out of the hospital, completed the race. And then he did like 100 pushups. And he's fucking like this. He's like, he's getting to the door of death. Just the door. And that's how he feels normal. Yeah, he feels alive by like getting his body to, and he's 50 by the way. I can crazy. All right, so maniac. Did you watch by the way? Did you watch the Anthony Joshua Jake Paul? I did. Of course I did. Yeah, I would have guessed. Yeah, I had to watch it. Spectacle. Yeah. Look, that guy did great for someone who's been boxing for like less than a decade. He has had no real professional opponents other than Tommy Fury that were legitimate world-class boxers. How do you remember what happened in the Tommy? He lost a close decision, but it was a good fight. It was a good fight though. He's a good boxer. If he wasn't a YouTuber, people would be way more impressed with him. The problem is he was like a famous kid and then no one took him seriously. Yeah. Oh, then he started to with more spectacle-ish fights. People were like, oh, this is you. He thought Nate Robinson, like basketball player. Yeah, but the thing is he's not Nate Robinson. He's not dead. And it's the way he did it that I was trying to tell people, like, no, no, no. That was skillful. So there's like boxing matches where you see two guys just slugging it out, one guy lands a punch. Yeah. Yeah, he landed a good punch. What Jake did is he slid back and landed a punch. Yeah. He's not going to ask lettuces on the lawn with the intelligence, the technique. I'm like, he's not even doing it that long. And he's also hyper competitive, even though he's wealthy. You know, like you would assume that wealth would take away your drive for competition. But he has it. He's also nuts, right? Just the fact that he's willing to fight the two-time heavyweight champion, former Olympic gold medalist, a guy who's gigantic in his project built like a Greek god. Yeah. And you're going to stand, and he's a one-punch killer. And you're going to stand in front of that guy. And he avoided shots till the sixth run. He just started getting tired. Yeah. He has movement in that fight was crazy. It was very good. Yeah. He was very good. He was really keeping him moving around the whole ring. And then you can't afford to get tired. And then you get tired. That's the thing is, like, he gets tired and a lot of his fights and a later rounds. And you should really sort that out. Because if he had a much bigger gas tank, like if he was training with some of these elite world class strength and conditioning coaches and just worked on his cardio, he'd be beating way more guys. You think so? Yeah. 100%. But it's like what he's doing is learning how to box. And he's boxing. He's training hard, for sure. But to get that world class gas tank, you need like a Sam Colavita. You need like a Nick Curseon. You need like these plyometrics experts that have got heart rate monitors on you. And they're checking when your recovery is ready. And go. Yeah. Yeah. You need guys monitoring your recovery, monitoring your heart rate variability, your VO2 max. I couldn't believe. I don't know. And maybe he is. Maybe I'm wrong. Maybe he is doing that. But whatever it is, it's not enough. It's not enough. Because in so many of his fights, like the Nate Diaz fight, he gets tired in the later rounds. In the beginning, look, if that guy is only fighting three rounds, he's a fucking handful. He's really good. He clocked Anthony Joshua. He did hit him with a big right hand. He did. Didn't have any effect. Yeah. Because he's, you know, really, he weighed 216, but he's done, he doesn't even have abs right at 260. He could easily weigh 190. I'm sure he could make 190. Yeah. Anthony Joshua's gigantic. So big. He's so big. He's so much bigger. So of course, like his punch that he knocks Tyrone Woodley out cold with Joshua just eats it. Yeah. Because he's a giant. Yeah. He's a fucking giant man. He's so big. He's so big. He's terrible. I give, I give Jake so much credit for stepping into that ring. Bro, he got hit with a bomb. A right hand bomb. When he got hit with that too, I don't, I don't know if enough has been made of the fact that, I mean, it was absolutely devastating. But the fact that he had awareness immediately to go like, like he looked at how he was like, oh shit. Like wow. He was like, yeah. I think he went and said fight knowing that was probably going to happen. And ultimately, the big win for him would be that he was even willing to do it and that he could do well for a little bit for a little bit. Yeah. And then eventually just deal with the fact that Anthony Joshua is going to connect with a bomb and breaks his jaw in two places. Yeah. And he's fucked. His jaw's wired shut. Now he lost teeth. See, I mean, he made it to the six round. Yeah. Pretty wild. Did they put your teeth back in when they pop out like that? Or did they gone forever? I don't know. I don't know. But it's wired shut for like six weeks now. Yeah. You got to eat nothing but protein chicks. Bro. It's a, I mean, look, it's a crazy world. The thing is that I would hope that he recognizes is right now he's doing great and he's only whatever he is. 28, I think. Is he 28? I think he is. How old is Jake Paul? He's young. God, Danny. He's probably made 300 million plus in his boxing career. How old is Jake Paul? No, he's 29. And look at that. So he's 28 years old. 29 next month. Don't do this very long because there's a price that you pay that is not worth it. It's not worth it. And that price is depression, deep depression, a severe brain imbalance that's going to lead you to addiction. It leads so many people to impulsive behavior. So many people become gambling addicts, drug addicts, alcoholics after their fighting career. It's, you could only take so much. And there's a certain, like that one that he got from Joshua, ooh, you know, say if you have like a punch card, you have like so many questions. You can get in your life, which I believe you do. I believe it. I believe there's a certain number. That one was like 10 bunches. Yeah. That was like, yeah. There was a lot of concussions in that one punch. Sure. That was real damage. Like if someone's breaking your jaw in two places, the inside of your fucking head is there's a lot of damage going on in there too. Fuck yeah. Just don't do it for, I know too many guys that like, they want it to be cool guys and they kept sparring like deep into their 30s and 40s. And it would go to the gym and do hard spot, not your just to boxing, boxing sparring. So they're just standing in front of each other, slugging it out to get bloody noses. They laugh about it and think it was cool. And then they go about their day. I'm like, man, that's gonna get you. Cause at a certain point in time, that fucking depression is unavoidable. It just creeps it. You just, every, you just, oh, you don't feel good. You just don't feel good. Like you're just like, oh, all the time. Just, oh, oh, there's a whole day. It's like that. Oh, yeah. You know that feeling when you're running over? That's their life. That's no. That's no way to lose. And it varies. Some guys don't get that. And he definitely doesn't have to do that. No, not anymore. No. If he could do anything, like I can do anything. If he could do what he did in boxing, he could do anything. Just don't do it forever. Yeah. It's just one of them things where it's like, the price you pay is eventually not worth it. Yeah. Awesome that he did. I mean, awesome that he, he made, he probably made $100 million dollars. So, you know, Jesus Christ, that's so much. I don't know what he got paid. But also it's probably worth another 100 million in publicity. Easily. Because people loved watching him get knocked out. They did. They also had to say that guy has fucking balls. And he does. He earned it. He earned it. That guy has ever, he, if he doesn't have your respect after that fight, because a lot of people like, oh, you're going to fight Jervante Davis. He's only 135 pounds. He's like, okay, I'll fight a guy 110 pounds bigger. So you've, you couldn't pay me. You could not pay me enough to do that. Guys got balls. He's got nothing but respect for me. Yeah. Nothing but respect. Just don't, don't do it forever. There's, there comes the time where the cost is not worth it. Because some people never return. That's what you have to understand. There's, there's people that get out like, if you listen to Randy Koteur talk now, talks fine. He's great. He was knocked out a bunch of times. Chocolatel knocked him out. They knew when to dip out. New one to dip out. And you know, Randy also like really didn't even begin as UFC career until it's late 30s, if I'm correct. He was at 35, it might have been 34 or 35 when he had his first UFC fight. I was there. That was in like fucking in the middle of nowhere in the style. He's pretty old, right? Oh yeah, for you. He was in a elite wrestler. He was in elite Greco Roman wrestler. And then he got into MMA late in life. Back in the time, the days when you would be able to wear shoes, they used to wear wrestling shoes when they fought. Really? Yeah. Oh wow. The early days used to be able to wear shoes. But like he's, he's fine. There's a bunch of guys that are still fine. But there's a bunch of guys that are really struggling, really struggling. Don't get there. Don't get there. Scary. Dip out before that happens. It's real true. No one to dip out and have friends that tell you when to dip out. You got to, you have a coach, a coach that doesn't say, well, let's give it one more shot. Yeah. Like don't, that's not, you only want to be doing that if you're trying to be the best in the world. That's my opinion. I mean, there's a lot of guys who are never going to be the best in the world and they still love competing. But and that's great too. And there's a lot of guys that make a living doing it and they make good money and, you know, and they feed their families. And I'm not just, I'm not saying, but if you have an option, I don't think it's you unless you're a fucking complete maniac, absolutely obsessed. You want to do it more than you want to do anything else in life. Because if you don't feel like that, there's a guy out there that does. Yeah. And that guy's going to fuck you up. Yeah. That guy's going to come and take your soul away from you. I always think of Mike Tyson when he was 20. Yeah. I was like, if you're not that dedicated, you should be fighting because my Tyson is not one person. There's a bunch of those guys out there. There's Alex Pereira. There's all these guys out there in the world that are that obsessed. You know, there's all these Islam Makachas and Ilia Tarporia. There's these guys out there in the world that are just driven to do it. And if you want to fight, if you really want to fight, if you run into one of those guys and you're not doing what they're doing, you're going to get tuned up. Alex, I didn't realize how big he is. Giant. I did not realize that until the photo of him next to somebody I know, like a friend. And I was like, there's a lot of chatter about him fighting in the heavyweight division now. Really? There's a lot of chatter about it. There's a lot of chatter about him perhaps even fighting serial gone. I don't know how much of this is true. I haven't talked to Dana about it. But it's not an illogical move. He's 240 pounds right now. 240 plus. And he's like, what? 6, 4, 6, 6, 5, 6, 6, 4, 6, 5. And make no mistake about that guy can knock out heavyweights. No doubt about it. He hits harder than anyone they've ever recorded, ever, on that fucking stupid punch machine. You know that thing? Yeah. Francis and Gano got like a 129 on it, which is crazy. He got a 190. 190? 190. When you watch him hit it, you're like, what the fuck? You want to see it? You should just see it just to feel what it would feel like to get hit in the head by that. Oh my God. Like that guy is out there in the world. You know what I'm saying? Like you think you're going to be a journeyman and you're going to all of a sudden, you know, be looking across the octagon and that guy's standing there, chama. Like he's going to hunt you. He's going to hunt you. And you're not in that space that he's in. He's in a killer-be-killed space. And you're in a, this is fun to compete. Yeah, it's not the same thing. Not the same thing in the world. Watch this video because it's fucking bananas. When he hits it, you just go. Everybody around him goes, oh, like what the fuck? They say, watch this. See that? One more time. One more time. Well, you're doing the beginning? That if you don't, the sound is so crazy. Yeah, that's your face. You know what? Mark Goddard. Mark Goddard was the referee in his fight with Khalil Roundtree. And he came up to me right after the fight. Like I got into the octon. They were going to announce Alex Pereira, winner by knockout. Goddard walks up to me, goes, the sound that guy makes. He goes, I've been doing this for 20 years. He goes, the sound is ungodly. Really? It's ungodly. It's different. And you can see when you're hearing it doing commentary, you see to look on the guy's faces. When they get hit, they're like, oh, this is real. This is different. Yeah. This is different dudes out there, man. There's different dudes out there. And that's a different, not just of dedication and drive and focus, because he definitely has all that. But it's genetics. That dude is a legitimate Amazon warrior. Like he comes from a tribe in the Amazon. And he goes back to that tribe. And he puts on the traditional outfits that they wear and the face paint and hangs out with them. And it's like, yo. He would have been the fucking tribal warlord. He would have been the chief. Yeah. I mean, that's his ancestry. Fuck me. Yeah, he speaks to the language. Oh, he does like the dialect. I think. I don't want to misspeak. But I'm pretty sure him stands with their saying, because he's talking to them. Not just Portuguese, like Brazil, but they have. That whole Amazon area is so fascinating, man. Have you been to the Amazon? No. I went once. Really? Yeah. What'd you do? My uncle was working for an oil company in Peru. And there's a part of Peru called the Gethos in the North with his is the jungle. And I went with him. And we went out on the Amazon. And then we pulled up to some place. And he's like, we're going to eat here. It's not like fucking Terry Blacks. Right? This is like some prick and a shack. And the guy just kept praying. I was like, what am I eating? He was like, I'll tell you later. Piranha. It was all kinds of weird shit. Well, we eat. I mean snakes and rabbits and Amazonians shit that I've never even heard of. And I would take bites and be like, what is this? Later. I'll tell you later. And I was like, OK, they made me eat all this stuff. And I was like, this is fucking crazy. But when you're out there, yeah, you are kind of wowed. You're just in awe of everything around you. And like just the fact that this is on the planet with us. And you can make a trek to a place like this where there's species of not just animals, flowers, and trees, and things that don't exist anywhere else. And it's so rich with everything that's there. It's an awe-inspiring kind of thing. It hasn't even been documented. There's so many pharmaceutical drugs that come from plants they find in the Amazon. It's wild. It's such a crazy place. You know the craziest part about it? The density of the Amazon rainforest is essentially man-made. Man-made? Man-made. Yeah. They didn't know that until fairly recently. Those are agriculture plants that grew out of control. And they constantly find, but they'll find like a species of a bird. And they'll be like, this is the only place we've ever seen this bird. It doesn't exist anywhere else on the planet. It all used to be populated, too. That's what's really crazy. Yeah. They do, have you seen that lidar stuff they do? Yes. And they find all these ancient structures. Yes. The white man came and brought the kudos. And there's still like these tribes that live there and literally have low darts. Oh yeah. That hunt. That's how they kill their meals. My friend Paul Rosalie lives there. Lives there, lives in the Amazon. And he's got this organization that's working to try to preserve the rainforest. One of the things they do is they find these loggers. And these loggers generally, they're poor guys that just get forced to do these jobs. And he pays them more than they get paid as loggers to protect the rainforest. So instead of cutting it down. Now you have a job where you get paid more. But now your job is to protect the forest. So they plant more in everything? Yeah. They plant more. They stop people from, I don't know if they plant honestly. They stop people from cutting things down. The problem with planting, and this is where the Amazon gets really weird, the Amazon soil natively is not conducive for growing a lot of stuff. So there's a type of soil that's man-made that they do not know how they did it. They do not know when they started doing it. But it's called teraprata. Is that what it's called? And it's a thick, dark man-made soil. So it's essentially compost and all these different process and carbon and a bunch of things that they get into this man-made layer that's all over the Amazon. Wow. That whole area. We thought it, like, so there, you know, this lost city of Z story. So the lost city of Z was that movie, you ever say it. Was it Percy Richards? What was his name? Percy Faucet? Percy Faucet. So this guy goes down to the Amazon a long time ago. He comes back with his story, European traveler, comes back with his story of golden cities. And it's amazing. And so he comes back, he reports his findings, and then 100 years later, like a new search party goes down there to look for this place. And they don't find nothing. Like, oh, that guy was full of shit. But it was, he wasn't full of shit. It was all real. It's just that he brought the kudos. So they brought disease and literally wiped out millions of people and the jungle just consumed whatever structures were there in 100 years. Which is like, look at Detroit. Detroit is freezing cold. It's nowhere near as tropical. Yes, of course. This is the Amazon. But Detroit houses are just trees are growing straight through them. It's only been like 50 years. So in 100 years in the Amazon, everything was gone. All the people were dead. All the structures which were wood were all just like consumed by the rainforest. Whoa. Yeah. And they didn't even know this until they started doing this lidar stuff. And so there's lidar stuff when they're flying over with this, it's a type of laser. And essentially it looks into the ground and found structures. Yeah. Right through the trees. They can like scan things. And they're finding aqueducts and roads and like the complex irrigation systems, big giant symmetrical structures like this. This is all covered by jungle. Like these were all buildings and streets. Like they had millions of people living in the Amazon, millions. This is like the same, you know, the theory that you know how like UAPs have become more, like there's congressional testimonies about it. And everybody's always talking about where are these visitors coming from? Right. But like one of the theories is that they're not visitors from somewhere else. Yeah. They're visitors from our own planet. That is an interesting thing. I was always interesting, especially just because we know how much of our planet is actually unexplored. Like we always think of it as like, oh, we know the planet. Right. But like most of the ocean is unexplored. Like a huge number of, and then obviously things like the jungle where you're just discovering like, oh, look, there's a whole civilization in there. Well, there was a civilization. Yes. I think the Amazon rainforest people that they encounter now, the uncontacted people are probably as survivors. Yeah. Because the thing is, during the Ice Age, the equator was lush. So these areas probably had like a perfect relationship. Yeah. Huge populations, perfect climate. I mean, think about all the incredible structures that you find in those areas. Like the ink and structures and the Mayan structures. Like they were obviously like a very advanced civilization back then. Nothing makes sense when you're there. Like I've been three times to Machia Picchu and that you're always, you went to Machia Picchu. Yeah, I went three times. And every time, because you see photos and stuff, when you're actually there, you're like, it's just your brain just goes, I don't know, it doesn't. Cause it's all theories. Right. Everyone, you'll have a guide who's like, this is how, and you're like, yeah, but this is your guess, motherfucker, you don't know that. Cause it just doesn't add up in your head how this could be built up in the Andes. Like, well, the predominant theory by the alternative historians is that water was that high back then in that area. Yeah. And that there've been some enormous seismic changes, you know, earthquakes and the like, which is one of the reasons why they made those stones the way they did in the first place. Like if you see the stones, they're cut like jigsaw puzzle pieces and slipped into place. Yeah. The reason why they did that is because that would better redistribute any energy that would come from an earthquake. But like, so instead of like brick stacked on top of bricks, they're all like interlocking with each other with a bunch of different angles. There's their immense. If these pieces are so immense and it's laying perfectly flush against the next piece, it's not like. They're locking with each other with a bunch of different angles. There's their immense... If these pieces are so immense... ...and its laying perfectly flush against the next piece... It's not like, kind of, sloppily thrown together. It looks like an architecture firm designed it and hired, you know, like that there were cranes putting... You're like, how the fuck would this be put together in 1500? Yeah, it's really, really difficult to figure out. Yeah. They don't know. And they don't even know the date. The date is silly. Because they're not... What they're basing the date off of... There's a bunch of different structures. There's the base structure, which is way more complex and way bigger. Like, expect socks that have one on and a bunch of these other places... ...that they have layers of civilization. It's really clear. Yeah. Like, the layers above it are like less sophisticated than the giant megalithic stuff that's below it. And yet they all try to attribute it to the same time. The problem is they get married to a timeline. Yeah. And once they get married to that timeline, and then they go, oh, well, that's just what it is. That's just what it is. But they don't know what it is. Of course. They just... They've discovered this new stone structure that is in Oregon. And it's 18,000 years old. They didn't even think up until fairly recently. They didn't think that people were here 18,000 years ago. There's a structure in Oregon that's 18. Yeah, let me see if I can find it. I think... Yeah, here it is. I found it. I always feel like when those... The experts give you the... A bunch of fun, Jamie. Yeah. Testing yields new evidence of human occupation 18,000 years ago in Oregon. So they just keep... So this is a stone wall. It's pretty cool. Um, so they found camel teeth fragments under layer of volcanic ash from an eruption in Mount St. Helens. It was dated over 15,000 years ago. Team also uncovered two finely crafted orange. I don't know what that word is. Agate scraper. Agate scraper. I guess it's a type of stone. One in 2012 preserved bison blood residue and another in 2015 buried deeper in the ash. So they did the radio carbon dating on this stuff and they came up with a date of 18,250 years before present time. Fuck! That's so goddamn long ago. The date in association with stone tools suggested the rim-brocked draw rock shelter is one of the oldest human occupation sites in North America. See if you can find what that looks like. So there's a few places in America where people are like, okay, what the fuck is this? And one of them that's really interesting, what is perplexity? I have to say about this. The site is a shallow rock shelter about three meters deep, 20 meters long on a basalt rim near the town of Riley and Harnidge County, Oregon at the northern edge of the Great Basin. Interesting. This stuff is so interesting to me. Yeah. Because there's a weird one in Montana. Have you seen the sage wall in Montana? This one's really weird. So this one is actually debatable, apparently. So there are some people that are geologists that look at this and say, this could be a natural formation. Another people look at it and go, yeah, but it has like legit tooling on it. So this is a wall that's on a piece of private property in Montana, like just looking at that image. Boy, that looks a lot like people made it. Yeah, that looks a lot like people made it. So there's an argument though that there are similar but not as uniquely man-made looking structures that are not that are definitely not man-made. Wait. So this is a debate is that this might not be man-made? Right. Right. This might be naturally occurring. Exactly. What are the odds that that is? What is that? Like what is that? Is that well, the fun thing is of an ancient civilization or is that just a geological formation? Well, the funny thing is in that image, I lean more towards I could see how you could make a case of a natural formation perhaps. But on the other ones where things look more stacked, it feels like that second image below. No, I think that's AI. Oh, okay. So I was trying to be careful which ones I'm showing you. But when you look at it from the top, that's kind of crazy. Yeah, that is kind of crazy. There's parts of it though that look like, there's stuff around that that just doesn't look as uniquely man-made, but it is without a doubt weird. Because if it turns out that people did make this thing and apparently it goes deep into the ground, like there's some cuts that looks like. And then there's also some evidence that looks like somebody might have been working on the stone, like drill holes or something. I forget what it was. But look, look at these. Yeah, that looks like. Okay, this is not that. That's comparing it to the stuff that's in Peru, which has some of the craziest stuff. Peru has some of the craziest stuff in the world. Look at that. Look at that angle. Go back to that one right there. Look what the fuck is that? That's crazy. Other nubs on any of these rocks. That's a good question. But some of them like, boy, that looks really fucking suspicious. You've looked up, I don't know if we talked about the lines of Nasca before. Oh yeah. But do you know about the mummies that tried to act on mummies if they found that area? Uh-uh. Oh boy. No. Oh boy. Okay, so they've always had artwork that depicted these three finger, three toad beings with big eyes. It's a part of like ancient Peruvian artwork. They're dated back to like a thousand years. They've found these mummified remains of the weirdest looking fucking creatures you've ever seen in your life. They're three feet tall. They have big heads, three fingers and three toes and they're dead. And then they do CT scans on them. They have all the ligaments and structure of a living being. But with, they look at different scapula than us. And I think, oh, they don't have a sternum. But they have all, they have the ribs that we have. I think the same amount of ribs. But they're structures different. But it's a real structure. Like when you see the structure with the CT scan, you see flash and tissue, these things. Bro, this is all in Peru. So there's all these little metallic implants on this thing too. But this is the structure of its body. And as it goes further, it shows the tissue and everything because it's mummified. So you could see like ligaments and tissue and when you, so this is, there's a bunch of different scans that they did and one of them, the being was pregnant. But look, it has a spinal column. It has all the joints in order. But they're different than it's in that area. It was this. It's this is all in Peru. And it's all in the state. Look, it has a fucking metallic golden implant in its forehead. And look at the size of its head. It looks like a gray. See if you can get some of those images that show the CT scans of the tissue. is the CT scans of the tissue are the weird, it all, all that there is. So it also has fingerprints, which are weird. Like look at that, it has fucking fingerprints. But they're different hours and three digits. Unique fingerprints. They don't know what this is. But my friend Jesse Michaels went down there and saw them in person. He said it was unreal. He said it's really fucking bizarre. Did I tell you when I went to the Lina's, the Naska? No. So I went there. I was in the picture. So like the whole skeleton. My uncle set me up to go see them with my dad. And so we got into what was a cartel plane that was confiscated by the government. It was now like a like a proving government plant, like a military plane. But it was really like four seats in the back, two pilots in the front. I think two propellers, right? One of those types of planes. The best way to see the lines is in a chopper so you can hover. But we went on a plane. And we're like, I mean, you can't believe what you're seeing, right? Right. You're flying over and they take us and then like the middle of it, my dad's like, I need to pee. And I'm like, what? He's like, tell the pilot I need to pee. I'm like, we're going to keep doing this. He's like, I have to pee now. Oh boy. So I go to the pilot. I was like, hey, my dad's got to pee. He's like, what? I think he's like, he's like 65. I'm like, he's got to pee. And the guy's like, all right. So we just find some random airstrip, I think, in Peace Corps or something. And then how long does it take to do that? I forget. I mean, we had to go out of our way. And then he pees. How long did it take? I mean, for us to get to the airstrip, probably like, it was out of the way. So maybe like another 20 minutes or something. Oh boy. Yeah. And I was like, dude, he's like, what am I supposed to do? I was like, I don't know. But didn't you fucking pee before we got in this thing? He's like, yeah, but I got to pee again. All right. And then they just like walk around and they find an oil canteen that was discarded on the runway. And they're like, this is for your dad so that if he has to pee again. We don't have to lay in the fucking place. And I was like, here you go, dad. It strikes you again. Please piss him this. Did he do it? Yeah. He did. He did. He pissed it. He pissed it again. Oh my god. He pissed in the oil can. And then where he's like, that's pretty neat. Looking at the lines in Alaska. Like, yeah, pretty neat, man. Really bizarre. It's kind of funny too to think about. Show me the images of the like the red ones where it shows the tissues and the ligaments. The fact that some people aren't wowed by things like this. Do you know what I mean? Jay Anderson had a good one. He had a bunch of good, because he did a piece on it too. Yeah. Well, you have to be out of your fucking mind. You're not be wowed by this. Yeah. I know. But don't you feel like half the population is like, oh, that's cool. Half the population is asleep. Yeah. They're all on TikTok. It's all rotten. They're all just social media is like, transform their attention. They're locked in on nonsense on things that don't have any bearing on their life whatsoever. And that's where they're focusing on six hours a day. Yeah. That's a lot of people. And then you show them something like this. And they're like, this is completely bananas. Yeah. That's a fucking million. That's a fucking million. Yeah. It's a fucking alien. It might have been a kind of human being. So there's a bunch of different ones. Everybody knows about Neanderthals. But there's also the Hobbit people in the island of Flores. There's three-foot tall human beings that look probably like a Hobbit, like a little chimping. Look at that fucking fucking egg. Like, what is that? And the thing is, it's like, if you just saw the outside, you'd go, oh, that's a cool structure, or it's cool sculpture rather. But then when you see the actual ligaments and tendons, and all the stuff inside of it, you go, oh, this is a living being, whatever the hell it is. And they all have three toes and three fingers. It just strikes me too that they're like this is the primary conversation. Look at that. We're having, though. I mean, look at that. I know. How it's saying is that it's an alien, man. They're very different. They also, they have different shaped heads. Like, there's a difference between, you know, how many did they find? Oh, there's quite a few of them. There's quite a few of them. That's a monterat. Is that the bigger one? That's the biggest one of the names they gave it? Yeah, they gave it a name. So this is the largest one and the most impressive. And she has these metallic implants. She's got the one on her forehead and she's got several of them on her body. It's a very weird thing because it seems like it's a living creature, but it's not like a human being. Like, even the way it's skull, those lines in the skull, like we all have those, whatever those, those lines are, they were the plates. Yeah. Their lines are different than ours. Everything's different. Jesus. Yeah. And the way they found these things were, grave robbers find them. So they don't really tell you where they found them. They lie about them. They find them in Peru. But I mean like, how long ago did this happen? All this is fairly recent. Okay. All this is when the last decade or so, but the really, the focus on it has been over the last year or so where a lot of these scientists have gone down there and take a look at it and guys like Jesse Michaels and some other people. The problem is the country doesn't want them removed for testing, right? Right. But you're going to have to bring equipment down there because testing has to be done. Like we have to figure out what these things are because it seems like it's a life form that is a bipedal, hominid that's different than us that probably lived alongside. By the way, that thing is also 1200 years old. That's old. Yeah. And now 1200 years old. It's not a fake. What if that's the civilization that did those lines, you know? Very well could be. The same civilization that also did all that still structures up there. There might have been living amongst us. There might have been multiple different civilizations in the past that just don't exist anymore. If these things turn out to be real and they do have this enormous head and these weird spin-lea bodies and three fingers and three toes and they start finding more and more artifacts that point to that, that that changes our understanding of what has existed here before. Because whatever that thing is, it's at the very least it's advanced enough to give itself metal implants. Like what's going on there? Where it has a gold circle and its forehead implanted into its skull. What's the point of that? Because gold does have a place in electronics. They use gold in certain electronics. It's got great conductivity. So why does it have what is that thing? If it's a real thing, everybody should be front page. That's what I'm saying. Yeah, look at that. Look at that implant. That's Jay Anderson. He was actually just on. Look at this knee. Yeah. Bro, it's bananas. Look at those eye like the slots for the eyes. Yeah. Like a gray alien. Trig-dactyl, but yeah, they're not. Like a gray alien. And by the way, like people have described when they've had encounters, they've described things that look exactly like that. He fingers, three toes, spindly, big head, large eyes. He went down there and he went down. My friend, Jesse Michaels, went down there and actually touched them. He was the first video. He was in the room while they were doing the scans. He said it's so strange. He said it feels so surreal because it's so obvious that it was a real living thing. I don't understand how that's not like the lead story in the news. Everywhere. Yeah. Meanwhile, they're arguing over everything. Everything else. Whatever the fuck it is. Yeah. Can you believe what's going on with turning point yours? They found aliens. I know. They found alien bodies. Like if you ever wanted alien bodies, whoa, show me your body, that's an alien body. Yeah. The very least is not us. Or maybe it's from here and when extinct or maybe it's in the ocean or the congressional testimony of like high level whistle blowers being like we have these, whatever, this ship, everyone to call it that we've and then it's like in a congressional testimony and everyone's like that's cool. Nobody cares. Nobody cares. Yeah. Everybody's like talking. But it was funny. It was funny. Nicky Muddanah is on stage with the TPUR side. It's crazy. It's really crazy to me. Yeah. That's like, that's not captivating people more. Well, I think, you know, people are in a trance. There's a giant percentage of our population in a trance. That should be the main news other than the wars that should be the main news today. Well, hopefully they're in a trance to watch my new special teacher on Netflix. I like how you did that. Go ahead and move so now. And watch that with your family. Yeah. Wow. Comedy's fucking super important when the world's going crazy. It sure is. When the world is going crazy right now. Yeah. We were talking about the Epstein releases like before we got started. Like first of all, like photo dump and the emails. Fucking nuts. But it's also there. They're doing it so slowly. Mm-hmm. Like you guys have had this stuff for a year. Like, don't we were promised multiple times it's coming. It's coming. Doesn't it seem like you could just throw all that into AI at this stage of the game and just redact the names of the victims and let's go? Yeah, of course. It seems like that would take five minutes. I mean, it feels like, I mean, you can't help but feel like the administration is just like watching their back and that's why it's happening. Watching someone's back. Yeah. I mean, it's all speculative why they haven't released it, but it's not good. It's not good for everybody's confidence. No. So it's not good that this thing was going on, that they had this bizarre blackmail operation running. That's very weird. Very strange. Very weird. But it kind of makes sense. Because if you're a, you know, 60 year old billionaire and you're a freak and you like to get your freak on, but unfortunately you're a gigantic software developer and everybody knows who you are. Yeah. Well, there's, that's the thing is like there's, it makes sense when you go like, oh, some of these dudes really liked visiting that place. It's like, that's the only place they can go. Right. You can't go anywhere else. Right. And that's why they set it up for them. Yeah. Eric Weinstein said that to me once he like, I was like, oh, okay, that makes sense. If you're the former president of the United States, you can't go to a nightclub. Yeah, he said, I think there are people out there that provide experiences for certain people that have a hunger for them. Yes. Yes. And that's also how they compromise people too, right? Oh, yeah. That's how they get you to vote the way they want you to vote and play ball, Bobby. We've got video you suck in a dick. Yeah. What do you want to do? What do you want to do? Yeah. Cause like I bet all those people have something on them. That's how they stay in the game. They have to. It's like, you've skull and bones. You've got to suck the dick. Well, look at like, otherwise we can't trust you for the Epstein shit. Like, look at the level of people that were visiting. I mean, it's all at the highest level of influence power and fame. Yeah. And so you go, yeah, this dude wants to do some wild shit. Can't go to fucking, can't go to cheetahs and get done. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You can't do it. He's got to go somewhere. Yeah. What sounds a private island? Yeah, he can't just like order up a call girl. Uh-uh. It's too risky. Where you going? I'm going to Captain Billionaire's house. Yeah. Suck his dick. Do it every Tuesday. Plus I'm on meth. I keep it secret. Yeah. These guys, it's dark. It's dark. So some guy comes along and says, I can take care of your problem. And then, yeah. And everybody says, oh, trust me, he's a great guy. He's really cool. And he also does this thing. Yeah. Great sense of humor. Yeah. I staff love him. They also do this thing where, you know, it's like you're going to hang out with other famous people so it must be safe. Mm-hmm. Bill Clinton's here. This is just no problem. This is a statement released by the spokesperson or spokesman for Bill Clinton. Oh, let's read that. Yeah. Wait a minute. There's a person who signed it. I'm, my name is Angel Urena. Spokesman. Spokesman for the former President Bill Clinton. Isn't that weird? He's a deputy chief of staff for Bill Clinton. Okay. He's, he's still got a chief of staff. What does he do these days? Epstein files transparency act and poses a clear legal duty on the US Department of Justice to produce the full and complete record of the public demands and deserves that the public demands and deserves. However, what the Department of Justice has really so far in the manner in which it did so makes one thing clear someone or some thing is being protected. We do not know whom what or why. This is like the killer pretending to be the detective. Yeah. We have got to solve this crime. Yeah. We do not know whom. This is the killer joining the search party. We do not know whom. What or why? We have photos of you in a fucking hot tub buddy. But we do know this. We need no such protection accordingly. We call on President Trump to direct attorney general Bondi to immediately release any remaining materials referring to mentioning or containing a photograph of Bill Clinton. This includes without limitation any records that may exist and are subject to disclosure under the act public law 119-38 and act on November 19, 2025 including grand jury transcripts, interview notes, photographs and findings by the, this means a deal was made. So if you release, you have a press release like that. That means the call went well. Yeah. You got a deal in who we're good. We are good. All we have to do is let them run for a third term and we're fine. Look. He's the Clinton chilling in that hot tub too. Hey, I would chill in a hot tub too. It feels nice. Yeah, it feels nice, but it's just like, what's the big deal? You're chilling in a hot tub. If I went to your house and you had a hot tub, like let's all get in the hot tub. I get in there. Come on, take a picture of me and my fuck, dude. I don't even know her. Yeah. Why'd you do that? I don't know. I don't know how old she was. And you got cameras up all over your house. Yeah. Yeah. He knew what he was doing. Oh yeah. Probably watching people do Coke in the bathroom, get cameras of that. They were probably doing all kinds of shit. He was compromising a lot of people. And made a shit ton of money doing it. God damn, he sure did. Boy, that's what's really weird. Like he got gifted a giant mansion to Manhattan by the dude from Victoria. It's too good. Yeah. And that guy was like, yeah, he was just running my finances. But then I didn't realize what kind of guy he was. But I gave him billions of dollars to manage. And you're like, what? Yeah. I see you do. No kind of a guy he was after he got arrested for having sex with underage girls. So then I stopped working with him. Okay. My favorite one was when they were questioning Bill Gates about it. And he goes, well, he's dead now. So you got to be careful. Do you ever see that? No. Oh, it's crazy. That's it. That's crazy. She asked him why he had these interactions with Jeffrey Epstein. And he was essentially saying it was a mistake. I was hoping that he was going to do a lot of work with philanthropy. He was going to help me out with philanthropy. A giga. Right. That's why I mean it was. So many times. But the end result, the final statement that was chilling is like he's dead now. So you have to be careful. Like, what? What does that mean? What do you mean? Be careful to not hang yourself in jail, which is what the official story is. Right. Does that what you mean? Be careful or you'll hang yourself in jail? Is that what you're saying? Yeah. No, it's not what you're saying. You should be careful because someone killed them. Right? Which is what we all think. Which is why there's no fucking, the cameras were down, which is why the guards were asleep, which is why his fucking his gigantic roommate who was a murderer and a drug dealing cop who assassinated people who was built like a fucking gorilla. You see his, you ever see his roommate? No. You never saw Jeffrey Epstein's roommate? Uh-uh. Oh boy. He had a cellmate when he was there. Bro, not only did he have a cellmate. He had a cellmate that murdered several people in drug deals who was a cop. He was a gigantic roided up psychopath. This is the roommate. You can get that guy to kill him for extra cigarettes. That's what my point is. I mean, you're a jail for life. I remember, look at that guy. That guy. That was his fucking roommate. Just imagine what kind of a plan you would have for the biggest defendant in any sort of high level espionage, possibly involving foreign governments. You'd put him in a prison cell, a cage with a guy who's committed four different murders. I think I was a cop. Yes. Look at the build on this motherfucker. Look at the size of this guy. Yeah. This is the guy you put up a murderer. That's nice. Yeah, he's just a sweet guy. You put a murderer, well, he had a bunch of things barking in case anyone came near his property to get back at him. Do you remember that famous forensic? Like a bad. Like a bad. And he testified that the high-oite, I think it's called the high-oite bone that was snapped on Epstein was far more consistent with, as he says, a homicide than bothers me so much he says it like that. Homicide. Yeah. I think he said it was broken in two places. He's like, that's much more consistent with homicide than suicide. Yeah. It was someone strangled him. Someone strangled him from behind. It was also the position. Here it is. Put this. That's OK. That's OK. That's OK. Red doing that. He had relationships with people he said would give to global health, which is an interest I have, not nearly enough to land because in that direction. Now those meetings were a mistake. They didn't result in what he purported and I cut them off. That goes back a long time ago now. So there's nothing new on that. It was reported that you continue to meet with him over several years and that, in other words, a number of meetings. What did you do when you found out about his background? I said, I'm regretted having those dinners. And there's nothing, absolutely nothing new on that. Is there a lesson for you for anyone else looking at this? Well, he's dead. In general, you always have to be careful. And I'm very proud of what we've done in philanthropy. Very proud of the work of the foundation. That's what I get up every day and focus on. Me too. I'm a good guy. Imagine if he was reading for a film. You'd be like, I don't believe award. You just say, I don't believe award. You take two. Let's do this. OK, who wrote this? He's going to just transition from hanging out with this guy. He's dead now to a really proud of the work we've done with philanthropy. Let's shift this conversation. Much more positive place. That's the PR spin. I'm super proud of the work we've done with philanthropy. He got into all that stuff in the first place after the Microsoft stuff. Because Microsoft, at one point in time, had all this anti-competitive accusations. And so he was thought as being this guy that was drowning out competition, was monopolizing. So then he pivoted. It became a philanthropist. It's a good move. It is a good move. You know who else did that? The guy who invented the Nobel Prize. Really? Yeah. Peter Berg told me the story. It's a cool story. So he dies. The guy I forget was first name is. It's the last name is Nobel. He died and everybody called him the merchant of death because he made dynamite. Oh. So he didn't really die, though. It was a fake story. So he saw the stories. He's like, hey, I'm not dead. But oh my god, this is how people think about me. This is how they're going to write about me after I'm dead. I got to do something to clean my image up. So to clean his image up, he invents the Nobel Prize. And so it's giving out these prizes for peace and for physics and Nobel Prize. Yeah. And so then the Nobel Prize becomes synonymous with excellence. The name Nobel is now connected to that instead of connected to killing a bunch of motherfuckers with dynamite. That's a great marketing move on his part. Is that right? Yeah. What was his real name? Oh, Alfred Nobel. Alfred Nobel. Big dynamite, right? That was the thing. Yeah, but I'm looking at the Nobel Prize as well. It says there's a well-known story about the origin Nobel Prize, although historians have been unable to verify it and some dismiss it as a myth. Well, let's find out if the story of him being called the merchant of death or true, and the fake death when people thought he died. Is that true? I mean, I have to just check that out real quick. Look that out. I bet it's true. That's a good marketing move. It's a move that people do. Well, that was also some really evil people have done also. You know, like serial killers, like John Wayne Gacy was like, I do clown parties for kids. It's like, look over here, I'm a fun guy. Cosby was always telling people how to live their life and people are like people are doing it. Don't tell dirty jokes. Yeah, don't curse. Don't curse. Yeah. He would call people up and tell them not to swear anymore. Yeah, call it. Matt at them. Eddie Murphy. Oh, yeah, famous famously. Yeah. Still far and filth. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, he did. He did do that. He did do that. I remember one time Juan de Sykes interviewed him at like some award thing. He was in the crowd and she came up to him in the interview. And he was like, so rude to her. He had so much disdain. I remember that too. Remember that was weird. OK, Nobel grew extremely wealthy from an adventure like dynamite and blasting gelatin, which are widely used in warfare and earned him the nickname The Merchant of Death in the Press. 1888 French newspaper mistakenly published his obituary after his brother's death, condemning him as a man who became rich by finding ways to kill more people faster. This stock, this shock, is widely seen as prompting him to rethink how he'd be remembered. So it is true. Yeah. This should be no dispute of this. In his will of 1895, he left most of his fortune to fund prizes for those who shall be conferred the greatest benefit on mankind. Of course, you're dead. You don't need your money. of 1895, you left most of his fortune to fund prizes for those who shall be conferred the greatest benefit on mankind. Of course, you're dead. You don't need your money. Nobel never publicly explained his motives, fucking duh. So historians emphasize that any account of his reason is an informed reconstruction, not a direct statement from him. Okay, I get that because they're historians. Did you see how I think it was these days you don't know what you cast to be confirmed not, but it looked like on the Kennedy Center, they're starting putting the name Trump on it. Yeah, he had his name to it. Yeah, it's crazy. And he took out the Kennedy Rose Garden. And I was like, oh, take it away. Now, that's a cement fucking nutty. There's nothing nutty than the plaques underneath the president's names. That's insane. Shane and I were just reading them the other day. It's insane. How was this real? It doesn't feel real. And you're just like, how you allow to do that? That's the thing. I think how was you around to write that in the White House? You can just probably as president do what you want in the White House. Turns out you obviously can. Yeah, because but nobody ever did it before. Those are going to get taken down. No, they'll be up forever. I don't think they're going to leave it like that forever. No, fucking. Yeah, like a museum piece. It's so crazy. They should have like the Trump wing. This is what happened when he was president. Look at this fucking lunatic. The auto pen photo of Joe Biden and the actual yeah, it should widely consider the worst president of all like what are you talking about? It should be like a museum. Yeah, it should be the facts of his presidency. What happened during his term? You know, the Iraq war started and dut, dut, dut. It should be that. Of course, that's it. If that, you know, an under Reagan is like Reagan like Trump and Trump liked him too. Trump was a fan of Reagan. What? Why does that Reagan was a fan of Trump? What? It's yeah, guys. Not so crazy. But you can't just let someone just fucking fully swim in it like that. I know. So he needs like a right hand man. Go, sir. I think they just let me just, I understand the motive. Well, he's also losing it too. You can tell. Well, I think everybody does when you get to a certain age. Yeah, of course. I mean, the guys about to be 80, right? Right. There's no, and also the stress of going through what that guy went through where they were trying to jail him when they were going after him with the Russia thing, the Russia hoax and all that shit. Like they were, they were trying everything they could to destroy him. Just that alone's got to break your brain. It radicalizes you. It makes, yeah. And then they took a shot at him. Yeah. Somebody shot him, then that guy dies. And then when the guy dies, they find out that his apartments been professionally scrubbed. They find out he was in a black rock commercial like two years before that. He was. Oh, yeah. The shooter? The shooter. Oh, yeah. Was it an actor? Yeah. In the film. Yeah. But obviously, he was like connected to some people that knew some people. What does that mean? It might mean nothing. Yeah. But there's also a lot of weirdness to his past. It doesn't have a social media profile. It was like he seems like like an MK ultra plant. This presidency, though, does feel like a parody of a real thing. Like it doesn't even feel real. There's a lot of stuff that doesn't feel real. The for sure the Rob Ryan thing didn't feel real. Oh, my God. That seems so insane. You know, I didn't realize because I obviously knew him. I knew Rob Briner as the actor from from all in the family, which he was he was a great in that role. And then I I have memories of like I always think of like when Harry met Sally, the princess bride. Yep. And I was like, oh, yeah, you know, he's a spiral time. You know, stand by me. Stand by me. So I'm like, oh, you know, great storyteller comedy. I didn't realize until he died that he did misery. I had no idea that was him. Yeah, he did misery too. Yeah. He did so many great films. He really did. He really understood like human emotion and and storytelling across the board because like it's one thing to be proficient in comedy. And you see this sometimes with comedy really high level. Like Adam McKay did so much high level comedy with Saturday Night Live. And then, you know, Talladega nights and and like those those big Will Ferrell movies. And then his pivot into drama is like exceptional. You know, like he's really, really good at it. And it's like really remarkable when they can make that jump. Yeah. He's really, really good. Yeah. Well, Jordan peel, he's fantastic. Another one. Yeah, he's, he's made some giant horror movies that are just like and he was so funny and comedy. I know, it's weird how good they are. It's weird how like different they are too. Yeah. They go like, I'm comedy, I'm calm. And then like this hard pivot into a totally different lane and be not just let me try it but be like excellent at it. Yeah. But I kind of get it, right? It's like if you can get really good at comedy, like which is a complicated thing to do, you for sure have other creative thoughts. Yeah, you're not. Yeah. You're not really probably using those. Yeah. And I think obviously they get, I think a lot of those guys get bored, especially running a sketch show, right? Yeah. You have to wow. You just beat all the topics to death. You know, I mean, how many topics on especially like a mid sketcho are so derivative? Yeah, of course. Yeah, there's a lot of that. And they just go, I did it. There's nothing else to jump into. Well, you might have like nine episodes. You have to bang out. Well, I don't have to tell you. You're actually in the middle of it. Yeah, we just finished writing season two. But you have, your show is a giant advantage. You could just, you could go so far and be so ridiculous. They kind of just let us do what we want, which is really crazy. I got the same notes. I got the first season. Don't say the end work. That would basically it. That's like, that's my, that's everything else. I'm like, yeah, you can do that. It's such a crazy show dude crazy. It's really fun though. It's so much fun. I had so much fun doing it. I can't believe I get to do it again. And it's just, it is such a blast. We get to make these like sketches and like little short films that are like whatever we can think of, whatever the craziest thing we can think of and they're just like, yeah, do that. And they gave us a, they gave me like a mandate. They're like, we'd rather tell you, tell you that's too far than you should have gone further. Right. So they're just like, you can make it as crazy as you want. That's not. Yeah. But that's the beautiful thing about Netflix is the variety of what's on there. It's just so bananas. It's so wide ranging. There's so much shit on there. I just watched the Beast and me. Oh, yeah. I'm on episode three right now. Don't tell me anything. It gets so much better. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I'm sure it does. And how good is Claire? They're doing amazing. Uh, Matthew Reese plays. He's a psycho. Yeah. That guy's great. He's phenomenal. And he plays that part so exceptionally well. I mean, it's just so good. Yeah. You can know people. You know people like him and you know you're like, this is a fucking psycho dude. Oh, yeah. Yeah. He's great at it. And it's like in the eyes. It's always in the eyes. You know, you see it in the eyes. It's like, yeah, he's really, he's got a darkness in him. Mm hmm. I really does. He's like, hey, get it. You know what else I just saw? I saw it on Peacock. And I was like, I was like, I don't like, I don't have Peacock. I'm like, what is it? This is like, you know, fucking Kevin Hart in a bathtub interview and it's like, I don't know what's on Peacock. Right. I love Kevin by the way. But like it's like, you know what I mean? Like these like fun silly, that's what I thought Peacock was. They're old. And B.C. Yeah. Reruns of like, they're old friends. Yeah. I'm like, I don't know what fucking and I got recommended to watch the day of the jackal. What's that? Fucking fantastic. Really? Yeah. It's a thriller that is super high production and very cinematic, but the writing and the acting unbelief. Who's that? Eddie Redmay, I think it's his name. Eddie Redmayne is the lead in it. And I don't know that many of of the names of the other actors, but it's incredibly produced. Is it a series? Yeah. How many episodes? So they're in they're making season two now. I think season one was 10 episodes. $120 million budget for the season. Wow. I'm writing this down. Yeah. Day of the jackal. Day of the jackal was excellent. Yeah. Okay. This is this is it. Give me the trailer. I'll watch it. Yeah. What's watching this fucking trail. It's fucking that's that's Eddie. It's really good, dude. I couldn't believe how captivated I was by really, really well done. It's like a, you know, espionage type of thriller. Those are my favorite mine too. But this is what I watch instead of, you know, we were talking about comedy. I watch this shit. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Me too. Yeah. He's really good in it. But so is everybody else. They're really, really good. Okay. I can't recommend it enough. Okay. I'm on it. Really good. Yeah. There's enough shit to watch these days. I'll tell you that. Do you watch Dave or sick? What? Do you you watch Dave's special? Dave's, oh, she fell. No, I didn't see it. It's great. Yeah. I saw some clips. It's great. I mean, it's, it's vintage. It's Dave. Yeah. Like it's, it hits. He does what he does so well. There's silliness, you know, seriousness, seriousness. Yeah. Some philosophy. Lots of social commentary, provocative things, hilarious. It's, it's good. It's really good. I'm sure it's going to be awesome. He's always awesome. He doesn't. I mean, it's, I, I, I pissed a lot of people off, which is always fun. Yeah. I saw you went after Bill Mar. Yeah, he's a fuck. I do. I know it's probably about fuck that dude. Yeah. That's very funny. It's a, it's a good special man. It's really good. It's fun. Dave's, Dave's in top form. I love that for me, by the way, because my special comes out Christmas Eve, right? And, and then six days later, Ricky, Gervais comes out. Oh. And it was supposed, that was supposed to be, that was the release timeline, right? They're like, there's, there's one earlier in the month. And like, you'll be Christmas Eve a week later, Ricky Gervais. I was like, cool. And then like three days prior, I get a call before it's announced. And they're like, hey, we got to tell you, we're dropping a special on, unannounced Chappelle special tonight. And I go great. And they're like, they're like, I know, you know, it's going to take up a lot of oxygen in the room, obviously, because it's, it's Dave, right? I go, yeah. I mean, I understand. I go, you realize this is like, being a musical artist, and I've been working on my album. And you guys were like, we're so excited. And then you call me, you're like, just so you know, tomorrow we're releasing radio heads new album. And you're like, thanks. I guess there's like, there's nothing you can do. It's like the big, the biggest guys coming out with it, you know, but it's hilarious. He's great. But people will watch it. It's only an hour, and then they're going to want to watch more. That's, that's the, well, it's good. It's one of the thoughts is they go like, it just makes stand up more popular 100%. Yeah. I think so. Yeah. Stanip is very popular right now. It's incredibly popular. Yeah. I mean, there's more arena. Actually, I just saw Napregause. He added a 3 p.m. show out here. Nate is on because but Nate's thing makes sense when you think about it. You start doing stand up. There's this thing that happens when you're early on, young doing stand up. And you start to like, do spots, a lot of people will be like, Hey, if you can, curse less, be clean. And you're like, that's not who I am. And they're like, all right, well, and they always say this thing, like you'll get more opportunities, different opportunities will come to you if you're like that. Right. You're like, whatever. It's just, I don't do that. And when you're really funny, like, natives, and you get really good, what you see on the, on the business side of it is that when he announces a show, like when I announce a show, a couple might go like, let's go see him, right? Like I'll buy, they'll buy two tickets. But when Nate announces a show, that couple will bring their children, their parents, that they're in-laws, their neighbor. So, every, two tickets you can sell, he can sell 12 and everybody's going to enjoy it. And they're all going to enjoy it. Yeah, because even though it's just clean, it's always clean. It's hilarious. It's hilarious. He's really funny, but he's really funny. So, Gavin, you know, Gavigan has that thing too. Definitely. Yeah. The whole family can go. Sebastian has that thing too. Like, you can bring anybody's seat Sebastian. And they'll all have a good time. Yeah. But yeah, he can do three fucking marina shows in a city. It's crazy. Yeah, it is nuts. But there's more people doing that now. Like, I mentioned Sebastian, you, Bert, Tony. I mean, there's Shane, Shane's doing a football arena. That's crazy. A stadium. Yeah, he's doing like 90,000 people. Yeah, Lincoln Financial, I think it is. There's people doing that now. Where there's so many of them, where when we were coming up, the only people that had done it were Dane and Dice Clap. Dice. Yeah. It was Dice Clap and Dane Cook. And for that, you have to just, you go like that is the internet. Man, the internet made stand up global. Well, the internet made Dane. Right. Right. Right. That's how it was. Like, he got huge from my space. He was the first guy. Fact is so many of us can move those kinds of tickets. Oh, yeah. It's a, it's because it's global. 100%. When it was just like, hey, catch me. my special at Comedy Central at nine o'clock on Friday, it's not going to have the same reach. Right. Right. And it's just clips too. Clips get shared. And then there's so much word of mouth. It's like that's the one good thing about social media is if something comes out and people like it, whether it's a new special to drop or a new song or anything, it just gets shared. So easy. Yeah. And things just, they just take off. I know. It's, it's what I never, I might did 40 arenas this year. Like I never, I was never thinking that would be a thing, you know, I remember when I met you. Yeah. I met you in 2007. We did that, uh, real men of comedy tour together. Yeah. If we, I met you in Phoenix, we did that little Hollywood theater, which I love that celebrity theater. Celebrity theater. That's right. That plays is awesome. That's one of my favorites. In the round, it spins. It's awesome. That plays rules. And I always love Phoenix period. They're fun. That's a fun place. Yeah. That's a really good place. Yeah. I went back there on this tour too. I went to the, uh, I did the, the big arena there this time. It was fucking amazing. It was one of my favorite shows this tour. Yeah. It's Phoenix rules. Yeah. I've done their reunion Phoenix too. It's fucking fun. Man. They're fun. It's a fun city. Yeah. Because they don't have much culture. Yeah. They do a lot of blow. They do. And they like them hard. They party hard. Phoenix, Arizona just party. Yes. They party hard. Well, it's like, think about the people that had to settle that place first. You get cowboys and Mexicans, just fucking wild people. It is, dude. And then you got Scottsdale, which saw rich people. I remember we went to dinner like that, I think the night before just like a steakhouse. And we were just like, we were like observing that when you go to dinner at a like a steakhouse in Phoenix, it feels like an after party, but it's just dinner. Do you know what I mean? Like the vibe in there is that people are having a fucking good time. They're partying. Yeah. That's what Phoenix feels like. Yeah. I always liked it because it was not Hollywood, you know, yeah. In every way. It was just not Hollywood. Yeah. Those people had no preconceived ideas of their own celebrity. They didn't want to become famous. Like the problem with LA is the entire culture is wrapped around the possibility that you might become famous. Yeah. And that everybody really secretly wants to become famous. And some people might make it and some people won't. But the reason why they came there in the first place is to be famous because they wanted to be famous. Yeah. Phoenix, they just want Coke. Yeah. Get some Coke. We're like, fucking party. I'm going to play golf in the day. Yeah. And I'm doing Coke. I'm having a good fucking time. They're wild people. That theater thing too. There's, um, I don't know if I'm right about this, but I've been told that there's only two maybe three theaters left in the round in the country. That's the only one that I know of. Well, there's the one in Long Island that I also did that was it's so fucking, which one's that? Westberry music call, I think it's cool. Okay. Is that what it's called? I've heard of that place. I didn't know that was in the round. That's in the round. It is so fucking fun. The round rules. I just did it. I did it a couple months ago. It was one of the most fun shows of the entire tour. I tried to explain to people who had never done it. Like, oh, I'm like, I'm telling you, it's oddly intimate because everybody's facing everybody else. Mm-hmm. We're all in this together. It's not just a massive people staring at a stage. Right. We're all wrapped up together. Yes. It's cooler. It's cool. Yeah. It's a better vibe. It feels better. You would love this theater. I'm sure. Yeah. It's a fucking rat. I love that Phoenix one. That one rules. But do any show that you could do in the round is like the first time I did it. I don't know what to understand. Where do I move? I think the first one I did was when we met. Yeah. Because I was also, I'd be my first one too. I was kind of like intimidated. What the fuck did and then somebody told me once, it might have been Louis told me that I think it was him that told me. When I was doing the going into arenas, he's like, you're instinct will be to stay in the middle, but you should go further out to the edges. Because when you're further out to the outside of the stage that's in the round, you're actually open to more people. Does that make sense? Yes. Because like if you're on this edge of the round stage, more people can see you over here. Right. And you're closer to them. You're closer to them. Yeah. It's more intimate. If you're in the the middle, it's like you're all standoffish. You have so much, you can come closer to me. Yeah. Why are you all the way over there? Yeah. That's right. Yeah. Walking around too is fun. That to me is, I told somebody is what I think makes my performance better is that I'm a naturally kind of standstill guy. Yeah. But the round makes me move, even though it's subtle movement, that keeps you more engaged. Because there's a constant movement to it, even if it's slow. It's fun. It is a fun thing. Yeah. It's fun. And it is weird. There's so many of us get to do that now. It's so bizarre. It wasn't, it wasn't the case at all. It's so bizarre. I did some nutty ones with Dave. We did the Tacoma Dome. That was 25,000 people. I was so nuts. It was so nuts. It was so many people. It's so many. But so many. It's very strange. I did a couple with you guys. I did, um, I did New Orleans with you guys. Oh, that's right. Yeah. That was fun. And I think we did Nashville or something. They're Memphis together too. Yeah. I think it was Nashville. The most fun one though ever. This will, I think this will always be in my memory is when we did the like Vegas is back. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. That was fun. At the MGM arena. That was fun. And we were unannounced. Yeah. A couple other people were too. I forget who was on that. But I remember the absolute like pandemonium of that place where I was like shaking because it was like things had been shut down. And they're like, this show is back. The shows are back. And this is the show to open Vegas again. I don't think we'll ever feel that again. Not like that. Hopefully not. Because that means that the world went crazy again. It's exactly right. And it was like, you can't duplicate that. You can't duplicate it. It's almost like when you have an improv on like off the cuff line of something that just happened. And like you can't manufacture that. Right. You said the thing because this happened. And like the world had shut down. Yeah. And they're like, here's a standup show in the round in the arena. Joe, Dave. And the crowd was just like, I mean, it was like a fever pitch. It was so, there were so many people hanging out backstage. Remember that? Oh my God. There were so many people. I was like, I've never seen this many celebrities in our shows. It was a room. They were like, this is the red room. And this was backstage. And there was like 200 people in there. Oh, so packed. And I brought you in there because you didn't know about it either. I was like, have you been in here? And you're like, what the fuck is all this? It's like a whole extra room. A whole extra room of like just people hanging out. Yeah. The whole extra room of comics that I hadn't seen in years. Yeah. Because everybody was kind of celebrating the fact that we could do shows again. It was the best. They all came out. That was a such a special show. Yeah. I mean, there was boxers there and wrappers. It was like, people were out. It's like there's something to do again. It was like there was a feeling in the air. It was so and people, some people were still scared. There's still people wearing masks. Yeah. It was July. I remember that. It was July. Some people just didn't want to let it go. They were still connected to this idea that we could all die at any moment. Yeah. That's true. I still see those people. Yeah, there's still in some places. Yes. Some people that got broken. They got broken. The stress of that whole thing was also kind of depends on who you're around. too. Right. I mean, I think you could put me with certain people and then I would have been even more apprehensive. Well, that was the thing that I felt about coming here really quickly, that people here were not nearly as scared as people are in California. The whole attitude of the government here was very different. They were like, things just stay open. I remember I went and met with the governor and had dinner with them. And he was like, you know, we gotta let people live their lives. They need freedom. Yeah. Like you should be able to make your own decisions doing this. I was like, yeah, and this is like before the vaccine. Really? Yeah. And people had already started doing shows out here. We started doing shows out here early. We tested everybody. Remember we did those stub shows? Oh, that's right. Yeah. Dave, Dave and I did these shows at stubs. We did a whole series. Which is an outdoor venue. Yeah. And we tested the whole crowd. So we tested these people for like an hour before the show. Everybody queued up. Everybody got tested. And we only wound up removing like two different people that were positive. That's it. Yeah. Yeah. Most people knew that they weren't sick. You know, and we weren't doing PCR, right? Which is the one that really gets a lot of false positives. It found out recently. There was an estimate that PCR testing, the false positives might have been as high as 86%. 86. Yeah. The guy who invented the PCR testing carry mollus, so that she would never be used to detect diseases. So like it's not what it's for. And he said, if you ramp the cycles up high enough, you could find almost anything in people. I did something once this shameful. I had to test for like a trip somewhere. And then I had to like do it on a zoom with somebody. And it came up positive. So I threw it out the window. And then they were like, where is it? I go, my kid just threw it out the window. And they're like, what was it? I was like, I don't remember. I'll do it again. And then I just waited a week. That's it. I remember the second time I tested positives. I tested positive once. That was a whole horse dewormer seeing anything. And then the second time I tested positive, I didn't even know I had it. I couldn't believe it was real. I came in here sniffily. I came in here straight from the gym. And I said, I got the sniffles. I said to Mercy, the nurse, I said, I go, must be COVID, just joking and she was actually your positive. I'm like, no fucking way. Like no way. Because you felt fun. So I got IV vitamin drip, NAD, the whole deal, 24 hours later, I was negative. That NAD shit's amazing. Amazing. And I also, I'll say this. And this is, I'm telling you, I have not gone wood. I have not gotten sick in a while. Oh yeah, you're healthy now. I'm healthy. That's how it works. That's how it works. But during the movie I did over the summer and during production on series, the first season one of my show, there were days. Like I remember the first day we were shooting bad thoughts season one, I was getting a cold. And I did NAD, like 500 milligrams or whatever. Like the high dose three days in a row. And I was no long, and I had never experienced anything like that. Because I was the type of person where like, I get a cold and I am fucked for like weeks. And then the next time that I felt this like, you know, you feel, you know, you're like, oh, I'm getting sick. It would, I was like, I'm doing the NAD thing again. Three days in a row, just jamming that shit into me, like high dosage completely went away. That's crazy. Like it didn't dip into like now you're really sick. It just was like, I'm getting sick, I'm not sick anymore. Yeah. That was part of my COVID routine. When I, the first time I had COVID, I did NAD along with IV vitamins. I don't even think I mentioned NAD when I did that little video that went viral. But that was, I recommend that to anybody whenever they get sick. It's unbelievable. High dose vitamin C is amazing too. Amazing. Can't believe it. Yeah. High dose vitamins intravenously when you're not feeling well is phenomenal. Because it gives your body all the weapons that it needs to fight off whatever the fuck it's dealing with. I feel like doing it tomorrow. You should do it tomorrow. Yeah. It's due at all the time. You know what else you start doing? Like I told you red light bed. I know you've been on that for a minute. Yeah, it's amazing. It's incredible. You said it helps your vision. It helped my vision 100%. I don't even understand that. Well, red light skin stuff. Red light helps. It gets, we could. We could. We could. Let's put that into our sponsor perplexity. What is the benefits that red light has on your vision? Why is it work? But it works 100%. I could tell you for a fact. There's two things that I've done. One thing I've taken a lot of supplements for eyesight. I always talk about this company pure encapsulations. I have no affiliation with them. I just buy their stuff. There's they have a thing called macular support. It's yeah. Yeah. I take that stuff. So I take that stuff and I've been very consistent with that. It has a bunch of new, I showed her to Huberman and he went over the list and he was like, oh, this is all great stuff. I take that and I do red light multiple days a week. And it took a while. In the beginning, I thought it was actually making my eyesight worse because I was like, your eyes are covered during it. No, I keep them open. Keep your eyes. Red light. Yeah. Red light therapy using deep red wavelengths around 60, 670 and M. I don't know what they're in nanometers. Shows promise in improving declining vision by boosting mitochondrial function in the retinal cells. Studies indicate benefits, particularly for age related vision loss. That's me. Macular degeneration and other eye conditions. Morning exposure appears most effective with effects lasting up to a week. So I do it. I try to do it three times a week. How long do you do it for? I do it 20 minutes. It's a short session. It's like three minutes weekly can enhance color contrast vision by 17 to 20% adults over 34 with greater gains in older participants. That's me. I'm getting it. It makes a big difference. Therapy supports retinal health by reducing inflammation, improving visual acuity and slowing proto photo receptor decline. Emerging evidence also suggests help for dry eyes, myopia progression in children and diabetic retinopathy. It works. I'm telling you it works 100% with me. I used to struggle reading the screen sometimes. It would be kind of blurry. I have to like Jamie make it bigger. Now I can see things way better than I used to be. When I said Jamie make it bigger, I used to. I wear glasses all the time now. I don't need them when I look at text messages anymore. I don't need them when I read emails anymore. And I don't need them on my computer anymore, which is a big one. That's a big one. Because I always used it when I wrote. And I realized the other day like, oh my god, I'm writing and I don't have my glasses on. Joe E. Diaz will be so happy if I use these. What do you know with those fucking glasses? You're wearing glasses. I call them up today. I go, I'm doing a podcast with security. He met Peppy Le Ploop, Peep, over there in France. And now he's making croissants. Who's this fucking guy with his glasses glasses? It's always on me for that. Go ahead. I mean, as Joe E. Diaz is, it's not Peppy Le Pugh. His name is Jim Basta. And it's Italian. It's an Italian bakery. Yes. Well, it's a problem. It is a dog. Chocolate croissant. You gave me a real problem. Tell you buttery and flaky and perfect. It's perfect. Yeah. It's why I fell in love. A little more chocolate in there. I can tell him. I can tell a little more chocolate. I still, little. Don't be stingy with the chocolate. I fell in love with that chocolate croissant when I lived in LA. That guy was in my neighborhood. Oh, that's how this all started. That's a problem. And I would walk down there and sometimes I would buy like two dozen. And then I would walk I would walk back to my house and I would give away croissants to people walking down the street. I'd be like, you got to try these. Just regular people? Regular people. That didn't even know them. I got to just got these croissants. What if they thought you were psycho? I mean, I guess they didn't, but they would take them. And I mean, I didn't give them all away. I would eat a lot of them too. But I stayed in touch with this guy and I would, every once in a while, would go there and I would get some of their pastries and I would do like an Instagram video. Like, hey, I'm at this place and I would just say it. And then I became friends with them and they go, hey, you know, when you do that, they were like 100 people came today. I was like, oh, that's cool. It was just like a friend. There was no business. We're like, doing it because I liked it. We always stayed in touch and I moved here and I go with when I'm in LA, I'm going to try to stop by and see you guys like that kind of thing. And we stayed in touch and I always be like, I would be awesome if you open one in Austin. That conversation continued. And then eventually, we talked like, hey, what if we really did this? And that conversation started like over a year ago. And then our fixed location will open in March, but we have a pop up right now. I just don't know how you have the time for all this. Well, I'm not, here's the thing. I'm not the one like I don't bake. You know, I'm the, I'm a business partner in this. And I market it in that I promote it. But the, the easiest thing is to market something that's fantastic. Right. And I actually thought about the fact that I was like, for me, this is like, like people trust your opinion on one of the reasons I think that on it was successful with you is that they're like, this guy knows workouts. He knows vitamins. He knows like they, they, you have credibility in that. You know what I mean? Like, having credibility and something is, is, is really important. For me, it's like, if there's one thing I completely trust myself on is if I'm like, this tastes good, I don't doubt it. I'm like, this is good. I know what it's good. I'm, I'm Important for me. It's like if there's one thing I completely trust myself on is if I'm like this tastes good I don't doubt it. I'm like this is good. I know what it's good I've eaten that the best restaurants all over the world and this is like my favorite one of my favorite things has always been Cressants and things like this so when I had his and I knew they were amazing It was like there's no like I'm selling it. I'm not like being like, oh, you should you know I'm not I'm making up this shit. It's amazing. So all I do is go like it's open It's fucking amazing and we're selling we've sold out every day. That's incredible We've never not sold out well once you eat one of them. I get it. Yeah, it's fucking and he's Always coming up with like I at first. I was like, we're opening a croissant place But he's doing like you know Like the homemade focaccia bread Italian sandwiches He does homemade pizza. It's all every day and he's whatever like inspires him. He makes that it's all amazing So it's like the easiest thing to be like, yeah, this is this is my bakery Yeah, I love it. I thought about doing that with an Italian deli Yeah, I've talked to Giovanni very briefly the guy you are in Delhi. Yeah, that place Opening up one of those out here. I'm credible with that be incredible those sandwiches I sent me and Joe Doreza. We send each other sandwiches. Yeah, Joe has his sandwich place Yeah, which place is great. Yeah, Joey Rose is this fucking great. I sent him this place in Toronto, God, what is it called something crudo? Hold on a second. I'll find it What happened to oh The iPhone made everything different. Where'd you put it? There you go because that it searched in the bottom. That's it Crude, it's in Toronto the sandwiches Go to their Instagram if you can go that where it says crudo pizza up there. That's their Instagram Go down on their Instagram and find some of their Oh, yeah Bro, look at these Yeah, well, they're homemade bread look at these are insane and the bread's got a nice little char on And they the bread comes out piping hot from the oven and they make the sandwich. Let's get piping hot bread Yeah, show me one of them videos where they're pulling the sandwich is out and making them Because there's a few where you get to see how hot the bread is Scroll down a little bit Oh, and then stop stops up go up. Go up. No, no back there. Oh, look at that Tommy Look at they know now you missed it watch this when he cuts it open. Oh, and this yeah, oh look at that The more thought I look at this Jesus, oh my god look how insane that is this is my drug like this is if I have a problem with food It's this yeah, it's Italian cold-cut sandwiches and pasta. Yeah, those are the problems I have a real problem with not eating that you know he's a olive oil on it. Oh Look how comes out of the oven pro are you kidding me? You know what my guy started making now? Like he's just on a whim. He's like I made a lasagna today. Oh, no And then he's doing like different versions of it did one with like brisket in it Like just crazy things and they it just goes course. Yeah, it's called by the way It's called chichobomba which is what you call him. Yeah, it's the name of the bakery. It's called chichobomba Which is what you call a little fat ass kid in Italy His bumba is like explode so like when it gets a little fat ass That's funny. It's called a fat ass. Yeah, it's called a little fat ass little fat ass kid. Yeah That's hilarious. Yeah, yeah, dude. Yeah. He's he's he's awesome. Him and Marlow Tarstain then in it especially now you're in the one 80s. It's it is let it go. He could let it go I could let it go. Yeah, look at you. They got excited about let me go Yeah, I want a bakery. Yeah, I just fucking not text your trainer back Fuck you or when I stop by there too, you know, it's like I have access to all of this Yeah, you get eat free. Oh, yeah, and then whatever you want You can make you think I give I give most I take a bite of things and I'm like that's delicious And then I stop myself. I'll let myself Have a full thing but not every day dude not even not even every few days like once a week maybe when I used to come home from the store Two things were a problem one of them was Jerry's famous deli Go to member Jerry's family. Yes, they're gone now and then amazing Jerry's deli's gone Jerry's deli's gone There was one of Woodland Hills. That's gone. That was the one I used to go to all the time I think I think they're all gone now. I don't know if any of them still exist Hopefully one still exists Jerry's famous deli's fucking great They had the best chicken noodle soup man. It ruled and they had pastrami Rubens. Oh pastrami Rubens with steak fries. They were so good And if I was hungry coming home from the store, that would be the spot the other spot that was a real problem was crispy cream motherfucking donuts. Yeah, I would drive by and I'd see that hot sign on Cheers burgers to our problem and announce a problem. That's a problem. There was that one in West Hollywood that I used to love I forget the name of that place it was right near where I was working in post-production burgers were fucking unbelievable another problem was canters Can't just daily I think that's why it's still open that was a good 24 hours a day. That was post show fun Always yeah great post show you this before because you know the power of delusion is strong Is that when I would tour with you this is like I would say like 2009 10 Delta terminal used to be terminal five at LAX sometimes we would get back and We would land because we would land the morning right we did the show the night before they had a Like a little deli bakery coffee place that had really good chocolate croissants. Oh, I remember that place. Yeah, yeah And sometimes we would we'd be walked by and you'd get one. I was like well, Joe got one. I should get Like he's in shape. I'm in shape. I just tell myself like you can eat this and because you would how you love those I remember those chocolates That's when we brought this one. I was like oh, that's a problem. It's a problem But they weren't as good as that no fuck no the ones at LAX were pretty good. You're okay This is like a it's not no shit. It's like a three-day process That's how long it takes for them to make a bachelor. Yeah Yeah, like proofing the bread and it stays in this cabinet and they put I mean it's a whole process and it's He has a he makes like spol yetella which is like it's okay said that way. Oh and one boron You know like just like incredible pastries men that like when you see them you're just like Don't get fat so easy to get fat Can't fats a giant problem older you get you're just like this could be real easy Especially if you got obligations you got things to do and you're tired you're working need structure dude Yeah, that's what I get it. I get it. I get it. I need peace and quiet So I like working out by myself. Yeah. Yeah, I don't I mean I like working out comics sometimes would do those comic workouts here Those are those are really fun But for me like my time working out when I'm like suffering by myself I need that. Yeah, I need by myself. I don't want anybody talking to me able to song the news Just asking me cool. So now here. What's JD Vance look? Yeah Yeah, I'm here to fucking get after it. Yeah. I just I my problem demons one of my problems is When I get I know this from Pat like you just realize you have patterns Is that when I get to like a good place and Relax yeah, and I do it when people are like you look good. Yeah, and then I go oh, I'm done You know that's that's been my pattern. Yeah, so this time. I've just been like do not Accept that thought. Yeah, you know hey, you can't There's no end there's no end finish line. Yeah, doesn't exist Every day is a new unique little battle with your inner bitch It's really the truth. It is the truth. That's what it is every day you wake up You go to war with your inner bitch That's why it's good to beat it early beat that fucker down early get cold water It's fucking work out here Get the song afterwards Today today, but the food is the bigger challenge for me like I won't say that like workouts aren't hard they're hard And like I like it. I like the challenge staying on top of like how to eat is the is the bigger challenge well There's a problem too with all these new medical advancements and one of them is there's a new peptide that They're showing is essentially like exercise in an injection That's loop. I don't know what it is. I read some article about it like quite a while ago And I said it to break them. What is this? He's like dude There's so much stuff on their eyes and so much groundbreaking stuff But you're basically gonna be able to get the benefits of exercise in a peptide so it will trick your body to think you exercise I mean, it's loop does that that's one of the ones that does it's in a pill form right I haven't heard about it It's called sloop. Yeah. Yeah. Do you take him that I have taken it? Yeah, I don't have any I'm the listen. I'm like a crack addict if you tell me something would be good. I'll be like cool. I'll inject like 40 things Yeah, what is this loop do well? They they they they did tested it on mice and found that by giving it to mice They decrease their body fat and increased muscle lean mass and do nothing doing nothing Wow And so then they have started to that's it right there. Sloop 3-3-2. Yeah In obese mouse models sloop 3-3-2 reduced fat gained by up to 10 fold and compared to controls promoted 12% body weight loss And enhanced metabolic function without altering appetite or activity levels levels. Yeah, yeah It's exercise. It's exercise did exercise in a peptide and you took it in a pill. Yeah And so what did it feel like when you took it nothing nothing felt nothing? I'm getting that shit tomorrow. Yeah I'm on it. Let's go. Let's go. What happened to your pecker? Did it get excited? Hell yeah Yeah, I'm hard to put this up. That's what these goddamn things do and you can just buy that stuff Or is that a prescription thing? I don't think it's a prescription. No, you can just buy it But I think you just have to like go to a compound pharmacy that kind of place. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They're trying to shut those places down Are they yeah, they want to own all that stuff. There you go. There it is. Bam Amazon All over Amazon good or not. I don't know. Just I don't know. Yeah, I don't know I don't know I want to think that I've read about Amazon You see this right? Is that there's a lot of fake supplements on Amazon are there yeah? Because how does that work? How are they even getting up on Amazon? I think they're well that's a whole different thing But like they're just like copying the labels and stuff making it look like it. I've heard that's a problem with pure encapsulation So I started buying their stuff from their website because I read that because I read that like a high percentage was fraud I don't know if you've ever researched this, but apparently when I was in Abu Dhabi They were like they have what's considered something like the cleanest Vitamins on like people go there just to get vitamins in the UAE really yeah Like the like really high level vitamins for some reason and I don't know what the Thought is on that but like a lot of people that travel in that region go to UAE to get their vitamins That's interesting. I don't know if their standard is just higher Well, they have so much money. They do and they also you know shake talk noon is a Brazilian Jiu Jitsu black belt. He's a jit bad motherfucker Yeah, the Hanzo Gracie black ball and he's the one that created this Abu Dhabi comeback that the championship He's also like incredibly fit. Yeah his cardio is out. I was talking to someone. No, he's a legit black belt Yeah, he's he's a Hanzo Gracie black belt. We're so like you know There's levels of black belts out there Where you you heard about a guy got a black belt from this guy. I never heard of that guy I don't know who that guy is, but I'm sure it was good. Yeah, and then you hear about someone got a black belt from Hanzo Like oh like Guy Ritchie is a Hanzo Gracie black belt really yeah Guy Ritchie's super legit man Yeah, I know guys have rolled with him like dude. He's legit Yeah, which is it's like a Jake Paul thing like you know thing. All right. You know, thank you Jake Paul You can't fight what's the isn't the guy from Mary with children and on you? Yeah, legit Gracie black belt. Yeah, he got his black belt from Horian or I think Horian or At least that school you got it from Gracie Torrance That was a surprise one to me. I was like really oh he's legit too. Yeah I sat next to him once on a plane randomly and we spent the entire flight just talking about your jitsu real He was so excited. Oh, that's cool. There he is. Yes 2007 yeah, Horian Gracie. I was right two decades of training under Horian Gracie started out as another 42 Wow, that's another very legit black belt you get a black belt from Horian like you have a real black belt But he was a big guy man. He was a football player back in the day. Wow. Yeah That's awesome man. Yeah, he's legit. So we were just like I said, we were just randomly on a plane and And we just start talking about your jitsu. We're both like little kids really. Yeah. That's cool Then I ran into him another time randomly in Hawaii in the ocean. I was in the ocean. I ran into him That's cool. I was like, hey, what are you doing man? He's great. I think he's a very nice guy guy very nice guy too. He's you got to talk to like regular person You know, there's certain actors. I feel like we have to get through this little wall of are you cool? Yeah, is this okay to talk to you? Mean to me like yeah Yeah, yeah It's like a thing and they think they get weird around comics too because they don't want to wind up in your act I got so lucky Doing that movie over the summer in that I had like the best Actors like as far as like just fun awesome people. Oh, that's nice I mean like and you know, they were fun before you work with them. No and that's and you know It was funny is that their regular act like they go from like set to set to set right and They kept telling me they were like, you know, this is like really special What's happening here? And I'd be like, what do you mean? They're like this is awesome everyone's having the best time every day Everyone's hanging out we're all going to dinner together. We're hanging out on weekends They don't like each other. It was like the best experience I think actors sometimes are so competitive with each other. Yeah, we didn't none of that way people were just and when when you do have a Cool vibe like we had Everyone's just trying to make every scene better, right? You know and like you want the guy to be like I want him to be super funny in this because it's gonna be funny in the movie. What's like stereotypes get Created because of the worst people in whatever category you're talking about and if you're talking about actors It's not all of them. Some of them are really cool. Yeah, of course like Chris Pratt. I'm hung out with that guy a bunch of times He's really cool. Yeah easy to hang out with giant movie star like but like so normal right I went L-Cunting with that guy really yes Super cool guy to everybody like easy to talk to we didn't dinner together all hanging out with guys Fucking so normal. It's rare. Just happens to be a famous actor. Yeah. Yeah, so normal But there's guys like that they get me to them and you go oh, okay like Woody Harrelson the fucking nice That's gonna be Woody's things off so easy to hang you can't get a hold of him. He's got no phone He's got no email you had and I'm just a huge fan But I saw clip of you had a Billy Bob Thornton. Oh, he's the best dude. I can watch that guy do fucking anything The best to talk to too like so easy to talk to and the other one I think you had him on too But I always see this guy in interviews and it's always like I end up sharing it with everybody is Ethan Hawke Ethan Hawke's great I mean his his his wisdom and like his philosophy on on art and on life I'm like guys like a Messiah he's just like so Fascinating to listen to well. He's a real artist. Yeah really in love like I asked him this question because I Always wanted to know like is this the same thing as like being in the zone and other things like what happens? When you're doing a scene where why is it so believable? I know your Ethan Hawke I know that's Denzel Washington. Yeah, I know that you guys are acting but yet I'm in yeah, I mean like what is that yeah? He talked about that it is it is like what it is with stand up. It's like a hypnosis It's like they're hypnotized They're so locked in and they believe so much what they're saying that you believe it too. Right. It's it's truth It's that the the scene Reads as true or not make right you know there's there's times when you're watching something and you're like I don't buy that And that's why you step out right step out because you're like that's not it's performative. Yeah Yeah, you realize that someone is performing rather than being like really locked into it whatever it is Somebody said one time and I totally agree is like one of the reasons why we Revere Denzel so much is like every time he's on screen you believe every choice that he makes Yes, you know you're just like I believe this yeah, there's only a few people like that You know Claire Danes is definitely one of them. She's fantastic. So good dude I mean I want to give away any parts of it But there's this one part where she finds something out and her fucking whole face starts shaking. Yeah I was like how are you even doing that? Yeah, it's she she starts breathing heavy Nothing freaks me out more than someone that finds out something crazy and doesn't have like a physical reaction to it Because anyway, that's ever had anything crazy happened to him your heart starts racing. Yeah Yeah, you can't breathe. Yeah, and some people just don't nail that But she she nailed it so hard. I felt like she really believed it. Yeah, you know and I believe I'm like oh my god Yeah, you start freaking out too if that scene was so good that I was watching I was like damn She's good. Yeah, that's why I was thinking during the scene. I was like damn. She's good have to call me when you finish this I will It's it's just it's so good. She ruled in homeland too. She was great in that too. Yeah She's really a tremendous actress. Do you ever see the conversations she had? She had a conversation with fucking with his name the vaccine dancer guy Colbert and Like she was talking about the CIA being involved in all sorts of different things and See if you can find it because he like changes the subject like immediately really Yeah, because she's like saying wild shit about the CIA Well the CIA being involved in I forget exactly the context of what you were saying something here it is My camp for us producers and writers and really yeah, yeah, so we park ourselves in a club in Georgetown and talk to like real spooks and You know people in the intelligence community and end the state department in journalists and people who really They tell you that like what's the most surprising thing that they've told you about their jobs or something You would need to know for every year. It's different right? We've been at it for a while and and the climate has been as changed But this year it was all about you know the distrust between the administration and the intelligence world and And the intelligence community was suddenly kind of how lying itself with journalists, which You start doing this The intelligence community aligns itself with journalists to try to get rid of the present. I have I had one This is not the same thing that I had I know somebody who was Very high up. I'll just say in the intelligence community and his older now and I had a relationship with them and I Was talk sometimes we would talk through it was through You know my parents that that knew these people And I was I would love to talk to this person because they were so not just well-informed intelligent like fun to have a conversation with and I was on the phone with them and as I asked a question They go not on the phone And I and I kind of was like repeating myself. I couldn't they go not on the phone I was like oh like it just it gives one of those moments where I thought yeah, I was like oh, okay. I was like yeah, I'll see you later. Sorry I got so scared like I violated. I'm sure every phone called they make is Be recorded. Yeah. Yeah, I saw if you have inside information about something very important You're supposed to stay secret about it. Yeah, and you start blamming. Yeah, it's hanging out in Scottsdale doing blow. Yeah Talking about a fine year in Syria. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You went up getting whacked By some crazy person that goes himself. Correct. Yeah, something happens. Yeah You know about this MIT fusion guy that got assassinated mm-hmm Supposedly the same guy who assassinated the MIT fusion guy also went to Brown University and shot people at Brown and then killed himself Really? Yeah, and a lot of people are like what this guy was working on ground-breaking energy He was working on fusion at MIT and he was also Talking about the poles the earth poles shifting and that this is a natural Process that happens that we have to do to keep our magnetosphere That protects us from the fucking rays of space. What is our world dude? What is happening? This a lot of cute people that get killed because they're Adventing things that are gonna disrupt industries. That's what I believe and this is why we scroll to take six hours on tiktak Why is this like I don't want to fucking yeah, you don't want to know yeah, you don't want certain things you don't want to know and curb meds Gertex me all of them Really text me all of them everything that I don't want to know they it shows up in my fuck or Delan Tim Dylan text me and I texted to them to if I find something out because there's just so much nutty shit in the world But you're like what is going on? like people getting whacked and oh Yeah, I couldn't overwhelm you they can overwhelm you. Yeah, yeah, and I know so many people that are like legitimately mentally ill Because they dwell on that stuff all day long. Which is why we need the escape. Yeah, yeah You need something and you also should limit your amount of time at your exposed all that psychotic behavior Yeah, it starts shaping the way you view people And if you if you interact with people more on social media than you do in real life It can really fuck your head up so many people do that a lot of people a lot of people do that yeah Especially that was one of the real problems during covid too so the people are isolated and that was the only way they were interacting with each other The fucked up thing is you realize how much those people end up like losing That connection with other like real people. Uh-huh they think that this is yeah, they think this is real life is the real world. Yeah Yeah, they live in the comment section. Mm-hmm. It's crazy. It's just it's such a Like it's like eating food that has no nutrients in it and your body is just freaking out like where the fuck are the vitamins? Yeah, there's no vitamins in it. It's just nonsense and It's also like what percentage of it is even real people. It's not a hundred There's a bunch of it. It's just like bad actors from other countries and people with fucking flags and their bios and who knows what is going on And it's all just to try to shape narratives. We're involved in it. Russia's involved China's involved corporations are involved There's like entire companies that are based around crowd campaigns about organizing a tax on individual Organizing narrative control or organizing pushing a certain narrative entire businesses are built on that where they try to shape things and make things go viral Yeah, it's nuts. There's oh my god There's so much complete new part of our society that didn't exist before and it shapes the way we view the world and it's being purposely manipulated by people and it's legal because safeguards haven't put into place and also the amount of times That like people are talking to bots and like losing themselves. I don't like a scam I mean like fucking oh, yeah interacting just like with you're interacting with a computer right now. Uh-huh. Yeah All the time I started getting these weird WhatsApp group texts of investors People investing in things and how much money they're making this is incredible sign me up and like like all these random fake people will be in The little really group chat talking about how oh, I can't wait to get involved in this You know, I'm gonna go all in on this and then trying to get you to go Oh, I want to go on to I should go. I should give you my take a come. I think a bigger position I wire some money to you fuck man and so many dumbasses get sucked into things like that the best though is when it happens to Like somebody will be like I sent 80 grand of Brad Pitt Like Brad Pitt was like Messaging me and it's just like some 60-year-old lady. She was like it was you know It just felt so real and it's like it's it's like a deep fake. He's like Hi Amanda. How was how are you today? My love if you could just send me $30,000 and then she's like and I did it. I feel like an idiot and you're like yeah You fucking thought Brad Pitt needed 30 grand Well, here's the thing if you've got a scam like there's certain scams we allow right? Yeah, like here's one televangelis we allow that scam yeah, because if you're so dumb that you think Robert Tilden is Got a red line direct line to Jesus. Yeah, you know Go ahead. Check to me. Yeah That's gonna win he bought like a G4. Oh, yeah, yeah, they all do This is the one crazy guy that was pointing out to report with the devil. That's the one. No, that's not Robert Tilden No, but that's the guy that yeah, that's about that guy because she was asking about that time Oh, yeah, gave me such a deal. Yeah. Oh, you just like God take this blank. Oh my god that guy looks Cracked craze out. Yeah, he looks scary, but that scam will allow you know We allow certain scams. Yeah, we let that one go like if you're so dumb that you buy into that like does not even illegal I do feel so so bad though when it happens to the elderly For them terrible that guy this guy can it's go blend This guy what is this? Dirty fingers imagine that dirty finger in your asshole is my playing yard dirty plane Wealthy televangelis defense using private aircraft and viral exchange. Yeah, yeah, yeah Medea gave me a deal do all of his work All that work preacher who wants fifty four million dollar jet will donate old jet. Let's go What a sweet guy? Which that guy? Jesse deplantis see like those guys we allow that we allow that kind of which is crazy They should be in prison There's fucking scumbags. Yeah, but they're getting people to voluntarily Money which is weird Then there was the guy the one I asked his congregation for 65 million to buy a jet There's you remember the one that was like locked the doors and that was a whole scandal He's like shut the doors Lock the doors. Oh for what for donations. He's like we're not Right we're not leaving until you shut the doors. Yeah, who was that guy pastor locks church door demands forty thousand dollars As you close the door there's a hundred there's a thousand of you close them doors Ushers close the doors. That is so crazy. That's so crazy The lock the doors people Oh Well, there was a thing during the was it Katrina or what was it down into Houston? So one of the floods with that dude The the famous one. Oh, yeah The guy that has a big arena. Yeah, what's his name? Fuck what is his name? name Jamie you know I'm talking about Big shitty didn't grin. Yeah, black hair Joel Osteen. Oh, it's that guy. Yeah. Yeah, he wouldn't let the homeless go Yeah, hey, no. No like we need. Yeah, places to put people not in here Yeah, it's gonna be gross people have lost their homes. No, no, no, no. You can't shit on my floor. No get out of here The power of Christ. I think he did eventually let everybody in under pressure. Well They shamed him into it. Yeah, he realized like oh, yeah. I got a what would Jesus do? I don't yeah Jesus would just hire more people to clean up. Jesus would get the all-new global 7500. Yeah, Jesus would get a new Rolls-Royce That's always unreal. Yeah. They all do it though. That's just funny. They all have super expensive suits. And tax free, right? Yeah. This is religion. That's the nuttiest part. That's the weird part about the scam. Is that you're allowed to be tax free. Fuckin' A. That is weird. It is weird. It's also weird when you think about what happens on the corporate level. Mm-hmm. That there's these corporations that make like hundreds of billions of dollars. And they're like, yeah, they didn't pay tax on this. Because they're this corporation. Right. Those are tax loopholes. Yeah, we both funnel it to Ireland and then not pay tax on it. Well, supposedly that's what Jeffrey Epstein did for people. He found those tax loopholes. He helped with tax loopholes and, you know, they helped rich people figure out how to save money. I mean, those money. I think this for a reason, right? Well, scumbags. Yeah. They've all put it in place. You know? Powers the B. I got you. They just want to make sure that they keep the most amount of money possible. And then there's that thing where like no one should be a billionaire. Well, okay, hang on. Do you like having a fucking iPhone? Yeah. Somebody had to make that. They're working 16 hours a day. They like, you don't want to be Tim Cook. I'm not saying, yeah, yeah. You know what I'm saying? You don't want to be Steve Jobs. I died young because of it. But I guess the argument that some people make against that is not that that guy shouldn't be wealthy. It's that when they have this overabundance of wealth and that the people that also work there don't have like certain health coverages. Really like these Amazon warehouse guys or like fucking dying in the warehouse. Well, I mean, they talk about these work conditions that are sometimes deplorable, right? And then you have the people at the top with like hundreds of billions of dollars. Like you can't trickle any of that down to like some of your workers. That that always seems like a legit complaint from people to me. Oh, for sure. Yeah. I mean, listen, if they didn't work, you would have nothing. Exactly. That's what's weird. This guy's doing like like $15 an hour. But if he didn't start the company, they wouldn't have a job. True. But you know. It didn't work. You would have nothing. Exactly. That's what's weird. It's guys doing like, it made like $15 an hour. But if he didn't start the company, they wouldn't have a job. True. But, you know, at the certain point in time, it's kind of like spreading around. Spread it around a little bit. Yeah. Spread it around. Seems like probably better for everybody. Spread it around. Maybe people wouldn't hate as much. There's always going to be people that like, you should donate it all. I mean, that's like the beautiful utopian. There's that one that did it too. Was it the Patagonia guy? Did he? I think it's the Patagonia guy that became a legit billionaire and donated almost every fucking penny of it. I think it's him. You know, that's why I love to change the world. I love to change the world. But I don't know what to do. Is that right, Jamie? Was it him? You guys like the Patagonia guy? First just typed in billionaire that gave donated everything in another guy popped up. It was probably a bunch of those guys. It's one of those, it's one of the outdoor, you know, apparel people. So outdoor apparel billionaire who literally, I think gave away like 98% of his. Yeah, gotta go. Yeah. The dude like kept like wearing a give it to him because somebody probably took his money. They probably live it on a yacht somewhere. That's the problem. I think he gave it to like a lot of land preservation type of things. You know, things that make sense. Okay. I'm pretty sure. That's smart if you're an outdoor company. Yeah. And that's what you love. But it is like that almost unbelievable. You know, I mean level of generosity. Mm hmm. That a guy, one in capitalism and to that degree and was like, he probably did mushrooms one day. It was like, what am I doing? Yeah. What am I doing? I'm living in this is a prison. Yeah. I'm getting a prison by all this money. Yeah, maybe Sam Walden was apparently like pretty down to earth too. You know, though the Walmart guy, yeah, got started. Yeah, I mean, he drove his like old pickup truck. Even when shit was like really, I mean, he died a long time ago. His kids don't live like that. I would have yelled at him. Yeah. Oh, pick up truck. If I was Joe Diaz, the fuck you do with this old pickup truck. You're balling now, talk, talk. Yeah, get a fucking Cadillac at least. Yeah, his, his, his, uh, you know, children and grandchildren live a very different life. Of course. Yeah. Yeah. The nipple babies. Yeah. Yeah. That's not good. That's a tough way to live. Yeah. When Forbes named Sam Walden, America's richest man, October 28th, 1985, people were shocked at discovery, lived a humble life and Bentonville, Arkansas with a muddy bird dog running around the yard. He was America's richest man in 1985. They also surprised choice of vehicles, 1979 Ford F-150. But Sam said, why do I drive a pickup truck? What am I supposed to do? How my dogs around in a Rolls Royce? It's just what who he was. Yeah. Also, it's different. I think when you, he made it to that level as like, a regular guy, he was already like, in his 40s or something, 50s, like it was just different for him. He wasn't, he wasn't handed anything. Don't forget who you are. Don't forget who you are, Cox, sucker. Yeah, he didn't. Well, some people do. Yeah, that is weird too, right? Yeah. Weird when people change like radically so. So, so radically. Yeah. And but also that level of wealth is like not something that most people can even cover. No, you can't comprehend billions. He was the richest man in the world. Yeah. He drove a pickup truck with a bunch of dogs. Like, what do you do with your money? I was watching that documentary about the murder in Monaco. Did you watch that one? What's that one? That was about a guy who was one of the 200 wealthiest people in the world. Safran, I think says last name. He was a banker. And he lived an ostentatiously, I mean, like, out of control. He among us, villas. Yeah, 25 security guards around him all the time. And was like a target and he was murdered in his penthouse in Monaco. What was he doing that everybody wanted him dead? He just had a lot of, well, one of the things is that he invested or was like one of the people that got this Russian, I don't know if it was like Russian crypto, some type of currency or stock market in Russia that collapsed when the when Russia devalued their currency by like 75% all sudden one year. So billions of dollars disappeared from people. And so he became like a target of the Russians, but he also had connections to a lot of government. When you're a high level banker with banks everywhere, you're, you know, you're deeply connected to some like not so great people. And so there was always like who did it. And his wife who it was, she's, I think she was, he was her fourth husband, also had two other husbands die. One of them was like the richest guy in Brazil. He died. And then people suspected that this guy, Safran's nurse may have killed him. And there was this, what the documentary was about. the interview him and like the documentary supposed like when the documentary owners, mail nurse who, and he was convicted, he was convicted and he served like 10 years. And then he's in the documentary doing the interview, right? Like they keep interviewing him and other people. And then it's like the documentary ends. And then the documentary filmmaker is like, this was where the documentary was supposed to end. But this guy who we just did this documentary about this mail nurse, as we're in post production on this got arrested for he did like some forged check shit. I think maybe in Arizona and got locked up and his cellmate was like, yeah, he tried to hire me to kill his ex wife. So then he got put on trial for soliciting to murder his ex wife. And then they go and interview him again. He's like, nice, I'll bullshit man. I'm telling you this fucking book like he's like, it's a, it's very strange. And it's, it's like, it's one of those things where you're like, you don't think it's the guy and then you do think it's the guy. What's it called? I think it's called murder in Monaco. Yeah. Monica was a crazy place. Have you been there? I've never been to Monica. I've been. It's really wild though. Weird. Yeah. There's so much money there. Everywhere you look as a Rolls Royce or Ferrari. It's the, what is going on here? The highest amount of millionaires and billionaires in the, the geographic like square mile or whatever. Because it's so small actually. Right. If you have residency there, I believe there's like crazy tax. You don't pay taxes. You don't pay taxes. You don't pay taxes. And guess what? When, when the husband died, the life got her monomonoco citizenship like that week. And then inherited the money then paying tax. Wow. Yeah. How hard is it to get a monomonoco citizenship? I bet it's somewhat challenging. Really? I think so. I don't know. You got to be the right people. I would assume, I mean, I know like for instance, you know where it's like impossible. And it, there's great benefits to it is UAE. They don't give that shit to anybody. Oh, really? Yeah. You got to be from there. And that's the same kind of benefits, right? Yes. Massive, massive benefits of being a, there's even, there's even a thing if you're a UAE citizen. Like if we have the same job and you're a non citizen and I am a citizen, I get double your salary. Wow. Just from being from UAE, things like that. Yeah. Government will also pay for your housing, give you a car, pay for your education. Yeah. But they have a small, one of the reasons they have extreme wealth, but they also don't have a high population of native citizens. Right. So they're able to do things like that also. And they have insane oil money. Insane. Especially now, who died? Well, that's when people talk about like the richest man in the world. Yeah. Like, okay, publicly. Yeah. But those guys don't have to tell you how much money they have. There's also a big difference between being extremely wealthy, holding stock and extremely wealthy, holding cash. Yeah. That's a real big difference. Yeah. Well, that's why it's wild what these guys are doing with like Saudi Arabia and so doing with boxing. Mm-hmm. Because they're just going, what do you guys want to see? Yeah. Okay. Let me call that guy. $1,000. Like what? Yeah. And then they're like, that ain't shit. That's fine. Yeah. Yeah. That Saudi entertainment fund is it's been interesting. It's just the government's fund. What was it like doing that re-od festival? Fantastic. Yeah. It was fantastic. I mean, the people there were amazing. Like, you know, there's always like, you look at things on the news and you have your preconceived notion of like what things are. Right. But when you're on the ground somewhere and you're with people, you know, I was just meeting wonderful people. We went to the comedy club there. We went to the club. Like not what we were brought there to do. Like they had like comedy pod, I think it's called. And it was just like, I mean, it was just Saudi comp, like local people. And the crowd was just citizens. There's like, and they were all just so warm and welcoming and they were such huge admirers of ours of like American comedy and American podcasts. And they were just super sweet. Like they were so genuine. And what is the restrictions? In terms of like language and subject matter. So everybody was highly, highly, highly well versed in not just English, but like American pop culture. So everything we talked about, they got everything, you know, they got everything. I mean, I went one the night before I went to see Jimmy Carr and Louis perform. And like I was like, holy shit, they get like even like the little throwaway lines, you know, like the things that aren't even like the bit, like the little jokes. The only restriction that we were that we had was about Islam and the Royals. That was it, which wasn't really a hard thing for most people to adhere to because like, you know, like me and those guys like we didn't have Islam or royal jokes. We were cutting anything for acts. So I was like, yeah, by the way, when we did UAE, you know, like Dubai and Abu Dhabi, they were like, do not talk about same thing. Don't talk about our Royals. Don't talk about Islam. Don't be like super graphic about, but then we did do graphic stuff and they're like, yeah, that's fine. They'll just take it easy on the on the Royals and on Islam. I was like, yeah, that's not a challenge for me. But the country like as far as like the people that we met, they were all fantastic. They were really sweet people. It's just people have a weirdness of like you're going over there because the Saudi Royal family has the money, right? The Saudi family is the family that funds the entertainment fund. Right. And then people were like, they would accuse me of what about Islam for saying that that's the same fund that paid for Ed Sheeran to come and Beyonce to come to do their shows. And like that's what I'm like, but how that's just facts. Like it's not what about Islam. It's like that's the money that funds entertainment. Some people will go, well, you should do it if the money came from like, let's say a promoter. But you're like, yeah, but that doesn't exist yet. Do you know what I mean? Like, this is this is the system that's in place. Now maybe in like, so who accused you of what about Islam? Just people would were so vocally upset that we went. Yeah. And I was like, I mean, first of all, the way that I went was that I was doing Dubai. I was like, I was booked to do Dubai, which is in UAE. He was already announced. And then three months later, I got a call and they're like, hey, do you want to do Riyadh? It's like a 90 minute flight. I'm like, I'm in the fucking Middle East. Yeah, I'll add a show. You know, like I'm there. It was like, route. Did you know it was a festival? I knew it was a festival. And then they told me the lineup. And the lineup was bananas. It was like, Kevin Hart, Bill Burr, Dave Shippa. I was like, oh, I was like, that sounds like a great lineup. I didn't think really like that I was doing something that would, I had no idea. I had no idea. I didn't think it would be something that people would get offended by. I mean, when the people that were most offended with the comics that weren't invited. Yeah. There's a lot of them. There was a lot of them were super vocal. And I'm like, you can't sell a ticket in Houston. I don't know why you're upset about Riyadh. Like no one's going to see you anyway. Right. It was a bunch of like 50 year old feature acts that were upset. And then we went over there, had a great time. And I actually think that like one of the things that was overlooked is the fact that we were all saying they're like, oh, you had to adhere to all of us. Like dude, I told you the two restrictions, which I didn't affect my act. And I do think it's a sign of their progress that they put on this festival and that we were saying all kinds of wild shit, like the shit that we say on stage without talk, we didn't talk about Islam. Right. I mean, that wasn't a crazy thing to me. Like I think that that's showing because what's happening actually there is that right right now the entertainment hub of the Middle East is Dubai. That is the entertainment hub of the Middle East. That's where people go. That's their Vegas. Big shows, spectacles, all types of shit. Saudi Arabia is like, no, we want to be the hub and they have super deep pockets. And so they're trying to be the to compete with Dubai in entertainment. That's what like the fuel of this is. And putting on this festival, to me felt like that's a path towards their goal of like entertainment can be here. And they put on a great festival, treated us fantastic. You know, people get, I don't mind if people are like, you can be mad, be mad about whatever you want. I don't care. But as an experience, it was an amazing experience. And I do think that they'll continue to put on these festivals. It'll be very interesting to watch as this festival continues. Who goes, who gets invited and goes, who was against it at the beginning? Because you know it's going to be a few people. And I have some screenshots that I've said. So we'll see who goes. Maybe perhaps it's interesting. It's interesting that comics are held to a higher standard than singers or other people that perform over there. Yeah. I mean, it is weird though, you know, because it's like comedy uniquely challenges the idea of free speech. Yeah. Sure. Yeah. That makes sense. Yeah. And I don't know if you guys have any songs. But I don't have any songs. But I have to say that also like some of these comics who are saying this, like, oh, you know, you don't have free speech and you adhere to these restrictions. It's like, if you've ever done a private, have you ever done a university? I have. Yeah. They had restrictions. Yeah. You know, they were like, don't talk about our mascot. Don't talk about this. Don't talk about that. Yeah. And you don't, and you don't have that in your act already. Then the question is, should you be working for those people because of what happens with Jamal Khashoggi? Mm-hmm. That's everyone's big argument. And Dave had the best line about that. Yeah. It's like Israel killed 240 journalists last month. Yeah. You know, like what are you talking about? I mean, it's the last three months. It's a fair point. It is a fair point. Yeah. It's, um, it's just different, right? Like one guy was sought up in an embassy in a way in suitcase. It's not good. It's a, it's a horrific what happened. But also, I mean, if you want to like go down that, that line of that, that argument. Then you shouldn't be working in America either. I mean, that's, that's like, are we saying that only their awful thing is right? Right. Well, it's against their funding it, right? As opposed to like if you work in America, it's not the CIA doesn't fund a comedy show. Sure. Sure. Sure. You know what I mean? Yeah. There's a lot of, there's a lot of ways to look at it. If it, if it really upsets you, my position is good. Well, the other thing. Yeah. Yeah. Let it upside you. Yeah. It is a good thing to bring great comics over to Saudi Arabia. I think so. Good for people to hear what these Jimmy Carr and you and Louis and Bill and all these comics have to say and Dave, it's a good thing for the culture. Like it's good thing for human, it's good thing to open up society. And it seems like outside of this whole Jamal Khashoggi thing, which again is undefensible, right? Yeah. It's a more progressive organization. Like they are letting women drive now. They're like, slowly, this is coming into a more moderate sense of progress. It is progress. It is a sign of progress. Whether people accept that or not, it is a sign of progress there. Yeah. It doesn't, it doesn't help the people there if you never interact with them ever again because it's something their government did. Exactly. And I have to tell you, if you saw the faces of these people that we were performing for and the, I mean, when you could, sometimes they're like this. But like how genuinely thankful and excited they were to be at these shows. It was awesome. It was it just Saudi Arabia. You never would imagine you'd see a lineup like that. Oh my God. I mean, some of the guys they were telling us they were like, dude, like 10 years ago, they're like nothing like this could have ever, ever happened here. So I don't know how you don't see that as some type of progress. What's up, Jamie? I just don't know across something insane. What? This is on the justice website. Justice.com. Just as Jamie scroll. I don't know how you would. No, I just saw it tweet and clicked. Okay. What is this? Corn of the screens is Jay Epstein. Jeffrey Epstein killing himself. What? It's the date. So what is he doing here? I don't know. It's a 12 second video that someone found on their website. Can you see that again? Put that up. Can you pause it and make it larger? So is he hanging himself there? Looks like he's leaving. I'm not showing on screen because I don't know. I don't even know what he's saying. But I don't even know if that's like what is, it looks like plain white hair. I don't know if it was, you know. Well, he definitely had white hair. But like, so is that him with a thing wrapped around his neck and he's trying to kill himself? I don't know. That's a much worse. So one thing that's important was he had a previous suicide attempt, supposedly, when he was locked up. Yeah. I mean, that was one of the reasons why he was under like 24 hour supervision. That's the case, right? Didn't he have a previous suicide attempt? I don't even know if someone found this. That's crazy. That's on the government website. But you imagine that they've had this footage the whole time. Was that real? Yeah, but you know what I'm saying? It's like, who knows what's real? I watched a cruise ship hit a bridge in the bridge fell apart and everybody died. It's fake. It's fake? For like a half of a second though, I was like, oh. Yeah. Like, oh my God, I thought it happened today. Like, yeah, new tragedy. And then I'm like, how much better are they going to get at that too? Oh, it's going to be impossible to tell. It's so much better than it just was just a couple of years ago. It's just someone guessed the URL of the files that were uploaded to DOJ's website that were not announced yet and found the video. Holy. Oh, okay. And then the correct it says, 100% fake. Oh, but it's on that website still, which is it's on the Justice Department, where the like, it means it's fake shit on the website. Oh, boy. So, I think the video is 100% fake with the visual, did release by the DOJ. It seems it's a collection of files collected by investigators in this fake video originated on four chant. Yeah. So even there, four chance strikes again. Wow. Yeah, man, there's it's going to be impossible to know in the future. There's no way to tell. There's no way. There's going to get real fucking weird. Because already with the voice stuff is crazy. Like, I can listen to something for like your voice and I'll be like, and then find out that it's fake. I can alter it to make you excited, make you little sad here. And in like your case, in my case, there's just thousands of hours of a speech. Mm hmm. So it's even easier. Oh, yeah. And that won't even matter in the future. It's like with the newer technology, they'll be able to manipulate it. And it's going to get way better. Yeah. That's what I mean, what does that even mean? What is it? Tom Siger. Tell everybody once again. Guys, please. Please, some comedy special. It's called teacher. It's on Netflix. What does this come out? You're in the game. I'm sorry. I didn't mean to play sound. I'm here. This will be out tomorrow. Oh, great. Yeah. So Chris, come on. Yeah. It comes out. Chris, missy. Missy. Nice. On Netflix, it's called teacher. I'm very excited about it. I thank you so much for watching it over this holiday break. It's a good time to release. I toured for two years to get ready for this one. I'm very happy with it. So I hope you enjoy it. Well, if it's any of the stuff that I've been watching, it's going to be awesome. Thanks, brother. Thank you so much. Have a beautiful seat. I'm excited. I'm happy. All right. That's it. Bye, everybody. Merry Christmas.