The Jerogean experience. I've had multiple ocean scares now. Like, the ones where you're like... Crying on the beach. Well, no, just that like, in the moment... Yeah. I keep telling myself don't panic, don't panic, don't panic. You know? And one, I remember, was in Hawaii, where we rented a Jeep, and we were like, we want to go see something, you know? So they tell you, oh, take this road, and it takes you to this single road that goes up, where there used to be volcanoes, and we come up on this beach. And they had mentioned the beach, but not really too much about it. And so when we parked, I was like, I love the ocean water, I'm going to get in the ocean, you know? So I get in the ocean, and I remember that going in, the beach into the water was a decline, right? So like, you go down, and I was just like, knee deep in there, about, and I was like, man, this current is pulling back hard. Like, really hard. And I kind of take, I could step back, and I feel myself going further down a decline into the ocean. Right? And when I decided to get out, I have to really push hard, like all legs, like boom, boom, like run, like you're running up a hill, take it out, and I was like, that was fucking, that way you hit you there. That was kind of, that was a scary. There's a WWE wrestler. They tell me, though, when I get back to the hotel, they go, I go, yeah, we took, I go, that beach was, that was a little scary. They go, did you get in the water? And I go, yeah. And they go, oh, you can't get in that water. Like, you'll drown in that water. No one, did you notice there was nobody swimming there? I go, yeah, notice those. They're not thought I was coming. They're fucking, they're like, they didn't tell me they're like, do not swim in that water. They're like, you can't swim out of that. If you would, like, if you would swim 10 feet in, they're like, you're just gone. Oh my God. Panic, you feel, especially in retrospect, because you remember the feeling of being like, I think I'm stuck here. You know, I think I'm stuck right. It's him and saved a lady in Thailand. Really? Yeah, someone was drowning and fits him and swam out and saved them. Really? Yeah, pretty sure it was Thailand. Somewhere crazy like that. Yeah, it was on vacation. I'm not a made up Thailand. I'm not a made up Thailand. That's a, it doesn't tell me. It's a place for the people. It's a good Thailand. No, he would go, he's a world. Oh, he's a Hawaii guy. He surfs in Hawaii. Where ever it was. If it's him and it's one of the oceans and saved a little. No shit. Yeah. I saw my dad save a lady. That's scary. The resort. It was at the bottom of the pool. He was just laying at the bottom of the pool. Oh my God. And I was like nine years old. It was like father son. He took his resort. And there's a slide. You ever go on a slide where the water that comes off the slide that like, so in other words, like when you hit the water, it's like high impact. Like holy shit. And it pushes you down. I'm nine years old. So this is many years ago. And I remember like I could swim. I was on swim team like as a little kid. But I remember being like, fuck, that is powerful. Like it pushes you down, right? And you just swim up and we're all people are, you know, at the resort. And then look down at my dad, swims at the bottom of the pool and pulls up this lifeless body. And then they do CPR and she came back. Oh, shut up. And they would write letters to our house for years. Really? She wasn't a good kid. She's the guy. Oh my God. The snowboarder upside down when the random skier comes back. Yes. Just sees us. No more sticking this far out of the snow. Is this the one where the guy was buried under the snow? He goes, what the fuck? He stops. He goes, hey, go, go, go. He's saying the guy's life. Randomly. Is this separate? Have you seen the footage where the guy's wearing the GoPro? I've seen that. And then he's like, oh, I'm into the dinch. Like a hole? Yeah. That you can, is visceral that foam. Oh my God. And then he's just like, we'll see what happens. I obviously he got out because there's footage. Like when you're watching that, you're like, oh my God, you could just fall in there forever and apparently that's something that happens. Three wells? That something that happens. So this guy just falls and they watch this. Bro. What? I know, birds feeling this. No, I've had a couple experiences like this. He manages to stop himself. Like what the fuck? How the fuck do you get out of that? How the fuck do you get out of that? Fuck the skis. How do you get out of that? It's over, Joe. But no, he's out. I know. They had to, I think I've read about this. They had to get search and rescue. He had to hang out down there for a while. Search and rescue had to come up and hold you. I'm thinking more than she was. He used to go so lucky that he stopped right there. But the way he, right here, he's not flailing. He's like putting his arm and his ski out to try. It's like, so this guy was able to keep some composure. Which is like kind of the craziest part. Oh my God. So this is the snowboarder that's buried upside down. This guy just sees that little blue piece. Bro, just ran out of this happened to me. Skied right over. Yeah, he easily could have missed that. Yeah, could have got another one. There's not much blue. Soft snow, he's in a tree well is what it is. So the tree wells, it's really soft, soft snow. So if you get stuck in a tree well, you are fucking dead. A lot of people die in tree wells. God damn. Yeah, I'm thinking of getting one of those GPS things. So I want to remind you. We went snowboarding in Madahorn, Hella skiing. And the guy put a beacon on us. And the first he said he puts a beacon. It's like four feet of powder. And he says, this is so we can find the body. And I was like, what? He's like, this is on Kravas or on Abalanch. So we put the beacon on to find the body. Wow. That feeling, this happened to me. That feeling is terrifying. This guy's like, thank you. Good. I'll get you out here in a sack of guy. He was panic. The panic knew he was dead. I feel panic watching. The panic is what happens is like what happened to me and that when we were Hella skiing, is I fell face forward in powder. And I just, I'd never, snow skiing, snowboarding in powder, four feet of powder is very different than snowboarding. It's like you have to have your bindings reset. You have to really know how to ride the powder and I could not turn right. And the guy's holding me is like, don't go within five feet of my tracks, stay within my tracks. So the whole time I can only turn left. At the time I really wasn't that good of a snowboarder. But I could snowboard, but not powder. And so he's going like this. And all I can do is go left and I'm just going off the track. Oh no. And I'm fucking panicking. But by the way, we're like 13,000 feet, 14,000 feet. It's very little oxygen. I'm gassed. I'm fat. I'm hung over. It's the day after the national championship that we went to. So we eat netables. It was like, it was the day after that. I flew to fucking, I flew to Switzerland and immediately landed and went Hella skiing. I don't remember that. And so no, no, no, no. When we went to Florida State versus Alabama. I was like, 13, 2013. Yeah, 2013. So all of a sudden I go to turn, cut right. And I catch it, my nose. And I fucking go face birds in the snow. And at first, I'm like, fine. I push my arms in and they just do not touch anything. It just goes like this. And now snows impacted on my face. So I can't really breathe. And I'm first of all, I do a panic. But panic hit kicks in immediately. And I'm like, this is why I have the fucking beacon on. And so I try to clear the snow out of my face. But I'm like pulling all the muscles in my back, trying to turn over. And then the guy just comes up behind me, grabs me on the back, flips me over, and he goes, you should see your sound guy. My sound guy's upside down, skis kicking, upside down in the snow. And we just got the fuck out. We got on a helicopter and got the fuck out. I was like, this isn't safe.