You're gonna run the Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night! All day! You look like you lost a large child for your body. 86 pounds. That's right, that's a large child. I know that you want to take credit for it because... Fat shaming works. Exactly. But I can't give you all the credit. No, you didn't. I didn't deserve all the credit. I didn't do anything. So, because... I just was concerned for your well-being. And so, I was just saying, if you really are saying that you want to get healthy and you really are saying that you want to play soccer and do all these things again, like... A friend has to be brutally honest with you. Yeah, it's cool. Well, that's a hard one. That's a hard one because nobody wants to hear their gaining weight or their gained weight or that they have to make radical changes to their life. I'm actually at the lowest weight since I think 88. That's incredible. That's a great one. That's crazy. How much better do you feel phenomenal? I'm gorgeous. Isn't it incredible? It's unbelievable. Like, if they could give you that in a pill, just the feeling how it feels to be 86 pounds lighter. Exactly. Oh, my God. I mean, just to give you a sense so that we could put it into metrics when I was overweight, our love-making session was only an hour and a half of a success. Whereas now, I've doubled it. Congratulations. How do you have so much time? It's incredible. My wife has lived in East East by sea. She demands a lot of things. What did you do other than exercise and like, how did you shift your diet? So two things. Number one, 15 to 20,000 steps a day, no matter what. No matter what. So it's been almost now two and a half years that I haven't done a single day of less than 10,000 steps. Now, the steps could be treadmill. It could be walking outside. It could be running vigorously on the, you know, whatever. It could be biking. But I always have with me this actually at fall. Is it one of those pedometers? It's those pedometer things. The obsessive about maintain. So just by having this clear objective that I have to reach makes it that no matter what I've got to get off, you know, off the proverbial couch and walk around. It's minus 20 in Montreal. I'm walking outside until I reached out. So that's, but I was always quite physically active. Of course, much of your weight loss comes from keeping this guy closed. Yeah. That's the thing that people need to work. It's very, very, very, very difficult to exercise your weight loss. Exactly. And so what I did, so my wife, who's here, who you've known her for many years, she's an amazing woman. She turned into the diet gashtapo. She's got this, my fitness pal, they're getting, I guess, free publicity on the number one show on the world. So through my fitness pal, she would, she enters till today. Every single thing that goes into this gorgeous body. Wow. At the end of the day, she says, don't have any snacks. You're at 1727 and you were supposed to get under 1700. So by having that feedback loop that's always keeping you in check plus the, so the third thing is I weigh myself once a week so that the auto corrective mechanism comes in not when I've now, when I'm now to 27 in terms of weight. But if I've come to Texas and then I go on the scale and I've gained three pounds, well, I need, I know that I need to correct the following week. So these little changes, I mean, there's nothing magical just doing that. I guess if I can add a fourth thing, I remove the all or nothing mindset. In the past, I mean, the highest weight I reached you. Can you, and you want to send me, can you from knowing me for many years, you know how heavy I got? I guess you can calculate. Well, if I look at you now, you look like you weigh about 165 pounds. Yeah, exactly. I'm 170. I'm going to weight classes. A lot of years of conversation. Exactly. And I would imagine the heaviest you got was probably close to 300 pounds. 256. Yeah. Okay. So that's the 86 pounds. So 256 for a guy. That's the heaviest that I, maybe I could have been more that I'm aware of that I've actually seen it on this scale was 256. I had gone from my yearly physical and I got on this scale and I was 256, which is the average weight for a 6 foot 4 middle linebacker who's, you know, 88 inches tall. Yeah. Right. That's scary. And so I removed the all or nothing mindset and that I need to lose all the weight by next Tuesday. You know, my mindset was as long as every day I'm a bit better, adventure, you know, the old baby steps. And so I get on. I'm now 10 pounds less, 20 pounds. Hey, let me try to get under 200. I am. And then bit by bit magically. Here I am. So a message, if you have a message to anybody out there that's trying to do it, what would it be? What's the most important thing? It's that there are 1000 different temptations in a day for you to violate your goal. And you can almost never fail. You don't have to be so punishing, but 997 out of the 1000 befrications in the road. You have to take the right road. And so do that enough days enough times get 997 out of 1000 and suddenly you'll be 30, 40, 50 pounds like just trust the process, trust the process. And that's what's hard for people to do because they really do want immediate results. And the way I always describe it, there's a there's a gambling term that you have to get better the same way you get sick. It's like if you're gambling, say if you and our playing pool and I was ahead 100 games and you said double and nothing, I would say no, no, no, you got to get better the same way you got sick. Because I'm up 100 games. Why would I risk losing it all in one one shot? No, no, no. And that's that's how it is with weight loss. You got to get better the same way you got sick slowly over time. And it's been now, you know, the usual thing is that you put it back on. I've now helped, you know, had it off for for quite a while. So I'd like to think that I'm in my steady state now, but that's well, you've become aware now of the value of being thin and healthy and you've become aware of how good it you feel. Yeah. I don't think you're a smart man. You're not going to go back. Exactly. Did you ever have any trouble with your? I mean, I've been like five pounds overweight before. Ten pounds overweight before. Yeah. And then I always like, oh, you fat fuck and I lose the weight. Now is that is that because of your. Go on. Go on. No, no, not putting it. Why didn't you ever put on more weight? It's not an option. I'm not getting fat. Is it literally a vanity issue? No, it's a health issue. So I work out. I do martial arts. If I'm fat, I can't work out. Like, can I feel it? It's like I put sludge in my engine. Yeah. Like the fat I've ever got, I think I've got like two, seven, one time. And it's, for me, it goes right here. It goes on my sides and in my belly. And if it's also is eating a lot pasta, which is just not for me. Whenever I do that, I always feel like shit. And I just overeat, but I work out a lot. So it keeps it in check for the most part, but I can get it. It can get away from me if I'm stupid. Because I just, I still eat like a teenager. I eat like I eat as much as I want. Like I eat large amounts of food, but you do mainly the protein stuff. Yes. Mainly, mainly I eat meat, but I mostly meat and fish and fruit. That's mostly what I eat. So I guess the fifth element of when you ask me what the hydrolives is weight, I also remove all the carbs almost all of it. Once in a while, I, you know, I have a bit of something. But so what is a daily meal for you? So breakfast, I may have one or two boiled eggs. Lunch might be my wife and I go to the Peruvian rotisserie place that we probably go to four times in a week, which I'll get a quarter of a chicken with a bit of coleslaw, vinegar, coleslaw, not creamy coleslaw. I might have one or two snacks around mid afternoon, which might be things like a hundred grams of frozen raspberries, a little yogurt of 70 calories. And then dinner will be a fantastic salad that if you looked at the volume, you think my God, how are you losing so much weight? But it only has, you know, five, six ounces of protein, but it's voluminous. So then I feel full. I may have another, you know, a little snack at eight o'clock, 70, 80 calories. And I've reached my 15, 16, 17 hundred calories. And I'm Mr. Slim Man. Are you trying to lose more? Are you going to maintain this? Yeah. Because you look great. Thank you. That's very kind. I just want to see a one and a six. I haven't reached it. I've gotten to 170.4. Last time I checked, I was 171. I just need to see a steady state of, you know, 165, 167. And now the actuarial tables, by the way, for a guy in my height, they put me at 155, which strikes me as a bit. That's pretty thin. That's pretty thin. Yeah. I don't, those, those tables, the BMI tables are, they don't account for mass and weightlifting. And also you did soccer for many, many years. You have strong legs. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. I think that one thing that can help you. I don't know if you've done intermittent fasting. Have you tried that? So what kind of window? 16, 8, 16. I like 16. Yeah. I like 16. So I've done that for three days. Just because I'm trying to recover from having gone on a trip. But I'm guessing you're suggesting that I do it for a longer period. Correct? Well, I just, that's what I do. Always. Yeah. I do 16. I mean, I occasionally violated if I feel like it, but it's only because I know I can get away with violating it because I'm so consistent. Right. But that's, that's my move. Are you as disciplined and other aspects of your life as you are in your weight management? I mean, certainly in your work ethic you are, but other things, or you're a punctiliest nature, only manifest itself in a few domains and you're completely carefree and others? No. No, I can't. This is me. This is me with everything. You're exacting. Yeah. I mean, I take days off. I relax. I can, I know how to relax. I'm good at that. But I think discipline is a very important thing for a person. I think it's a very important thing to take care of the thing. It's like not taking care of the things causes you so much more pain and anxiety than taking care of the things. Right. So take care of the things, no matter what it is, whether it's your body or your work or whatever you got to do, fucking off is not good for you. It's like you need, if you're a professional, just do your work. And you should be a professional with your body. Like there's a great book called, I think it's called going pro. It's Stephen Pressfield, the same guy wrote the war of art. I'm in the middle of his second book, which it only gets much as a war of art, but turning pro. And the whole idea is about approaching your work, like, decide that you're a professional and show up when you're supposed to show up. You put in the time and this is in regards, he's a writer. But it's, I think, that it's applicable to almost anything with your pain or like yourself and intellectual. You could be whatever, whatever it is, whether you're dealing with your physical body, whether you're dealing with hobbies, just do the work. Do put in the discipline. So I can apply what you're saying to being an author. When you try to write a book, look, I do two types of authoring. I write academic papers, but those papers have a very clear template. Right? You start with an intro, then you've got the hypothesis, the literature review, the methodology, the results. So the content is not a priori determined, but the template is clear. When you write a book, you're going on an open end to journey. I mean, you do have a outline. You have a book prospectus of the things you want to say, but how you fill these in, you have no idea. And so one of the things that I tell people when they write to me and say, how did you become a successful author? Discipline. Every single day, rain or shine, I decide that I have to write no matter what 300 words. They may be great words. They may be things that I edit. But there is no, I'm not feeling good today. There is no, my throat is itching. I feel a bit down, no matter what. I'm writing 300 words. And so if you have that grit, I think it's a path to success. Yeah, Pressfield talks about that very same approach. And he describes the muse as like a thing that will show up when you show up. That if you show up every day with respect to the muse, he even says a prayer to the muse. I don't remember if he gives you the prayer, tells you what the prayer is, but he'll sit down and say a thing, like out loud, to his laptop before he sits down, starts to write. And then he'll write. And he will write for three hours, no matter what. And he feels like that three hours he starts to fade off and his creativity and his energy for just the whole process sort of wanes to the point where it's not valuable to keep going. You know, there is nothing more orgasmic to me other than sex literally, but then the process of creation. There is a day when I opened the laptop where that word document has zero syllable struck. And 12 months later, 16 months later, there is an entire book that's written that hopefully is going to be consumed by many thousands of people, many of whom are going to send selfies. And that process is addictive. And so a lot of academics don't write books. They tend to focus on the peer reviewed scientific papers. What does it have to be entertaining? That's a different stream. A peer reviewed a paper and what you write. Which by the way, I want to give you a copy of the parasitic mind with an autograph, please don't sell it on eBay. I will not sell it on eBay. Thank you very much. Cheers. Enjoy it. I think a lot of the woke stuff that you talk about is all covered in this book. And you covered it years ago, too. I covered it. The few were one of the first people to sound the alarm many years ago. There's a real problem, both in academia and the way students are interacting with ideas and the way people online were interacting with ideas. And you were a long time ago saying that there was something going on with people where these essentially mind parasites. It really is what it's like because they're actually a contagion. They spread throughout communities and people accept them as standard. And it becomes very hard to debate ideas and it becomes very hard to talk about subjects objectively and honestly because some things are triggering and some things are offensive and some things are and it's just like they can just decide like what cannot be discussed because these things are offensive. Just like the whole idea of fat phobia. Like I was watching this video today and this woman was talking about how people going on a diet and she was saying you don't even know yourself but going on a diet you're being fat phobic and let me break this down. And she breaks this down with this like pseudo intellectual nonsense because I guess she was an educator. And so here you got this sloppy overweight lazy educator telling people that it's good to be lazy because if you're not lazy and if you try to become healthy then you're a big it. You're a fat pho. Body positive. It's nonsense. Body positivity is stupid. We are the only this is the only time in this world we're living in in 2022. This era from like whatever it was maybe 1970, 1980 on where poor people are fat. This is crazy. Where it's not just wealthy people who are just sitting there getting fed grapes while they're lounging. It's poor people. Everybody's eating bad food. But you know so earlier you asked me about how did I lose all the weight? Well it's a daily grind to be able to lose it. It takes a lot of discipline. Isn't it easier for me to construct an alternate universe that basically says that Joe Rogan and my physician saying that I'm overweight is going to reduce my longevity. You're just part of the fat complex that are trying to marginalize differently weighted people. Yeah. And so friendly weight. Like that. I coined that trademark. But really it's from an ego defensive perspective. It's a lot easier for me to adopt that ideology than to do the daily grind that's going to require for me to auto correct and therefore I buy into fat phobia and I buy into body positivity. Yeah. The grind is it's legitimately hard but there's support out there. The thing that I would say to people that are on the fence and it's easy to just decide to be body positive and it's easy to decide to tell everyone they're beautiful no matter what and to look at someone who's morbidly obese and say you're amazing. You're so special. You're incredible. It doesn't matter and fuck those people that say you need to lose weight. You just need to be you and you're just I love you. You're an any man who looks at you for your beauty rather than what's on the inside is not a man that you want to be with. Yeah. Well, he doesn't want to be with you either. So I don't know what to tell you. So if you want to just like call it first and say I don't want to be with him because he judges me. Do you remember the book The Beauty Myth by Naomi Wolf? Do you know that book? I do remember about that book. I did not read it. So she she's kind of come around of it because she's now been more on the rational side of the whole COVID thing. You know, more nuance, more temperature. Isn't she recently suspended from Twitter? Why, she? I didn't know that. Naomi Wolf was suspended from Twitter. I believe I might be right. Is Jamie the part of the ministry of truth because Jamie's on the ball. Don't worry about Jamie. The ministry of truth is that the United States. Yeah, here it is. What's the spend? Look at this. Yeah. The tweeting anti-vaccine misinformation. There you go. Yeah, but this is on the BBC. What is the actual anti-vaccine misinformation? She took what did she say? Oh, The Beauty Myth. There it is. That's what I'm going to talk about. Yeah, this is her. So what did she say? She was duped into tweeting a made up quote of an image of an American adult film star dressed up as a doctor. Most recent, she tweeted that the urine and feces of people had received the jab needed to be separated from general sewage supplies while tests were done to measure its impact on non-vaccine people through drinking water. What? Is she gone crazy? I don't know. How are they like, she claimed that vaccines were a software platform that could receive uploads? Oh, Jesus, Naomi. This is what happens when you don't lose weight quick enough. She also compared Dr. Anthony Fauci to Satan to her more than $140. That's not misinformation. That's correct. But you could do that. You're allowed to say that someone's Satan, but you can't say that they're separating the sewage. Like there's some sort of a program that like separates vaccinated from unvaccinated poop. But you're going to fill this out so we can detail which pipe your poop should be sent through. We'll talk about the idea of ministry of truth if you want in a second, but just to finish the point about The Beauty Myth. She had written a book in the early 1990s where she argued that women are now winning in all facets of life. And the only place where men can still exert control over women is by promulgating the idea of a beauty myth whereby there are universal standards of beauty. And so now women, even though they're not literally chained by the patriarchy, they're chained by those expectations. And so I had tackled that book in my first book in 2007 as a bunch of gibberish that was part of the victimhood narrative. I don't know. Apparently she hasn't done any better recently. She blew a fuse. She blew a fuse. It seems like she believes if that's all true, Jimmy, see if there's anything that's like more rat. The BBC is very sketchy lately, especially when it comes to COVID stuff. Maybe there's something that like has a detailed depiction of why she was suspended with the actual tweet itself. Because I remember people were outraged on Twitter because she posted some really rational things and somebody reposted it. She posted it somewhere else and they were like, she needs to be brought back. But I don't know what it was. The problem with beauty is that it's not fair. That's what the problem is. So when someone says, you know, the beauty myth and this is an in-home and men who want you to be held to certain standards of beauty, those men are bad people. It's like, no, it's a tyranny. It's a short-lived tyranny. A tyranny of beauty and it is reality. And you know who doesn't talk like that? Really hot women. Exactly. It's fucked. It's just, there are a drug. When you're around a truly gorgeous woman, it's stunning how people fall in line and they don't know what to do and they stumble over their words and men like insult each other and like in a sort of a joking way to try to get a one up socially over each other in front of the woman. It's bizarre to watch. Here's the thing. So to give some people who may not be gorgeous, some light at the end of the tunnel, mating is a compensatory process. What do I mean by that? I'm not six foot four. Height is a beautiful trait, but I can make up for my lack of height by being charming, by being funny, by being exceptionally good looking, which is just a genetic lottery, by having academic status and being an accomplished person. So I can compensate for traits on which I'm lacking in this case, physical height. And so there are ways by which you can improve your lot on the mating market. Men can. So you write that physical beauty. Well, we talked earlier about being 500 pounds and somebody telling you, but people should love you the way you are. All other things equal. Any person who doesn't weigh 500 pounds and instead ways within the normal range is going to improve their looks. You're not going to turn into Beyonce if you don't have the facial morphology to be gorgeous, but we can all improve even on things that seem to be immutable. No? Well, we certainly can. And men are certainly attracted to women's personalities and certainly attracted to their energy and how they approach life. But the unfortunate truth about sexual attraction is it's largely a body shape and the way the structure of the face, the geometry of the face. It's, it's, I mean, clearly some people are repulsive because of their personality, even though they're gorgeous. That's true too. But it's stunning. Like I'm sure you're watching this Johnny Depp Amber Heard trial. I watched a bit of it. Yes. There's no way a fat woman could get away with what that lady did to him. Right? There's no way an unattractive woman who's overweight could ever talk to Johnny Depp the way she did. She's genetically gifted and she's got an amazing face structure. I think at one point in time she was voted the most beautiful woman alive. You know, she has perfect face. It's kind of fading a little now because of craziness and she's stoning down her beauty to appear as a victim. She's not showing up. Well, yeah, she's not dalled up. But she's not, I mean, she's vain. She's not going to not wear makeup. She's wearing makeup. She's also been doing coke for decades. Yeah. It's like that shit wears on you. I think the may launch the combination of their two personalities was the perfect combustible fire, right? Yeah. I mean, I didn't follow her closely, but from what I gather he was pathologically jealous because he's much older. She's the super hot girl who is not very homely in her interactions with other men. She probably can trigger jealousy and even the most secure guy. So you take a rather narcissistic girl with a guy who is maybe fading in terms of his qualities as a man. He's much older than her. And so they feed off each other. One of the things, for example, I love and I've been married to my wife for 23 years. We've been together. I think I hope your degree. She's a beautiful woman. She's a beautiful. Thank you. I know it's weird that she would pick this guy. That's maybe my biggest compliment. You're beautiful too. Thank you. She's never once that I can remember triggered a jealousy response for me. Not that I don't have the capacity to be jealous. I think we even the most secure of people can be true. But it's because she has those wonderful qualities whereby we both know the code. We never try to test each other's love by triggering each other's jealousy. That's dark shit. When you see that in a relationship, I mean, I've been in relationships where that happens and it's not fun. But when you see that happen, you just go, this is not going to end well. No one's going to learn that type of personality that does that. She, one of the things in the trial, she called them a fat ass. An old fat ass. There you go. When they insult to each other and it's just like their actors, they're crazy people. That's just what it is, man. That business, first of all, you've got to think that the reason why someone wants to do that in the first place. The reason why someone wants that exorbitant amount of attention was they didn't get enough when they were young, almost always. Then they obviously couldn't possibly realize the perks. Maybe that's why they do it. But for the most part, it's someone that's making up for something that was missing in their childhood. Then you get them in this bizarre system where you have to audition for everything. You have to be chosen. You have to bend your personality to what it is. It's not on objective. It's not on the tricks. It's not there. There isn't a clear ABC that would result in me being picked. It's the vagaries of the casting director. It's also an ideology attached to it. It must be progressive in liberal. You must be progressive. If you walk in there with a fucking mega-american gradient hat on, it's going to work. An attorney point USAT shirt, they'll kick you right out of the fucking room. You literally won't be allowed to speak. If you went into the average casting agents, if you were the best, if you were Daniel De Luis, and he walked in with a mega hat on, they would not get the fuck out of here. They don't want you because there's a gatekeeper role that's a function of the casting directors and the producers and executives. It's part of the weirdness of Hollywood. That accentuates the craziness people. You have crazy people and then they're massively insecure already and then you have them be chosen. Then they bend their personality around. It's like water finds its way. You've got to figure out what do I have to do to get in. I've been exposed to that. I've been around that for decades because I've lived in Hollywood for a long time. Now that I'm out here, I realize how much better it is to not be around that kind of a community because it shapes everything around it because you don't realize it whether you realize it or not. A lot of the people that are executives in these entertainment companies wanted to be actors, but they just didn't have the talent. A lot of people were waiters. They wanted to be actors. A lot of people who have zero talent and recognize it, they want to be reality stars. They try to be influencers online. They try to do, like you find out, when are your kids moms is a TikTok lady. You're like, oh, Jesus Christ and she's doing TikToks and asking and Tik selfies with you. You have any celebrities from that world entered your innermost friendship circle in your life. There's good ones. There's people in that world that are very good people that are not in any way like what you would expect from like a movie. So like Chris Pratt is a great example. He is the most normal, down to earth, friendly guy you could ever know. Oh, that's great. He's wonderful. He's a great guy. Like I've run into him multiple times. I've been in a hunting camp with him. I ran into him and Lenai on the beach just randomly ran into him. I didn't know he was going to be there. He didn't know I was going to be there. And he was there with this at them time, I think newly one. I think they had just gotten married and he was there on his honeymoon. He's the best. He's so nice. And I'm going to make a prediction as to the number one personality trait that the source people into the Chris Pratt's and not ready? Yes. Authenticity. Authenticity is certainly a factor. Another factor is he's very religious. So he has like a core set of values and ethics and morals that he thinks are above everything else. So a guy like that is not going to get sucked in. So it keeps him grounded. Yeah. Yes. Very grounded. But I've met some other people that are really cool. I met Robert Pattinson recently, the new Batman guy. He's fucking great. He's a great guy. He was so normal. You're fun to hang out with. Great sense of humor. You know who's my fantasy interview on my show? Who Clint Eastwood? He's a fantastic character. He has another one. His son. His son Scott. Great guy. Great guy. He's in the business. Yes. He's famous actor. He's been stars on the beach. He's a bluebird. Yeah. Should I be ashamed that I've never heard of him? No, you're not young enough. He's in like God. He was in that recent Guy Ritchie movie. What was the recent recent movie? He was great. He played a bad cop in the Guy Ritchie movie. He's been in he's in a lot of shit man. He's always in movies. You know what I love about Clint Eastwood. So my first exposure to him was as a young kid in Lebanon with this spaghetti westerns. I'd say you're five. You're six. And there's this quiet guy whose ominous who comes in. a young kid in Lebanon with this spaghetti westerns. So you're five, you're six. And there's this quiet guy who's ominous, who comes in, who saves the day. And it's playing on all of the evolutionary-based archetypes that we're programmed to respond to. So I'm looking at this guy and say, I like this guy, I want to be this guy. And then throughout his career, as I got older and as he progressed in his career, he's become a great filmmaker. And so he and plus, he's not woke. And so he just seems like the type of guy, obviously he's now quite elderly and so on. He'd be the kind of guy that I'm sure I'm unlikely to meet him and not say, my God, what a cool guy. He just exudes those qualities, right? He seemed very fun, very interesting. I mean, the kid's career has been incredible. He's doing those westerns in the 1960s. Kind of like maybe one of the last old school movie stars that are still around, right? Well, also, old school movie stars who's still working on a regular basis in his 90s. Unbelievable. Yeah. They're directing as well as acting. Here's another one I would love to have on my show. I don't quite have your reach. So I could only fantasize about some of these guys. Burt Bakerak. Do you know what that is? No, don't. Burt Bakerak was arguably the biggest music composer, song composer of the 20th century. I've all many of the pop songs that were big hits in the 60s and 70s from the carpenters from Diane Warwick. Is this, I think he's Jewish, this Jewish guy who you would never imagine could produce this kind of soul if you're going to be stereotypical. He's now into his 90s. Check him out. They are, yeah, he's even sang himself with Barbara Streisand. He just seems like one of those old school guys who you could sit with and he's going to tell you stories. They are going to blow your mind. So I'm not really too much into celebrities, but if I had to pick two guys that'd like to sit down with, Clint Eastwood, Burt Bakerak. Well, you have a great podcast. And when you move out of that communist country, you're stuck in maybe you will be able to get those people in your show. Well, aren't you lovely? I remember. I was actually telling someone earlier this morning. I was meeting with some people from UT Austin and the president of University of Austin earlier today. And I was basically saying that Joe told me long ago when I used to do your show in California, you know, you used to say, why don't you just move to California and do your podcast? And I think I told you at the time, well, it's not quite as easy for me. I have to give up by 10 years. But I think at some point, you just have to take the risk and get out of the golden cage that 10 year is. Well, it is a great cage. But you're popular online to a point where you have this literature career. You write, you do your podcast, you're you comment on things. And you're, you know, you have a very valuable perspective to a lot of people. At some time, sometimes being connected to an institution, even though provides you with security. And it's wonderful in terms of the benefits, you know, guaranteed money that can sort of hold you back. And I don't know exactly if it is holding you back. But it is. You can talk about that. So first, let me address the communist part. Four. Five minute eventing. And then we can please do. So last week, yeah, I'm, I'm by temperament, unbelievably jovial. I wake up in the morning. I'm happy. I'm excited. I'm going to do Joe Rogan. Then I'm doing, I'm just life is beautiful. Right. A week ago, I went through a momentary depressive existential crisis on May 2nd, Monday, May 2nd, when it was the deadline to do your taxes. So I have basically two main sources of income. One is my professes salary. And then the other is anything else. Much of the anything else this past year was the parasitic mind, the book royalties came in. And so, you know, I don't make $100 million Spotify money. So the royalties of that book are enough that, oh, now I can buy a home and retire if I wanted an Austin or Florida. If you take that money from me, now I've got no money. Right. That's really that different. So the how impersonal the exchange was is kind of what hit me as an existential crisis. I quietly like a good little boy entered my password into my bank account. I, the, the, the, the box for Quebec government and Canadian government are ticked. I put in a very large number in each of those two boxes that corresponds to a large majority of the book royalties that are coming from my neuronal firings. It's not, you're not taxing me because I sell cups, which I understand that everybody doesn't want to be taxed. But this is the most personal form of taxation. It's a taxation of my personhood. I'm telling you my story growing up in Lebanon, what happened to us. I'm sharing with you my experiences as 30 years of a professor. And the Quebec and Canadian government say, hey, great job, Dr. Sad, 55% of the proceeds of your book are mine. 55? Yeah. It's about, it ends up being about 55. So there's a progressive taxation system. And at the highest end, it gets about 53, 54. The highest rate for the federal government is 33. The highest rate at the provincial is 25. So I end up with about 58% just on the income that I made. We didn't get into the sales tax, which is both at the provincial and federal level. And then all the other, the property tax, so I'm left with roughly about a third. Now, it's not as though I discovered taxes yesterday. I knew about taxes. And I've always accepted it. It's part of the institutionalized scam. But when it's the money that you had taken ownership over it, because it hadn't been taxed at the source. So that money had gone into my bank account. It's there. I'm now feeling as though I've built a little nest egg that would can allow me to retire early from Concordia to move to Austin and Hanga with Joe and have my podcast here. And then very, very coldly in a dispassionate way. Just like an Nigerian prince were speaking to me, I pressed two buttons and it all goes into a magic cloud. Really hit me hard. And I've never been someone who's interested in pecuniary things like money. I've never cared about it. But now I do because I do want an exit strategy. I want to move on to the next stage of my life. So money does matter. So when you tax, though, my thoughts, my neuronal firings, my personal history, I can't imagine a higher form of existential rape. I mean, let me just acknowledge as one more thing. When you torture someone and say in a political prison, you will often hear the victim saying, they could torture my body as much as they want, but they could never get my mind. Well, the Quebec and Canadian government got my mind. They said that the proceeds of my writing belongs to them, certainly more than it does to me. That's insane. That's an incredible rate of taxation. But I always knew the Canada was really high. And it used to be the Canada was high, but crime was lower the United States. People were friendly. It seems like a great system because you have socialized medicine. You have some sort of a health gear system up there, although there's a lot of complaints about that as well. Your education system is, it seems like it's more accessible to people to go to college and things like that. So you're contributing into this pile, which is fine. But then when you have what's a creepy fucking dictator for a prime minister, and that's what he is, the way he behaves, the way he behaved during this thing and the just the disingenuous way that he communicated, it freaked me out because I never thought that guy was like that. I always, we had a conversation a few years ago where you were sort of more positive about it. I thought he was a handsome fellow with a good vocabulary and seems like a nice guy. And you know, before he really leaned into the woke stuff, I just thought he was a kind sensitive guy. And I was like, that's probably a good, you know, disposition to be a leader. But just the way he labeled those truckers as racist for no reason, the people that were protesting against mandates, he decided they were misogynists and racist. That's public. Yeah. It was just, but the way he did it was just like, he just cast a pejorative label on them with no evidence, with no, there was no provocation. It was just like, I'm going to label them this so that then I can impose laws to stop them from doing what is essentially a peaceful protest against something. Tell you about the draconian measures we've had in Quebec. For, I'm not. Oh, I know. You know about friends. I have friends that live in Quebec and they're fucking furious. So we still have, by the way, masks, I think they're removing them on May 14. Right. So the first time that I came to the US after COVID was to Texas in December to San Antonio. I was speaking engagement. The second one was in Naples, Florida. And having now habituated so much to being masked under the dictatorship in Quebec and in Canada, it took us a day or two for us to kind of fall into step with everybody in Florida, where I had gone to an event that Dave Rubin had invited me to the first day that I was there. And everybody was unmasked. And yet here were the Canadians who were still masked because we had a difficult time letting it go. And now, now, I don't say anybody masked here almost. But till today, you can't go into a cafe in Montreal and not be masked a few months ago. We had a nighttime curfew where after 10 o'clock you weren't allowed to walk your dog. Yeah, there was a there was a politician in Canada that just said the science is settled. And he's going to mandate if he wins COVID vaccines for young children. And it's going to be a part of their normal vaccination process like measles, mama, cerebelli required vaccines. Well, that's not science is not settled. Exactly. It's not only is it not settled, there's clear evidence that it's more dangerous. And like you look at a children getting COVID, it's not dangerous. Like if you really want the settled science, you're going to encourage people to lose weight. Right. Because that's the settled science. The settled science is obesity is a massive factor, a massive factor, a risk factor in COVID outcomes. Yeah, I mean, this kind of points back to what we were talking about earlier with getting Naomi Wolf off Twitter, this idea of a ministry of truth. Look, science as I think you well know and your listeners know. The beauty of science is that it truly is epistemologically humble and that anything that is settled in science is settled within asterisks. It is provisionally true. If in a hundred years, someone comes up with compelling evidence that suggests that the theory of evolution is false, then with complete humility, we will go back to the drawing board. Right. But so to speak of settled science is literally an epistemological attack on the scientific method. Nothing is ever settled. Even though we now have an overwhelming evidence, I mean, short of gravity, there's no theory that is as, you know, supported as the theory of evolution. But I always keep in mind open that if tomorrow somebody were to bring down the whole edifice of Darwin, then that's what it is. So this idea that there are there is someone let alone this woman from Joe Biden who was doing the singing. Do you know what I'm talking about? The minister. The minister of truth. That who's going to adjudicate what is true or not. In a free society, there is always room for racists and in the bills, idiots, false spreaders to exist. That's what it means to be true. And I've said this a million times and I'll say it again on your show. I'm Jewish, as you know, there is no greater, more offensive lie that you can say than to deny the Holocaust. There's nothing more offensive. Right. The most documented historical event that has led to the systematic eradication of a people in the most industry level way. So there's nothing more offensive than to deny it. Yet I support the right of Holocaust deniers to exist. I may not invite them on my show because I think that it is fruitless pointless for us to debate what is right. But they have a right to exist. So what does it mean that someone is going to adjudicate misinformation, disinformation? No, let the autocorrect of process of debate and the scientific message, message, decide, method, decide that. Yeah, and people should know also that your life experience was far more extreme than the average person's when you're, when you're saying this, you're coming from Lebanon where you literally flee for your life, your family flee for their lives because you're Jewish. Exactly. Like it wasn't, it's not as simple as I'm Jewish and denying the Holocaust as offensive to me because I'm Jewish. I can, no, you flee for your life because you were Jewish. And yet I support the right of those. So what, what greater commitment to absolute freedom of speech can you exhibit? So, so I hate all this stuff. I hate this idea that there should be hate speech laws. You can get on the pedestal and say, Jews suck. And you know what? You're an idiot, but that's cool. What you can do is say, let's go to the corner of seventh street and eighth street, whatever, eighth avenue and kill every Jew that said that's in a dog. So short of incitement to violence, short of defamation, everything goes. Yes. No, I couldn't agree with you more. And I do also agree with you more about Holocaust deniers. And there's a lot of people that say really ridiculous shit online. And what we need is people that correct them and do it with a sound or argument and a more convincing argument. And then you allow people to debate what people are concerned with. And I think people have this naive perception about the, about this information that there are people out there that are dumber than them. And they'll get talked into things that aren't true. That's what it is. It's protecting people that are dumber than them because they're not getting sucked into it. You know, like, say, if you have a bunch of people that believe the earth is flat, you know, who are we protecting by not allowing people to make videos about the earth being flat? We're protecting morons. That's it because it's not going to trick you and it's not going to trick me. It's not going to trick most people. And the beautiful thing about someone coming out and saying the world is flat is that other people would say, actually, they proved the world was around a long time ago. And this is how they did it. Not only that, we have satellites that fucking rotate around the earth and they go a very specific miles per hour. You can actually time them. You know when they're going to pass by. Not only that, we've had satellites that are in space that look back and take photos of earth. Not only that, every fucking planet is around. So the likelihood that earth is this weird, flat thing that's shaped like a frisbee, while everything is round like a ball doesn't make any sense. Does it? No. Well, that's what the process of spreading correct information to counteract this information looks like. The problem is we have these election terms and they're like four years, right? And then every four years a new president gets elected. Well, if you could just trick people enough to get someone into office, that person could do a lot of damage. Yeah. And that's what they're worried about. So unfortunately, this thing, this machine of spreading information and also this process of picking a new person every four years, it gives people this sense of urgency that they have to stop information immediately right now, which is what led people to make sure that the Hunter Biden story, the laptop story was removed from Twitter, right, which is pure insanity. Pure insanity because it's 100% legitimate story. It's now been substantiated. It's now being openly discussed in New York Times and the Washington Post and all these other liberal newspapers. They wouldn't touch it with a 10 foot pole before the election for fear that Donald Trump is going to get elected again. So through their own fear of this process of truth that their truth wasn't going to be convincing enough, they decided to censor facts and news and real information and they did it for the good of the people that were too dumb that they were, because they're not going to, look, those people were not going to vote for Donald Trump. If you look at the hardcore left people in this country, they're not going to vote for Donald Trump just because Hunter Biden is corrupt and just because it appears that Joe Biden is corrupt as well and that they were getting bribes from Ukraine and he did have a job that he was completely unqualified for and it was paying an exorbitant amount of money and he was smoking crack and like, you know, and was a sex addict. Maybe, maybe just likes to party. I don't know, but the point is, this is all real information that was pertinent to our understanding of who Joe Biden is and who his son is and what kind of business dealings were they involved in and shouldn't this demand an examination, but they wanted Trump out so bad they decided to censor? Well, this is a fucking slippery slope, a terrible slippery slope. So let me give you the academic analysis of what you just said. So in ethical systems, there are two systems of ethics. There's what's called consequentialism, right? So is it okay for me to lie? Well, it depends if the consequences of that lie protect someone's feelings. So for example, if my spouse says, do I look fat in those genes, that I better put on my consequentialist hat really quickly and say, my God, you've never looked better, sweetie, right? Therefore, in this case, the consequences of the lie are noble and therefore it's okay to do it. The entological ethics are operates in the absolute realm. It is never okay to lie. Now, the reality is for most things in life, we typically are consequentialists and that's fine. But when it comes to the truth or foundational principles, then you should be completely deontological. So let me give you an example. We both know someone who's been on this show who maybe remains a friend of yours. Let's show mine for reasons that are unrelated to me who violated deontological ethics when he went on Twitter and celebrated the fact that Jack Dorsey had taken out Donald Trump's account Twitter. Not that it's literally Joe Jack Dorsey, but he had kind of attacked him. Thank you, Jack, for doing this. So what did he do there? He was a consequentialist. He violated a deontological principle which says that you never violate a freedom of speech thing. But in his case, Orange Himmler is so dangerous that if I have to violate this deontological principle only for this one time, then it is worth doing it. It's not unlike Brett Kavanaugh, right? What people said, well, sure, he may technically not be a gang rapist when he was 16 going up and down the East Board raping every single woman inside. But this, the presumption of innocence here doesn't apply because this isn't a court case. It's only a job interview. So let's not grant him that courtesy of presumption of innocence because it's too dangerous to have a guy. So that's where all of those cases come from. There are, when it comes to truth, when it comes to foundational principles, be deontological, for all other things, be a consequentialist. Yes. And it's so important for the dissemination of information. It's so important for our collective understanding of what's true and what's not true. And when you violate that and as soon as you make these decisions based on ideological principles rather than based on the true desire to understand objectively the facts. Right. And that's where we find ourselves today, which is grossly highlighted and exaggerated by social media because these echo chambers that people get in and then they seek approval and they seek validity from all these other people that are, that share the same ideology and then they all support each other and they virtual signal to each other and then you just, you develop these bizarre like groups of humans. Like I love following certain people just because I know they're going to tweet ridiculous shit and then I can go into their little hive mind and look at all these people in their echo chamber agreeing with them. And I'm like, this is crazy. It's, but it's so, it's so fat and some of it is of things like fat phobia and some of those things like men can get pregnant. Like that kind of stuff. It's like, it's crazy. Like if you had told me that there was going to be a pregnant man emoji on my iPhone just five years ago, I would have told you to get the fuck out of here. Do you remember? I don't know if I've ever said this story on this show, but I think even if I have it's worth repeating. It's something that I've discussed in the parasitic mind that I have to tell you the story with my interaction with a woman with whom I had a battle about pregnant men getting pregnant. I don't believe so. No. So let me tell you this. So this of all idea pathogens that I discussed in the book, the granddaddy of all, so social constructivism is an idea pathogen biophobia, the fear of using biology to explain human affairs is a pathogen cultural relativism is a pathogen identity politics. Right. So postmodernism is the granddaddy of idea pathogens because it removes the most fundamental epistemological premise of reality, which is that there are universal truths that we can regularly count on. That's the whole premise of science. There are natural laws that we're trying to discover. Postmodernism says there is no absolute truth. Everything is shackled by subjectivity by personal biases, by relativism. So in 2002, one of my doctoral students had just defended his PhD. So he calls me and says, you know, would unluck or maybe I've called him whatever. Let's go out to dinner to celebrate. So it was myself, my wife, we didn't have kids then 2002, 20 years ago. This is going to speak about your emoji with the pregnant man. So it's myself, my wife, him and he's bringing along a date, a female date. He calls me up to say, I just want to give you a heads up that my date for the evening is a graduate student and postmodernism, women's studies and cultural anthropology to which I answered, ah, the holy trinity of bullshit. So and then I said, okay, I get what you're saying. You want me to be on my best behavior. This is about you. We're celebrating you. So I'm mums the word you can count on me. I'm going to be good. Of course, it was a complete lie. About halfway through the evening, I turned to the lady in question and I said, you're a postmodernist graduate student. Yes. Yes. Do you mind? I mean, I'm an evolutionist evolutionist psychologist. So I do think there are, for example, human universals that we can rely on. Do you mind if I propose a universal and then you can tell me how I'm an immiscal? She said, go for it. I said, is it not true that within Homo sapiens, only women bear children? Is that not a universal? So she looked at me kind of baffled by my stupidity and said, absolutely not. I said, no, how is that? So she said, well, there is some Japanese tribe of some Japanese island whereby within their folk chloric mythological realm, it is the men who bear children. And so by you restricting it to the biological realm, that's how you keep us, barefoot and pregnant. So once I have the logic. Yeah, exactly. Once I recovered from the mini stroke having to expose to her embiscility, I said, okay, well, let me take an example that's perhaps not quite as corrosive and as contentious as only women bear children. I realized that was too dangerous ground. Is it not true that since time immemorial sailors have relied on the premise that the sun rises in the east and sets in the west? Is that not true? So there she used a variant strain of postmodernism called deconstructionism. And the founder is Jacques De Rida, who basically says that there is no reality outside of language language creates reality. So there she deconstructed. She said, what do you mean by eastern west? And what do you mean by the sun? That which you call the sun, I might call dancing hyena. I said, well, fine, the dancing hyena rises in the east and sets in the west. And then I see your perplexed face, but that's postmodernism. So she said, I don't play label games and that ended the conversation. Oh my god. So how is this guy dating her? No, they're not. They're not. I don't think it lasts much longer. Exactly. So what do you like to interview her again? I wonder by the way, if because I've told the story on a few occasions, it's in the book. I've always fantasized about whether she read that story and says, what an idiot I was or whether she reads that story and says, what an idiot he is. He's never come around to seeing the truth. She was in her twenties, right? She was seven and now she's in her 40s. So maybe she's a Republican. Maybe she got red bill. That happens a lot. Well, that was in Canada, by the way. So I mean, whatever, whatever your version of that is over what is it? What is it? What's your conservative? What have been Harper the last prime minister who was conservative? What is your party? The conservative party? The conservative party. And oh, it's just the conservative party. And then there's the liberal party and there's the NDP. Those are the three main ones. Well, at least you have three. Yeah, we don't have a two party. But we have a joke. But the point, I mean, just to wrap up that story, the she wasn't in a scapie from a mental institution. She was a graduate student in postmodernism. Maybe you can't tell the difference with Jesus too. But she wasn't an outlier. She was just aping what you learn in if you're a graduate student in postmodernism. So what's the goal? It's staggering, right? It doesn't. People often think that when I attack some of those disciplines, it's because I'm placing a value judgment on sociology or on art history. I'm not. I think you can study all those things in a very rational, in a very enlightened way that can enrich the human spirit. What you can't do is to be so parasitized by idea pathogens that it becomes a form of intellectual terrorism. It becomes a form of nihilism up is down left. So I could have predicted the whole man can get pregnant from that story from 20 years ago. It's pretty incredible that she was willing to deny East, West, North and South. And the sun. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, we're, we have a fucking compass. Okay. As far as like, what is East and what is West? Like it's, well, what is hot and what is cold? You deny those labels. Like, do you know, if you ask for tea and they give you an ice cube, you cool with that? Well, this fuck are you talking about? Listen, I come from a background in mathematics before I got into the behavioral sciences. There is no field that is as axiomatically free of your identity bullshit, then mathematics. The distribution of prime numbers is the distribution of prime numbers, whether you're Latx or transgender or two-spirited, right? Now, about five, six years ago, on my show, I did one of my satirical pieces where I donde a social justice warrior wig with red coloring. Because of course, it shows that I'm ideologically fierce. If I have blue-haired color or red-haired color. And I facetiously stated that I was introducing, coining a new field called social justice mathematics. You know, we don't say the word irrational numbers because that marginalized mental illness. I just went through the whole litany of mathematics. Five, six years later, my prophetic satire catches up with reality catches up. So now we have math is white supremacy. Yeah. So why is it that I'm able to, it's not because I'm a prophet. It's because I have the ability to look for this stupidity where it is. And then extrapolate how far you can take that stupidity. That's what I satirize. And then I wait with my arms folded until reality catches up to my satire. It's insane. It is insane. And it's, I don't know where it's going. Do you do you have any predictions about five years from now? Is there any satire that you have thought about releasing on the world? Not that I could think off the top of my head. But for example, I have another series of satirical clips where I do the hiding under the desk. Have you ever seen any of those hiding under the desk? Yeah. So so I literally, so I remember once you very kindly said that, you know, you really appreciated that professor of kind of my standing could be such a, you know, regular guy and joke around and so on. So what I do is I mock the hysteria of the, the woke people by releasing clips where I'm hiding under the desk because I'm so fearful. So for example, Donald Trump is inaugurated. I hide and I literally do it. I don't know if my acting is very good, but I pretend that I'm so fearful because I'm satirizing the insane hysteria. So for example, when he was inaugurated on my personal Facebook page, you'd have endless professors saying, well, I'm a woman of color. Will I be able to still go safely on campus now that he's been elected? Well, what do you think there's going to be militia roadblocks where they severe the women of color? color will I be able to still go safely on campus now that he's been elected? Well, what do you think is going to be militia roadblocks where they veer the women of color to gang rape centers? Like what kind of hysterical responses that to, I mean, you don't like Donald Trump fine. Yeah. But it's not going to lead to the eradication of professors of color. And so I have a whole series of clips where I feigned hysterical fear hiding under the desk. The most recent one might have been, or one of the recent ones. I think you'll enjoy the story. So my wife and I go to a cafe every morning after a one hour walk. The barista that was serving him, her looked like a transgender person. So she came to me as we were waiting for our order to be delivered to us. And she said, you know, I felt quite I didn't want to make an error in how I was addressing the person because you know, I didn't know should I say. And so I put out a tweet that was meant to be a testimony to how sensitive and kind and empathetic my wife is that she was very, very concerned to not get the, you know, the address wrong. So it was meant to be something in aligned with the pronoun Taliban, right? But it turns out about 28 million tweet impressions later over two days all egged by Valerie Bertinelli that, you know, because she somehow she's an ally to the LGBT community. So she came after me. But anyways, doesn't matter. Valerie Bertinelli, the lady used to be married to Eddie Van Halen. Exactly. Exactly. You can probably go find all the tweets. They're still up there. So then, so I'm a little lost here. What is she upset at? She couldn't have said, hello, may I have a coffee without using pronouns as she mentally ill that she doesn't know how to address someone without a pronoun use. There was, I explained then what happened. There was a colleague of the barista who, who my wife turned to that colleague to say, because it was the first day that the transgender person was working. I was having a hard time with the cash register. So she wanted to say, oh, it's only his first day he'll get the hang of it. So there was a need to use a pronoun, right? It was her first, but she didn't know. So she don't want to presume that this female presenting person was a her, maybe that will offend her. She didn't want to use the, and so it was a very inoffensive, innocent thing. So I tweeted about it as a measure of how lovely my wife is that she was so concerned. So I mean, literally millions of tweets of hate. Now, of course, if I were Drew Breeze, I would have gone on the record apologizing for having exhibited patriotism towards the flag and I didn't know that the US flag heard some of my colleagues. I'm a honey badger. I don't apologize to anybody, but what I did is I released a satirical under the desk clip where I said that all of the stuff that I faced in the Lebanese Civil War from Islamic extremists is nothing as scary as the pronoun Taliban. That got them more angry and I just kept egging them on and on till they went away. So less than a life lesson never apologized to the assholes. But that seems like you have a lot of free time. You're willing to engage with those people all day long like that. You know what it is? It's a pressure valve release for me. Yeah. Yeah. I always do these things with a sardonic smile and a twinkle in my eyes. I just enjoy. Now, sometimes I'm too busy and I don't do it. Plus I'm combative in that, you know, if you attack me, I'm going to attack you and anybody who's gone who's ever known you. Right. It's just part of my temperament. So it's not a question of I have free time or not. It's just I can't walk away from a fight. Well, I don't know if that's healthy either. It's not. And I've tried to modulate that by being less on social media. But this pronoun thing is so strange. I never would have imagined that gender would be such a hot topic. I'll never would have, I mean, there's always been, you know, look, go back to Rocky Horror Picture Show. Yeah. It was a transvestite spectrum, you know, and then transvestites somewhere along the line, you heard transsexual now. And then transsexual became a new thing. And it's like, okay, now people are transsexual. And then you had drag queens which were not necessarily transsexual. Sometimes it's people that just have like some erotic connection or, you know, some fantasy connection with dressing. I'm like a woman. Sometimes they were heterosexual. And they just like to dress occasionally like women. But then somewhere along the line, it became like a major fixation for culture. The pronoun thing, putting your pronouns in your bio, like grown men with beards, say he, him. Like what the fuck do you think you have? Every single professor I know on LinkedIn has to put it. That's insane. I've talked to a professor about that. And he said, I reluctantly put it in my bio because I don't know what I'll be attacked for. The day that you see me putting it on my thing, send out one of your security guys to put a bullet in my head. No, I'll send them back to kidnap you and take it to Texas. We don't have to do that here. But even places like Austin is very progressive. It's probably the most progressive place in Texas. What, what will you put it in the continuum of wokeness compared to say the Mecca of Portland Oregon? Not close. Not close at all. So still way, way, way more normal. It's tolerant, which is beautiful. I like tolerance. I like, look, I don't have any problem with someone who has gender dysphoria. I, I wish that everyone was happy. I wish everyone whatever clues you wear, whatever name you like, whatever identity you choose. I don't, it doesn't bother me. What bothers me is when you enforce it on other people and then you promote it. And then you make it seem as if it's more for young kids. I've had conversations with kids that are in high school. And one kid was like, it's not just tolerated. It's preferred and rewarded and you're looked down on if you're heterosexual. Like he has friends that are queer and he has friends that are, this is one of the things we were talking about. He was saying that there's people that just claim non-binary. And you can get away with non-binary and still have sex with girls and date girls. But you just call yourself non-binary and you can say I'm a they-them. And as long as you don't dress with like tank tops and, you know, fucking yoga shorts. Like, so like, where it's really obvious, you're male. You can get away with it. Like, it was the weirdest conversation because I was like, what is it like in school these days? And he was like, man, I know so many trans people. And I go, are they really trans? He goes, I don't know. He goes, some of them are being trendy for sure. And a lot of them are, it's girls that like they didn't fit in before. Like perhaps they're, you know, they're, they're awkward socially or whatever. And then they decide to be, you know, either non-binary or trans or, or they don't want to specify, or they come up with some other gender, you know, or they're pansexuals, another one. Which is like, I guess you're attracted to everything. Yeah. Yeah. Which is, so that speaks by the way to the earlier point where we talked about the ontological ethics versus consequentialism. Yeah. Look, both you and I think are very socially liberal. Yeah. So I support transgender rights in the strongest of ways. Everybody should live free of bigotry and so on. In the pursuit and defense of that noble goal, I don't have to murder truth as a consequence. Right. Right. For example, with equity feminism versus radical feminism, equity feminism is the idea that all, you know, both sexes should be equal under the law. By that standard, both you and I are strong equity feminists. Absolutely. On the other hand, when it becomes a problem is that in the service of that goal, we end up creating the premise that men and women are interchangeable, indistinguishable, that all changes, all differences between men and women must be due to social construction and other idea pathogen. Yeah. So we're murdering truth for a higher noble goal. No, I never see one millimeter of truth for any goal. I have to be the ontological and the defense of truth. Well, that's very brave of you in your line of work because that's not something that is common in professors. No. Professors, they give in to, for the most part, they give in to the will of the crowd. And it's very strange. You know, I've made the following analogy. When we, when we choose Navy seals, we're choosing them based on certain traits. They have to be courageous. They have to be physically fizzed. They have to have bravery. So imagine if we were to choose our professors in a way that we're not only choosing them based on their IQ, but on intellectual Navy sealness, if you'd like. I mean, on Navy sealness in their intellectual courage, right? Yes. So let's pick people as a matter of fact, most professor are invertebrate castrated individuals. So they don't have a spine. No, do they have testicles irrespective of whether they're male or female. So they may have all the intelligence in the world. As a matter of fact, most of these specific, all of these specific ideas originally were spawned by professors. So it's, so being intelligent and educated does not inoculate you against stupidity. Since many of the ones who originated those ideas are the anointed professors. But they don't have is intellectual courage. And so actually on this trip that I'm meeting you here, I've met some folks that are associated with University of Texas Austin and now the new University of Austin, that not only do we share intellectual affinity, but more importantly, we share intellectual courage metrics. That's what is required to change the system. You know, history is not shaped by fence sitters. It takes bold people intellectually, bold people. And we certainly don't choose our professors based on that trait. No, I think that's, that's a great point that intellectual courage should be a requirement and that it should be something that we celebrate and cherish and reward people for. And based on an objective analysis of truth, like that you, because there are facts, there are some things. And like you said, like saying that someone who's a biological male cannot bear children, it's just a fact. It's just a fact. And if you deny that, that's, that's cowardice. That's you're just scared of the crowd. You know, you're not denying that it takes a double X chromosome and a womb and eggs fertilized by sperm inside this viable womb in order for you to conceive and ultimately give birth to a child out of your vagina. But no, they're teaching people, there was a university, there was a story about a university that is facetiously teaching people how a biological man would give birth out of his penis. I've heard of that. Yeah, this is fucking insanity. This is the ultimate cowardice, the ultimate intellectual cowardice. Because they're so terrified of the madness of the crowds, as Douglas Murray would put it, that they're, they're literally saying, well, when a man gets pregnant, the baby must come out of his penis, like, are you teaching people this like you're out of your mind? This is, but this is, this weird place that we find ourselves in where truth is not as important as, as, as adhering to these ideological principles that are clearly inaccurate. But the reason why they're parasitizing this way is because they're trying to adhere to a higher noble goal, which is don't hurt someone's feeling. Right. Don't attack their, their personhood, celebrate their personhood. So again, we go back to consequentialism. If I have to murder truth so that I appear empathetic and loving and accepting of all people, goodbye truth, it was nice knowing you. That's wrong. I can chew gum and walk at the same time. I could be very socially conscious as I think I can speak for both of us, but I am a dogged defender of the truth. And I will never concede an inch of the truth in the pursuit of not hurting your friends. I remember one time on a previous show and I actually took that quote in this book where you said, but if you pursue, you know, forbidden knowledge in your research and it hurts someone's feelings, what then do you remember what I answered you in a very general member? Which is a, I said, well, fuck your feelings. Right. Your feelings are like, that's the problem. It's like there's a lot of people that get offended by things very easily. And if we start catering to them, we're not going to get anything done. Right. There's people that get offended by alarm clocks. They don't want to have to be somewhere on time because they're offended by the idea that they don't need as much rest as you do. Right. Or you need less rest than that, whatever the fuck it is. The point is that like anything can fall into that category is something that hurts your feelings. If you have more money than the next person, that could hurt their feelings. So you should have less money and we should have even distribution of income and the merits of your heart. Yeah. Well, yeah. Well, that's that's the dangers of quality of outcome. Right. I mean, that's that's literally communism. That's that's how it gets going. So let me tell you, let me apply what you just said in the context of, you know, when you do research in the university, you first have to send it to institutional review board or an ethics board, right? That that that ensures that the research that you will do, it hears to certain ethical principles, right? So now let me give you the historical background to this and and and then tell you how insane it has become. So in the 50s, 60s and 70s, which was which has been referred to as sort of the golden ear of social psychology, you could damage a person's sense of self in the pursuit of science, but there was no ethical oversight over that because it was for the betterment of science. So let me give you an example of that. Suppose I bring you into the lab. This is let's say in the 1960s, I'm going to do what's called the false feedback paradigm. I'm going to ask you to do an IQ test and I'm going to falsely give you one of two experimental conditions. I'm going to say, hey, Joe, you know, you scored a 99th percentile of the most intelligent people. And then I'm going to see how you solve a math problem based on this going feedback or I'm going to say, oh, Joe, based on this IQ test, you basically score lower than a newborn pigeon. Oh, okay. Never mind. Let's let's move on to the math test, right? So I'm giving you false feedback, either glowing or not. And then I'm seeing how it affects your performance on some subsequent tasks. Well, now after you finished the experiment, I debrief you, right? I say, actually, it was wrong. It was false. I just randomly put you in this condition. We didn't even do an IQ test. Now this by the more recent standards of ethics, which is still fine, would be considered unethical because even if I now tell you, I was not truly giving you an IQ test, you'll walk away, not knowing for sure whether what I just said is untrue, right? So that he now tell me that I'm not a newborn pigeon because he's just trying to as large my feelings, but I truly am dumb as a door as a door knob. So it made sense that at some point we erected some ethical mechanisms to make sure that people were not damaged. But now we've taken that to your earlier point to such an extreme whereby I can't ask you, are you male or female? I have to have a seven hundred and forty page list of all the different possibilities. I can't ask you about your cultural background because of I'm going to offend you. I can't ask you about your income because that marginalizes maybe some people who don't have good income. So basically I can't ask you anything on an experimental study or survey because there's no way by which there isn't going to be some road by which some participant may or may not be offended. So now when I go through these ethical review processes, that's probably the thing that causes me more stressed than actually conducting the study because I know I have to jump through 900 hoops before some moron says, you're okay, you're now cleared to do your studies. And it seems like the academic world rewards this sort of intellectual cowardice. Like if you comply, then you're a part of this group, you're part of this system and you're allowed to continue spreading bullshit and getting a check for it. And then your new coming group, you're in incoming students from the 2023 year and 2024 year of the freshman class, they're going to be more extreme with each year, they're going to get more things or going to be on the list of offensive topics, offensive answers, offensive reactions. And it makes me wonder where this is going because this is accelerating. This is not slowing down. And even though there's a lot of people like yourself and myself who are older who realize how preposterous this is, the young people don't. And they seem to think that not only is this better, that it's required in order to make the world a better place. So here's some optimism along those lines. I'm hearing from a lot of teachers and meaning teachers at the high school level and so on who write to me and say, my latest batch of students strike me as being less woke than previous generations. As if now the fulcrum is starting to shift. So I don't have, I don't have incontestible empirical evidence, but I'm increasingly hearing that we've kind of reached the similarity. Peak walkness. What do you think is causing the shift back? It might be that there's been some people who've been fighting this and now they're getting bigger platforms so things are changing. It might be that more, I mean, take for example, someone and I'm happy to use this platform to give him a kudos Christopher Rufo, do you know what that is? I know his name. Christopher Rufo is a guy who came out of nowhere, you know, was a journalist who became the kind of central repository of all things anti critical race theory. He's a journalist, right? And now he has spearheaded it. It was a serendipitous thing. He had never planned on being an anti CRT activist, but through the serendipity of life, he has become sort of the honey badger of anti CRT. And now there's all kinds of battles that are being won by parents who are finding their spine who are going to these school board meetings who are saying I'm tired of this bullshit. And so it doesn't take much for people to be ignited and find their courage. And so I'm getting the sense again, this is just from the trench that I'm, you know, the reports that I'm getting that more and more people are now willing to speak out. It's a domino effect, right? This one speaks out. So I speak out. And so my feeling is that if we're able to ignite the silent majority into speaking, as you know, the blue hair Taliban are a minority. It's not as though there is millions of them on every campus is very vocal. There's this very vocal, very committed. They have the ear of the administration. So very few committed people can keep the rest of us and check. Most people are not on board with all that nonsense. And I receive millions of emails that attest to that. Well, we see them. Sorry, but we see that we're Disney, the stock crashing. They say Netflix, they're stock crashing. So there's all kinds of little evidence that's coming out to suggest that we might have reached peak walkways and we're going to, you know, there are now a lot of institutions that are trying to position themselves as a bit less woke. And you know, the University of Chicago declaration, the Prince. So my feeling is maybe I'm being too optimistic. I think we've reached the maximum of the parasitic infestation and may reason rain again. Well, may reason rain again and may debate take place again too. Let's let opposing sides discuss things. You know, come up with a champion for your left wing idea and allow that champion to debate someone from the right. And then if the right, the person from the right lose wins rather. Do better. Come back with a better argument. Do it again. And maybe you're wrong. Maybe it turns out that this guy's going to convince you of certain things or maybe he's wrong. Maybe you're going to convince the audience of things. When I was a child, when I was in high school, Barney Frank, who was a liberal in Massachusetts was debating someone from the moral majority. And I got to what and the moral majority was like this. He was the first openly gay company. He wasn't openly gay at the time. Oh, I see. Yeah. He is now. First openly gay, but at the time he was not open. So anyway, Barney Frank, who's this brilliant man in my high school, is debating this guy. And I found it fascinating because I got a chance to see two different perspectives. And Barney Frank was just much better. He was just more rational, more well read. It was just, and the other guy was sort of this like kind of cookie cutter, raw rock and servitive, you know, god, liberty, justice for all that kind of shit. It was just like he was doing, he was reading off of a playbook where as Barney Frank had a much more nuanced and much more convincing perspective. And it was great. It was great because me and all these other kids that were 14, 15 years old got to sit in this class and watch these two people debate. Now today you can't have that. You can't have that. The other guy who thinks that abortion is against God and that homosexuality should be outlawed. And that was like one of his perspectives as an anti homosexual perspective, which was ironic as Barney Frank is gay, but he wasn't nobody knew that. But when that all took place, it was very beneficial to watch it play out. And the crowd let it all play out. You know, there was claps when people did well. But it was, you're watching this intellectual discourse. You're watching a sparring match. And Barney Frank was the more skilled at that. And that's how it's supposed to go. That's what's beneficial for everybody watching. And beyond the philosophical arguments for why we should have open debate, let's link it to your personal reality. The Joe Rogan show is in large part popular other than your infinite charisma and so on, is because of undoubtedly sure that you score very high on the open mind of this trait. And it is that open mindedness that created this called safe space of deferring ideas. That's what resonates with people. Today you can bring God's ad and tomorrow you can bring someone who is completely anti God's ad and you'd have a great conversation with both and people reward you for that with a big spotify this. So there are even very concrete earthly non philosophical reasons to be open minded. It results. Yes, though. You can't fake that though. I don't think it would come out eventually. But you know what's interesting to me is that when I have progressive people on the podcast, I get no pushback at all. From them or from the audience, you mean from the right from the right. Now when I have someone from the right on, whether it's Dan Crenshaw or Ben Shapiro, I get accused of being a fake left wing person, a fake progressive. I get all this hate and you moved to Texas and you became a fucking your red state and all. It's only captured by the right. He doesn't even realize it's hilarious. The mental gymnastics people will go through. Even if I argue with them, even if I have them on it, I don't agree with what they're saying about many things, which oftentimes is the case. It does not matter. The tolerance level from the left has evaporated. So I've got a theory for this. It's actually in my forgive the shameless book of my next, my next, this is not this book. This is the next book. The next book which I'm just finishing wrapping up, it's a tentatively titled, A Recipe for the Good Life. I look at all different metrics that have been studied relating to well-being and happiness and I infuse it with personal anecdotes. At one point, I talk about this political ideology effect your well-being and your happiness. I look at the literature and a lot of the literature finds that conservative score higher on happiness to your point, score higher on happiness and well-being as compared to the liberals. I'll tell you why. You go ahead and I'll tell you why. The liberals are unhappy that the conservatives exist. They're not able to happen. I'm going to add to what you just said. The conservative at the root of the word conservative and the etymology is to conserve. There's a set of beliefs, values, foundational principles that are worthy of conserving. So I wake up existentially if I am a conservative and I say, yeah, there might be at the margins, bad things, but I'm happy because life is good. There are things worthy of conserving. The liberal, on the other hand, is looking for the magical utopia, unicornia that's around the corner. The current world sucks. I need to burn it down so that I can start fresh. And so I think that's why you get the deferring venom from the two. The conservative is happy with the status quo. The blue-haired Taliban wants to burn it down. This is interesting because conservationists, a lot of them tend to be liberal. It's true. They're trying to conserve nature. Yeah. Well, cognitive consistency is not a hallmark of the left. But conservationists who also participate in outdoor activities like hunting and fishing tend to be more Republican. I'm right. So they're interesting. And they really are conservationists because they actually contribute financially. The vast majority of the money that goes to wildlife habitat, conservation that goes to wildlife biologists, that goes to making sure the populations of wild animals are healthy. Vast majority comes from hunters. Is that true? Billions of dollars. Totally or the data is true. No, no, the real data. Okay. Yeah. The Pittman Robertson Act, it's an act that was created that. So it's not just hunters. It's also gun owners. So people who buy ammunition and firearms, people who are just gun enthusiasts who never hunt, they contribute, fine with the exact amount. I believe it's 10%. So 10% of this act goes to conservation of wildlife habitat. It goes to setting up these structures to make sure that these wetlands are preserved for migrating birds and all these animals that require certain populations in order to be healthy. They'll either import new animals into these areas or they will call some of them so they'll increase the amount of tags that are available. All that is paid for by hunters. By people that are trying to shoot the animals and eat them. Do we know what is the rate, the ratio of a vowed Republicans to Democrats who are hunters? Right. It's staggering. 9-10. It's probably somewhere in that range. Wow. I would like to know. I wonder if anybody's ever done that study. They asked the big ones that I meet. They're all Republicans. It's like 80%. Right. There's a few that are liberal that become concerned with regenerative farming and then they did some of them become vegetarians but their body doesn't go well with it. It's like they have problems with their health and so then they reluctantly start reintroducing meat but they want to do it in an ethical manner. So then they start hunting. That's happened to quite a few friends that I have that are liberal but that do hunt. But most of them are conservative. Very interesting. Yeah. I did in this book. I looked at the distribution of Republicans to Democrats certainly within academia and as you could imagine it's overwhelmingly tilted to the left. Depending on the discipline and some disciplines could be 120 to zero the ratio. I mean literally not a single Republican. What is the discipline where it's more balanced? The most balanced balance in this particular study I have in mind which is probably the most exhaustive one that's been done. Engineering was 1.6 to 1. Now 1.6 to 1 is actually very lopsided according to the metrics of stats. You know I mean there's something called the odds ratio when you're calculating the efficacy of a drug. If you get 1.2 to 1 that means the drug is effective. It's 20% more effective. So 1.6 to 1 is already quite lopsided. That's the least. You start getting into 5 to 1, 10 to 1, 15 to 1, 30 to 1 and then as you get into the more activist fields it turns into 60 to 120 to 0. So again it's not that there is anything inherently less scientific about sociology. Sociology could be as scientific as physics. The problem is that sociology is more prone to be parasitized by ideology whereas physics is less prone. So the pursuit of these disciplines either makes them more amenable to adhere to the scientific method or less. So oftentimes people again to go to the earlier point people think that I am. of these disciplines either makes them more amenable to adhere to the scientific method or less. So, oftentimes people, again, to go to an early point, people think that I am denigrating sociology as a lesser than no. As a matter of fact, it's probably harder to study social systems involving human beings than to study the chemical structure of a particular compound in chemistry that is a lot more deterministic. So, there is nothing unscientific about the endeavor of sociology. What makes it unscientific is that it doesn't adhere to the scientific method, it becomes an activist field rather than a scientific field. So, if we can get rid of the activism and leave it out of the university, we'll get rid of a lot of disabilities. It's just stunning for a person who's not an academic to see so much intellectual, ideological capture that's involved in so many of these disciplines. The Piment Robertson Act, did you Google that? Like with the percentages? It's 10% for handguns 11 for long guns in ammo. Yeah, so that's a large amount of money. And how much money does it generate per year? In the 76 years since its inception, over $7 billion has been collected from manufacturers and has been made available to states, including over 106 million in Mississippi, this partnership of hunters and sport shooters, the firearms and ammunition industry by far America's largest contributor to wildlife conservation and public access to our natural resources. Now, isn't that so if you were to ask people their perceptions of which of the two parties is more committed to environmentalists, I'm willing to bet that almost everybody would say it's the Democrats, right? occasional cortex AOC is someone who you know is just a little cortex. And by the way, someone told me that that Michael Savage uses it and that pissed me off because they're saying, oh, you stole it from him. I've only found out independently that he uses I wanted to give him the kudos, but I came up with that joke. I studied the brain, occasional cortex. So occasional cortex would be on that one. Aren't you sweet? So I'm a maladaptively honest to a fault. So I would never do that. So occasional cortex is the lynch pin, right? She's she's the new green deal, right? So I'm willing to bet that even Republicans would probably not know of this. Don't you think a lot a lot? No, the ones that hunt know, what is the whip percentage of hunters are Republican versus Democrat? I'm trying to find that out. I couldn't get accurate data. I felt like a poll of a thousand hunters and they were giving other, and they're answering other questions that didn't say like, I'm a Republican, I'm a Democrat. I bet it's like sociologist. Well, the other way. So earlier I was saying about the distribution of Democrats to Republicans in the academia, but I found a study that was looking at within medicine. So you are an anesthesiologist. You are a surgeon. You are a psychiatrist. You are a dermatologist. Does the likelihood of you being Republican or Democrat change across disciplines of medicine? And there are profound differences. I thought that was fascinating. This is not my study because someone else's study. So psychiatry, pediatrics scored very, very high on the left, orthopedic surgeons, all an infectious disease also scored very high on the left, which we might presume from some of the COVID interventions. Orthopedic surgeons were a lot more right. Is that interesting? Well, it's a structure thing, right? Like there's no room for funny business and shenanigans when it comes to fixing your knee, fixing your at least tendon. Yeah, it's just like this is what it is. A bet military very high on the right. On the right. Exactly. Very high on the right. It's well, the thing about hunting in particular that I think leads it to be very high is not just the use of guns, which is of course that alone just firearm laws and regulations like the people on on the left overwhelmingly want to restrict those because it's partly ideology. But it's also the hard work. It's very different. Hunting is very difficult, especially a mountain hunting. I would imagine that the people that do like L. CUNTING and the people that do like the real high mountain stuff. It's overwhelmingly conservative people. Right. It's fucking hard, man. Like there's no equity in in hunting. Like you don't, you know, you have to fucking put in the work. And if you're a part of a hunting party and everybody only eats if you do your work, you know, you can't say, you know, you're being fat phobic. Like no, you you have to get up and fucking go. And if you're 100 pounds overweight, people are going to look at you like you're a problem for the rest of the tribe. You know, the fact that we have gotten to a place where there's so much comfort and so much leisure time and people are so protected and insulated by the overwhelming amount of resources that we have that you can make that argument, that it's okay to be fat. It's okay to be, you know, the body positivity that only exists because of excess. I'm wondering, forgive me, I don't mean to be psychoanalytic on you, but it, you're disdain for obesity has come across in many of at least our chats. Is it because you don't, you ascribe a particular trait to someone who is willing to let themselves go that it's kind of a personal injury to your sense of I'm afraid of seeing it in myself. I see. Yeah. I mean, when I mean, one of the things that people people are upset at something they see in other people, it's things that they would never want to see in themselves. Like I don't like liars because I never want to see myself long. I don't like people that are weak. I don't like people that just give up. It drives me crazy. Right. Because I don't ever want to see that in myself. That's the thing I fear the most. So what is obesity? It's like are you blind? Do you not recognize that you've done something horrible to your body? Of course, you know, right? You've just chosen that it's too difficult to act and do have a slow thyroid. Oh, me too. Really? I have hypothyroidism. I do. Okay. I was being facetious. No, I really do. Okay. Yeah. It doesn't matter. Yeah. Yeah. I did when I found out about it, I had 8% body fat. Yeah. That was fucking ripped. And I was still like, why am I getting headaches? And the doctor's like, yeah, hard time losing weight. And like, no. And he was like, you will you have hypothyroidism. It's what's it called? Hashimoto's disease. Yeah. And so they prescribed thyroid medication. But it just stuck because at nighttime, I would get these vicious headaches. And I would go to sleep like I got shot with a tranquilizer dart. I was so tired. But my will power and my discipline is what kept me working out. I don't know if I was 8% body fat. I might have been 10. But I was I had a six pack. I was ripped. And so they're like, this is unusual. Usually people of hypothyroidism, they gain weight. Exactly. But I just worked out all the time. I just made sure I worked out period. Like I didn't use it as an excuse. Like people that use that as an excuse, like, I'm tired all the time when I exercise. I still fucking do it. I just make myself do it. Like, that's a possibility. That's a choice. But you enjoy it though because I enjoy exercising. Yes. It's not a chore for me to do it. Well, clearly when you get healthier, you're enjoying even more because you're seeing the fruits of your labor. But also, once you get going, once your body starts sweating, effort feels good. Yeah. You know, especially like when you do it and then you have those breaks in between sets where you get to take some deep breaths. And you realize, all right, I did this. I did those things that I thought were really difficult to do. Like I always said, I'm going to do 50 burpees and I do 50 burpees. Like that's, you did it. Like that, in that little reward for hard work and for effort, that's very important for people. And especially in this world that we live in where we have these bodies that were designed to run away from predators and fend off invaders. And they don't get any fucking use at all. You just sit down at a chair. And when you do that, you get depressed and you fill the anxiety like gee, I wonder why. Well, people tell me they're anxious. Oh, I have anxiety. I have an eye of anxiety. Okay. Do you also have exercise? Right. You don't have exercise. Well, what a coincidence. You don't have exercise. And then you, the thing that you get when you don't exercise is prevalent, which is anxiety. Yeah. Exercise rigorous hardcore exercise is clinically proven to be better than SSRIs for dealing with depression. They've shown better results for anxiety for people who exercise vigorously than almost anything. So other than like just fucking hardcore benzo diaspines, which are very difficult to kick. I'm going to share this probably for the first time ever publicly. And I'm doing it on the biggest four in the world. Last year in July, I was driving to go get the roti three peruvian chicken with my wife and kids. I had absolutely no sense of doom or anxiety or stress. And I got out of the blue with and turned out to be a panic attack. I've never ever had this. I've never, you know, I'm an intense person, but I'm very mellow first time of your life, first time. So I had had a few times where I felt kind of an anxiety rush. I think it started when I was getting in 2017, a lot of death threats that required for me to have security and so on. So that's the first time that I felt kind of this rush. But it was totally manageable. I've never experienced anything. And so we were driving. And I told my wife, I feel like I have to stop my heart is really beating fast. I started getting tingles in my fingers. I said, am I getting a stroke? Am I getting a heart attack? And so we went to the hospital. And very quickly, they said, you know, it's a panic attack, which I haven't. I've never had a recurrence of it. I can't explain why I had it that time and I haven't had it other time. It turns out, by the way, that the attending physician, when we were, I said, you know, because I'm always where I mean, you would feel more than I do your public figure. I'm known. And he goes, I know who you are when I saw the name that I was right. And then he kind of told me, you know, maybe you need to mellow out and not be so, you know, you made the usual stuff. But I'm saying all this because as I felt other times, this kind of rush coming that might lead to that, what would help me is to right away start exercising. Yes. And when I would exercise, it's as if like a gag reflex. You know, when if sometimes you're nauseous, you're nervous. If you gag, it releases it. So exerting the physical, you know, pressure that's pent up in you. Then my wife would say, how do you feel? I say, oh, I feel great. I'm fine. So I think I have anecdotal evidence to support what you're saying. Yeah. I think most people do that have experienced that that have had these bad feelings, then exercise and felt good afterwards. This is the release of endorphins. I mean, it's all science. They know what happens to the body when you exercise exertion feels good. There's something very valuable. And if someone's overweight and you're saying, well, I can't run, I can't exercise vigorously. You don't have to. You can just walk, just go walk. If you're, especially if you're overweight, I would encourage you to just walk. Right. You don't have to do something that hard. Now what I'm about to say next is completely speculative because I've often tried to introspect us to, you know, what caused that particular episode? And it kind of relates back to our earlier comment about, you know, how I lost weight. So something that I suffered from not in a clinical sense, but I am very health anxious and that, you know, I'm because I'm punctilious, because I'm perfectionist. I always worried is something looming in the background. And of course, once I'm overweight, it's a lot more looming in the back. And, you know, it's, it could be around the corner. Right. And so as I was losing weight, but I had never gone to see a physician for several years, I was always ruminating about the possibility that once I see my physician for the first time in three years, since I last got my checkup, could there be something that ends the party that I'm on? Could there be a result? Right. And as we were driving to go to get the chicken, I saw, and again, I'm speculating, but it makes sense. I saw a bus sign add in the back of the bus, like city bus, that said, you know, could you recognize the signs of a stroke if it's happened? No, Jesus. And so I think I literally internalized it. Got the panic attack by putting it to myself, developed the symptoms of a panic attack that mimic these kinds of things. Yeah. And I said, that's it. I'm about to die in front of my chill and it just gets worse and worse and worse, right? So for anybody who's listening out there, there is hope that you could never have it again, but when you do have it, it is a surreal feeling. Well, I will speculate as well. And I think that completely makes sense. And also, I think it makes sense that you finally doing something about your health and losing weight makes you also anxious about the fact that it took you so long to do it. And what kind of damage have you done in the process? Yes. And because when you were 86 pounds heavier, which is so crazy for me to say, I can't believe you were actually 86 pounds. But that's how you were when I met you. That is terrible for your body. Your body carrying around all that extra tissue is just, it's the worst. And you know, it's like, it's not my disdain for people that are overweight. I have love for everybody. And I certainly have love for people that are overweight. I have a lot of friends that are morbidly obese. I have friends that are comedians. One of your comedians who always appears. I don't know his name. Joe, he deals. Yeah. Yeah. He's always lost quite a bit of weight. Oh, good. Yeah. He lost quite a bit of weight during the pandemic. He was really worried about it. He's you're setting a straight one guess at a time. Well, as I try, man, it's just I try not to do. I'm just a come off mean sometimes because I'm mean to me. Right. You know, so I mean, if I'm mean to me about stuff like that, I mean to your friends, my friends, you know, and sometimes they don't want to hear it in my group. Okay. Okay. But I'm just telling you so funny. You said this because I didn't I didn't not to be charitable bit, but a lot of people got upset when you had fat shame me. And I think my wife and I were talking. And I said, you know what, how about I look at it this way? If he didn't care, he wouldn't have said that. No, I've had a lot of fat people on never say a fucking word to love you. Oh, I want you to be right back. Well, and I'm happy that you are now. I'm really happy. It's beautiful. And I've been following it very closely. I follow you on social media. You said me once such a nice message that I'm seeing you on those. That really made my day. That was so good. Well, my day to see you thrive. It really makes me happy. It makes me happy because I know how hard it is. It's very hard to change lifestyle. It's very hard to change habits because we get ingrained in these patterns in our head with their good or bad. And one of the things that I could say, like people say, oh, it must be hard for you to exercise every day. I don't think it's not, it's not, no, it's not really. No, it's hard when you haven't been exercising to start. Yeah. Once you have momentum, it's not that hard. It's like when people say it's, Joey Diaz said this, Joey's a very wise man. And one of the things he said about stand-up comedy, he said, it's the hardest, easiest thing you'll ever do. Because when he's on, when that guy's on, he in my opinion is the funniest guy that's ever lived. And when he's on, I'm not seeing a lot of great comedians. And like, you know, there's great, great comedians that are live today, but no one makes me laugh like that guy. And when he's on, it's effortless. It's effortless. He's just in the group. But getting there required decades and hard work and writing and performing and constantly experimenting with how the deliver material and how to do it correctly, once you've got it though, then it's just about maintaining it. You know, it's why you see the great ones of like Chris Rock or Dave Chappelle, they're constantly working, they're constantly going out. If they had to start over from scratch as a beginner as an open-maker, that's hard. Right. Like that's why I'm very encouraging of young, up-and-coming comedians or even old. You know, I don't give a fuck what age is Star, but people are just starting out in comedy. I'm very encouraging of them of them. Because I want them to know like, hey man, we all suck in the beginning. It is a hard grind. But it's a beautiful fraternity of people. And if you can make it in this community, if you can get to a point where you're funny, you will have a really enjoyable life. It's a great way to make a living. I saw you on a documentary where I think you were, it was a documentary about stand-up. Do you know which one recently? I don't know which one. I was fascinated by it because I think what was being discussed is the creative process in generating material. And I'm fascinated by that because I can explain my creative process of how I write a book. But I've never attempted to write a set of jokes. I could be naturally funny, but I don't know the mechanism. I don't know how a chef is creative. I don't know how it's painted. But the act of creation excites me. And so I remember I had watched that particular documentary and I thought it was so cool to see all these, can be, it was, I'm trying to think which one it was. It was maybe a two-part series that you're doing at your belt. I've done a few of them. I haven't done one in a while, but everyone does it differently. Some people write everything in joke form and they think in joke like Tony Hinchcliffe was one of my favorite comedians, good friend of mine. He writes in joke form and he thinks in joke form. Like he's the guy, like if something happened, if Jamie says something and Tony has a sly look at his face, I always look at him and he'll have like the perfect line. He's like the best off the cuff guy I've ever met. And he hosts this show called Kill Tony that's on Monday nights on YouTube. And the beautiful thing about that show is complete amateurs and professionals and you know, they all throw their name into a hat. And he reaches in and pulls a name out and that person will go on stage live on YouTube and in front of hundreds of thousands of people that are going to watch it and they'll do one minute of standup comedy. And then Tony will either encourage them or mock them or they try to find humor in it, but it's all in good spirits and it's all in good fun. And in that takes courage. It does take courage. But my point was that his specific style of writing is very different than mine, which is I either get an idea and I write it down or put it in my phone or I write in essays. So I write essays where I just like a subject like sex differences. Yeah, sex differences and then just start ch ch ch ch and then I just like I'll just I might type out a thousand words of nonsense for one sentence and that one sentence of like there's something there and I'll pull that out and I'll put it aside I'll copy and paste that somewhere else and then I'll start over again with that one sentence that I know that's good. I'll keep that above and then write below it. I'll give it a couple spaces and write below it. I'll readdress the subject. How do I do it from new eyes? So if you have to come up with new material for one hour special. Yeah, how how many pages of content is going to correspond to the one hour? Nine out of 10 pages suck. Really? Yeah, if you looked at my notes, you believe this guy's fucking terrible. But the thing is like I don't know I'm not writing down the things that I think are good. I'm just writing. Okay. Right. So I'm trying to let my mind find the things that are good. Right. So as I'm talking about a subject, I'm just, so if that's true, then why is this? And then like, ha ha, I got something and then I'll pull that aside and I'll try to figure out a clever intro to that and then maybe I'll try it the other way and maybe I'll start with the premise first or maybe I'll start with the pun. I mix it up. But I find that my best writing is when I write in just an essay form and then extract. And are you trying to write every day or the second time? Yeah, I write basically every day. I do something every day, every day. I mean, I'll take a day off. But I feel like if I don't sit down every day and review my notes and go over my material, I feel I'm doing it myself with the service because there's so many bits that I have that are in my act that have been on comedy specials that I've done that just came from sitting down and writing. Right. Some of them came from nowhere. Like some of them came from nowhere. You know, I goes with a friend of mine once and we were talking and she was laughing about this overweight woman who had all this makeup on and this short dress and she was like looking at this like crazy image of this woman and she goes, what is she thinking? I go, I'll tell you exactly what she's thinking. She's just letting everybody know, it's not the best ride, but there's no line. And her and I were houling. We were laughing. So that came out of the ether right? That made it on to a comedy special, but that came out of nowhere. So sometimes it's like that. Sometimes they just kind of test the stuff on trusted audience of your friends before you do it the first time professionally. Sometimes I'll run it by a professional, sometimes I'll run it by Tony or one of my friends. I don't like having an idea, but most of the time I run it on the stage. So most of the time like I've been doing this Johnny Depp Amber Heard chunk and I just I've got like two different versions. So Friday night I did two sets in Phoenix. I did one version of it, the first set and it's different version of the second set. Just trying to figure out and so it's baby leg. So obviously because the trial just started, I need to figure out if it's even going to work. Like it gets laughs, but I'm like you always have to realize that if something gets laughs and it's in the news right now, it doesn't mean it's really good. It could be that they're just reacting to because they want to laugh this crazy fucking trial. It doesn't necessarily mean the material is good. So you can't rely on the moment being novel. Like this is this moment and everybody's excited about this moment and they're all aware of it so they're tuned into it. It's got to be good a year from now. Right. Right. Where it's like if you had to do a joke tomorrow about you know someone Brett Kavanaugh being inducted into Supreme Court, it's got to be good a year from now. It's got to to be good. It's got to be a good chunk. It's got to have good material. It can't just be familiar. So I want to ask you, I want to tie what you just said to some scientific principles. So there's something called two-factor theory in psychology of persuasion. The idea being that every time you are exposed to a stimulus, there is incremental learning. The first time that I hear a lecture might I pick up a lot of stuff, but the second time I pick up more, but it reaches us asymptote. After I've watched the same lecture 18 times, I can't extract anything from it. Right. And an opposing factor is what's called negative tedium boredom. The first time I hear a funny ad that's surprising, it makes me crack up, but by the second time it decays very quickly. Yes. The combination of these two results in what's called an inverted U shape. Okay. So I'm wondering how we would apply that principle. Let's say to the feeling of novelty that you as the comedian experience when you deliver that joke, right? The first time you say it, it's exciting. The 73rd time that you say it during your tour, are you able to deliver it with as much spice and spunk? Or are you entering as the deliver of the message, the negative tedium with the curve? That's part of the art. The art is you have to be in the moment when you're discussing a subject. So you have to care. If you don't care, the audience knows, if you're phoning in and they know, you can save the right words with the right amount of pause, with the right timing, and it doesn't matter. They have to fucking know that you're tuned into it. If you're not tuned, they smell it. They feel it. It's like there's what's going on when you're doing stand up is some kind of weird sort of massive gnosis. That's what's going on. Right. And to think that it's just jokes is not totally understanding the art form completely because everyone knows everyone that's done stand up that's had a killer set. When you're killing, you have this feeling where you're just, everyone's like synced. It's like there's energy in the room. Like you feel a wave that you're all riding. And you're as much of a passenger as you are the driver. Right. And you're all riding it together. That's the best best time for the audience. It's the best time for the community. So of all the, I don't think I've ever asked you this. So you've got many hats. You've got this show. You've got the MMA. You, you know, you do other things. You do stand up. If there is one that I told you, you must choose as the one. Is it a fair question to ask you that? What would it be? I definitely wouldn't want to choose because I think one of the things that I really like is that they all pop up many other. They compliment each other as well. Like doing MMA, for instance, one of the things about it. First of all, I love the sport. And it's a great honor for me to be able to do commentary for the UFC. And it means a lot to me. And it always means a lot to me. Now, I never take it casually. I always take it very seriously. I'm never funny. Like I'm not cracking jokes. I'm not trying to be funny. It's, I mean, if something funny comes up, it's just like that's fine. But my job is to explain what's happening and to put color to it's that's literally a color commentary guy. Um, that's helped by comedy because I do, I talk live all the time. So like when I'm at the UFC and millions of people are watching and the light goes on and the cameras pointed at me and I have to explain what's going on. I have zero feeling of, oh my God, always people are watching because people are always watching me. Right. Like I'm dead watching me when I do this. They're watching me when I do stand up. And I'm well aware when I stumble my words. I'm well aware when things don't come out the way I wanted it to where I'm searching for the correct sentence and it doesn't really fit right. And I'm not, whether I'm not warmed up enough or because there is like an intellectual warrant process and show you're aware of that to that feeling. Um, so they, the compliment each other, all three things compliment each other. Podcasting is complimented by stand up because stand up is the most difficult of the three. Right. Stand up is you don't get a chance to redo it. You can't say actually what I meant to say is this, you know, like you can, there's so much wiggle room and podcasting, which is probably the easiest podcast is probably the easiest. And then stand up is the hardest. And MMA, it's easy with a caveat. It's easy for me because I'm a massive fan and I watch fights constantly. I'm always watching them on YouTube. And this is something that's been a passion of mine, my entire life. So from the time I was a boy up until now, I've never not followed combat sports. I've never not watched all the big fights. I've never not paid attention. I've never not trained. I've never not. So it's easy for me to plug into it because it means a lot to me. But if someone was just applying it as a job, so say if you didn't give a shit about MMA, but you like, well, you don't have to be good if I was an MMA commentator. MMA is really popular. Maybe I should become one of those with no, I'm not, I'm not in a training. I'm not, it's not a part of my life, but I'm just going to learn a lot about it. Good luck. Good luck. Good luck. That shit would take decades. And you're going to get things wrong. The people going to get so mad at you, you're going to say the wrong name for a kick. Are you going to give the wrong advice about the way you need to position their feet or the way they need to move? You're going to fuck it up. And then the people that know are going to be so mad. One of the things that I'm very fortunate that I have that job, very, very fortunate. But I say I'm very, everyone knows I'm very fortunate. I know that they know, they know that I know. And they also know that I'm legit. Like I really care. A dentist that you talk about. There's not a moment when I'm watching a great fight where I'm pretending. I am fucking 100% tuned into that. They know I'm one of them. So like when I'm talking about technique, talking about like style match ups and what's fascinating about it, they know I'm 100% genuine. If you're just a sports guy and you're bullshitting, we've had a few of those sports guys who come in and try to add like sports guy terminology that they might use for baseball or football or what have you. And they try to apply that to MMA. MMA people get mad. They get mad. Because it's a it's it's a more personal form of competition. It's more personal, more intense. It's like you're literally putting your health on the line. Well, I remember what maybe the first time that I came on your show used to something that always stuck with me. You were drawing an analogy between the the honesty that is required when you are a stand-up comic when you're a fighter and you go into the ring. You can't hide anywhere. And then you analogize it to when I have to speak in front of an audience about academic stuff. And you said that all of these three pursuits, you can't bullshit because they're going to know. Yes. And I love that because I am someone who is authentic to a fault. And so I love the idea that if you walk into the ring, you can't fake it. Right. If you're not prepared, you're going to get pummeled. If you go up in front of an audience, you're not funny. Regrettably people are going to respond accordingly. If I get up in front of an audience and I start espousing bullshit, people are going to I mean, I'm on this show. People are going to listen to every syllable that I utter. And so I think for me, what protects me is that I'm very epistemically humble. In other words, when I know something, I walk with the swagger of someone who is who knows what he's talking about. But then if you ask me about. So what are the consequences of the legalization of marijuana Canada? I'm going to say, you know. Someone who knows what he's talking about. But then if you ask me about, so what are the consequences of the legalization of marijuana in Canada? I'm going to say, you know what? I don't know enough about this topic. And so having that epistemic humility protects me against the prying eyes because I am very modulated as to what I know and what I don't know. And of course Confucius talked about this many many thousands of years ago. And so I think that honesty element is so beautiful. And so people ask me, do you get nervous before you get on Joe Rogan? And I say, no, he's a friend. I know I'm going to have a good time. I don't think just like you that there's anybody watching me. The number one thing that makes me stressed about coming on the show is, am I going to have to go to the bathroom during the three hours? But you have to go, you let me know. I know you always say that. Just let me know. That's literally the only thing that worries me. But your honesty is very important. I mean, and you are obviously honest to a fault. There's no fault to be honest. That's a weird statement. It's so that people know they can trust you. Yeah. If you're like you are, you know so much about psychology and you know so much about the mind, you know so much about the way people think and why they think and what the evolutionary basis for those things are, you can enlighten people in a way that they can just accept your knowledge because they know that you're being honest. Yes, exactly. And that's so valuable. And you know, it's so valuable. One of the biggest thrills I get is, as you might imagine, given your platform, I receive innumerable emails from people. Someone will say, I got into evolutionary psychology because I followed this stuff that you were talking about with Joe Rogan and which leads me to another point, which again, not to blow complementary smoke up your beautiful behind. But in the fair, in the fair, I tell the story in chapter one of the hotiness of academia and the story that I tell is I was at Stanford speaking at the business school, the bottom is big of academic mecha is you can get. And the gentleman who had hosted me, you know, the night before for dinner said, oh, you know, you're, you know, Joe Rogan, you go on a show. I said, yeah, yeah, well, you know, we don't condone that at Stanford. I said, well, what do you mean? What is it that you don't condone? He said, well, you know, we don't do sexy research so we can get on Joe Rogan. I said, well, I don't do research so I can get on Joe Rogan, but I can do research and get on Joe Rogan. Surely you would think that popularizing your ideas to millions of people might be worthwhile in addition to publishing and peer review journal. And his answer was, yeah, well, we don't do it. Well, he's just saying that because he hasn't been on exactly. It's an ego. I've had a lot of people from Stanford on. Well, but not this guy, but by the way, when I started coming on the show, I don't think you had yet many professors who had come on. I think now everybody wants to come on Joe Rogan because you were one of their, what year did you find? I might have been the, I mean, year was the first time 2014. I don't know if you were the first professor, but you were certainly one of them. I mean, it was eight years ago in that crazy year. Time flies. I'm going to leave. Do you foresee doing this forever or do you ever see it? I enjoy it. I don't think about it. I don't think about whether or not I'll keep doing it. I thought about it when I was going to build a giant building. When I came out here, I was going to buy a piece of land and build, and I'm like, wait, wait a minute. I'm going to do this for what purpose. What are you doing? Build a fucking crazy podcast empire. Just build a giant studio. I'll show you what we're doing here afterwards. Yeah. But I thought about it for a moment. Then I'm like, what are you thinking? Why are you thinking about that? I just do what I like to do. And as long as I can do what I like to do, I just do what I like to do. If it becomes like pragmatic, if I have to sit down and go, well, this is not tenable anymore. Not manageable. There's too much of this and that. But it's not. So I don't have to think about it. So if you don't want me asking, you've had recent stuff with Spotify and this thing being taken off and that would that be construed as something that affects your enjoyment of doing a podcast? What affects my enjoyment is whether I enjoy it while I'm doing it. And I always enjoy it while I'm doing it because I always pick who's on. Like I don't have, there's not a managerial department or there's no executives. There's no one. So if you see, I guess today I had the black keys on, I love that band. They're fucking awesome. They were great. And like I'm friends with them and they contacted me and they said, hey, we got an album coming out. I'm like, fuck yeah, come on. Like that's the process. So there's no filter. So the audience knows there's no filter. They're aware of this. They know that if I'm talking to you, it's because I enjoy our conversations. So that that's always going to be good. And when it's not, I'll just quit. But I was like, I don't want to do that anymore. I'll just quit. So I recently saw you on Instagram posting about Marcus Aurelius. Yes. And so I want to, can we veer to that for some? Sure. So in my, in the next book that I'm doing, the recipe for a good life, of course, I get into the history of all sorts of cultures that I've explored the good life. It's not as though I'm the first guy to write about this. Probably one of the topics that's been most written about none have been as prolific as the ancient Greeks. And so, and so when I, when I saw your thing about Marcus Aurelius, I was about to write you to say, well, I've come to that same realization because so as I was doing my research for the book, every time I would get an insight that I thought was original to me, I'd say that fucker Epictetus has already said it a thousand years ago. In that wild? Yeah. It's unbelievable. And so it reminds me and I want to give him kudos on the show. So do you know when I seen Talibas? Sure. Yeah. So I see him as a good friend of mine is fellow Lebanese. And so many years ago, he was kind of egging me teasing me saying, I don't really understand what you study in psychology, God. I think that there is to know about psychology and human nature, the ancient Greece have already covered it. And so I, I mean, he was just egging me on. But then many years later, as I'm preparing for this book, I'm like, I think he might be right. We might be empirically validating what they've already philosophized. But so, so your, you know, post about Marcus Aurelius really resonated with me at exactly that same moment. It's quite fascinating when you read his, his writing. It's unbelievable. Because he was so wise and his decisions for what he would concentrate on and not concentrate on. And you know, how he would accept people's flaws and mistakes that they'd made as if they had never made them. And this just approached the stoicism and his philosophy on life. The Greeks were the Greeks and the Romans. And you know, if you look at the history of these ancient civilizations that dominated the world at that period of time and that we can get a kind of an understanding of how they thought about things. It's to me, one of the more amazing things about history is to peer into the, it's almost like we have a little bit of a time machine. To peer into the mindset of these people that were so wise, thousands and thousands of years ago in that their words are applicable today. Yeah. Well, I mean, that speaks to the universality of the human condition. Right. And I always tell my students what I'm teaching about evolutionary theory. I say, look, you can use cultural products as fossils of the human mind, right? The human mind doesn't fossilize, but the products that is left from human minds, we can study its contents in the same way that paleontologist studies fossil remains. So I can connect to the mind of an ancient Greek poet and understand what he's talking about as though he's speaking today because the software that's running his mind and mind is identical. He doesn't know what an iPhone is. He doesn't know what a podcast is, but he knows about sexual longing. He knows about paternity uncertainty. He knows about sibling rivalry. Those are the universal themes that are invariant across time and place. And so one of the things that I love about being an author is that I get to be connected through ideas with all of these immortal souls. And so it's really a beautiful thing to write and to create and that the fact that I independently thought of something that Epictetus thought 2000 years ago connects me with him. Yes. Truth. It's just you developed an understanding of human beings and of human nature and you have deciphered from this and extracted some truth and it turns out other people have done the same thing. Fantastic. You know, there's a great book called the immortality code and it's Brian Murr-Rescu who has he's gone through ancient Greek culture and all of the Ulyssidium mysteries and looked into all of their rituals and tried to figure out like what was going on. And one of the things that they've done is going over pottery and finding that there's remnants of psychedelic substances in these pottery jars. And so these wine jars, these jugs, these pottery, they found that they were imbibing in wine that was dosed with Lesergic acid. So they had different kinds of ergot and different kinds of things that would produce psychedelic states. So all of these, you know, like when people would go there to learn and when people would go to have these ritualistic experiences, they were tripping. And this is the birthplace of democracy. This is the birthplace of a lot of these thinkers, these great thinkers of, you know, that age. And of course, Roman emperors forbade it and they outlawed it and they in the book, they sort of detail how it migrated to other countries. And you can find the same remnants in the pottery in these other countries. And you can literally, you could trap the path of their escape from these areas where they were more restrictive and trying these ritualistic experiences in other places. But yeah. It's the immortality key or code key, the immortality key. It's an amazing book, really, really. The brine was on the podcast and because of him being on the podcast, Harvard has opened up a field of study. Wow. And in that particular area where they're looking at psychedelic substance use in ancient Greece, because it's irrefutable now because of the residue. Now they now have scientific evidence. They have residue that shows that they were most certainly flavoring their wine with this stuff. That's another thing that I didn't know. I always thought wine was wine. It was fermented fruit. It's not. They're wine. They would always add things too. They constantly added stuff to their wine. Their wine was never just wine. Their wine was most of the time wine with other things and oftentimes psychedelic substances like ergot mixed in with the wine. Fantastic. So earlier you said that everything that I do, I do it out of love. If I stop enjoying it, I won't do it. So in the recipe for the good life, I talk about the two decisions that you'll make in your life that are most likely to either impart great happiness or great misery on you. Number one, choosing the right spouse. Number two, choosing the right job or profession because most of your waking time is going to be spent either with your family or at your job. And if either or both of those and part you great happiness, you're well on your way to living a happy life. And so in your case, you've ticked off the job. I mean, you probably lived the most desired life in terms of a pursuit that most people desire to be in your right because you're completely free. You're not bound to anyone. You do exactly what you want when you want. So what would be if it came to choosing the right spouse, you've been married for a long time. So that you'll meet my wife before. I've never met her. Oh, she's here. She'll be here in a little bit. Oh, that'd be great. I'll be here. We have a gym next door. So what would be the things that you would advise people? I want to see if it jives with some of the things that I say in the book, the things that you should look for for the optimal mate. Of course, there is no guaranteed recipe, but do you have some life lessons as to how someone should choose their optimal wife or her husband? You have to be someone who a good person would want to be with. That's a big one. There's a lot of people that want this amazing spouse. They want an amazing husband. They want an amazing wife, but they're not amazing. Who the fuck are you to get that person? Like you have to be, I don't mean worthy as in a human being. I mean, worthy in your behavior, your tenacity, your discipline, your passion. You have to be fun to be around. You have to be a giver. You have to be someone who enjoys being around you. So like when you're on a date with that person, when you first meet them, they like you. They have fun. You like them. It's mutually beneficial. Everybody wants to be desired, but nobody wants to be compatible. Nobody wants to be generous. Those are not things that people aspire to. People don't aspire to being cordial. They don't aspire to being warm and friendly and loving and humorous. But that's what people like. Everybody wants to be the baller or the club with the champagne, the big gold chains. But that's just a fucking bullshit. That's what you see from the outside. You want to be the person who's on stage where everybody cheers and they see your face. That's on the outside. What you want to be is someone who people like, genuine. Like as a person, not the image of you, but who you fucking really are. They have to know you. So if you don't know yourself and if you don't, if you're not honest with yourself in terms of like your discipline, your work ethic, the way you treat your friends, the way you treat strangers, the way you are, your personality. If you're not working on that, you're never going to attract a valuable mate. You're never going to attract someone who is someone who's desirable, someone who you want to be around. Why would they want to be around with you? Because people out there that are working harder than you. There's people out there that are nicer than you. There's people that are there that are more friendly than you. That's attractive. If a woman's on a date with a man and the man's rude to the waitress, I was going to say exactly that as a test. Oh my god. Or the man talks badly about his ex-girlfriend or his ex-wife, she's going to go, what are you going to say about me? Yeah. You know, what do you get at, why are you not even treating me nice? I actually, so I agree with everything that you've said. So one time, so you know, I told you I always go for long walks with my wife to get to the cafe in the morning. And so one day we were stopped by one of my daughter's friends, father, who came up to us. He's a photographer and he said, we stopped by to say hello. And he said, do you mind if I ask you a question, I said, sure. He goes, how do you do it? I said, do what? What are you asking? He goes, every single day I see you walking on this thing, your arm and arm with your wife and you're kind of lost in conversation. You're both very serene and happy. I said, well, I don't have a recipe. I really just enjoy her company. She's my best friend. It sounds cliche, but that's really what it is. I'd rather be with my wife more than anyone else on most days that I exist. Now, I don't know if there's a recipe to find that person, but if you do find that person hang on tight. So that's one. Well, you have to know who you are. They're very true. If you don't know who you are, you won't know who they are. And if you're full of shit. And by the way, the ancient Greeks already beat you to that, know thyself. So the stuff you're saying, they already said it. Yeah, they do. To our point. The second thing, if I'm going to get more scientific, it turns out that for long-term marital success, there are two competing maxims, birds of a feather flock together or opposites attract. Opposites attract is great for short-term mating. I tend to be extroverted. You are introverted, maybe that compliments each other for little sexual dallions behind the bushes. But on the other hand, for long-term marital success, you want a source of mating, a birds of a feather flock together, on which traits on shared values. Right. And so if you don't have that in common, the stats of you likely divorcing shoots through the like Johnny Depp and Amber Heard. And Johnny's a sweetheart of a guy, but is actually really? Oh, yeah, he is. Yeah, he's a sweetheart of a guy. Yeah, I've talked to him and he's very good friends with one of my very good friends, my friend Doug Stanhope. He's a sweetheart of a guy. And that's part of the problem. And he was in a loving relationship before her and had a child and the whole deal. But it's also that's the partying, you know, that's probably what they shared in common. But what they didn't share in common was truth and honesty. And Johnny's pretty honest. And that other way. I didn't know that he was so poetic. Yeah. See, people are going to get the chance to see him. He's an interesting guy. And she's not. Well, she's interesting like from if I was a psychologist, I was studying her like for you, right? Right. Right. Because I mean, she's so full of shit that she, she says things on the stand that are directly refuted by previous things that she said, right, including that she never hit him. Like she's fucking on the toilet. Not only that, the two of them recording each other. Like how crazy the both of them, that's when they have them in common, neither one of them trusted each other. So they were fucking recording their conversations. Like insane people. Yeah. You were mentioning earlier about the test with the, if someone treats the waiter or waitress. Yeah. Do you remember in Bronx, Dale, the door test? Yes. Yes. Isn't that unbelievable? Yeah. Why? Yeah, it is why. But how crazy is it back then? Like there's no automatic door. Exactly. Yeah. He's like, by the way, one of my favorite movies of all time. It's a great movie. It's a great movie. Yeah. Yeah. But that is a test. Like you want people to care. Like people that don't care about other people. That's only a virtue if no one cares about anyone and you're protecting yourself from pain. Right. Right. And so there are a lot of people out there that say that, I don't give a fuck about anybody else. I'm going to get my thing. Like that's silly. Right. You're missing the objective point. The objective point is community. The objective point is camaraderie, love, friendship, relationships, whatever. It's like it's a mutually beneficial thing to be caring and to be kind and to it. It feels good to be nice to people. It really genuinely does. It's actually selfish to be generous and kind and nice. It really is because you benefit. Because you benefit. Yeah, you benefit. And people don't think about it that way. And it's not why you should do it. You should do it because it makes other people feel good but that does make you feel good. It really does. It's like really like that's one of the secrets to my happiness. I have a lot of really good friends and I'm really close to them. And I love them. And I tell them I love them. I tell my guy friends I love them all the time. And I have a lot of friends and these friends that I have a lot of them I've known for decades. And we've had a lot of fun together. And we have kindness and generosity but also we hold each other accountable and we're also very honest. And when they're not honest I'm like, come on fuck face. Do you because of your family and so on? Are you not defensive but are you guarded in bringing new people into your inner circle? Always wondering if there is a ulterior motive to why this person do you have the mechanism to be able to adjudicate that? Because a lot of people are trying to be friends with Joe Rogan. And I need to make sure that you're not a pretender, a user, someone who's being instrumental and you can find out pretty easy. Bullshitters are not good at it. No one's good. There's some legitimate sociopaths and wind up being cult leaders and shit like that. But eventually you see it. Eventually you see it. Just don't let them all the way in. But you get it by just the way they talk. When you're full of shit, one of the things about being a liar or being someone who is dishonest or is acting. You're acting like you're someone who you're not. You're not good at recognizing that and other people. And you're not reading how the other people are seeing you. So you think you're conning people when you're not. This is the amber-heard thing. If she was an honest person, just the way she's talking and acting, the fake crying, it would be so brutal. But it's so funny because I listened to, I think it was maybe Meghan Kelly's podcast where it seemed as though everybody had bought into her eye. No way, even though she's an actress, could she ever fake those emotions. Whereas I watched that little snippet and it struck me as inauthentic. So what is it that? It thought it was authentic. Well, I can't remember who her guest was. No, no, no. I think there was a guest on her show. Oh, the guest was to be a hardcore woman feminist. It doesn't believe ever. But do you think that's the only victim? Do you think that that's the only thing that can assert people into seeing the inauthenticity between not seeing it? Yeah, I think she has, if someone doesn't recognize the inauthenticity of that woman on trial, it's because they don't want to read people. Well, they either can't read people or they are so biased that they're looking for. Like when people were talking about Joe Biden, like Joe Biden stated union, Joe Biden is a part of it. Joe Biden's part of it. It was a friend. I think that was the guest on Megan Kelly, where he was saying you can't fake those kinds of raw emotions. That's hilarious. Isn't he a lawyer though? That he is. Yeah. Well, about that. Yeah, sorry, I didn't mean to call you out. Of course you can fake that. She's not even faking it well. You're right. But a sucker he is. I'd like to find out how many times that guy's been divorced. Okay. I'm really sorry. I gotta tell you. Maybe he's got it. Like maybe he's just saying that to be a country. So I, I know Mark, well, he lives in Southern California. He's done a lot of high profile cases. A couple of summers ago, I was in Southern California with my family. We were very keen to go to an LAFC game Los Angeles football club. I reached out to Mark. I say, Mark, you got to hook me up with tickets within two hours. He's inspired me tickets to go. So he's a good guy. He is a very, very good guy. He got guys or suckers. No, I might agree with you on one point. Doug Peterson. Is that his name? The guy who killed his wife or Dennis Peterson. The guy who killed his pregnant wife, whose, whose was on death throw in California, he represented him. I'm going to remember what I got. When, when did wide will be the circumstances of him killing? There was a guy who was dating having an extramarium affair. his pregnant. I call a rado. No, it was in Modesto, California. He was on a few of those cases out there. Can we get some? Jamie, the pick. Scott Peters. Scott Peters. Okay, I remember that one. Yeah. Well, I think Gary goes represented him or maybe during the appeal process. And I've always wondered whether when lawyers do that, they have to know the truth. You have to know. But it's your job to defend the guy. That's what's the darkest thing about that job. Yeah. I'm not an attorney in particular where you have to defend someone who very well might have killed their pregnant wife. But technically speaking, if that client were to say to you, I admit to you and private that I've done it. Yeah. Do you have to go under the... No, no, I'm not a lawyer. I don't know. I don't know how that works. I mean, I think you could probably recu... Could you recuase yourself? But what happens when someone knows that their client is guilty? Is that... That's a very good question. Yeah. So my feeling is as long... I don't know. I'm not a lawyer either. But I don't think they can simply say, I did it and you're defending me. So I just kind of put my hand and I go, la, la, la, la, la. Don't ever say it. Yeah. And I'm presuming that we're going... Everything you're telling me is truthful. Yeah. And you know what's scary is the opposite of that. When prosecutors know that you're innocent and they're still trying to get... Yes. ...that's real. So that's Kamala Harris, by the way. Yeah. I despise that woman and I'm Canadian. By the way, her high school, I played soccer for my high school against her high school when she was at that school in Montreal. Because I don't know if you know if she was from Montreal. Oh, I didn't know. She grew up in Montreal. Wow. So we lived very close to one another. And she cheated soccer too? She probably cheated... Well, I didn't play against her. I didn't play. I played on... Back then we used to have boys team that were made up of violence. Lawyers are supposed to represent someone even if they think they're guilty. Okay. Is that what they think they're guilty? What if they know... What if they know... I believe it's the same thing. Oh, it's the same thing. I don't know. Okay. Defense lawyers are ethically bound to zealously represent all clients, including those they believe will just... Justly be found guilty as well as those they believe are factually innocent. A strenuous defense is necessary to protect the innocent and to ensure that judges and citizens have the ultimate power to decide who is guilty of a crime. So the problem with that is then it becomes like an intellectual exercise for the person who is the lawyer to defend someone who they know is guilty against an inferior prosecuting attorney that they know is kind of a schlub and that they could sneak by and they've done that in the past. You know, expensive suits and big words and... I mean, the missing argument that the mafia lawyers surely don't think that those guys are in construction really. So now... Not only do they not think it, do you remember when John God he was on trial and he had that mob attorney who was fucking excellent, who was built like a brick shit house? Bruce something. What was his name? Cutler? Bruce Cutler? That sounds right. Cutler? Boy, we're going to Jamie today a lot. What was his name? But he was built like a fucking linebacker. He was a scary guy. He was a mob lawyer. He looked like a mob. Yeah, look at him. What's his name? Bruce Cutler? Yeah. Look at the fucking... Look at the size of that guy. I mean, he looks like the guy would break your fucking head with a bat. Look at him. Look at him. Big bald gorilla looking dude looking smash your fucking face in. That's... That looks like a mob attorney. Yeah. Like that's a guy that was under no illusion that John Godie was innocent and he was really good at getting him out. That's what they called him the Teflon Don. They kept getting him out. By the way, you mentioned earlier how horrific it is when you prosecute someone that you're in the innocent. Of all the guests I've had on my show, probably the one that on a personal level affected me the most is I had a guy who spent 29 years in prison for a murder which he was eventually exonerated. And I've included him in my latest book because I'm talking again about the recipe for the good life. And what amazed me about this guy is how non-filled with anger and hatred and a sense of retribution he had. And so I basically coined him, you know, the new Buddha because I was trying to put myself in his position. If you stole from me 29 years of my existence, he was so poised and so truly like as if he's a saint and I thought you're a much better man than I am because if I got out after you've stolen 29 years from me, I think I would want to burn the world down because I would be third of your life. And if you're lucky. So I'll send you the link if you ever have time you should watch it because this guy is the model by how we should live life without having rancor in our heart. How forgiving he was is really incredible. That's amazing. Yeah, it's a sneaky system. I've had Josh Dubin on, he's an ambassador for the Innocence Project. He needs a good friend of mine. I've had him on multiple times and through this podcast several people have actually been let out a jail because of the arguments that he made in this podcast in cases reopened in people examining things and is there no end to your influence? Well, it's his influence. I mean, I'm giving him the portal but he's so selfless in his work and what he does to try to exonerate innocent people and we've had fucking tear-filled conversations about this because he's gotten people out that were immigrants, couldn't speak English well, or unfairly accused and the prosecutors knew that this person was innocent and they don't give a fuck. Once they have someone in the game, they're trying to win. Once the game is going on, they don't say, hey, you're on or I think we're wrong. I think this guy's innocent and I'm going to not try to prosecute him and even though we're in court right now, I want to say that I'm on his side. No one does that. I'm curious. And I'm going to not try to prosecute him. And even though we're in court right now, I want to say that I'm on his side. No one does that. Ego and careerism over truth. But so on the judicial point, are you four or against the death penalty? If people were honest, 100% of the time I would be for the death penalty, people are not honest. And if you know what I know about the whole process of trying someone and convicting someone unfairly about the way they withhold evidence, like we're talking about with Kamo Harris, including genetic evidence. Like they try to withhold evidence that would exonerate innocent people. If I didn't know that before the death penalty. So for the stuff that you're not against it, I am for killing people who rape children. I'm for killing people who murder your family, killing people who do horrible things. I'm all for removing dangerous people that are detrimental to the problem is, you don't know. You don't know because we have a corrupt system. And not only do we have a corrupt system, but we have people that have existed inside this corrupt system for decades. And they're really fucking good at it. So how about we do it very simply? If I'm going to set the criterion, if I find your DNA in or on the body. But you can't know because someone can plant that. Even then it becomes sketching. Because people have planted DNA evidence on innocent people. They've taken someone's innocent DNA and innocent person's DNA and planted it on a body in order to make it look like they committed to crime. That's so impossible. So then practically speaking, since there is no way to render that probability of malfeasance to zero, then practically you would never be further that value. I think it's so hard to know whether or not someone who is saying they're innocent, unless there's overwhelming evidence, unless you have their family members and all these people saying Jeffrey Dahmer is a good example. Like fucking monster. That was a monster. Clearly. There's a lot of cases of those, Ted Bundy. There's a lot of cases of those where people were fucking monsters. That makes sense. Like remove them from society. But what about people that are unfairly executed? Unfairly convicted and then executed for crimes that didn't commit? That happens all the time. So I think we can set the set of criteria that you must reach so that you would feel sufficiently convinced that it has us watch the possibility that someone is planting. So it has to be a richer, remiara-type situation. It has to be someone that the night's talking. Yeah, there's so many people that are good people that get fucking railroaded. And they wind up in jail and they have poor representation and maybe they can't read and maybe they're just, they get fucked and then they wind up getting executed and the killer is loose and free. And that's happens. That happens all the time. I don't know what percentage. Let's find, let's ask this. What do you think? I don't even know the statistics. What percentage of people who are executed turn up to actually be innocent? I want to say no more than 5%, which is pretty high number. But I would say you're probably right. I probably, it's probably less than that. I would say it's probably less than 5%, but that's enough man. That's enough. That's a lot. You get 100 people, five of them, but you're going to murder. But that's because the criteria, 4%. God damn fucking- How some knuckles, brother. God damn. Nailed it. Can I see that statistic the way they say it? It says the study published in the proceedings, the National Academy of Science, determined at least 4% of people on the death penalty, death row were and are likely innocent? I've been executed. Oh, people have no doubt that some innocent people have been executed. That's a different sense. But it's okay. It's the same thing. It says people on death row that have been acute, that have been convicted to the death penalty. Yeah, but no, there have been cases of death penalty where it's based on eyewitness testimony. We know how unreliable that is. Terrible. So you and I can set up the framework so that our exacting standards so that nobody falls on the 4% could be met. What I don't like is when you have people who say, under no conditions and no possible states of the world is it ever appropriate, normal to kill someone. And I simply don't agree that that's part of our attitude. Like Hitler, you tell me you didn't want to execute it. Exactly. It's crazy. No, but there's people that are egregious, right? There's people that their cases are so horrific that there is a moral imperative to remove them from the population. Exactly right. And I think the example that you gave with the children is that's where I would be. There's a story. There's a UFC fighter. It was one of the all time greats. Cain Velasquez. And he's in jail now because there was a man who was working at the preschool, who molested his four-year-old, 100 times or more. They don't know how many times this is the number. Before you go on, that number is an actual stats, which I may have mentioned on the show before, that the average pedophile one their cut has up to 100 prior molestation encounters. Well, this guy got out on bail and was under house arrest. And Cain Velasquez found out and chased him down in his car, shot at him in the car. One of shooting his father, who was driving the car, his father who, by the way, was running the nursing home. So his father likely knew that his son was a monster. Shot him in the abdomen and in the arm. I think he shot him through the door, the car was shooting out the door of the car. Cain's in jail with no bail, no possibility of bail, and he's being tried for murder, or tried for attempted murder, excuse me. And that's a situation where that guy seems to be guilty. I would have no problem with that guy getting the death penalty. That guy's ruining people's lives. Unbelievable. Ruining a small child, if you found out your boy had been sexually molested, fucking 100 times by some monster. It's the biggest nightmare. It's the scariest thing ever. And what Cain Velasquez did is what every person says they would do if someone came after their child. And that he actually went out and did it. So I've had not hated exchanges with my wife, but I always come with the following approach in parenting. I don't put my children who are now a bit older. They're 13 and 10. But growing up, I never put my children in any situation where they could ever be molested, meaning, if there is a man in any situation, my children are never going to be along with them. Now my wife would argue, aren't you being a bit too punitive in presuming that there's a pedophile hanging around every corner? I say, well, I'm not willing to take. So the precautionary principle, I'm not willing to take the chance that that person who really seems nice, that neighbor or the teenage son of their friend or anybody could be that guy. He doesn't have horns. I can't tell what he looks like. Therefore, there was never any sleepovers. There was never sleepover. He can't. There was no. So I can't understand not that I'm blaming this gentleman who saw it through that. But why is it that he was in a nursery that was run by a father and there was a male present? That makes no sense to me. No, I don't know. I don't know how it worked. I don't know the story. I see your perspective, but there's a lot of people that have run nursing homes that are adult males that are great people. It's not. It's a horrible, horrible situation. But I just think the problem is we can't read minds. Until we can determine ultimate truth, like pure, undeniable truth from a person. Like I sit you down and say, Mr. Sadley, please put your hands on this thing and tell us what you did and what you didn't do. And then until we can do that. And by the way, people, here's the thing, people say like, oh, just give them a polygraph test. Let me tell you something. Sociopaths, path, they pass. They pass polygraph tests all the fucking tests. Real sociopaths can sit there and lie to your fucking face and it doesn't change their heart rate at all. Liars, like real good liars. People have gotten real fucking good at lying. They've been lying their whole life. They've just been making up shit and lying about this and lying about that and covering their tracks. They don't even think they're lying. They're fucking crazy. And it's, so there's, I don't know if I've ever mentioned this on this show, there's a evolutionary biologist by the name of Robert Trivers who's still alive. Some have said he's arguably the biggest evolutionary biologist since Darwin. He's now in his late 70s. So he developed the theory of the evolution of self-deception. Why is it that we are so good at self-deceiving? And the argument is that if I'm trying to manipulate you Joe, when I lie to you in an manipulative intent, I have micro cues that signal that I might be lying. But if I first lie to myself so that I can shut off those signals, it becomes impossible for you to read the manipulative intent. Me. What psychopaths have innately built within them is the natural ability to have those cues shut off. And so the polygraph test can't pick it up precisely because they're not emitting those signals. But if you and I tell a fib, it's gonna create a physiological arousal state and then you're gonna pick it up in the media. Yeah. Yeah. It's not effective. That's why it's not applicable. Exactly. And they need to come up with one. I mean, that's the only way we're ever gonna really know. And until then, there's unfortunately a lot of people that are in bad circumstances. They have poor representation, they get framed, something happens and then they wind up on death row. So until then, it's very hard to support the death sentence. Yeah. I mean, I think I don't not support it in cases of pure guilt, like we you'd know. It's undeniable. Right. But there's a lot of places where people thought someone was absolutely guilty and turned out not to be the case. Sure. And then, you know, I imagine living with that. Imagine being a prosecuting attorney and you railroaded someone and sent them down the river, put them on death row, and then it had them killed, and then it turns out they were innocent. Like, man, good luck in hell. Good luck in hell. Well, there's a special place in hell for people like that. Yeah. Imagine. Prior to prior to eventually settling on consumer psychology and evolution psychology, I have toured with the idea of going into criminal psychology. I had always been fascinated with the serial killers and so on. And I decided, I think, rightly against it because I thought that I might have had the intellectual interest, but my personality would have been severely damaged by being exposed to darkness and evil. Yeah. That's actually one of the reasons why I didn't go into clinical psychology. Unlike, say, Jordan Peterson, a friend of both of us. I am empathetic that I think I could have been an effective therapist, but I think it would have been very detrimental to my personhood because I wouldn't have been able to create the demarcation between listening to what was done to you when you were a child. And then, oh, now it's five o'clock. Let me go and party with my family because all is good. And so I think I would have probably blown my brains. And so I think in retrospect, even though I've always been interested in forensic psychiatry and clinical psychology and criminal, I picked more uplifting fields of human behavior to start. I think you picked wisely and I think you're absolutely accurate. I think that same problem applies to police officers. Exactly. I mean, of many friends that are either former or current police officers and they tell me the horrific things that they've seen, you know, where they've had to go to a home where a father just murdered the wife in front of the children and that kind of shit and or murdered a child or you know, they've seen so many horrific, horrific things. And then they come home to their own children. And there's a high rate of suicide among police officers and I think they're correlated. And imagine that we now, you know, make them turn out to be diabolical via the hashtag defund the police. So of course they are bad cops. But the reality is we should be treating them with the respect that they're deserving of because most of us would not be lining up to do their job. They don't get paid enough for it. And yet we do hashtag defund the police. It's grotesque. Well, it falls in line with these people that live in this delusional world where you don't need law enforcement. You don't need laws and they're just going to be good people. And then you get LA where you get rampant out of control crime and people just get released on bail for murder. They're just out roaming around the streets. And if you're still living around 50. Yeah, it's not a felony. I mean, how many fucking Walmart have to close down and Walgreens have to close down San Francisco, those drug stores where they just walk in and just start shoveling things into a bag and walk out. No one does anything about it. But again, that shows you that having a poor understanding of human nature has downstream benefits. Right? So if you think that by definition, if you're a criminal, it is never due to your own personal agency. But it must that the culprit is really the society that caused you to become a victim. Then why should I be punitive? Right? And therefore I shouldn't put an issue in car sir, Ray Chiu, it's wrong. I am double penalizing you. First, the world made you into the rapist. Otherwise you're a beautiful lovely human being. And now I'm going to put you in prison. Why don't I instead find the way to help you out of this thing? So it's a wrong understanding of human nature that causes all of these insane woke policies. It is a wrong understanding of human nature. But there is a reality to people that are fucked by the world. There's certain people that through no fault of their own, they were born into a horrible circumstance. They have terrible parents, they live in a terrible neighborhood, there's crime and drugs and that's all they know. And that's all they've ever known. And they grew up that way and they're probably the victim of abuse, whether it's physical abuse or sexual abuse and violence. And they've had this their whole life. They've been in and out of penal institutions. They, these people are fucked. And the problem is they don't, there's no rehabilitation mechanism that's involved. The friends that I've had that have caught a jail and come out of jail, they're like, you're going to get a rehabilitated in there. If anything, you get turned into a harder criminal. You get taught how to do crimes better and you get to talk to people about how they get caught and how they're going to not get caught the second time when they get out. I don't, I don't know what the solution is. I would imagine that we're going to have to have a much more comprehensive understanding of what what it takes to program a mind and what it takes to deprogram a mind and what techniques, what substances are involved in that. That can be effectively given to people because we know that there's some substances that aid tremendously in alleviating people from whether it's alcoholism or any kind of addiction issues like this. I begame and there's a bunch of different things that people can do. A lot of people that have done, Silla Sybin, John Hopkins studies have shown. Tremendous benefits in quitting detrimental behavior, whether it's cigarettes or things like that gambling, drug addiction. And I think there's just aging reduces your criminality. Nothing, nothing. I just just your drop in testosterone is a huge predictor of the violence. Yeah. So just, you know, wait out the curve and you'll become less. Yeah. But I mean, it's like how do we let someone become more wise while still protecting everyone else from that person's impulses and urges, especially if that person did grow up in a violent household. They were beaten in the everyone in their neighborhood sucks and just there's a lot of people like that. It's not a, like that's the real inequality. The real inequality is the way children are raised. The real inequality is what are you exposed to? Even in the womb, you know, they've done studies that show that people that are that women that are pregnant, whoa, and notice I said women that are pregnant because, oh, man, can you get pregnant? I think that was a bold statement. I'm saying, while women are pregnant that if that woman is exposed to violence, that their her higher cortisol rates in her body and their stress in her body, they adrenaline, all these effects will actually make the child more inclined towards violent activity. Because the kid is thinking he's going to be born into a world that's crazy and he's got to protect himself. But then this kind of causal, causal argument could be applied at infinity. Right. At some point, you have to stand up and say, I have personal agency. Look, I grew up in the most violent environment possible. Right. It's called the Lebanese Civil War. I did not rob anybody. I did not attack anybody. I did not rape anybody. But you also grew up with good parents. Fair enough. I get it. You know, we do have, but there are many, many people who've grown up with very, very bad parents and they didn't end up killing that. That's true. So I get the argument of the mitigating factors and I'm empathetic enough to understand it, but it never justifies. You may at any moment in life, you have a bifurcation in the road and you can go right or you can go left. If you make the wrong choice, you pay the price. I think that's true. I think you're right. But I think we need to find some way to reach people and let them know this in a way that there's a lot of people that don't have any role models of people that are striving through all this chaos and doing the right thing. All the people that there are, I mean, people imitate their atmosphere. If everyone in your atmosphere is committing crimes and there are places in this country and certainly places in the world where that's the case, where you just, you live in a horrific environment and everyone around you is involved in terrible activities. Have you seen this? I can't cite it off top of my head, but that the number one predictors in a home that can serve as a predictor of how well your children will do is how many books are in the home. So imagine if it would be great if my kids are going to kill it because they're got a lot of books from guests that come on your show and the books you throw exactly. I'm going to test you on this book next time. What did I say in chapter seven? No, but seriously. So you're exactly right, having loving parents, you know, Larry Elder, whom I think, you know, often talks about that the number one predictors. He's the blackface for white. He is the popular. I saw that in LA Times. They wouldn't lie. Exactly. I was going to say a child growing up in a home with 80 books. We'll have a greater literacy and numerous things in adulthood. A home library can promote reading. There you go. So basically just, you know, the other thing that I think in terms of parenting that is fantastic is if you treat your children with the dignity that they are deserving of, now what do I mean by that? I don't baby my children. Even when they were five or six or seven, I speak to them as though they have a person hood. I listen to them. I explain the concept of libertarianism to my son who was nine last year and I was what we were walking and I was explaining, you know why? Because I was pissed off that a cop was standing giving out jaywalking tickets to people who were crossing the street when we I'm perfectly capable as a 57 year old man to know if there's an incoming coming car for me to make, but apparently no, the nanny state has to say when I should cross. And so that led to a discussion of libertarianism. Well my giving him the dignity of me speaking to him in a way that I explained this to him, that's what good parenting is, right? And I don't mean to be, you know, to take my own horn, but it's that you treat your children with the respect that they have a functioning brain treat them with dignity. And I think that could hopefully go a long way towards solving some of the criminality. Well, your children are very lucky that they have you as a dad. Unfortunately, there's a lot of people that have shithead dads. And you know, and the other thing is exposure to drug addiction. I mean, and then losing that sort of the fear of that at a very early age and everyone's doing drugs around you and it's a common thing. It's like, you didn't have a dad going up, right? No. My parents, I have a stepdad, my parents divorced when I was five years old. Did you stay in touch later with your biological dad? No, I haven't talked to him since I was seven. Wow. Do you even know if he's alive? Yeah, he's alive. Yeah. That's rough. Rough on him. Yeah. Does he ever try to reach you? No. No, that's what's even more crazy. His kids have, he has other kids. They tried years ago, but I'm like, do you think they reached out for you? I mean, asking you the Joe Rogan guy or... That's how they knew. Yeah. We have the same name, my dad and I. Yeah. His name is Joe Rogan too. Oh, his name right now. Wow. Yeah, that's his punishment. That's his punishment. He could have been with the San Joe Rogan and probably not though. Probably wouldn't have been me. You know, I probably would have been a shithead if I kept him as a dad. It's, it's one of those things where it's like, you always wonder like that. The curse of having that happened to me at an early age, it gave me an independence and a determination. Like I had determination that other kids didn't have. I had like, I also haven't got to show the world. I had that, but I also had no one's coming to help me. There's no dad that's going to clean up my mess. There's no dad that's going to be there to hold my hand and comfort me and I had to do it all myself in a lot of ways. You know, my stepdad's a very good guy and my mom was wonderful lady. It's not, they didn't do bad, but there's something about not having your biological father and your life and knowing that he's out there and that he's not even reaching out to you. I can't imagine that. I mean, I love my children so much. I won't say much, but believe me, I share a similar reality. Yeah. Yeah, I'm sure. And it's yesterday I was asked I was speaking at UT Austin. I was asked by a young man, how do you deal with the diversity? I said, well, for better or worse, I have the temperament that if you try to hurt me or if I face stressors in life, I want to then shove up, shove it up your ass and succeed even more. So the more you throw at me, not unlike what happened with you, the more I'm irreverent to that stressor and I want to defeat it. Yeah. So I hear you, brother. It's taken me a while to calm myself, though, because of it. It took into my late 20s and to really calm myself because there was part of me that also felt angry that he wasn't around and also part of me that didn't feel in any way like I was safe. You don't have anybody like when you're a child, you don't feel like anybody's looking out for you. It's like a weird way to grow up. You grow up in this way where you feel like, and plus, I was a latch key kid, they just let me out of the house and I was a little. And you grow up that way. You recognize a lot more danger than other people do, which is also why I moved here so quickly. Like I moved to Texas in May of 2020, I started looking for houses. I was like, fuck you. When they said two weeks to flatten the curve, I go, okay, flatten the curve. And then I started looking at statistics and a few of my got COVID and got over it really easily. And then it was going on. And then it was months later. And it was like, what happened a few weeks? And then it was like more restrictions. And I was like, what's going on? And then I came out here to Texas and everybody's no masks and just hanging out. I was like, how long here? What the fuck is going on? Like, yeah, you should take care of yourself. Yeah, you should be healthy. Yeah, you shouldn't do anything unwise. Yeah, it's not good to get COVID. But it seems like it's a respiratory disease and we've never been able to stop a respiratory disease from spreading ever in human history ever. And I know that and I'm not a fucking epidemiologist. How do you not know that? How do they not know that? They do know that. And masks don't work. Fucking fauci said masks don't work unless you have a fitted N95 or KN95 mask. Like they're not working. These fucking bandanas are people wearing? This is nonsense. Like what are we playing games? And the thing about Texas is like, you know, I met with the governor when I first came out here. And one of the things that he said, he said, we want to make sure that we preserve people's freedoms. That's the same thing Ron DeSantis said. I met him recently too. Yeah. He said, we preserve people's freedoms here. I spoke at an event by Hillsdale College. I don't know if you know the school. They're kind of a college that positions itself as kind of the premier anti-war college. And they had invited me to speak in Florida and at an event in Naples. And so I was the plenary speaker on whatever it was on Thursday. The Wednesday event. It was the Santa's. Mm-hmm. I didn't get to meet him personally, but I was at his thing. And he seems like pretty legit. What do you think? I think he's legit. You know, there's people that don't agree with some of the things that he says because, you know, they're ideologically opposed to him because they're on the left. But if you don't have a left or right, which would be way better for all people to just engage with individual ideas individually, engage them independently. And look at how do you feel about education? I think it's critical. It's very important. Yeah. It's a lot of indoctrination by people that are educators. I don't like that at all. There's just two different, very different things. And if you want to tell me that they're the same thing, I say fuck you because they're not because there's a lot of fucking crazy people that want to be teachers. Someone said to me that, um, or read this, uh, not all, you know, that term groomer. A lot of people don't like that term online. They're very upset. But they're real. There are groomers. You don't like it. Do you not like it because you don't want children to be groomed or do not like it because it's a bajorative that's used against the left, which is I think more likely. But here's what's more important. Not have people groom your fucking kids. That's what's more important than you getting uncomfortable with this word because it's used by people on the right. Like I saw someone as an argument, someone who I think is intelligent person say that there should be a block against using the word groomer. I'm believe no. No, there should be no groomers. How about that? And this is what they wrote. Not all teachers are groomers, but a lot of groomers are teachers. There you go. And that's real. That's a real fucking problem. I mean, constantly, teachers are getting arrested for exposing yourself to children, for masturbating in front of children, for sending nude pictures in front of children, every couple of days or the new one that pops up in the news. And how many of those people haven't been caught yet? And how many of those people are out there? And how many of those people are doing it under the guise of I'm an LBGTQ educator and keeping a tally of the amount of hate mail that you're going to be getting. Well, good luck. I don't read it. There's people that are good people in all walks of life, trans people, many people, straight people, bisexual, whatever the fuck you are. There's good people in all walks of life. There's also pieces of shit that will use those labels in order to get closer to your groups of people and indoctrinate them and indoctrinate them for their own sexual pleasure. And that's real. So you don't like kindergarten teachers talking about gender identity? I think it's important. And I think everyone should know it. I think that's why that whole, they were calling the don't say gay bill in Florida was so infuriating. Yeah. Like when you're saying that you oppose any sort of legislation that prevents people from talking about sex and gender identity and sexual orientation with people that are first grade through third grade, you oppose anything that restricts that. I go, okay. Who are you talking about? Because if this is open ended, I've had some fucking idiots for teachers when I grew up. You imagine if those fucking idiots were trying to convince your child that they should be homosexual or that they should even be straight. Imagine if you have a kid that's gay. Never mind convincing. How about just talking about dressing? Don't talk about this issue. That's my point. My point is imagine if you have a gay child and you have a fucking teacher that's trying to indoctrinate your child into the world of heterosexuality and convince your child that they're going to burn in hell if that child is gay. Imagine how furious you would be. What works the other way too, right? It does. It works the other way. There's you should be really good to be able to really good at what you do. If you want to talk to a fucking seven year old about gender identity and sex and we, I've seen some of these people with lip rings and fucking blue hair, they clearly are ideologically bound. I'm not saying there's anything wrong with the way they live their life. I'm not saying there's anything wrong with them pursuing whatever sexual identity they have and living their life. What I'm saying, you should not be the person that talks to children about this. pursuing whatever sexual identity they have and living their life. But I'm saying, you should not be the person that talks to children about this. Especially if you're a fucking history teacher. You're supposed to be teaching them about fucking Native Americans. So when I have students in my consumer behavior class, I tell them what age is it moral ethical, if not legal, to target children through advertising. And the typical answer that we get from academic research is that you should only target children with advertising when they know that the intent of the advertisement is to persuade them of something. Because once they know that they can build the cognitive barriers against your persuasive intent. So from this side of the smile of our mouth, we tell companies, you can't sell cereals to an 11 year old child because they're too young to protect themselves against the persuasive intent. But from this side of the mouth, we tell people, teachers, that it is when they're seven years old or six years old that we should tell them about LGBTQ stuff. Those two things are inconsistent. If I can't target your child to sell them chewing them, then I shouldn't be targeting your child with gender identity stuff. Well, the other thing is like children want the praise and acceptance from adults. They do. That's part of being a child, especially adult they admire like a teacher, especially adult that has a position of power, a position of influence. They're standing in front of a class and they're 37 years old and these kids are eight and they're telling them about how the world works. And maybe they're doing it in a better, more attentive way than the parents do. Maybe the parents aren't doing such a good job because maybe the parents are fucking tired and they work all day. I don't know. But what I do know is your cerebral cortex doesn't even fully form until you 25 years old. You're funnel-o, your ability to be a fully, realistically, you shouldn't be able to make any decisions until you're 25. Realistically. But I'm so concerned about that. It is. It's a high standard. But there's so much that you can convince a child though. There's so much. You can convince them to join cults. You can convince them to be a suicide bomber. How do you think they, why do you think they get children to wear those vests? Because you can convince a child that you're going to go to heaven and you're going to be with a law. If you put on a suicide bombing vests, when you're fucking 10 years old, there's a reason why they do that and they don't go to 50 year old guys with PhDs, right? Because that guy would be like, wait, how many virgins do I get? Why do I even want a virgin? What the fuck are you saying? Can I show you, show me this? How do I know that? I feel as though you're preparing the next bit for your show. No, it's just, we're at a very strange place in this country where we're so ideologically bound and we're so connected to our tribe that we ignore all the signs that both sides are doing something wrong, both sides. You know, you're speaking about Dave Rubin and there's one thing that I noticed recently that was kind of very disturbing. Dave is now, he's essentially a right wing guy, right? He used to be a left wing guy, he used to be with young Turks now he's a right wing guy. Dave and his husband adopted children or sort of surrogate. Okay. So they use their sperm and they created children, right? And then I was watching, oh, these fucking vicious, right wing ideologically captured people who were talking about how horrible they were and about this is rent a womb and this is they were talking about how it's satanic and all this like sick shit wow and just shitting all over him and his husband for their the I guess there's two children there's two of them. I'm watching this. I'm like, man, imagine being that dude and you know, you go over to that side and you think, you know, the well, the right wing accepts me and it loves me and it's kind of a cool thing because I'm a gay guy, but I'm also conservative now and I've been red-pilled and then you try to express a little bit about your own personal life and these hateful assholes are coming out for you and we just want to be a loving father just wants to be a loving father with his husband. And that basically speaks to a point that I make in chapter one of the person might where I say, well, I will be focusing on idea pathogens of the left because the ecosystem that I inhabit is academia. So therefore, all the bad ideas stem from leftist professors, this doesn't mean that I'm implying that the right cannot be parasitized by bad ideas as well. So the fact that I don't focus on the right doesn't mean that I am implicitly saying I support the right and not the left. Academia is run by leftists. Therefore, they're the ones who originate and spawn all those bullshit ideas that I discussed in the book. So you're exactly right. The political aisle that you lay on is there's not going to predict whether you can be parasitized. Yeah, it's not. Yeah. There's there's plenty of really shitty right wing ideas too. Exactly. And there's probably a shitty libertarian ideas. Like there's there's shitty ideas in all sorts of ideologies. And again, I think you should engage with each idea individually. This is by the way why people think that I'm being coy when they ask me. So what do you identify in terms of your politics? And I say exactly what you just said, I'm an ideas guy. If you if you ask me, what's your view on immigration or on the death penalty, you'd think I'm an ultra conservative. It's you ask if you ask me about gay rights and transgender rights, you'd think that I am a Portland Oregon inhabitants. So depending on the issue you ask me, I move around to different parts because I'm an ideas guy. I think if more people had that commitment, then we wouldn't be quite as tribalized if I can put it down. I'm with you. And I think that's the only way we get out of this. Look, I'm very much I lean far more left than I do right because I grew up on welfare. I grew up in poverty. I grew up. We had food stamps and I was a kid. I remember those times. I remember being poor. And I will never say that I don't believe in social services or social safety net. I think that's crazy that saved my family. It saved me. And my parents worked their way out of it. My mom and my stepdad worked their way out of that and eventually got off of it and eventually did well. I saw it happen. I saw the benefit of hard work, but I also saw the benefit of having a social safety net. So I'm very progressive in that. But I value hard work and discipline more than fucking anything. And I when someone says, oh, I can't I can't this because you know, I'm triggered by shot the fuck up. Like I know what that is. I know weakness. I know nonsense. I know excuses. I know slovenly behavior. And it should never be it should never be praised ever. Because it's not good for you either. And that the feelings that you get when someone like leaves and pretends that everything you're doing is fine. And you need a mental health day. I get it. You need to mental health day. Like a friend of mine who's an employer. She employs people. And she was saying that like some of her employees are saying, I need a mental health day today. She's like, you're not sick. Get the fuck to work. What are you talking? You want to get paid for this mental health day? Show the fuck up. You we're not talking about your your parents just died in a car accident. No, you're just you have a high level of anxiety today. You know, it's this roversus way thing. I saw it in the news. I need a mental health day. Fuck you. Show up at work. Show up at work and work harder. Get the fuck out of here. You need to be a bit more animated. I get so crazy about it. Because I know what it is. But I by the way, I see it in my own environment with the number of students who now file for special services through the office of disability or whatever it's called. So for the first 20 plus years as a professor, I almost had no one because when you when you file with them, for example, you'll get 50% more time on your exam. But you never find out because it's under it's confidential. So I never find out this person suffers from this issue. Therefore that so all I get is an instruction that person X needs 50% more time on the exam. Right? Well, I used to never have any of these filings. And now in any given semester, I may have, you know, quite a large percentage, 10% of the students are somehow. And so what happened? There's been a growth in the incidence of, you know, whatever disability you have to file. But no, it's part of the grievance infrastructure. Right. But an infestation of indulgence. Exactly. Yeah. And look, you can always find reasons why you can't get out of bed. I could find reasons every day. Right. We can always. And by the way, those things, thinking in negative ways like that, it becomes a pattern. It becomes a part of the way your mind interfaces with the world. Right. And it just creates more and more incentive for you to continue those patterns. And those patterns become comfortable. Just like becoming a loser, failing, falling apart, not not following through with things, fucking up jobs, getting divorced all the time, gambling away all your money, going in like all those things are patterns. I don't have to tell you, you're literally a psychologist. But though those patterns are so, they're so easy for people to fall into and you can't accept that. You cannot accept that because there's been plenty of people out there that have had those patterns to turn their life around. And that's what I encourage people to do. I don't say the things that I say because I'm a mean person. And I want to shit on people that are weak. I want people to be strong. Right. I want people to be strong with themselves. And I want people to recognize that there's value in being disciplined. There's value in getting your life together. This value in truth, this value in honesty, this value in hard work, this value in camaraderie and friendship and love and being a good person. And it's hard to be a good person. And Aristotle has already said all those things that you just yes. But you go on thinking you the first ones who said it. No, I'm not. I definitely am not. I'm teasing you. By the way, we're three hours in. Oh, crazy. You know, I didn't even know if it was an hour or two or it's crazy. You're a major. The parasitic minds available now. Did you do the audio book please tell me you did? No, it's from the time when you got angry. I mean, nothing has changed. It's not me who this I know. Why don't they let you do it? Tell these fucks. You're your silky smooth voice. I know. People are so much better than some fucking actor reading your bullshit. With the next book, will you read it? I am going to do everything in my power to adhere to your edict. Who is the publisher? The publisher of the book is Reignary, the audiobook. Reignary, please get your shit together. The godfather should be reading his own book. I am the Lebanese Barry White. Yes. I mean, the smooth voice. I need it. I need it on the audiobook. I don't even if I heard some other guy reading your words, it'd be like, wow, not just my words. Many cases it's my personal history. Yes, Lebanon. Right. Exactly. This is nonsense. I'm with you, rather. Let's go. Come on. Delete that old one. Start fresh with a new one. But either way, the book is fantastic. Just read it. Don't even get the audio over. Might get the do whatever you want. But know that this man wrote it. It's available and it's awesome. I appreciate your brother. Thank you so much. And your podcast is available. Sad truth on podcast, Apple, on YouTube. It's not everything. I never do the book. Always pledge. Always pledge my friends. Cheers. Bye, everybody.