The Jerogean experience with Grush. I think here's my take on it. I think he believes what he's saying, right? I think he has gone out there. I think I'm legit. Lucky it was a, whatever, 14 year veteran of military and national reconnaissance office. And I think he went out and he talked to enough people, and he believes it. I don't think he's out there, like, spinning a yarn and is worried that now he's gotten over his skis and he's said, you know, too many things. Now, but I don't, I don't know. I don't feel like it's tidy and maybe the difference between us is I spent, you know, a lot of time with the government. And the government is, is, sometimes can be really, really dysfunctional. And I just, it goes back to keeping a secret. The idea that they could have this, this, what essentially is a covert action campaign, you know, to spread this information about what they actually know, right? When the easier thing to do is just to have the program, you know, if, if, if, if, if it's, it's the US government's, you know, development of technology, right? And we're doing this to have the program and just keep your app shut about it. Not go for disinformation campaign. Not try to muddy the waters by doing this because in a sense, you're just creating more conversation around it. You're creating, you know, now there's a little bit of a, you know, movement within Congress to say, we have to do this. Now we have to, so they're going to look perhaps for a misappropriation of funds, right? Because they're not going to pursue like the UAP issue necessarily, right? But, but they might be interested in pursuing misappropriation of funds. So if you're running a program, if it, if it didn't, again, going back to the idea that it's a US government thing, if you're running a program, that's the last thing you want to do is because you're, you're doing this program to avoid government oversight. You're not going to create, you know, this alternative narrative that, you know, could generate the sort of publicity or the conversation, particularly up on Capitol Hill that causes them to then start looking and saying, well, where is money being spent? Right. Right. Because there is a trail there. Right. So, yeah. So what are your instincts? When you look at it, if I'm, I'm looking at it, I'm saying something's wrong. It seems like bullshit. What are your instincts? Yeah. I think I would like to, you know, I don't think we're going to get there. My instinct is to say, how do we solve this or how do we, how do we come to some sort of logical resolution as opposed to saying, what is it right off the bat? My instinct is to say, all right. If the all domain anomalous or anomaly resolution office has 800 cases, then tell us what those 800 cases are. Let's work our way through them or have a little bit more transparency about working through those cases. Again, you'll probably whittle them down. Right. And when we were doing black files, we were going around talking to people about, you know, various sightings and things. You basically just crossing things off. Okay. That was this, that was this, that was this. You know, you find some pretty mundane answers. But you whittle it down to maybe one or two things that you can explain. And then you can investigate those and say, okay, all right. Let's, let's dig further on these. But right now it's just like all over the map and they've got so many cases and they just kind of lump it all together. Are they doing that to obfuscate and create, you know, this, this, this, this situation where it does seem like bullshit. And, and I, again, I don't know. But I think I'm not willing to shut the door on saying that, that those handful of those few sightings that where we do have technical data, we get video, we got, you know, radar lock, we got, we got gun camera footage, whatever. It may be that can't be explained. I'm not willing to close the door and saying, well, it's, you know, you know, is it, because who knows, maybe China's doing the same thing, you know, oh, we're leading the hypersonic race right now. Great. But they've got another program, you know, and they're responsible for the tick deck. So we, we, we have to pursue it. And if that leads us to the doorstep that says, oh, that's a US government program and they've developed the technology. Okay. You know, fine, but, you know, I realized that, you know, I just, I'm not willing to close the door and say it could be something else. It could be the other world. Right? Because I just, it could be. I could be. I just don't know. There is a, that problem. Yeah. The infinite nature of space, which seems to actually be getting bigger. Yeah. There was a good way of putting it that, that, uh, my wife who's, uh, hell of a lot smarter than I am, um, try to explain it to me. And I kept one of my besties. And, but she had heard of, she had heard a program at one point where the, the person explained it like, okay, imagine how vast the ocean is. Right. And, you know, how you, we've explored the ocean, but then you look at space and how immense it is. Right. Compared to the ocean. Right. The amount that we've explored in space, right, is equivalent to like a wine glass full of ocean water. Right. So you take a wine glass full ocean water. You look at it and you go, eh, it's nothing there. Right. You know, there's all those life forms. There's all that, all those fish in the sea. It's kind of like that. And then, you know, you think about space and you think about what we know and what we don't know. And how we imagine like our limited capacity to imagine what life outside of earth could look like. Right. So it's, yeah. But when you hear talk of like crashed retrieval programs, yeah, that, that keeps taking me back and is, you know, to this, this whole idea of, uh, if there was a crash retrieval and reverse engineering program like David Grash talked about and had been an existence for decades, um, somebody would have fucking opened their app and talked about it. I think I, I think Bob Lazar, other than Bob Lazar, and they would have had some better specifics. Right. I mean, that's always the thing that's, it's always where it falls down. Well, I haven't seen it, but I talked to somebody who knows that it exists. Right. And I think maybe it's because we're human or program that actually want physical evidence. Yeah. We want to actually see it before we believe it. Um, but, you know, that, that really hasn't happened yet. What's one of the things that's fascinating is the narrative is shifted so wildly from it's completely preposterous to credible people like David Craver and Ryan Graves and all these different people that are talking about multiple sightings, things that completely defy our understanding of what a vehicle is capable of doing, hovering completely motionless and 120 knot winds. All the, the whole, you know, whatever that thing is, the, the cube inside its fear that they keep seeing over and over again. Right. Almost hit one of the aircraft. Yeah. Yeah. And what the fuck is that? Yeah. And then they land. So I think, you know, one of the good developments out of all of this and one of things that may eventually lead to transparency, right? Because it will, it will provide an avenue for these sightings, whether it's commercial or military pilots as an example to report it, right? And to be more, and for the government to take it, perhaps, you know, again, depends on what, what is a big good spirit there or not, to, um, to investigate in a, in a more logical manner and in a more detailed manner. So I think just again, the sheer act that we're talking about it, which then takes me back to the idea that, you know, if you're running a secret program, you don't want people talking about it. So you're not going to muddy the waters with a false narrative. If you don't have to, you know, if you're concerned, is it someone's getting closer to the truth and you got to do it? Okay. Then maybe so. But, um, you know, do you think it's also possible that there are patriots that do think that the American public deserves to know about this information and they have been sitting on it for a long time? Um, the people that gave it, brush and all these various people that are coming out and more apparently are wanting to come out. Yeah. Well, interesting thing with Grushe is, look, he's, he's set so during the hearing, right? He said, I can't talk about that. I could talk about it in the skiff, right? And it's sensitive and secure environment. All right. Well, if I'm, you know, one of the people on, on that sub committee, I'm going to say, you know what? Uh, to my staff schedule, uh, you know, it's skiff meeting with Grushe, get him in here. And let's, you know, have him talk in the classified shit. Right. Um, so that would be the next logical step in all of this. Have you done that yet? I don't know. I mean, it's, you know, when he said, I could talk to you about an skiff as people taking him up on that. Well, I, I, you know, you would have to ask him. I wouldn't, right? And they wouldn't tell anyone. And they wouldn't, and they wouldn't tell them they're, they're in lies part of the problem because if he sits there and, but if he sits in the skiff and continues to kind of say, well, like, you know, okay, I don't, you guys aren't clear to hear this and I can't. All right. Then you got to start questioning, you know, what he's actually got at what he, what he knows for sure rather than just having this, this, you know, witness interviews and sort of secondhand information. But I am, I'm much more, I guess the point is I'm much more interested in the direct sightings than, uh, witness interviews. Right. Right. And the thing about him is he's not really a witness. Right. He hasn't had any personal encounters with anything. Right. He hasn't had personal encounter with a craft. He hasn't seen a retrieved craft. He hasn't seen the biological entities. These are all just programs that he's been made aware of that he felt like people need to know about. Yeah. And that's the narrative. And again, not to disparage anybody, right? I mean, it's, you know, if in fact, you know, somebody leaked his medical records, which it looks like, you know, did happen. Right. Then that's, that, you know, that's, that's pretty bullshit. Right. Somebody needs to figure out what the hell is happening. Yes. The information from Grash, who said he was unable to discuss specifics on what he told the Pentagon's watchdog arm lawmakers want to sit down with the former official in a sensitive compartmented information facility, a skiff to get additional information from him. The group has been blocked. However, by officials that have informed them that Grash doesn't currently have security clearance, discuss the issues in a skiff according to Burchette. We think that we'll get there eventually. It's just frustrating. I'm ready to go. And the American public are ready to go. He said, Luna argued that the skiff with Grash could help lawmakers better understand the type of legislation they need to write regarding UAPs. She said she supports legislation that would declassify information on the phenomenon. So there seems to be some issue of secrecy and what what's possible to discuss or what's legal to discuss. Well, but yeah, look, the government casts a very wide net when you're talking about classified information. Right. The government is over classified information for decades and decades. Right. And you've got secret top secret, you know, code word, you know, and you know, they tend to just hoover everything up and classify it. Right. And then it takes fucking forever, right, to go through that process of declassification. And because nobody wants to put their neck out at that point. So yeah, let's declassify this. Right. Once it's what's it's in that pot. So but the question is great, you know, you're saying, you know, you can talk about it in the skiff. Well, damn, then that's the next, that's what the subcommittee should be doing. That's their job. Right. If they're curious, right. And if there's sincere about trying to get to the bottom of this and that's theoretically their job, then they should, because again, going back to the main thing and people can say, well, why are you wasting your time on this? But you can always circle back to the top line, which is it's for national security purposes. We want to know what the hell's going on. Right. And, you know, if so, yeah, we'll see. I guess that's the, that's the question that should be thrown at, at Grusher should be thrown at the subcommittee members. I'm also shocked at how few people care. I feel like people are so overloaded with information today because of social media and because of the news cycle, you're just, people are so overloaded with information that this barely registered on people other than UFO nuts. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there was a, there was a surprising amount, I thought, anyway, of, of sort of mainstream media coverage. It wasn't particularly deep, right. It just kind of covered. Okay. I was a hearing and I think they did it because I feel like it's a UFO is a UAP's, right. And so, you know, they knew they'd get some clicks on it if they were putting it online or whatever. And, and they didn't pursue it, you know, like has been, the, Benini, I haven't seen any stories that talked about the follow up with Grusch. There were a couple of stories talking about the, you know, the fact that perhaps his medical records were leaked, you know, as a reason. And the medical records showed what that he had some sort of a psychiatric condition. That he had an advance or something like that. PTSD, I think he, you know, some suicidal depression issues. Standing stuff with military veterans. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He had been done his time in Afghanistan. Yeah. And so that doesn't, yeah, it means nothing and except for the fact that it shouldn't be out there. Right. And those records should be damn well private. Well, not only that is now what we want. Don't you shut your little ding or off their phone. Is that, is that me going to you? Yeah. That's why your phone rang. Yeah. I don't want to use that little switch on the side. But thank you for my idea. Isn't that what you want from, I mean, that's the whole purpose of providing these services for veterans that when they do have suicidal, suicidal thoughts and they are struggling with PTSD, they get help. I mean, the idea that they're shaming him and saying that his report is not credible because of this seems ridiculous. Yeah. It's totally bullshit. Yeah. And, and he said, he's come out since it said, look, I did seek help. I'm in a better place. And he was happy that people were talking about it. They should be talking about it. Yeah. Look, it's we lose a shocking number of veterans to suicide. Right. And it's disgusting that we don't, you know, that the government doesn't work harder at this. Right. And we're effort. You know, I know a couple of people who do amazingly good work at the VA in terms of counselors, right? They're not managers and not executives. They work with the veterans every day, right? And it's incredible what they do. But overall, as a government, our, our assistance, right, to veterans. I mean, you look at the number of homeless situations. It's it's it's pathetic. And so when he talks about it, it's it's good that he's talking about it, right? And I think that that transparency helps and he clearly views it that way too. And he said, look, I don't have any problem with discussing it, but we should be concerned by the fact that, you know, somehow his medical records were put out there. And then, you know, some people will look at that and go, well, is that the government's effort to discredit them? You know, or is that or is that somebody's effort to discredit them? I don't know why anybody else would why would you do that?