All right, David. Thanks for coming, man. Yeah, thanks for having me. Incredibly huge fan of your work, bro. I just watched the most recent one I watched was the Sasquatch movie, which is incredible. We'll talk about it. Cool. But just before we started, we were talking about the operation of Dessa movie, which is one of the most insane documentaries ever. I was surprised, because when I was doing some background research on you, and I saw that, I was like, no shit. Like, this is that was one of my top 10 pro-movies I've probably ever seen. So why don't you explain that one real quick for people? How did you get introduced to that one? Yeah, so Operation Odessa was directed by a really good friend of mine, a long time colleague, Tila Russell. And he'd been working on that story for about a year, trying to get access to this Russian gangster named Ludwig Feinberg, AKA Tarzan. Because Tila and I had worked on a show together that, actually, I think never actually made it to air that was on about undercover agents. And there was this one undercover agent that we interviewed that was like the DEA's top Russian mob guy and off camera Tila asked him, OK, like, what's the craziest case that you ever worked? And this guy was like, bar none, the first case I ever worked. And he told us the story of Operation Odessa, which was that this Russian mobster Tarzan got connected with a Colombian trafficker named Juan Almeida and a Cuban spy known by Tony Yester. And this is right after the fall of the Soviet Union. And Tarzan had connections in the former Soviet Union to get surplus military hardware. Because in Russia, right after the fall, no one was mining the store. And so you could get motorcycles, military motorcycles, AK-47s, RPGs, whatever, right? All these military generals and officers on down the line weren't getting paychecks, OK? And so they started this trio. They connected at this strip club that Tarzan ran in Miami called Porky's, because he was a big fan in the movie, OK? So he named it strip club Porky's. And they started off moving motorcycles to the to a cartel in Colombia, OK, to the Cali cartel. And from there it went to the cartel, asked him if they could get like a heavy military transport helicopter, which they could use to move tons of coke with by hooking it up on a cable hook. And they broke her that deal successfully. And transported this massive Soviet military helicopter to Colombia using a transport plane. Holy shit. And so after they pulled that off, the cartel was like, can you get us a submarine? OK? And so that's the story of Operation Odessa. That's the story of the film. And wasn't there a famous scene in there, or one of the parts I remember where they're sitting in a sauna, and the dude's like, you want a new? Yeah, so the three, Tony Yester is straight out of Scarface. He was a Cuban intelligence agent that Castro sent over on the Mario boat lift with the intention of getting into the cocaine trade to send drug proceeds back to the Castro regime in Cuba. And so Tony Yester was a trained fighter pilot and trained intelligence agent that came over on the boat lift with the intention of getting involved in drug trafficking, which he did. But after a couple of years of sending money back, as he was ordered to, he was like, you know, I can be a spy and get my own thing going. So he kept funneling money back to Castro. But he also had a side business going. And the scene you're referencing was he went to a russia with Tarzan while they're trying to broker the submarine deal. And all the military guys, the Soviet military guys, wanted one of them to go on the sauna, because a lot of businesses done there. It's kind of a thing in Russia. And we all get naked. He's sweaty and do business. Exactly. There's a thing like when you're naked, like you see one another as you really are. And tiller and I, the jump it around, tiller and I, when we were making Operation Odessa, we went to like a Russian mafia sauna in Moscow with Tarzan. It was like part of like, you know, building a rapport with him. Like we had to do the thing with like the getting beat with the, you know, the evergreen branches and the whole, you know, fucking thing and drinking beer and eating shrimp. I still have the hat from that sauna. So, you know, well, these like mob guys. So anyway, but Tony, you know, Tony's Cuban and he's like, you know, as he told the story, he's like Tarzan, I'm from Cuba, man. I don't, I don't do this get naked with other guys thing, you know. And Tarzan, but Tarzan was in the sauna with the with the Soviet, but former Soviet military officers and he came out at one point. He's like, Tony, they're saying they can sell us a nuclear weapon. Should we buy a nuclear weapon? Tony's like, fuck no, man. No, we're here to buy a submarine. Like stop with the nuclear weapon talk, right? But you know, my God. Yeah, but that actually shows you how crazy shit was, you know, in the Soviet Union after the collapse, it was just like anything goes. They were just trying to sell anything and everything that was left behind. Yeah. Dude. So what year was that when they were making, when you were filming, when you were filming? Oh, I would say 2014, 2014. Yeah. How much time did you guys spend in Moscow? Just about a week. Yeah. What was it like? Man, it was sketchy and we were warned by that DEA agent before we went to Moscow. He was like, look, you guys should assume from day one, when you land that you're under surveillance, that your hotel rooms are bugged, that you're being watched constantly, partly just because you're an American documentary crew, but also because of who you're there to talk to. You know, assume that they know what you're doing. And so we were like really cautious the first few days we were there, but we were staying at the four seasons. It just opened right off Red Square, like five star hotel. And was it nice? Oh, it was an awesome. I mean, it was like, you know, heated floors. I mean, it was super, it was super luxia. And compared to DC, how would you rate it? And well above. And so we were, you know, we interviewed Tarzan for a couple of days, a couple of days of all day interviews with him. And we were thought we were being careful with the footage. We thought we were sending a copy of each day's footage via FedEx back to LA. That was one copy. The second copy we were leaving in the hotel safe. And the third copy was with our line producer. Okay. So we thought we had three copies of the footage. And one was leaving the country. And there were these Chechnya secret police, you know, guards, they were not so secret because they're, you know, the pretty easy to spot. And they're all over the tourist area. Cheers. Secret police. Yeah, they got beards. They got beards. They wear like kind of ill-fitting off the rack suits. They're all like super ripped. You know, they're undercover. They're not in uniform. But like, you know who they are. And there are only reason they're Chechnya. Putin likes Chechnya. Okay. Or I just, it's just a thing. Okay. All right. They're like a branch of the SFB, the former KGB. That are there to surveil, you know, Westerners that are staying in these hotels. Okay. I mean, that's how it was explained to me. And they were always in the lobby. And so we had this like kind of saying like as long as the Chechnya stay in the lobby, we're cool. And but we got careless. And it was like the third day we were there, I think. And we got a, tiller got a call from Tony Yester, the Cuban spy who like everyone we'd interviewed, FBI, FBI, DEA, Department of Justice, whatever. They told us there's no way you're going to get this guy to go on camera. We can't find him. He was on the FBI's 10 most wanted list at the time. Nobody claimed to even know where he was in the world. Which guy are you talking about? Tony Yester, Tony Yester. Yeah, the guy that wouldn't go in the sauna. Okay. The guy that came over in the boat lift. Right. And while we were in Moscow, you know, tiller had been using every contact he could to try and get word to Tony that we wanted to talk to him. And we got a call, tiller got a call from Tony Yester that said, I hear you're in Russia, you know, interviewing the waiters. Why don't you come to Africa and interview the chef? And we got really excited because we're like, we got a line on this guy. He didn't agree to do an interview, but he agreed to talk to us. He's like, meet me in Johannesburg and 72 hours and I'll talk to you guys. That's why he told tiller. And so that night we were like in our hotel room and we fucked up and we were like in our line producers hotel room. And we were just talking openly about all this submarines. Cuban spies, DEA, go into Africa. You know, because we got so excited and we were careless. And the next day when tiller and I met Tarzan in the hotel and we left the hotel and the sessions got up out of the lobby and started to follow us. And they're just following us and like Tarzan picked up on it right away till and I saw him. I mean, they weren't being subtle about it. Okay. As to yes, he's badass looking. They were making obvious. Yeah. They were chasing. They were following you. Yeah. And so we got on the phone with a line producer and he's like, guys, we've got to, he didn't even know that we've been followed. He's like, guys, we got a problem. He's like, that footage that we thought we were sending back to LA every day. It's still here at the hotel. And the hotel is saying that those copies of the footage and the copies we've been leaving the hotel safe are both like under the control of somebody not us. Like the hotel can't give them to us. There was a problem with the paperwork supposedly sending them out. And there's powers that be that have interest in this footage and they have control. So now the only copy the footage we have is is a control state. Yeah, we have one copy. And that's that the line producer has. And so we were just like, fuck it, we pulled, pulled the plug in the last day of interviews. And we basically just went to the airport Moscow and got the first plane out, which was to London. But we got a wish. No, no issues, but we were sweat that dude. It's a bus ride from Moscow. It's a, you know, it's a good 30 minute, 40 minute ride. And you know, we were on this bus with this fixer that we that we'd hired to kind of smooth things out, you know, in Moscow who we always kind of assumed that she was probably working for the government. And she like popped the bottle of champagne on the way out there that she'd been saving for the end of the shoot. And we all like, fucking ducked, man. We were we were sketched out. We were sketched out. Yeah, no, but we got to the airport. And, you know, we were really sweating it all the way through security, but we got out with the one copy of the footage. Oh my God. That's fucking insane. So you went from there to London. Yeah. And then did you go meet him in Johannesburg after that? Yeah. Yeah. We did went from London to Joburg again without the guy agreeing to do an interview. And then, you know, tiller, tiller met with him alone a couple of times. And I was really sweating that because, you know, tiller got in the car with this guy and was gone for a few hours and out of touch. And I was like, oh, I don't know if I don't know if tiller's coming back. I was I was really, really, really scared for him. But he did. And then tiller and I went out to dinner within that night and then tiller met with him again alone and talked to him in and doing the interview. And the and the leverage that tiller used, which was really smart, was like, this is this is your chance to tell your story for your kids. Like we picked up on that this guy Tony really regretted that he was not a part of his kid's lives because he was on the run. Yeah. Because if you did. And so tiller was like, look, this is your chance to tell your story. Your kids will see this. And you know, that's why he agreed to do it. Mm hmm. Dude, it's I've heard so many stories over the past few years from a lot of people that have been in here that I reported on like the car style car tell stuff that's been happening in South America and Mexico and everything. And the the level of technology that they've been able to get their hands on over the years is just astonishing. Like the not even just talking about weapons and stuff. But like the types of surveillance and spy espionage, like equipment and technology that they have, like tracking people's whereabouts at all times and stuff that they're getting from from they somehow get this stuff. They buy this from companies all over the world from like Israel to from Israel to Europe, Africa. And they get it somehow and they have like their own decoupled like military intelligence. And I wouldn't be surprised if they got their hands on a nuke at one point. You know, I mean, well, they have unlimited funding practically speaking. And they've got lots of ex intelligence guys on their payroll, whether it's Mossad or, you know, CIA greenberries. Right. I mean, they actively seek these guys out and bring them down there both to train their guys, but also because of the access to the kind of hardware that you're talking about. Yeah. Famously, I think Noriega was the guy we had a dude on here recently who did a whole story on Noriega. And he was he wrote this whole story made this documentary was a documentary. I think it was documentary or was it a book. No, you wrote a book about this guy who was ex Mossad agent who was hired by Noriega and was like Noriega's right hand man during like his whole run. And this dude was like in his late 80s, maybe early 90s when he was telling them all this stuff. Just crazy stories man. And yeah, it's frightening to think of like all of the military equipment and weapons and shit that those basically the cartels rogue cartel militias have. And you know, they don't have there's no mutually assured destruction when you're talking about cartels. Like they could put a tactical nuke in the bed of a pickup truck in any country or state and you would they would never know where it came from. Right. You know, Trump talking about going down, you know, sending, you know, the hundred first airborne in the next go whatever to bang it out with the cartels. Yeah, I'm sure they could take him, but I think it may be more of a fight than he may be anticipating. And I mean, that shit. I mean, another doc that I worked on till Erussel with was called The Last in Arc. It was about like CIA cutting-class game movie. And kind of the origins, the origin story of the Mexican drug cartels. And you know, back in those days, 80s, 90s, I mean, all the drug lords, they wanted to die old and rich. And the guys that are running the game in Mexico right now, they're all younger. Most of them are addicted to Coke and or meth. And they just like it's all about like clicks and views and going out in the blaz. It's just particularly different. Yes, they're all up to talking nuts, man. And it's terrifying. It's almost like a nihilistic death cult down there right now. But they have like, you know, heavily, heavily armed. And it's just all about your social media and going out and a blaz at glory. Yeah, dude. I had this guy was showing me these TikTok videos of this guy. I think his name was El Mini Leeker, something who was one of the, I think he was one of the security guards for El Chapo's kids. Yeah, he was just like, he had millions of TikTok views, posting videos of his shoe collection, his money is golden AK 47s that he had driving around in like lifted trucks and Lamborghinis or whatever. These guys are just, yeah, they're, they're super wealthy and they're like, in many cases, teenagers from what I understand. And they just like, they want to be fucking internet famous or something. Yeah. It's so strange. They're influencers. They're influencers. Oh, I'm gonna eat a mascara is the third most microdose psychedelic in the United States, with 3 million people reported losing it. That's more than LSD or DMT. But there is a wave of dangerous gas station fakes out there. And who knows how many people were cheated out of the real deal. I'm in tar is the complete opposite of those scams. And that's why I only trust, I'm in Tara. I never would have even touched Amanita, mascara if it weren't for I'm in Tara. They are the trusted Amani to supplier in the USA, totally legal, no synthetics and 55,000 happy customers. Small doses put you in a calm, focused flow state and medium doses are more like a jolly alcohol alternative. Great for sleep, dreams, and some people even call it nature's wine. Lately I've really enjoyed taking the Amani to microdose capsules because they help me get into a creative flow state in the after hours when I'm not working so I can sort think outside the box and focus on more of the fun creative tasks. They're also great for staying in the moment when you're around family, your friends and just trying to avoid work and worrying about the next day or the previous work day. Imagine being in a stressful environment and not feeling triggered, that's what Amani to can do for you. They are the largest Amani to supplier in the US, totally legal, ethically sourced and lab tested. They have the largest Amani to selection from oils to capsules to chocolates and the rock caps. It's not just a store or a single product. These guys are helping pave the way for a new legal, medicinal, psychoactive mushroom in the US and I'm totally happy to be a part of it. Go to amantara.com slash go slash DJ and use code DJ 22 for 22% off your first order. So have you been down there recently looking into this stuff? I was, yeah, the, my most recent show, it's out on a Canadian streamer called crave, which they're best known for that gay hockey player show he did rivalry, but they just about a month ago in February dropped narco menonites, which is a three part series on a menonite drug cartel. So in the process of reporting that series, I was in Chihuahua city and which is near where the, where the menonite cartel is based in Mexico, which is a little bit of a menonite cartel. Most people haven't. That's what made such a fucking great story. I never heard of it until I got onto it. And I know. But, but you know, I was in various Chihuahua geographically on the Mexican map. It's up against Texas. Okay. Okay. Yeah. So it's on the border. No, no, it's Chihuahua cities. Oh, shit, I don't want to fuck this up. Few hours, few hours, yeah, the border. But, you know, I was in jump around geographically and topically, I was in Ukraine like a couple of years ago. I was far more scared and worried about my safety in Chihuahua city than I was anywhere in Ukraine. I was there because the, the people, okay, that's where this is. Yeah. That was huge. Yeah. And so where the menonite cartels base is a little town called Kwakteimak, which is about 45 minutes on a north of Chihuahua city. Okay. Yeah. Yeah, but in part of it was like the people, the people in Chihuahua city are like, you could just feel the climate of fear. And it's supposedly its neutral territory, like a lot of the like drug lords, like their kids go to private schools in Chihuahua city. Right. You know, it's supposed to be a place where like, you know, you're not supposed to take each other out. But you could just, you could just sense that things could jump off at any time. And you could literally just like see the fear in people's eyes, just like the people on the streets. And atmosphere of fear. Yeah. That's the word fear. And I didn't find that in Kiv, you know, I didn't find that people were just sort of like commonly terrified like we're in Chihuahua city. What were you doing in Kiv? I was, I was doing reporting for a project that I can't say a whole hell of a lot about the involves like intelligence agencies and corruption in Ukraine. And like the US Department of Justice using the power of politically motivated prosecutions of certain like alleged organized crime figures in Ukraine. I know I'm being vague, but I kind of have to because that's still in development. But I was I was in key of meeting with, you know, a high former high ranking Ukrainian officials and politicians. I guess I would say. And that was another situation where I just assumed I was being surveilled in the entire time. Right. Right. There. Yeah. Dude, you're like a fucking cowboy. You're nuts. You're going to all the hottest, hottest nests all around the world, just like immersing, immersing yourself into all this stuff. You're, you're one of the original emergionists. There's not many more people like you left, man. Well, you know, and I mean, yeah, I still I still consider myself to be a Gonzo journalist even though my medium has changed for the most part from, you know, writing to filmmaking. But like that, I first like became aware of your work with that deck hands. Really? That was Gonzo's fuck, bro. That's Gonzo, man. That's my favorite thing I really ever did. Yeah. I mean, it's hard to define what Gonzo journalism is, but like, you know what, when you see it and that was fucking Gonzo. That's awesome. Yeah. Yeah. We had so much fun doing that. It was so like not even planned either. It just mean my buddy were just one day bored and we're like, dude, you know those fucking crazy crackheads we see hanging out in front of 7-11. It's like, we should just go film them. See what they have to say. We're like, fuck it. Okay. Yeah. The next thing we know, we're just fucking sucked into the twilight zone with these guys. And it's crazy how like, it's crazy how you can go into something like that. Just by like seeing an interesting looking person and going to talk to them and then getting sucked into this whole other universe of a story about like a corrupt corporate fucking system that is right in your backyard that connects to everything around like to Washington DC, you know, right. It was so insane. And like those people, dude, those like those people that we met and that we like spent time around. The fact that they've been living here in this town right under my nose my whole life and I never even knew about it. That kind of blows my mind more than anything. Yeah. But to do guns are right, you've got to be Gonzo yourself. I mean, meaning that they picked up on something about you to where they trusted you to tell their stories. Yeah. Like the Godfather of Gonzo, Hunter is Thompson of that saying that like when the going gets weird, the weird turns pro and like you got to be weird, you got to be fringe yourself. Yeah. And it's like, you know, a lot of the, a lot of the most important work like takes place like off camera or off the record, like, you know, building relationships with people. Yeah. But also they recognize something in you as a Gonzo journalist that makes you able to temporarily inhabit their world and get down with them. Yeah. You got to get down and dirty and you got to like live like them, you know, like when we we were doing that, we were, I was like, you know, it'd be like one o'clock PM, one PM, I'd be sitting on a fucking rat and fested island drinking vodka and mountain dude with these guys, you know, just like making sure my fucking I had no battery in my camera to get this footage. Yeah, dude. It's just God, man, that was so much fun. The hard thing about it is though, it's like, it's not that sustainable to be able to, at least for me, it was like, it was hard for me to find stuff like that. You know, like that was a, for me, that was like a, like finding a diamond in a rough, but for me to actually like go out and seek out those stories all the time, I feel like I would go crazy. Yeah. It could be hard on the soul too, you know. Yeah, it's a lot of darkness. A lot of darkness, bro. Yeah. The last narc, um, what year was that that you guys did that? Well, we were, we were making it like 2018 to early 2020. Okay. And then it came out, I think, fall of 2020. And that's essentially the story of Kiki Kamarina. Right. Yeah, but it's really, yes, it's a story of Kiki Kamarina who was a DEA agent, who was kidnapped and tortured to death in Mexico in 1985. And they based a whole season of that Netflix series on it, right? Yeah, they did. The narcos was it called narcos. Yep. But in my opinion, they pulled some punches on the CIA of it all. You know, I'm convinced that Kiki Kamarina was killed because he stumbled across the CIA's cocaine trafficking operation where they were moving coke from Colombia to Mexico, the trampoline, you know, and then into the US and then using that money to illegally fund the countries in Central America. I don't think Kiki Kamarina knew what he stumbled across. You know, I mean, but it's clear like we were able to, you know, get a hold of the actual transcripts of because when Kiki was being tortured, it was being recorded and we were able to get a hold of what I'm convinced are the legitimate transcripts of those torture and tear irrigation sessions. And they were asking him questions that he clearly didn't have the answers to like he couldn't give them the information that they wanted because he didn't know it. And I think he had just, he'd been really kind of laser focused on Raphael Carl Kintero. And I think Kiki had been surveilling an airfield and had seen, you know, planes that were CIA operative planes and he thought it was cartels. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't think that he knew what he, what I don't think he knew why he was being tortured to death. He couldn't give him the information that they wanted. But it's clear from the questions they were asking that that's what they were, they were getting at. I know, do you think you know who killed him? Well, I mean, I think he was, I think it's an over simplification to say that the CIA killed Kiki, Kamarina. I mean, I think it's a mistake to think of the CIA as this sort of like monolith. Yeah. Yeah. Right. But I think a CIA operative was involved in that way, you know, specifically, guy by the name of Felix Rodriguez, who now I don't think. Felix Rodriguez actually tortured Kiki, Kamarina or actually murdered him. I think it was just, you know, thugs, cartel thugs that did the actual torture and murder. But Felix Rodriguez is one of those guys that I mean, you think he was interrogating or maybe, yeah. I think he was directing it. And I think things got out of hand. I mean, Carl, can't tell fucking hated Kiki, Kamarina, because Kamarina had taken out Carl can't tell it was like biggest marijuana plantation, you know, and I don't think that they planned a murder him. I think they planned to interrogate him. And so I want to be careful here. I don't think that Kiki, Kamarina was was murdered on orders from Felix Rodriguez. But I think Felix Rodriguez was involved in the abduction and interrogation of Kiki, Kamarina. And then, you know, he was being held captive, you know, at a house that was controlled by the Guadalajara cartel. And I think that things just got out of hand and they took things too far with the torture. And, you know, did you guys ever try to get a hold of Felix? Oh, yeah. Yeah, he wouldn't do an interview. Really? Yeah. We interviewed him. Yeah. Oh shit. I asked him about Kiki. What do you say? Ah, he kind of threw his hands up and like, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, that's the wrong guy. I was in Miami. I was in Miami that day. Well, I'll tell you this. I mean, we did interview on the record, you know, three different cartel, you know, you could call him Caccario's enforcers, you know, guys that were around. as it did everything from, you know, carrying out hits to fetch and cigarettes and booze for, you know, hooker parties, right? But guys that were around and the guys that were around, you know, that mansion while Kiki was being held captive and their accounts were entirely consistent that Felix Rodriguez was, was, you know, in an in and out of that mansion. See if you can find the clip Steve from the interview where I asked him about it. Let me be interesting to see. So there. So all the guys, who were the guys that you said that had consistent stories? They were, they were, you know, they worked for, they, they each kind of, they were all former police officers that had become, I mean, they may have still carried bad. They did still carry badges. Yeah. They got on the work for, you know, for the cartel. Mm hmm. Yeah. And there are, you know, they're all on the record in the last night like telling their stories. And the, I guess the idea is, or the story goes he had a like a fake name or a pseudonym went back in that time. Yeah. And then it wasn't Felix. They were calling him nothing else. Yeah. Yeah. But I know whatever that name was, he said that he didn't have that name yet. I forget what the name was. You remember? I can't. I can't. I know it's in the show, but I can't. Yeah. So as long. Yeah. Anyway, yeah, he said, A, he goes, he goes, I have an alibi. I was in Miami that day and B, he goes, I didn't get that pseudonym yet. I was, I was a little nervous when I asked him right. Of course, of course, he's going to say no, but it was interesting when I was. I didn't get that suit in him yet. I was a little nervous when I asked him, right. Of course, of course, he's going to say no. But it was interesting when I was in there, when I went to go meet him in Miami, he wouldn't come here. He had to go to Miami interview him. Like there was all these other Cuban dudes around there, all these like Bay of Pigs dudes in this building, he owned this museum, I guess, this like this Cuban American anti-communist museum. And there was like posters and shit and books on the wall of like pictures of Kennedy with like fucking crosshairs on his forehead and shit. And they all hated Kennedy, man. That was crazy to see. Like one guy pulled me aside, like look at my new book, he's showing me like the picture, like the cover is literally Kennedy with a fucking bull's irons forehead. Yeah. Well, is this the clip? Yeah, let's see what the actually says. Documentary out there about the DEA agent in Latin America or in Mexico. And there's people that in that documentary, they accuse you of being tied to the murder of the DEA agent. Oh, you're a guy. I'm not in a geeky camera. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. We're in a world that. Yeah. What is your response to those people? I know. And absolutely like first of all, I come through where I was during that day. And especially now, I have since I knew it was, but I think what happened, I was taking note to this thing that I do every day. Okay. And now more in 1993, I started writing everything in detail what I do every day. So you tell me that I did something in 1995, September 4, three o'clock in the afternoon. I got that you exactly what it was. Who do you have met? What I did, what did I eat? Everything. When King Kamarek, when they claim I did day, I was supposed to be killing King Kamarek. I have a phone call with the warehouse. That's when they call me that day to tell me that General Gorman wanted to talk to me and they gave me a phone number to call General Gorman in Panama. We started that day. I had a meeting with Perry risk in the director of immigration here in Miami with Pedro de Vorello, the mayor of the city of West Miami. Because we had three Nicaragua of Contra fighters who have been very badly wounded. One call at the Grito, we got a bullet through his face here. We would all seem what's hanging down. It is Troy, his bandit and half of his phone, everything. And the other two were paralyzed. And we were able to get through a friend of mine, the whole pitall of of of Rhekarek, on Cuba, which is now I guess he all belongs a lot of. Anyways, he goes on a long time. Well, I mean, look, first of all, he's talking about one day. I don't think any of the, you know, cartel sources that we interviewed necessarily put Felix Rodriguez there on the day that Kiki was actually killed. They basically just finished him off. This went on over several days. Right. And they said that he was he was in an. He was tortured for several days. You know, I will say this about Felix Rodriguez. First of all, good on you for getting that interview that's fucking. Yeah, I figured he's not got time left. Right. Right. God, I love to tell that guy's story, you know, but when we were, you know, when we were trying to get an interview with Felix Rodriguez, like I exchanged several letters with him. And, you know, he wrote me like, he obviously looked into who I was and looked into my background and, you know, I'm very open about the fact and done a lot of advocacy about it that I was sexually assaulted when I was seven years old. And he wrote me a really like heartfelt letter about that, you know, expressing a lot of empathy for me and respect for the, you know, for, for telling my story and trying to help other survivors and things. And I really appreciated that. So I, well, I think, you know, I bet the house that he was actually was at that mansion. Well, Kiki was being tortured and that he knew Kiki been picked up. As they say, in Mexico, picked up, meaning kidnapped. You know, I still have a lot of respect for Felix Rodriguez. Yeah. Yeah. That's wild man. I didn't know about that. So yeah, he, uh, I'm of the story, you're familiar with the story, how he killed, how he caught Chegewa. Yeah. It's like a, that's insane man. Like, and he wasn't the one who killed him either. Like he was just like, and then like had an interview with it, like just talked to him for a few minutes before they went out and executed him. And then brought his body back. Fucking, I mean, the amount of shit that that guy's seen. Like, they made a death, especially when he's in Vietnam. Yeah. Like, mowing down people in Vietnam. Like, I've heard a lot of stories about dudes in Vietnam and they come back like different. If you ever shopped online, chances are you've purchased from a store powered by Shopify. It's easy to spot their purple shop pay button. And that's what we use for our merch store. The purple button has all your payment and shipping info. So you don't have to track down your card or hope your browse or remember your payment details. There's a reason why so many businesses are using Shopify. And that's because they make it incredibly easy to run and manage your own business. It's the business behind the business that really counts. And that's where Shopify excels with convenient tools and workflows. Shop pay has the best converting checkout on the planet, meaning fewer abandoned carts and way more sales. That's a game changer. You can spread your brand's word with the built-in marketing and email tools. Don't want to build your own page. Shopify has hundreds of beautiful ready-to-go templates to express your brand and forget the code like daylight computer, which is gorgeous. So if you've got a product, a dream in the drive to make it happen, Shopify is the platform to help you do it with ease because businesses that sell sell more with Shopify. See less carts abandoned and more sales go with Shopify and their shop pay button sign up today for your $1 per month trial at Shopify.com slash Danny Jones all over case. Again, that's shopi f y dot com slash Danny Jones. Shopify dot com slash Danny Jones. Yeah, I did interviews for this for this show that that was a development gig right 15 years ago when my first gigs in documentary filmmaking where I just interviewed Vietnam vets all day long for 10 to 12 hours a day for like for like two weeks and it really online to is all online like trying to do casting for this show. The concept was it was going to follow one combat platoon all the way through the Vietnam war as guys got killed and replaced and cycled out. So it's a pretty good idea actually. But didn't get picked up. But but man, the fucking stories and just seeing the like different levels of trauma still like and how it manifested in these guys lives. And then the special forces guys were like breed apart just still just fucking ice in the veins like to this day. Like no, you know, comparing them to like the you know, the guys that were drafted and there's crunts that were still just like haunted by everything they'd done. Like it was really remarkable comparing them to like the like sob guys, you know, there was like very few guys who sucked like seeked it out, you know, like seeked out the war. Like there was guys who there's one guy named Billy Waugh who uh, Annie Jacobson writes about him in this movie in this book that she did called surprise surprise kill vanish that during Vietnam, he gets he worked at the post office and he like would catch uh, he would catch the bus from where he lived in Texas to DC. So he'd go sign up for the Vietnam war. Like that's how bad he wanted to go to war. And like sent him off to Vietnam and I think like the first week, he got shot in the foot or the leg and like he literally almost died like he was crawling back to the helicopter like to get out of there like crawling over dead bodies as foot got like smashed into a million pieces. And then he got sent home and he did rehab forever and they were like you got whatever you got the purple heart you're good. And he wanted to go back like he just he he kept going back like did all like went to the hospital trying to get like more surgeries done to make his foot better. And like they were like no, no, you can't go back. You're literally disabled. And he's like no, I'm not. I could run faster than you bitch. And like they eventually just sent him back and this was when he was in his twenties. And he stayed in the military until like his late 80s. He was deploying to the Middle East like in his 80s for the CIA to go track Osama bin Laden. Like this is one of the dudes that was every fiber of his being was drawn to this. You know, yeah, that's him. But most most people I feel like most people that I've talked to on the show are people that you know, since the if you're talking about like the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, they went to those wars. They weren't like that. They just signed up for those wars because they didn't really have any better options. You know, it was like, oh, I can go to college or I can go to this or I could sign up for this war. You know, this sounds exciting. Let me try this and then they go do that and they come back and they're like, well, it's a real reaction. I mean, I mean, some of them then go, you know, work as contractors then. Yeah, you know, some get hooked on some of them get hooked on it. Yeah. But some of them don't some of them spiral out of control after that after they get back, you know, and then get like, I mean, just what was the what's the stat? Like how many veterans kill themselves every day? It's fucking staggering, you know, and I've tried. I tried to get traction several times that with a documentary on just that. I mean, if you look at like, you compare like almost take any, any combat unit that saw heavy action in Iraq and Afghanistan and compare their casually rate when they were in country to the casualty rate of guys that have either died of overdoses, accidents or suicides since they got back and across the board, it's comparable. And in a lot of cases, like if you take a unit, more guys have died since they got back from like misadventure or drugs or eating a bullet, then then got killed in the Middle East. Yeah. You know, it's fucked up. Our government's an a terrible job of like helping these guys out. Yeah. And oh, yeah, it's fucked up, man. And like now that's like everyone's kind of aware. I feel like I mean, I don't know, I'm young, but it feels to me like more than any time in my life that everyone's kind of like more aware of all like the government lying. You know, I think it's probably like through the technology and social media and podcasts. There's way more access to information. And it's like, the emperor has no clothes now. And like you even have veterans from the Iraq war and the Afghanistan that are like, what the fuck were we doing? Like this was all for what? And how do you justify any more wars? It's like we're living in this this hyper normalization. Like when the Soviet Union, you know, Adam Curtis, the BBC documentary filmmaker, he does, he does these crazy documentaries where he basically compiles footage, like historical footage. And he lays them out in a storyline with his voiceover. And he kind of like tells the story and the high the recommend the great historical like storytelling. And one of them is called hyper normalization. And like it explains how during the Soviet Union before it fell during the 70s and 80s, how like everyone who lived there was aware how the government and their economy and their society was failing. But there's nothing they could do about it. And they were just trying to pretend as long as they could that nothing was wrong. And eventually it all just collapsed. But they were basically just like living in a fake reality. And they all knew about it. Like the like the government knew that they knew. And they knew the government knew that they knew that nothing was real. And everything was on the brink of collapse. And that that's kind of like what I feel like we're living in right now. Yeah, I just tried to say so kind of like America right now. Yeah, man. It's fucking scary, dude. One more thing about Felix Rodriguez. If I get it because I don't want to leave that thread hanging. And because yeah, he's basically he called me out on your show is like one of the thing I would say like what motivation would these three cartel government have to lie versus what would motivation and Felix Rodriguez have to lie. But also, you know, think about that totally. Okay. And second is Felix Rodriguez is a classic case study in what is the CIA? Like what's Felix Rodriguez? A CIA agent? No. Was he taking action on behalf of the CIA? At least a faction within the CIA. Right. I mean, there's all kinds of like factions within the CIA. And a lot of times one hand doesn't know what the other's doing. He was he not he was an operative. I mean, he was a like a paramilitary guy. Yeah. Yeah. But he wasn't like recruited out of American University to join the CIA. Right. Right. Right. Right. But he was a CIA asset or CIA operative. So that's where it gets like there's a lot of tentacles coming out of the CIA. And so it's like it gets tricky when you start saying things like the CIA killed Kiki Kamarina. It's like, well, yeah, I don't think William Casey like put a hit on a DEA agent. Right. Yeah. Like shit just went south. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, there's so many people that are employed by the CIA. It's insane. And it's like the same thing with Kennedy. Like people say, oh, the CIA killed Kennedy. But it's like, you know, there was probably less than a handful of people that actually knew what was going on, you know, like if you could track all the cables and all this stuff like that, there was there was probably I would say less than 10 people if I was to guess that actually knew what was going on. And, um, you know, that's another thing. That's another like, that's another thing that they never will have to fess up to. But like if you if you pulled all of Americans today and asked them, like, do you think Lee Harvey Oswald did it or do you think the CIA did it? I bet you like a 90% of people would say they think the CIA did it. But it's like, is that going to change shit? No. No. But it's going to change. Who is the MK Ultra guy that went in in like, spent time with Jack Ruby in prison? That's that was when I finally tumbled where I was like, wait, what? I jolly West. Yes. Yes. Jolly West. He was everywhere. Yeah. He was attached to everything. Charles Manson, uh, Kennedy with Jack Ruby, um, he was even meeting with Stanley Kubrick and Edgar, is Edgar Casey or no, it was, um, yeah, I think it was Stanley Kubrick and Edgar Casey when Stanley Kubrick was filming 2001 space Odyssey over in the UK. Yeah. Look at this. This is on the set up 2001 space Odyssey and that's Stanley Kubrick in the front and it's fucking jolly West in the back. Yeah. What the fuck is guy was everywhere? So the Sasquatch movie, how did you get involved in this one? Is this this is not this was not very recent. This was at least four years ago. Four years ago. Yeah. It came out. Yeah. Um, I'd made a, I'd made a couple shows with this, uh, filmmaker named Josh Rufe and, uh, he, he was a big fan of this podcast of Sasquatch Chronicles. And he was, you know, one day he was just kicking around ideas. He was like, man, if we could just find like a, a true crime story that had a Sasquatch angle. And like, I immediately like tumbled back to this memory from like 1993, uh, when I, uh, kind of visited, uh, I was hanging out on, you know, on a, on a weed plantation, the Emerald Triangle. And there's this story going around about how like, you know, three dudes have been killed on this, uh, backwoods weed plot by a Sasquatch. And it was just being like, you know, it was just like a legend, basically, maybe, right? Or story, a rumor. And, um, so I was like, well, you know, why don't we like try and track that story that was going around in Mendocino and Humboldt County in the fall of 1993, trying to follow that back to its source and see what we find out. So that's how that project got going. So you, but you were there at like the start of this whole movie. Like this was like, this all started out like when you were in your early 20s in 1993, sitting in this log cabin in the middle of the wood, the redwoods. Yeah. Yeah. Really. And these tweezers come in saying they just fucking salt from guys get chopped up and it was the back foot. Yeah. They claimed that they had just been at the, at the, you know, scene of this crime and that like there was bodies that were mutilated. There was like Bigfoot footprints and they were like, legit terrified. And, uh, I was on mushrooms. I mean, I was coming down, but I was still tripping, you know, and I was just like, they, their energy was so fucking panicked. And, um, I hadn't had a lot of experience with crystal meth, but at that point in my life, you know, that I really recognized like that that was also an element in their behavior. Right. So I just kind of tried to sink into the couch, you know, but I kind of just like took it in and it stuck with me. And then when we, um, you know, I, when I told Joshua Fay about that instance, he was like, well, let's just start making some calls and see if like anybody else heard that story. And so that was really the genesis of it. It's like, and we, and we did that on camera. Like just calling like every connection I could find, you know, that was involved in the weed trade and the emerald triangle in 90s. And he's like, hey, did you ever hear this story? You know, and it was like a lot of like dead ends. And then finally we started to hit on people that were like, yeah, I remember that. I remember here in that like, yeah, like three dudes got killed. And the word was that that somehow a Sasquatch had, had, uh, had killed them. And then it extended from there that there was like this, supposedly this sort of like tribe of Sasquatch that were, you know, like like the as the farms were pushing further and further up into the woods off road. Like there was like people were having encounters with these pissed off Sasquatch that were like, hook and rocks at them and stuff and like bluff charging them. And so it kind of like got all wrapped into this one, urban legend about like that, that the dope growers had infringed upon this Sasquatch turf, if you will. And that the three dudes that got killed, like they, they set up a plot and they were like camping on it. And, you know, that's what led to them being killed. Of course, that's, we did track down, I think the, the, the true story of who killed those guys and why, but I don't want to spoil it for anybody that hasn't seen the show. Yeah. Yeah. Um, dude, that was like scaring the shit out of me watching it. Just the way that that, that, that whole landscape is laid out, you know, where you're meeting these confidential sources on the top of these giant wooded mountains that have, you have no cell phone signal, nothing like that. Like, we're, we're not terrified. I, I kind of get into this zone when I'm reporting like that, where I'm, where I'm able to kind of just, uh, just associate, I think, yeah, you know, and, um, and then, but then I get an adrenaline dump after and that's when I get sketched out. But yeah, especially the, there's this one road, one mountain spy rock, and there's this road spy rock road that's like, like to this day, like the police will not go there unless they're rolling deep, meaning like unless they're going with like basically SWAT team force, like this, you know, it's, it's, it's really, um, yeah, there was, there was one scene that I think for the most part didn't make it into the show. And I had, um, I went up spy rock by myself, most of the time, um, I had like a, uh, an ex cop that would kind of be along with me and under, you know, undercover, but kind of like watching my back basically. But in this instance, I was by myself and, uh, wound up on this, uh, dope farm that was run by these like two women, both heroin addicts and, uh, when they had a bunch of pit bulls and one of the women, uh, told me the story about, um, and I had a, like, uh, hidden camera and I was wearing a wire. Okay. And was what makes you nervous. Yes. Now I, one of them, not the one that's telling me the story about to relate, but the other one had big become a contact. And like I had interviewed her a couple of times on camera. She knew I was making a movie. You know, I think she probably would have covered for me if they'd figured out that I just, that I would, that I had a camera or recording advice, hopefully, but it didn't come to that. But, but her friend told me the story about, you know, how these, um, how these, uh, black guys from Los Angeles had come up, make a big deal. And how she and, um, some biker friends of hers had, uh, just killed these guys and took their money instead of selling the dope and they buried them on her property. And she's telling me how this on camera. And one of her, and one of the guys had, she, and she told this story like it's funny how one of the guys as he was waiting to be murdered basically had pissed himself. And after they buried his body, one of her pit bulls had smelled the urine or something and gone and dug up his shoe and brought it back to her cabin and dropped it. And she was telling this story like it was hilarious in her friend's laugh. And I'm having to force myself to laugh. I guess this is the funniest fucking thing I've heard too. You know, but the reason that we couldn't use it is because she was dropping the end bomb and describing these guys. And, um, like Hulu wouldn't, wouldn't air that footage just because even if they, even if we bleeped, that they were like, they still know what she's saying. And so like that, that just that one word is so radioactive. Right. That we can't even use this footage. And it was fucking, you know, it was hard one footage. But that was, uh, that was probably in the entire experience of making Sasquatch. That was probably the time that I was, uh, the most sort of feature pucker. You were by yourself. I was buying myself. Yeah. Yeah. Cause I've been in that situation before where you know you're just getting gold. Yeah. But like I've always had somebody with me where I'm like looking at him, like, can you book a belief that shit is real? Like can't wait to fucking get this shit down the hard drive. Right. But like, oh my God, being a lone dude, especially not like you're hiding the camera. So like you're terrified if they discover it, like you don't know what the fuck's going to happen. These people are like self-admitted murderers. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it was one I was in a watch and then I also had a camera that's in like a key fob. So I had to kind of keep my keys out and you know, kind of work dangle on it. Yeah. You know, and I had, you know, I had a rifle in the trunk of my car. But I was like, I was always very aware of how many steps away from that trunk I was. And it was, yeah, it was, it was sketchy man. And but the only way that I was going to get that access was to go by myself. Right. You know, and this was, this was, this was, this was somebody that supposedly had, you know, information about the trip homicide back in 1993. So yeah, I was completely unaware until watching that film that that part of California was like that it was just like this twilight zone where people can get away with it seems like just people can get away with murder. Like it's nothing there. And especially these people that are like living off the grid. Yeah. And I don't do they have electricity up there. Some don't, some live totally off the grid. You know, and it's, but like, I mean, there's still like some like just kind of classic hippies up there. Right. That are, I really love my favorite guy was the guy who for my, he ran me of Captain Hook from the movie Hook with Robin Williams, Dustin Hoffman. He's got like the hook eyebrows, the hippie guy. Yeah. Like leathery skin. Yeah. He was awesome. Go stance. He was on the right side of the frame. Yeah. Like a bookshelf behind him. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He, he was a great source. He was, he grew weed for the Hells Angels like back in the day. Oh, really? They're weed master. And he still has a lot of, a lot of juice in there and it's pretty well protected. And that's why he felt comfortable going on camera. Yeah. You were like, I think we found the killer. He's like, oh, really? He's like, he used to be my neighbor. I could choose number. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So do you think that that, so that guy that you talked to do think he was the killer that you, you complete, you never said his name once on the film. You believed his name in the film. Um, no, no, I don't. You don't. I think, I think he probably knew something about it, but I don't think he was actually involved. Yeah. Because it's very weird how when you, I mean, it's, it was like, first of all, the way you just so bluntly asked him straight up. Yeah. Like, do you know? So you tell me you didn't murder three people? Like, he's just straight out. He's like, I don't know what you're talking about. click and then hangs up. It seemed pretty guilty to me. Yeah. Yeah. Like I said, I think it, well, it depends on what you mean by the murder. Do I, do I think you actually carried it out? No, no, it means you're involved. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, and it's funny that, um, it's like, like biker slang kind of like played into it in that like the story was that like these three guys had like somehow abused some dude's daughter, but like in the outlaw biker world, daughter can mean like just kind of a young woman under your protection to, you know, and so that's where like things got a little vague, I guess. Interesting. You know, it's like, the story was, yeah, this guy's daughter had been, uh, you know, by these three guys, you know, that was one version of it. Right. Yeah. That's so, so, also so weird how you would get all these people telling you this story, or I don't know if it was one source or two sources that told you that story. Yeah. And like you talked to the guy, the name Bigfoot, yeah, foot Jacob's or whatever his name was. Yeah. And, uh, big foot Gary, big foot Gary's, like I never even had a daughter in 93. Yeah. And that's where that's where the shit up. But that's where that's what I mean is it's like, he may have had a biological daughter, but like, if there was a young woman that was not romantically involved with them, but it was kind of like a foster kid in a way, which is kind of common in that world, you know, like splintered families and like sort of taken under his wing. She would be known as his daughter, even though it's just not a biological daughter or adopted daughter, even just like a young woman that's sort of like part of his tribe. Okay. Did you ever meet him face to face big foot Gary? No. No. We tried like even, you know, one of the guys I made that show with, you know, went so far as to kind of like stake out this, this gas station that we knew he got coffee at every morning. And he just happened not to show up a couple mornings and then like the second or third day, that Zach was there. He got made and kind of like run off. So we pulled out all the stops to try, but I did finally get him on the fucking phone. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And some of those biker gang dudes, like some of the hell's angels do have like protection from the FBI. Like some of them work with the FBI, right? Yeah. Yeah, of course. So I wonder how I wonder like how many of them are like just protected or like well, I think that's really any there's no arguments, right? Any organized crime, you know, there's there's guys that are yeah, just that influence. I mean, look at whitey boulder, right? I mean, yeah. Yeah. That's a scary thing. Like these guys like you're not just some like undocumented migrant. That's out there, farmer stuff. Like you're like a legitimate like documentary filmmaker, American citizen doing this stuff. So it's like on one hand, you think you're safe because of that. But on the other hand, you don't know like maybe these guys have like a get out of jail free car. Right. Right. Right. And I didn't trust the cops, you know, in that part of the world. I mean, it's just you got to you've got to like witness and experience the emerald triangle to understand it. It's like, you know, there's a couple state parks with the redwoods there and you know, people go there camping with their family. Once you get outside that part of that world, it is like it's outlaw country. You know, it just is. I mean, it's like you got the kids, the trimigrants that come from all over the world. They're like every harvest season, you know, a lot of them just disappear every year. It's been going on for decades. I mean, there's so the missing persons rate in that part of the world is so high. It's crazy. Yeah. And you know, they're just buried in the redwoods. Right. Yeah, I'm sure the I'm sure this would be when you bury somebody in that soil like just with the environment and it's in just like eats it up. Like all the bugs and insects and stuff in the soil probably just soaks it all up and dissolves into nothing. Yeah. Like I said, that one woman just laughing about, you know, two or three bodies being buried at the same. Yeah. It's like another world right in her own backyard, like right in this country. Yeah. And she was like, she was, I remember she was bang and heroin and she also like got out in front of you. Oh, yeah. And she had like a handle of Captain Morgan's and she and she wanted me to drive her into town to get a pint of ice cream. And so we drove down Spyrock. I bought her a pint of ice cream and a handle of Captain Morgan's and drove back up and she like shot up heroin. She would just pour in the Captain Morgan's into the ice cream and just like eating it. Whoa. That's a interview. I hear. Whoa. That's crazy. back up and actually like shot up heroin. She would just pour in the Captain Morgan's into the ice cream and just like eating it. Whoa. As some interview at your whoa. That's crazy. Yeah. The warmth is already driving us out of hibernation this year. And it only took one day at the fair for me to realize that festival time is also hydration time. That's why I keep liquid IVs hydration multiplier with me at all times. Whether it's a three day festival exploring farmers markets or a 12 hour flight to a destination wedding, liquid IV is superior hydration than water alone. And right now you can get 20% off your first order by using the code Danny at checkout. Whether it's my kid's soccer practice or a day on the golf course, I always keep liquid IV handy. It's super simple. You can do it anywhere. All you do is tear it, pour it, mix it with your water, and you're good to go. One stick with 16 ounces of water hydrates faster than water alone. It's powered by LIV hydrous ions with an optimized ratio of electrolytes, essential vitamins and clinically tested nutrients that turn ordinary water into extraordinary hydration. You're eating three times the electrolytes of the leading sports drinks plus eight vitamins and nutrients in every stick. They've always got great flavors and the kiddos love the popsicle firecracker flavor. So it feels more like a treat instead of a chore to stay hydrated. So if you've got long days ahead this summer, this stuff makes a huge difference. Soak up unforgettable memories with on the go hydration from liquid IV. Tear poor. Live more. Go to liquidiv.com and get 20% off your first purchase by using the code Danny at checkout. That's 20% off your first purchase by using the code DA and NY at liquidiv.com. When you're in those wood, like obviously you didn't spend the night in the woods. You went to like the towns every night. Yeah. But like does it have like any effect on your psyche when you spend that much time? Kind of like in a different part of the world sort of disconnected from regular society. And you're like out with surrounded by all these misfits. Oh, yeah. Without a doubt. I mean, every assignment like that where you're like basically embedding in a criminal subculture, you have to, you have to, um, you know, first you have to like develop some contacts and gain people's trust, right? But you have to start mirroring. You have to start making yourself making yourself seem part of that world. So you like try and pick up as much of the like, you know, slang as you can quickly. Um, adjust the way you dress, adjust the way you act, your mannerisms like, um, and, and sort of give yourself over to that mindset. And that does, that does, uh, exact at all. Yeah. Every time I met my, I've been doing this for 30 plus years now. My risk tolerance is lower than it used to be. And I was in my 20s early 30s, I would take what seemed to me to be now like crazy fucking risks, but like Sasquatch was definitely risky for sure. I mean, but to answer your question, I mean, those, those, those little towns that are just like, first of all, they're just riddled with meth. I mean, just riddled with meth and oxy, you know. And so you just got like fucking junkies on me is wondering all over the place. You got to be careful with all the gas stations that there's not like a little chip reader on the thing to steal your credit card because they're often are. There's like cheap little pieces of shit hardware to like steal your credit card. And she got to peel them off before you get gas. And yeah, she's what is it about that part of the world that enables that behavior? Is it the woods? I think a lot of it's the remoteness, you know, and also like legalization hit that part of the world hard. You know, I mean, it's just like it's a lot harder to make money growing weed than it used to be. And when times are hard, like violence ticks up. And so, you know, it's like with the, with the legalization, it was like big corporations coming in, like putting up these like death stars of like hydroponic weed down around like Palm Springs or wherever. It's a lot harder for those like backwoods, black market farmers, even if they're still selling on the black market to make money. And so competitions, fierce and competition at part of world equals violence, you know, and like a lot of a lot of a lot of them have gone from growing to becoming rippers, you know, just stealing shit, stealing plants, stealing money. It's just things there. Rough. Is it still like that today? Right. Show me it is. I haven't been back up there since, you know, 2021, but yes, you mean it is. I heard that there were a cartlet look, literal carl cartels doing operations up there now, like the going into the woods and doing all their grows now because I guess it's a misdemeanor now. Yeah. I mean, and that was that also played into the Sasquatch story is that it was like, you know, the cartels were, we're, you know, Mexican cartel started to move in on the emerald triangle in the late 80s. And by the early 90s, you know, in this story about the Sasquatch kill on three guys, circulated. I mean, the cartels are definitely making a move there. You know, a lot of, but it's going to cartel like, well, crazy stories in the weed world for me is like these Chinese cartels that are growing weed on, um, like, you know, native land, you know, around like New Mexico and Arizona and shit. Like these, do you know about this? No. Yeah. It's like the Chinese Chinese organized crime. And these like huge weed growing setups, you know, on reservations, basically. It's a story that I haven't really into yet. Yeah. Yeah. It's been, it's been covered. That's I'm not, I'm not, you know, it's been in weed of all drugs. Yeah. Yeah. Still in New Mexico, New Mexico, Arizona. Yeah. Four corners region. This is like a great place to grow weed. Well, it's all indoors, right? They're not busy. Yeah. Yeah. And you don't really hear much about Chinese organized crime anymore, do you? I've heard a lot of, I've heard about like how they've been involved in Mexico, um, like with the fishing stuff offshore in Mexico and also, um, buying up mines and stuff. And mining lithium in Mexico and hiring the cartels is like security for their operations that they're doing down there, um, as well as like bringing fentanyl into Mexico. But, um, yeah, beyond that and then buying up, buying up real estate and stuff in the US. And you don't, you don't really hear much about that. It's bananas. Yeah. They're growing weed, you know, but they can, um, could talk about the narco meninites series. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So the, um, all of all that weed was like that the meninites started moving for the Mexican cartels in the 80s was all like outdoor weed, you know, from the, from the, from the, with the call, a golden triangle, right? Like meninites basically migrated from Canada to Mexico about 100 years ago, a few thousand of them. And they just happened to settle in this town, uh, quack taimok, which is like the closest population center to where in the 1960s, like Mexican opium poppy farmers and marijuana farmers started to plant their crops. And so somehow in the 80s, like, you know, the, uh, the first, first cartel, guadalajara cartel got the right idea of starting to use meninites to run dope form in the US, right? Thinking like because the meninites, they, um, they had these special visas that enabled them to, uh, you know, transit the US to Canada to visit relatives. And so the border guards, you know, in Mexico, the US in Canada, they just see a carload of meninites drive in, maybe with a, you know, truckload of furniture. And they think like, well, no problem. Just wave them on through. A lot of time that furniture was packed with, packed with weed, but outdoor weeds, like, you know, what we used to call brick weed, right? Uh-huh. Not as good. Right. Right. And then in the 90s, when, when BC bud started to come online, you know, especially in Canada, kind of push the meninites out of the weed business. And they started, you know, shift into, to harder drugs and coke, specifically. Yeah. And that's what they're doing now mainly. Not during everything, man. A lot of what they're doing now is, is laundering money for the cartels, because, you know, this town in Mexico, Quacchima, it's like every business, practically every business is meninite owned. They do do a lot of farming, but they do a lot of, you know, what are sources and law enforcement Mexico told us is that, you know, yeah, they're still running dope, but a lot of what they do is, is, is launder money for the cartels now. Huh. And the meninites, they've been really smart about like, keeping their finger in wind and kind of like never getting too big and being very careful about when and how they shift their allegiances with all the cartels, wars going on in Mexico over the decades. Yeah. So they're always like careful about who they're, they're sort of loyal to. Interesting. Yeah. It seems like the, the, the, the heads, the leaders of all the cartels, they never seem to have to pay the price for anything. It's always like the low level ponds are the ones that are getting murdered and shipped around and they're the ones that get the blunt end of this stick. They're, there's a, I have this friend who's a, a lawyer, a criminal lawyer right down the street from here. And when it was first cases, he ever got, he was a public defender for it. And it was a Cuban guy, not a Cuban guy. He was a Colombian dude, a ship captain, cargo ship captain who got hijacked by a cartel on the way from Columbia to Florida. And halfway through, on a halfway through the trip, the cartel boarded his ship, put a gun to his head and said, if you don't take all our Coke into, into Tampa, we're going to kill you and your whole family. So of course he took the Coke and, and went in and got like, you know, they were trying to give him like double life sentences. And my, my lawyer buddy ended up getting him off scoffery. Like this is, he had this, this guy was like fresh out of law school. And the other guy had zero money. And, you know, he was just trying to do this to make a name for himself and help the guy, let the guy live in his house for a couple months when they were fighting the case. And, you know, now, you know, he's been involved with more and more of these cartel cases in Mexico and South America. And like the heads of the cartels are trying to hire him for shit and like flying him down to Mexico City to meet at the Ritz Carlton and like, and he, you know, the way he explains it to me is like, those are the people. It's like the low level poor fisherman's boat captains or whatever. Those are the guys that are lining the prisons. This like those are the guys getting arrested and killed. And it's like, it's never the dudes who are at the top of the pyramid. Who are, who are making the real money, you know, those guys are either just they have too much money and too much security to get caught or they're working with the feds. Yeah. Everyone's while the government in Mexico, though, it seems decides to give one of these guys up. Like, I can't remember the dude's name at the guy that was the head of the at least go new generation cartel. It's just got killed like a couple of weeks ago. Yeah. You know, which now all hell is breaking loose down in Mexico because of that. So for the one that kind of that guy, I can't. I didn't follow that story. But, you know, I think every once in a while, like the Mexican government decides, okay, we got to piece the US and give one of these guys up. I think that they know, you know, where they are at all times. I think the same thing happened. I think with with choppugas, man, El Chapo. Yeah. Yeah. Crazy story about choppo. Like that same guy Tony Yester, there was in operation, Odessa. Yeah. After choppo escape from prison the second time Tony Yester called up till a rustle and I and was basically like it took a while because he's got a heavy Cuban accent. And he was calling, I presume, from Africa. And he was also talking sort of in code. But once we figured out what he was saying, he was saying that like choppo wanted to do an interview and he could line up this interview. And till her and I talked about it for like a couple of days and we were just like, wow, it just felt too dicey. And so we didn't do it. And then Sean Pan wound up getting it for Rolling Stone. Like choppo was just determined to like tell his story, you know, what he's seen operation of you guys. I know, I know we're still kicking our own asses over it. That's so crazy. Dude. I heard that he still calling shots from inside prison. I'm sure even in Supermax. Yeah. And his son just set up that guy that was one of the, you know, OGs. And I mean, it's just fucking chaos down there right now. Who did this on set up? Oh, shit. I'm blanking on that name too. But he like told the guy that they were going to go look at real estate investment like just south of the US border and wound up like landing a new Mexico. And then, um, and then the guy got arrested just happened like year and half or so ago. Oh, are you talking about, um, yeah, why am I blanking on this guy's name too? The guy who was basically the boss of this in a little cartel, right? Mayo. Oh, my, yeah. Oh, my, oh, thank you. Yeah. It was a myo son, I think. Yeah, that's an El Mayo is another guy. Like he's like no one, you know, no one paid attention to that guy forever. When he was like the old dude behind the scenes in El Chapo was really kind of like the poster boy, you know, he was kind of just like one of the, one of the henchmen to start out with and then it became like the most famous or notorious for whatever reason. Yeah. I mean, that's the same guys that we interviewed for the last narc. We're telling the stories about chopper back in the day. And he was just like a low level thug. Right. It was just like a homicidal maniac. Right. You know, it's just you know, why, why just use one bullet when you can use 70 kind of guy. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, like the theme of all these stories is just like desperation drives like the most violence. I've made it like people who are the most destitute who have absolutely nothing to lose will do like the worst, most heinous things to feed themselves or their families, you know. And it's like whether you're talking about drug smuggling and cartels or like poaching animals in Africa, like the dudes that are that are killing these endangered animals, like these elephants in shit in Africa, these people are just trying to feed their families. Look at these fucking guys are getting blown up in all these boat strikes. I mean, these aren't drug lords. Right. You know, you guys just trying to feed their families. Oh, you're probably the reason that is way of living. All those, all those boats that that we've been blowing up, you know, the last six, eight months. I mean, it's all just like guys are probably like part time fishermen. Yes. Yeah. Those are fucking poor. Those are poor people. Those people aren't calling the show. Yeah. Those people aren't making any different. First of all, those boats that they're driving with the motors that they have on there, those guys can't make it halfway to Cuba, let alone the United States with those motors. Like what are you talking about? They're bringing drugs to the US. Like a 50 horsepower, Evan route. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Right. Yeah. The story they told us about that being about drugs was just like a joke. I don't think anyone bought that. It's how it's like terrorists. You know, whether they're narco terrorists. Right. Come on. Yeah. No, man. It's a, it's a house of cards at this point, man. It really is. But like so, so going back to to be getting about like what got you into this stuff in the very, very beginning? Like what was the the first project that you worked on that got you into this type of journalism and this type of filmmaking? That's a good question. I mean, I'd really started in college. Some, some buddies of mine and I started a newspaper at University of California, Santa Cruz called the fish wrap. And, you know, we were all about Hunter S Thompson, you know, and so we all like we're practicing our, you know, our version of God's own journalism. I'd say the first like big story though that I did was my first job out of college was for the Anchorage Daily News. That's my hometown newspaper. I grew up in Anchorage and a couple of street gangs from Southern California were making inroads in Anchorage at the time. And I did a, you know, big, it was like my first big, like front page story. It was called a question of gangs. And, but I was when I realized that I really had a knack for kind of embedding with criminals. Yeah. That I could get criminals to open up to me where they might not, you know, be as candid or is accepting of the presence of other reporters. Right. And so that's when I think the, the fun of the, the switch clicked for me there. And then pretty quickly after that, you know, I bounced from mainstream daily paper to a chain of alternative weeklies in the 90s that at the time was new times that then became village voice media. And, you know, then I just started writing like long form, God's, I was shit and just went all in, you know, embedding with gutter punks and street gangs and twickers. Yeah. Yeah. Did you embed with a bunch of meth addicts or something? Yeah. I did a couple times that one story in Phoenix, but then I think the one you're probably talking about was I was working for a paper in Denver called the Westward. And I, I stayed up for 72 hours with, with some twickers, but they weren't like, I don't know. I don't want to say yuppy twickers. What were they, they had, they had dope. They had jobs. They had, they had money. They had money to afford, you know, really, really, um, pure crystal meth called Shaboo, you know, like really like pure came like in a, in a crystal statue that you just kind of like shave little curls off of and really smoke. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. This really popular Hawaii, I guess. These are like upper class, dude. Yeah. Yeah. Definitely. Definitely like, you know, it's going far back in the thick. I could say like something that only a flower shop and clothing store, um, you know, DJs, you know, that kind of thing. People that had lives other than crystal meth, right. But they would get together, you know, um, once a month and like, you know, go at it hard for two to three days. Wow. And so, but I did try it. I didn't. I have done, I have done crystal, but not in, uh, for that story, that story, I was, I was taking a, I'm a daffin' all, which is like an anti narcolepsy drug. Oh, yeah. We'll keep it work. Yeah. Yeah. It's like pro vigil. Same stuff. Okay. Same stuff. Yeah. And, um, you know, but if it's, I was, I was definitely starting to like kind of brown out, you know, round hours. Yeah. Yeah. I was gonna say like that many hours. I would have like taken a little ahead of it. I still have my notebook from that story and it's hilarious because the notes start off like really kind of lucid, you know, and you can just, and I keep, I kept doing time stamps and like by the end, it's just like hours are passing between the times I did notes and there, and there's some of them are just gibberish, you know, but uh, it kind of like, I was really worried about it. Uh, I was like, fuck, I think I didn't get the story because I just was not, I was not like cogent there at the, at the end, but it kind of, it kind of worked in a way that even even in the writing of the story, it's like written in a timeline format. It just gets more kind of scattered and kind of feels like it's going off the rails, which was the experience of, you know, embedding with them for that time too. They, they started off the rails. What is your, what kind of stuff did you ask him? Just, were you just hanging out and just hanging out and just being a fly in the wall? Yeah, 100% just, yep, just observing, participant observer. How did you go about doing that? Like, yo, you guys like math kind of hang out and like, I knew, I mean, I, I, I knew that. Yeah, I knew him before. I knew that they did this. I kind of knew him from the, and it was like a ritual for them. Some I ritualized I'd say. I mean, they did it once a month. It was like planned out. They would clear their calendars. You know, they would all pull their money to buy this really good shit. And there was one guy's house that was kind of the mother ship for the operation. They would go out to clubs and after our spots and stuff and come back and smoke there. And then put, put, the time I was with them, they decided about our 36 or so to like get on a charter flight to Vegas. So we all went from Denver to Vegas. And I was fucking, and like, it was summer. It was just like, oh, it was so bad, dude. That was so bad, it was so rough. It was like the Vegas strip, like pounding sun. You know, you just dehydrated and just, yeah. Oh, it was so fucking hell. Yeah, it was. And you also embedded with like some skinheads. Yeah, I did quite a bit of that actually. At least half a dozen times probably went undercover as a neo-Nazi skinhead. So to be clear, like with the with the with the Shabbu smokers, they knew I was a journalist. I was a journalist. A lot of the reporting I've done on like neo-Nazi organizations, white nationalist organizations, that was done undercover. I think that's pretty much the only time I've worked undercover was when I would have had a cover to escape the year. No, I was posing as a fellow neo-Nazi. And why, why would you do it that way? Do you think they wouldn't be open to you reporting on what they're doing? No, no, they, they have a very strict policy. You know, if anybody, if you're contacted by the media, the only thing you say is I have nothing to say. It's it. I mean, they don't really do interview sometimes, right? But like the real hardcore, like, you know, hate groups, they're not, they're not media friendly. Yeah. Yeah. So where, so where did you first go and Denver? Also Denver. This was in Denver. Yeah. It was a, there was a investigator for the anti-defamation league that got a hold of me. let me know that there was this event coming up called the Rocky Mountain Heritage Fest. And it was like basically like, if you want, I will give you kind of a crash course and how to, you know, what? Yeah. Yeah. And so like, I spent, I think I only had a couple weeks. I had hair like even longer than I do now shaved it course down to just a one buzz cut. And just spent like a couple weeks just like learning how to dress, how to walk the music, of the slang, you know, the history of that culture. The list of screwdriver. Yeah, of course. Yeah. This is a bunch of max resists, you know, all the hate rock bands. And, you know, and when I cover it, but it got, it got fucked up because like this, like the Antifa had found out where the, where the event was going to be and they showed up in force and in a way that like shut it down. It was like, it was originally going to be at this venue called the Aztec Theater in Denver. And like the owners like figured out because Antifa showed up what was going on and they like told the skinheads like this isn't happening here because it was clearly going to be a brawl. Yeah. And so, it just, so then they were suspicious about who was like letting Antifa know, you know, what, where their location was. And so like they're secured and their security was being run by these guys called the hammer skins and the hammer skins. They're like, they, well, they were and beliefs still are. Like a national skin at organization. Their symbol is the cross hammers from Pink Floyd, the wall. Mm. Those red and black hammers. Anyway. And so they were running security and like nobody, nobody knew me. I didn't have an in, you know, and I also, I didn't have any tattoos. Right. And both of those things were just for love. I did after that, I actually, after that story came out, I got a hold of the organizers. Cause I think I wanted to get a quote from him from the story and did and was like, hey, that guy, you know, David from Alaska, that was me. I'm not really a skinhead. I was in a reporter and doing a story. And I think they actually did contrary to what I just told you, give me a couple quotes about the event. Cause they knew they knew I got in. And they were like, yeah, we knew there was something off about you. We didn't think you were a cop, but like you weren't reading right. And I was like, well, what was it? And they were like, well, you didn't have any tattoos, you know? Like they were mad. They weren't mad. They weren't mad. And they were kind of like impressed. And why are they like, dude, you've got some false, you know? Like you know you would have gotten curb stumped if we figured it out, right? You know? And I was like, well, are you going to come after me now? And they're like, no. And I think I treated him fairly in the story. Like I didn't ridicule him, you know? And did you learn about him? Well, I'll answer that by saying what I've learned about skinheads more broadly, not just from that one story. Is that a lot of skinheads grew up in the movement. Or I was just saying neo-Nazis, okay? And a lot of them grew up in the movement. But a lot of them are just like island of lost children that are just looking for a place to fucking belong. And it's like they took a wrong turn at the Renaissance fair or something, you know? And they wound up like because there is something like very seductive about that feeling of intense community based on your racial identity. Okay. Like there is something like reassuring or empowering about being part of a skinhead set. And I also found out that when I, one of the things I did before I went to the actual Rocky Mountain Heritage Fest is I just went out in Denver, dressed out as a skinhead by myself. And I realized like people were fucking intimidated, you know? I'm not a small guy, but just walking into bars, dressed, you know, fully kitted out bomber jacket, dark martens, you know, the whole thing, white power shirt. Like I could see people were like fuck. And the reason they were is not is because they, I was representing them that I'm part of something a lot bigger than just me. And if you fuck with me, you're fucking with me and, you know, presumably my whole crew. And, you know, and so I think if you're like somebody doesn't, you know, have a lot going on in your life and you're like looking for an identity, there's something very attractive about that. What did I learn about it? I learned that even then, and this is like the early 2000s, like that subculture is a lot broader and better funded and organized than most people understand. And when I say that culture, I don't just mean skinheads. I mean more broadly like the white supremacist kind of underworld. It's funded. Well, that they got dough. Okay. Like like rich parents to me or they're, they're, they have careers. They're kind of living two lives or they, this is kind of like baked into, is this baked into every part of their life or do they kind of hide it from some people? And I think it varies a lot. But when I say that they're funded, yeah, let me, that like, like a lot of its merchandise sales, also they, they, they smuggle a lot of shit to Europe and make a lot of money that way because like stuff because of the first amendment. The Ukraine has a lot of Nazis, right? Russia. Russia does for sure. Really? Yeah. But in Europe and France, for example, Germany, like hate rock, like symbols, the shirts, the flags, all that shit's banned, you know, it's illegal. Right. So you can smuggle a shit over there and make, you know, a good amount of money. Whoa. Stuff that's cheap here because it's protected by the first amendment. Yeah. This dude, you've heard that guy named Darryl Davis, the black dude who be front of the Nazis. Yeah. Yeah. And I was talking to him. He was, he was saying that, you know, the first time he ever discovered racism, because he grew up, he said overseas, like he was going to school overseas and like he would come back here and he was like doing this on Boy Scout thing, like doing some like March, and public March and some dude threw a fucking rocket his head. And he went home and he was like asking his mom questions about it and his mom was explaining to him why they did it. And that was his first encounter. Like in his, he was maybe 10 years old of racism, like he had no concept of it whatsoever. And you know, that's what got him so interested in the KKK and all that. Like went out and started like going to bars trying to meet these KKK members and ended up befriending a bunch of them, getting them to leave the Klan for good. And like I think he said the biggest common denominator between all of them was that none of them had been outside the zip code they were born in. Like they were all born and raised in this little town and none of them had left the country let alone their fucking zip code. Which I thought that kind of made sense to me. You know, if you're, if you're surrounded your whole life by this like certain ideology or people that have one way of viewing the world, you never are exposed to any alternative view of anything, then maybe maybe that's just what happens to you. I think white nationalist groups now, I mean, this is born 20 years ago that we're talking that I was doing this shit. I mean, it has changed a lot. I mean, those groups, there are a lot more online based now than they were, you know, in the early 2000s and there are a lot more overt. They're, they're less underground. You know, I think they feel a lot more comfortable with publicly representing that ideology. Yeah, I've never run into it in the real world before. I've never run into anything like that. I know there's like a lot of clan around like, there's like little pockets of Florida where you can find like the clan, like where they, there's bars and stuff they go to. I'm sure they do fucking meetings in the woods somewhere around here. But like, yeah, I don't know. I just never, I mean, I'm not, I'm not out searching for it either. But yeah, it's like for me, you only, I only hear about it like on message boards and things like that. But it's just wild to hear that they're like still doing their thing, you know. Well, the tightest spot I got in, I got in a couple, but one of them was an event in, in Arizona called area and fest. And there's traditionally been a lot of, a lot of tension between like neo-Nazis and the clan, you know. This, this. in Arizona called area and fast and there's a lot of traditionally been a lot of tension between like neo-Nazis and the clan you know but this was a this was like a sort of a pan white supremacist gathering so there were there was one of the why is there a rift between them they don't like punk i think this like skinheads like it's part of its regional yeah but i think it like the skinheads like kind of regard like the clan is like you know they had their day and they fucked it up yeah and i'm just kind of look at him as like there's also an age difference like generally like you know skinheads are younger right yeah and neo-Nazis guys um but there was uh there was a there was a claver in there at area and fast and one of the clan guys just he just called me out you know and i think i had one of those like disposable codac cameras i was taking photos with you know which is okay love isn't the only one taking photos yeah and i think i just took one photo to many or something and he called me out and accused me of being like from the anti-defamation league and um i had to just get right in his fucking face i mean there's just one of those things where like i knew if i just pretended to ignore it you know because he was kind of making comments out the side of his mouth that made your ADL yeah yeah yeah i took i took a photo and he was like oh i guess we'll see that on the anti on the ADL website next week or something like that yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah you know and i knew that if i just pretended like i didn't hear it or or i tried to like laugh it off or something that that would that's not that wouldn't be right that would like be a suspicious not what i realized i had to get right up in his fucking face you know and just call and call and call a clan a bunch of fucking posers a bunch of shit you know fucking sheethead you know like you know ask yeah you like oh we did i mean did you find anything any any we're able to find any humanity in those guys like was there was there any sort of like any soft spot you could find form or like you kind of understood them from from any kind of perspective or where you felt bad form or like you could see could understand that much with the skinheads but there was like an organization called the National Socialist Movement and and they were like you know straight up brown shirts swastick arm bands like dressing like they were from like they were not the ties yeah and i just remember it some of their rallies like running in these kids that were just like seemed to have no idea what the fuck they were doing there what this group is really about they just seemed like total lost souls and you know they just somehow got wrapped up into this or you just want to like kind of take them under your wing and just get them out of this shit yeah so i did have some empathy for them you know but most of the skinheads like i mean but in the skinhead movement like it's really easy to become a leader like if you've got like you know decently high IQ and some organizational skills you can become a big shot at that movement pretty easily in the same way like if you're just a mediocre musician if you start making hate rock or white power punk like all of a sudden you've got a fan base right you can actually sell records or you know now downloads right and have a fan base and like tour the world you know and have groupies and the whole fucking rock experience point with some of the leaders i was always wondering like how much do they actually like believe this shit how much of it is just like power for power sake and i saw that this is a way to get people to like follow them right and then the other people just trying to fit into a crowd you know being misfits and just trying to find someone else trying to find a place to fit in yeah you know it's like prison you know in prisons you hear you know the people you have to join one of the either you be with the blacks you can be with the skinheads you can be with the or like the the one group you never want to be a part of is the chomo's who everyone fucking tries to kill all the time and it's like it's like lower to the flies you know hold that thought i gotta get people quick we'll be right back to it man i hit this point recently where i just felt off same lifestyle same workout schedule same diet but after 2 p.m i was just dragging one of my guests said it sounded like a testosterone issue and suggested this natural pill which led me to Marsman it's designed to support your body's natural testosterone function without synthetics or needles just ingredients like tonk hat ollie shilaji zinc and boron i instantly noticed more consistent energy better workouts and clearer focus not a spike but feeling normal again it's made in the u.s third party tested and it comes with a 90 day money back guarantee and for limited time our listeners can get a whopping 50% off for life plus free shipping and three free gifts at men go to Mars dot com that's men go to Mars dot com for 50% off and three free gifts when you check out and it's now on amazon after you purchase they're gonna ask where you heard about them and please support the show by telling them we say you locked and loaded for the reverend moon who died in 2012 his church split apart and two of his sons established the new congregation and their followers are eagerly awaiting the end times and they are armed it's called the sanctuary church this is what their members look like brother they look like i mean look that lady looks happy like that's how they go to church where is this this is in pencil veg yeah tudy we might need to go investigate them we should sign up attendees hold rifles and this is the this is their blessing ceremony look at that dude like how do you end up there you know like how do you get recruited to go to that that's what i want to know like how do you how do you come up like meet somebody and get convinced that this would be a great idea to go here every other every once a week with your fucking ar-15 and await the end times it's wild to me it's wild to me you know this right here where we are right now is like the hub of Scientology this is like this town is where Scientology all started right just down the road yeah the church is like right down the street from here yeah the dude who created Elron Hubbard had this ship that was parked right out there when he was alive and that's how he tried to escape and tried to avoid all the tax evasion ship this is this is one of their e-meters this is what they use to do like technological exorcism some people they wait are you familiar with Scientology at all yes i've seen the South Park episode that's all you need to know no yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah a guy i worked with at the new times in Phoenix tourniquet Tony or Tega he's done a lot of investigative reporting on the one of the names it's done a lot of like reporting on Scientology and like every few years man i get a call from somebody presenting themselves as like a private investigator or a filmmaker or something and they're trying to dig up dirt on him and they find me because they just know that i worked with him you know in the in the 90s at a paper in Phoenix it's crazy they're still out to get him yeah Tony or Tega yeah i definitely know that name the Scientologists are with their their their ruthless with like the amount of intimidation and stalking they'll do yeah that's what they're doing to him yeah they're always just trying to dig up any you know any dirt i have him on the day so i just trying to like fucking this lead him yeah i mean you you hear of all like the crazy sinister evil cults that have bubbled up in america over the years and Scientology is the one that was able to get away with the most they were able to get away with being tax exempt by attacking the IRS and having all their members sue the file lawsuits against the irs eventually having them cave and like you know i hear their membership is dwindling but like dude you walk up it you drive up and down the streets around here they're everywhere there's young people that are still in it that walk up and down the streets part of the sea org the sea orgs like the faction of it who are like the workers who basically they get paid nothing they basically have to work for free clean toilets and try to recruit people and do these auditing sessions on people and it's just like god you're these like this is their day i was driving by and this girl she looked like she was maybe 21 years old you know and i just wonder like how did you end up here can you spot him like you can spot him for sure yeah they had any spot him they wear this certain outfit they wear this like this um a vest that's like this color this like maroon color with like a white a white long sleeve button up collar dress shirt with this maroon vest they wear sometimes it's a it's like a royal blue vest and they all walk together and they look like robots but one of my one of my um one of my friends so like another weird thing is like there's a bunch of big companies around here like all of the all of the big Scientologists around here are very well most of the wealthy people in this area are Scientologists for some reason they're all super rich like the high level ones and um they own like a lot of big businesses around here and one of my friends worked for one of the businesses that was owned by Scientologists and i mean him are getting lunch one day and i was like dude i'm like i'm like this town is infested with Scientologists right i'm like i'm sure a lot of them are nice people whatever like they don't bother anybody but like how do you how do you note can you tell like who is and who is it and he's like oh yeah he's like i can tell you i know exactly it's easy for me to spot a Scientologist anywhere am i can't hear with us in this fucking restaurant we're in he's like yeah it's like there's one right in this room right now i'm like what how do you know like there was no undressed weird like everyone's dressed pretty normal he's like you just look into their eyes and it's just it's like a robotic vibe you'll get from them and i looked around and and sure shit i could spot him like is it that guy he's like yep that's the guy and you could just tell like there was something about the the guy the way the guy carried himself and like the look in his eyes which is like robotic and um i think you know one of somebody told me that one of the reasons they think that they were able to maintain for so long is because they never became a sex cult like they were never they were never associated with any like sexual abuse or like that you know but i'm at least you wonder like was that on purpose like was there an executive decision made like early on like we're never gonna do any kind of like sexual depravity or like sexually assault people like every other cult does right so maybe that's maybe that's why they were able to get by for so long but apparently their numbers are dwindling apparently like it's dying a slow death it's crazy that also like elron hovered was best friends with jack parsons and alistair krowley and all these people from back in the day all these occultists as punkers man you know i did a series like a couple years ago um there's some peacock called christian is there was about the harry christian is about organized crime within the harry christian movement you know i spent a lot of time with with harry christian is and um i gotta say like they did not have that like you know robotic vibe really all like some of the like happiest well adjusted people have ever met or christian in devotees what is that can you explain what that group is yeah so so it started in the you i mean i mean there there's sort of spiritual tradition is like ancient like far predates christianic goes back to the vatus like the oldest religious texts in the world known and uh but it came to the u.s with this um i used to say guru from india probupod who came my head as timing was perfect he like came over in the mid 60s you know just as a time is that you just surf the way of the counterculture like perfectly like had like you know wow you know kind of um events i guess you can say in golden gate park as infersist go and like like the george harris and the beetles got super into it and stuff he's like sent over a group of devotees to london to recruit the beetles in the movement but um but you know i went into it like thinking like how are christians really occult like in my way thinking like no but there was this one um when prumprabupod the founder of the what we call the harry christian as in the u.s when he died he like appointed um all male some of his like top disciples to be to carry on the movement and one of them was this guy named kith ham but his his christian name was kirtan ananda and he uh started this commune in the mountains of west Virginia that's still there uh called new verndavan verndavans of city in india that's you know the birthplace of christina in that mythology or belief system yeah and um he started this uh uh commune in west Virginia called new verndavan and and speaking the sextuff i mean that's what took him down see he was like abusing the kids you know in the in the commune that's what eventually you know got him dethroned yeah yeah that's him it looks white yeah yeah he is yeah oh he is yeah yeah all the all the guys that carried out like uh propupod was uh indian but um all of his uh devotees that carried on the movement after after he died uh were white guys americans hmm maybe one Canadian anyway this guy's like uh kith ham or kirtan ananda in verndavan in india there's this um there's this his tomb is there and he still has uh like devout followers of kirtan ananda that like live around his tomb and there's these like big buildings that look kind of half finished and i went to a went to verndavan to you know to film for this series and got access to to kirtan ananda's tomb and was like interviewing the guy that kind of keeps it you know there's candles and pictures and shit and i kind of asked one question too many and all of a sudden like all these like devotees of kirtan ananda started coming out of this building and i was just there with like one camera guy and me and are like you know interpreter and the interpreter was like it's time to go now it's time to go now like you get the fuck out of there whoa yeah because he's real like controversial figure he's kind of like officially excommunicated by the by the harry christian is but still has kind of adherence within the movement so what are the harry christians believe like what is their primary belief like what sets them apart well they believe reincarnation karma you know um akin to Hindu you know i'm not a religious scholar so i don't want to like misrepresent their belief system but yeah they definitely believe in like the cycle reincarnation and um i believe in dancing a lot dancing yeah yeah i mean the harry christians like the you know the old like you know uh like that comedy in the 80s like airplane or whatever like there was the running joke about the the christians in the airports used to see them in the airports in the u.s a lot like in the 80s they'd be like selling flowers and books and shit or you'd see them like in venous beach in california like they call them kirtans and they're like sort of like dancing drumming ceremony is chanting mm-hmm yeah wow and what and so so see you just like discover one day you you you became aware of them and you win and when you know when you embedded with them you didn't have to like you were a number i stayed i stayed at the the commune at new vendauv in west vidgenia i mean where a lot of like evil shit went down like in the 80s and early 90s like this guy um kirtan ananda uh he had you know basically this vietnam vet that was like his enforcer that would just kill people on his orders like people that started the challenge his authority you know and he wasn't the only like guru that went bad there was another one the guy that became known as the machine gun swami who was like into like you know running guns and shit like some of these guys really went to the dark side because they had all that power because like if you're a you know if you're a guru you're basically like a direct conduit to the divine and so you had these you know i mean i think probabod was like really in a jam he'd started this movement that had grown very big very fast in the u.s and then he died or you know on his deathbed he kind of like appointed these guys to carry it on but they were all just like young dudes in their 20s and then all of a sudden their gurus you know and some of them kind of carried it on in a in a righteous way and some of them you know went to the dark side all that power went to their head hmm and how did the sexual abuse park it and like how does it happen on the file i mean you know and so he was you know and and the you know that the harry christian is like as as a movement it had problems akin to the catholic church although i'd say like unlike the catholic church they sort of confronted it head on you know a decade or so ago but kirtan ananda was one of the worst examples of like child abuse within that you know religion and he just had he had you know several hundred i think yeah several hundred like followers that lived on this isolated lived in this isolated commune up in the mountains in west Virginia the closest cities Pittsburgh but it's like kind of it's out there man you know it's especially in the 80s they were really kind of cut off and it was a place that um you know if you were a fuckup in a in a christian temple in los angeles or denver wherever they would send you to new verandabans so here to non that could kind of like whip you into shape so it was also kind of like a lot of like uh difficult personalities i guess you could say were sort of funneled to him yeah you know it was in some ways it was kind of a dumping ground for the movement um and but there to this day there's this temple there uh that's just like it looks like a like a like the fucking Taj Mahal or something i'm just incredible you're just driving on these winding roads in west Virginia and uh there's just this this palace this like tribute to probabod that's there that that was like basically built by the the devotees and it's incredible whoa yeah is this what you're most recent move yeah yeah it's on peacock on page called christian is yeah i came out a couple years ago how long how long do you typically spend on these projects a little over a year a little over yeah sometimes i'm working on more than one at a time you know i'm always usually making one and then trying to figure out what's next you know trying to sell the next thing but like yeah yeah so sometimes i'm working on two to two at once but in terms of one project it's i'd say it nets out about a year to year and a half how long do you get with like the editing and stuff very yeah yeah yeah i have a really old school method i mean i take all the like interviews all the archival material we have and i actually write what's called a radio script which is a really like kind of frankly antiquated method of doing things and i have to have editors that are like will work with me on that because i don't like to work on machines i like to work with paper okay like even sometimes pen and paper and i just think that i'm just i'm not exactly a lot i but let's just say you know i prefer to write at least on screen when i'm creating and so i write a script and then give it to the editors and be like okay take this part of the interview and then this piece of archival and this b-roll and that like actually give them a script and then we collaborate you know mix them like that yeah yeah for me like like for when i was filming deckhands i remember it sat on my heart it sat on hard drives for probably two years before i ever touched it because i was like kind of scared to go watch it again because i knew it was on the hard drives and i like i like the experience was so overwhelming i was just like you know i like for me it was just the the the idea of attacking all of that footage and trying to mold it into something just was so daunting and i was like i'm a i'm a ferocious procrastinator and i just you know i didn't want to fucking dive into it a because it was so dark i was like i don't really want to go back into that and like b i knew it was going to be such a big project to like actually try to tackle and wrangle into something that made sense and that was cohesive so like when i finally start like when i first started like putting it together you know you kind of like like oh okay this is kind of cool and then i started to piece more stuff together piece more pieces together and then i like i kind of like i realized okay i'm missing a lot of i'm missing a lot of transitions here i got like a lot of cool like little pocket stories but now i gotta fucking go back all these years later and like i gotta i gotta fill in these gaps to make this make sense you know like to actually tell the story so like that was the kind of way the kind of like the way i did and for me like the music was a huge part of it too like the mute like it was kind of like a musi it was kind of like a like a creepy music video like there was no narration it was like it was more of kind of like the music playing in with like the scenery and the ambiance of it kind of just like made you feel a certain way you know yeah it was just kind of like a dystopian music video in my mind which i i like enjoyed doing nice to like doing music videos when i was younger on deck ends did you have collaborators if you just like cut that yourself i did it all myself everything myself yeah that's one of the things i like about um making docs is like it's a collaborative like team effort i mean when i was doing just gonzou print journalism i mean every once in a while i'd be paired with with a photographer an assignment but for the most part is like total loan loaf you know yeah and i really like working with crews like in the field you know it came a cruise and work with the editors i mean i do write those scripts if the night i like sitting in the editing bay with a with an editor and just like kicking ideas around actually moving shit around and stuff it's like it's a very satisfying creative process yeah yeah it was just like the part of it for me was just like jumping from me you know in the middle of that like being on a boat with a bunch of dudes like doing blow and like watching their porno collection then going home and having dinner with my family that night just like like god i'm not going to do this forever like it's this fucking crazy you know and and uh it was like it was really it was it was really like it felt good to be able to like to accomplish that task but i don't know i guess i just like wasn't cut out like what what's the next thing going to be like how am i going to go find and sustain this you know forever because i came from the i came from like a world of like before i started doing that kind of stuff like on youtube i was kind of like trying to do what you're doing now i was trying to like do like documentaries and like real documentaries you know and like sell them to like networks or whatever this was kind of like before streaming i started doing that like in the boom of like the reality show type thing when that can or not i'm sorry when like duck dynasty and like pawn stars were becoming big shows like the reality craze and like trying to do shit that i thought was cool and like i was never able to get anything off the ground and um like that's when i started like just digging into like my archives and it's like i'm just gonna throw all this shit on youtube and just see what happens and uh you know that's when when shit started to stick because like i got a really bad taste in my mouth from like working with those production companies and like trying to like deal with like you know shopping it to networks and to torture streamers like that it was like i was like constantly riding this emotional roller coaster of like like my fate was in somebody else's hands you know yeah and you just got to get used to fucking people telling you that it's like right at the finish line and then they just kick your fucking chest and exactly and then over again i felt like i was just getting put on a shelf with a bunch of other stuff you know and like they're just they're they're intentionally the the parasites that are in that business they're they intentionally tried to play on your emotions to keep you strong along you know and in that little shopping agreement that they have you locked into yeah yeah i mean i'm fortunate in that i'm always trying i mean i'm always trying to develop my own ideas but i'm fortunate in that like if somebody has like a gonzou idea they'll come to me like with narco menenites as this filmmaker sherry finbo who's a canadian which is in australia and she'd figured out this story and it sold it and she was like hey you know i've sold this story to crave the streamer in canada it sounds like something you might be interested in as like what is it and she's like it's about a men and i drug cartel i was like bingo you know i'm in right same thing with the with the christmas like i didn't have to sell that show a production company had sold that show to peacock and then they you know wanted somebody to make it and they were like well this just seems like um something a whole house might be interested in so i've gotten to that place which is good but i know it's it's you know i can't tell you how many times the last couple years especially with all of this like consolidation going on the industry yeah everybody's nervous is fuck about ai yeah you know most recently everyone's like wondering like with this elas and deals gonna go through you know a netflix within a bidding war with them and that dust still hasn't settled like people some buying a lot of stuff right now it's it's it's a tough time so i'm fortunate to be in that place where people are coming to me with shows that they've already sold and they just need help making them so you don't have to necessarily go kicking down doors and she's still trying to find stuff yourself yeah how do you do that you're just like you have like a network of people i've got to talk into yeah i do have i do have a good network of you know my secret to my success has been working both sides of street meaning cops and crooks so i've got yeah really good sources among law enforcement and really good sources on the other side of things you know some always talking about stories and a lot of it's just you know just fucking reading reading everything i can every day yeah you know about what's going on the world right now but also like you know that library of books you have outside this room you know should like that just just constantly digging through turning over rocks yeah looking at a rocks exactly yeah it's usually like the most interesting shit is the shit that's not being reported on by anyone stuff that you're not going to find in news you know right stuff that more like the stuff you find behind the fucking 7-Eleven yeah man the whole the fucking like some of the stuff that's going on right now is just it seems like it just seems like supernatural shit like bubbling up into reality where it's like you don't even know what's real especially like what gets reported on with like mainstream news and like this whole thing about this Epstein files thing i don't know how much you paid attention to that oh i pay a lot of attention yeah but it's like it's it's it's one of the most insane things to me is that that stuff can be made public and and admitted to by the DOJ and like nobody cares it seems like nobody cares other than a few journalists it's really disheartening i think part of it's everybody's attention is so you know discombobulated like it just seems like there's there's so much to try and pay attention to right now but that story is fucking crazy and it just seems clear to me that that he was and some kind of Israeli intelligence agent and was you know gathering blackmail material i mean it was both both a pimp but he was also you know running honey traps i mean it's not even it's not even conspiracy there it just seems like that's been reported i mean yeah so like the dots are right there big giant 24 point dots to connect yeah and all of these crazy qAnon pitegate people are being vindicated the people who we were all making fun of a few years ago they didn't have it exactly right they had it pretty damn close i mean it wasn't in the basement of a pizza shop in washington d c but it was fucking everywhere else yeah the guy should have gone and shut up uh... Epstein's mansion in new york right part yeah yeah it's crazy and like you know we've all we've all here like heard the stories of like the rock of fellers and the Rothschilds and here it is playing his day in declassified emails like the guys talking to the Rothschilds and now they're doing these subpoenas on all these people like this less wexner guy who owns Victoria secret and they subpoenaed or they did a deposition of him they did a deposition of bill clinton deposition of hilary clinton they're all talking about yes the Rothschilds he worked for the Rothschilds and like before all this came out it like the consensus seemed to be at least from my view that like what you said he seemed to be like an intelligence agent who worked for multiple different intelligence factions like um probably uh the m i six the most odd and the c i a but from what it seems like with these files is that they worked for him you know like these people were like he was a like there was that that layer of intelligence that's kind of above the politicians that run countries right that so you have like us politicians intelligence and then you have this Epstein Rothschild rocker feller layer that's like behind the curtain doing all these crazy arms deals and like funding civil wars in Sierra Leone and like profiting off war selling arms trilateral commission stuff it's like it's like ripped open a veil in reality that i don't think i don't think people are already to accept that that's real but they fucking in reality that I don't think people are already to accept that that's real, but they fucking they've made it public. Yeah. I don't mean to say that he was just that he was just working with Masada. I mean, there's also links between Epstein and FSB. I mean, there's emails where he was like, you know, trying to get to Putin through an FSB agent, you know, I mean, so I think that he had he had his I was about to make a bad comparison. I won't he definitely had the most he had the biggest connection to the Masada for sure because he had the guy the former head of the former prime minister like at his house every day. What drives me crazy though is it's in this in this like hyper partisan environment that we're in that it's like both sides are taken what they want from the Epstein files. You know, oh, it's all oh Bill Clinton. It's all about Bill Clinton right right right. Oh, no, it's all about like Trump. Well, it's fucking both of them. Exactly. This is the most it's not either or it's both and yeah, it's the most by bipartisan story probably of my lifetime. They're everyone is implicated in this stuff. It's not left to right. It's it's not Republican Democrat left right. It's us verse the layer above us. It's a it's a vertical fight. Not a horror is exactly right. And it's like, yeah, man, like the the more you pay attention to it, like the more it strives crazy. Then like the code words, the code words like jerky like trafficking people and in like allegedly it looks like depending on how you want to interpret the code words they were using that they were fucking eating people. Like what? And where are all the videos? Right, you know, yeah, he had cameras everywhere. Where the fuck are they? And what did they like if that's B.I.s had all this shit for so long? Like what did they make of it? Like what did I'm sure they have to have some sort of analysis of what those code words meant? Right? Like I'm sure they had to come to some conclusion, but they didn't. Instead, they're just like trying to fucking hide everything and start wars to distract us from it or, you know, I don't know, man, it's a lot to digest. Going back to the the Sasquatch film it seemed like a lot of the people in that area in the Mendocino area, there was like this overwhelming sort of like belief in the supernatural with those people, not just with the big foot stuff, but it just seemed like that was kind of like a yeah, I know, I know what you're saying. And and it's it makes a lot more sense if you've been there. Okay, meaning that yes, the people there are much more willing to entertain the possibility of the paranormal and cryptids than like your quote unquote average American. Yeah. And part of that may be the level to which psychedelics permeated that culture, but there's also just something about those like ancient forests that lend themselves to giving credence to possibilities that maybe don't make sense in in suburbia. Meaning like I there was one time I was hiking I was hiking by myself in the redwoods just kind of trying to get my head around the story. And I stopped and looked around and I was like, fuck, like Sasquatch makes a lot more sense. Like when you're actually here, I mean, I wouldn't have been surprised if a fucking branasaurus had just started walking by me, you know, in those forests because they just feel so like ancient and spooky and magical. Yeah, I've heard of feel it like he got excited. Yeah, I've heard people explain something similar to me. Like the Stute Paul Rose Lou's Mount in the show, he's been spent most of his life in the Amazon. And he explains that like when you're there and you're like disconnected from modern technological society and you're kind of like just walking barefoot on the dirt and you have like all the insects insect noises around you like the birds and the monkeys and all those noises. He's like, he's like it almost kind of like removes a layer between you and like something else that you can't release. Like almost like it unlocks like a buried ancient sensory ability that we may have had. Right. Your senses are definitely heightened. Yeah. And you're like more in your in tune, your in tune with something else. You can feel that current. Yeah. Yeah, that makes sense. I think the same is true in those redwood forests. And in a lot of other places where you can really feel that current. Yeah, I mean, it makes sense that like being like living in a fucking a city surrounded by stacked on top of where you're in an apartment building to stack on top of people on this traffic and and like all these like crazy sounds and pollution. It's like you're kind of like a like a killer whale in a tank at sea world. Right. Right. Right. Boston like in the Emerald Triangle, myself selective, right. These are people for the most part that have either grown up there. So they are the descendants of people that made a deliberate choice to get away from that to get away from the work of tank at sea world. Yeah. Or they've made that choice for themselves as adults and have moved there, you know, in recent years, one of the two, meaning those people by nature are going to be more open to those possibilities, but because of their personalities and then you add on that the environment in which they're steep in their daily lives. And you get a lot more openness to the possibilities of the paranormal. Right. And so, okay, but you grew up in Alaska and Anchorage. Yeah. And then you moved to Santa Cruz. Is that what you say? I went to college in Santa Cruz, California. Yeah. And that's pretty close to Mendocino, right? Oh, it's a few hours away. I mean, it's Bay Area. So it's it's about probably about three hours or so. Yeah. That's the Mendocino's way up way. It was just far north, man. Yeah, it is way fucking way. I mean, they would tell me stories about like harvest seas, you know, people driving like RVs packed with weed down to the Bay Area to sell it, you know, and it was just like fucking running the gauntlet of cops, you know, it's just like you're nerve racking it. Some of them were just fucking idiots about it. I mean, they they they they'd look like yeah, there's pictures of some of the vehicles. I mean, the people that got bust, I mean, they just look like deadheads or something. I mean, they'd be the might as well had a scientist had pulled me over like I'm going to beat the shit like win a big O like painted with, you know, psychedelic eye of Horus and shit. It's like, you know, come on. Like the guys that got away with this, like the most nondescript vehicle you can imagine. You make multiple runs packed in a hidden compartment in the trunk, you know, change the vehicles like be smart about it. Yeah. Yeah, there's a yeah, there's I mean, so many wild stories that come out of that part of that part of the country too. Like there's like, you know, there's a ton of UFO adoption stories that come out of that part of the world too or that part of the country too. You know, where you have people like I wonder like how, you know, where you explain like walking through the woods by yourself, you said you, you wouldn't be surprised if you saw a Brantosaurus walk, walk by like I wonder what sort of like psychological connection there is between that and like people see in flying saucers or think they got abducted by a UFO or something. You know, like I wonder what what that unlocks in the psyche that could be going on that's not like real, you know, nuts and bolts, you know, like just like just like big foot may not be some biological thing. Maybe it's just some like psychological phenomenon that is conducive to being in that to living in that environment. Maybe that maybe the UFO thing has like a similar connection. Maybe maybe there's a port there's portals around there. Right. I mean, some of the stuff that made I don't know it's made in most sense, but that I thought that was most interesting was people that lived in that area that believe that like there there are interdimensional portals in the woods around there and that that explains this ask watch sightings that Sasquatch is like an interdimensional being or messenger that sort of like flits back and forth between our reality and a parallel universe in the metaverse. Wow. Okay. That's like a commonly held belief up there just really. Yeah. Yeah. What are those what are those people say about like UFOs? Do they have like any belief in that or are they not into that? I didn't talk to them about UFOs. I was just really just focused on that because I saw that there were in your documentary. There's your talk into the guy in the first episode where like you're asked to about Sasquatch. He's always talking about UFOs are like what? Yeah. Yeah. I do remember that. Yeah. I was on the phone with him. Yeah. Um, you know, I saw UFO. You did? I saw Phoenix lights once almost 30 years ago. Yeah. That was the one of the that and the more time that went by after I saw that craft and it did not like really after the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan because I always like I believe that what I saw was probably a military, um, sort of airship giant airship that had a cloaking device of some kind stealth cloaking device that had frits out and they were testing it. I was like, I don't think that was a fucking alien space. Really. But then after the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and we didn't deploy anything like that, then I really started to think, well, maybe that was something else. You know, the 30th anniversary of the Phoenix lights just just passed like March 13th, I think. Yeah. But I mean, that was, you know, probably know, that was like one of the biggest UFO sightings, you know, ever documented fuck. I've wished we had these cameras and everyone had had a camera in their pocket on that night. There were some photos. There's footage footage. There's footage. We saw a VHS, you know, and I just wish there'd been a lot more angles, a lot more footage of it. And so that's yeah. So people saw two different things, right? They saw this array of lights and then in the East Valley, like over around Tempe or Mesa where I was, a lot of people saw what I saw, which was a much bigger single craft like the V shaped craft huge. I saw, yeah, I saw the V shaped craft, but it also seemed like it changed shape to me into something that was like a lot even bigger than just that that V shape, like that stealth bomber shaped thing. It seemed like it was changing shapes as it was flying. And you don't think it was alien. Well, the more time has gone by that we haven't had that military technology has not been revealed to be military technology, the more the more question what it was. But I know what I fucking saw. And, you know, I remember like the governor of Arizona, five-sighing to saw it. But he had a press conference about it because people freaking the fuck out because like thousands of people had seen two, at least two different UFOs or two different UFO phenomenon. And he had to wear the governor held a press conference about it, but he had like somebody dressed up in like a silver like alien space suit come out and kind of like locking it, mocking it, even though he had seen it himself. Yeah, that shit. He actually came out in to apologize for that. He did. He did. Yeah. Did you, so when you saw it, what time was it? Was it like was it? It was nighttime. I don't remember. I want to say it was a super late though. No, it wasn't super late. And were you able to see like other than the lights? Were you able to see like an outline of anything? Definitely. And that's what I'm saying is that I saw I did not see the like sort of scattered array of lights that seemed to be smaller craft. And also remember that like that same night, the military went up and dropped a bunch of flares. Okay. And then initially that was like one of the explanations for it. So why did the military go up and like drop a bunch of flares? If not to like provide some kind of cover, not a cover story, but an explanation for what people were seeing. In other words, people started to see the lights. And then round the same time, the military went up and dropped a bunch of bright burning flares in the sky. So people saw a lot stuff in the sky that night. What I saw was this. I saw the a large craft with a V-shaped lights on it. And then at one point, those lights went out. And it seemed to me as if the shape of that craft changed and elongated and got larger. Like it was morphing. Okay. And at that point, it was dark. There were the lights went out. But it was at low altitude. A lot of people said that they saw it and it was really high up. What I saw over Tempe was low altitude, like close, noiseless. And almost like he could make out the shape by it blocking out, you know, light in the sky. You could just see a dark shape. And went on, you know, several minutes. It was not like a fleeting thing. And it was slow moving. I think there was photos or videos of somebody who was like up on a mountaintop, like really, really close to it. Remember, do you remember us talking about that, Steve? Is that with David? No, not with Morehouse. Morehouse came in and he was a, he was saying that it was definitely military stuff. He was saying that it was a balloon. But if it morphed shape, that wouldn't make sense. I was not a fucking balloon and it wasn't flares. Yeah. I, you know, I'm not going to sit here and tell you that it was definitely an extraterrestrial craft. But I know what I fucking saw. And it's like these explanations that it was like a balloon, or that it was all these flares that the military dropped, there's just, there's no way that that conforms with what I saw. And I know what I saw. So I mean, I was asked to come to like a 30th anniversary event, you know, this year. And I didn't do it. And I am talking about it on your show because I don't want to be that guy, you know? But it's like, oh, that project blue book shit about like, you know, deliberately setting it up so that people that recount these kinds of experiences or things that they saw that they're mocked ridiculed, you know, it's done a good job. Because here I'm still, I'm nervous right now, like telling you about it because like, I'm going to be the like the Phoenix lights UFO guy now. And I know, but I, yeah, it's weird. I just keep coming back to it. I believe what I see. And I saw it. Yeah. I mean, the fact that they had a whole project to discredit people and to like, why so disinfo like if it's, if it's nothing, then why would you go to that effort to do that? Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. It's a, it's one of those topics that's just gets like, you know, there's so many different layers to it. And so many people that talk about it all the time is just like, God, you get kind of like burnt out on it. Like, I don't want to fucking hear anymore about this shit, you know, it's like, let me know when you figure it out. It's like too much to pay attention to. Well, I feel it's like, I mean, the link between the Epstein files and UFOs is that it's all right there out in front of us. It feels like right now, it's like happening in real time. Yeah. It is right there. And it just almost like the idea of this like one top, you know, 10th of percent of people running the world, right? That the curtain got peeled back on that over here. And then here it's like, it just seems like the evidence of these unexplained and unexplainable aircraft. It's all out in the open right now. Yeah. And it's just overwhelming. Right. I think it's on purpose. To your, you know, that's spooky. Right. Well, I mean, it's like because of the internet and there's so because there's so much shit available on the internet, we have so much access to everything. They could they could hide the real shit in there with a bunch of other bullshit and nobody would know the difference, right? It's like some sort of like weird limited hangout where it's like some people could know think they know the truth. Like you could have the good shit mixed in with all the bullshit. And like, it doesn't matter to you because no one's going to ever know which one's real and which one isn't like trying to pick a needle out of a haystack. Right. Cause we're just flooded. Yeah. And I'm sure there's a lot. I'm sure like, dude, like some of the craziest stories you've ever heard about UFOs, they could very well just be real. And to us, like rational thinkers, like you're like, no, of course that's like the craziest things never going to be the real thing. But like if you're on, if you put the shoe on the other foot, like, you know, maybe it's some sort of like weird fucking sigh up who knows who knows, man. Yeah. One of my teachers at UC Santa Cruz was was Frank Drake who was one of the founders of SETI and he came up with the Drake equation, which is like a way to like, you know, punch in different variables to estimate the number of other intelligent species just in our galaxy, you know, and the way he broke down is like, of course, of course there has to be probably hundreds of thousands of highly developed technological beings just in our, just in the Milky Way. And it's very convincing. So I'm convinced that that's true. Yeah. You know, yeah, I think it's probably if it is anything, it could potentially be like a, a former breakaway civilization of human beings, maybe that like lives underwater or like was a part of a, they were maybe humans once and they like evolved in a weird way for some reason. Like they developed some crazy technology, you've been trying to avoid some sort of fucking catastrophe that happened on earth. Maybe they went underground or underwater and like they're so fit and everyone else got wiped out, but they were so advanced technologically. Everyone else got reset, but they stayed the same. They were like some breakaway or whatever. They hid somewhere on earth and like maybe now they're like popping up and random places and we don't know what it is. I'll tell you what, if you were, you were extraterrestrial life form and you wanted to come check us out with better place to hide in the ocean. Right. Yeah. We've explored more of the surface of Mars than we have our own oceans. Yeah. It's insane. Yeah. It's bonkers, dude. And the fact that like all those occultists and people that were hanging out with Elrond Hubbard and the fucking Nazis that we recruited to come over here and work on the atomic bomb. They were the same ones that were like fascinated with all this UFO stuff. You know, that was right in the time that Roswell happened. Yeah. That's another layer that I don't know. I don't know if humanity can handle that one being exposed. But who knows? I didn't think they'd be able to handle it. I didn't. I didn't think people would be able to handle this Epstein ship. But apparently people just can ignore it and just go about their day. It's just a massive state of denial. Yeah. I think so. Or a few people to confront it and what it indicates. Just to speak about the Epstein files. How many projects are you working on now? Or do you have like one in particular? And we mentioned the Ukraine one. But like, do you have anything like big you're planning on doing or that you could talk about? Yeah. I'm working on a couple projects right now. One of them is on basically on energy and focusing on like California's energy policy, which is like, you know, California is at the vanguard of trying to move towards quote unquote net zero in the United States. Right. And so California has essentially passed a lot of rules and regulations to try and shut down its domestic oil production in California. There's a lot of fucking oil in California. Yeah. Right. And so you think like, okay, well, California is shutting down all this oil product. But government of California is making it so hard for these oil companies to do business. It must mean that California is using a lot less oil. But that's not the case at all. California is still burning as much oil as it ever has. And so I started with that question. I was like, okay, well, what are the ramifications of that? And like California is importing a lot of oil and the single greatest source of imported oil for California is Iraq. What? Iraq. 40% of California is imported oil comes from Iraq right now. And so people have this perception of California being like kind of at the vanguard, the green movement, the United States. You know, it's a massive economy. It's not the fifth biggest economy in the world. Yeah. Right. And so I'm just kind of like digging into that. And like, okay, what are the like national security implications of California relying so much on oil from the Middle East? And is it really better for the environment to be trucking this oil from, you know, overseas on these tankers that burn its really dirty fuel? Yeah. Not only are they still burning the same amount of fuel, but now they're actually paying this tankers to current more fuel just to get it there. Correct. Correct. So I'm still kind of feeling my way. You know, I've partnered up with this great director named AJ Carter on this and we're, you know, it's all like independently financed so that we have editorial control, total editorial control of this story. And then I'll probably come out like later this year or early next, I would say. You know, but it's crazy that we started making this film, you know, a few months ago and we were talking all these energy experts and national security experts about the Strait of Hormuz, you know, and they were really they were presenting it as like this theoretical risk, like what if war broke out in the Middle East and all this oil that California is depending on is somehow as in cut off. It's going to be a real big fucking problem for California. And then it happened, dude. Like, so is California the most fucked state there good because of this. I mean, the gas, there was there was this USC professor who last year came out with this study and he predicted the possibility of gasoline rising to eight dollars a gallon in California at the pump because these big oil refineries in California are shutting down because the government's been so hostile to to the industry that they just kind of like threw in the towel. And he was saying like, you know, something goes wrong. Some X factor gets introduced to this gasket skyrocket to eight dollars a gallon in California. And he was fucking ridiculed by Governor Newsom. Right. He was Michael Mache is a business professor USC. And within a few days of the war in Iran starting, there were gas stations in Southern California that were posting prices of eight dollars and 20 cents a gallon. So he was totally vindicated. And so this idea that he put out there that was like, you know, seemed ludicrous or that was ridiculed by the governor and in the media was told he proven right. So that's just like, you know, I really liked stories that sort of like challenge conventional wisdom. Yeah. You know, or challenge likes that prevailing, accepted truth, I guess. And then in this case, the accepted truth is that like shutting down the oil industry in California must be good for the environment and good for the country. And I'm not so convinced that that's true. Yeah, that's a fucking that whole topic is a maze to try to navigate because there's so many like it's so it's so a political, it's so much political baggage that comes along with it, you know, and like it's really hard to know what's what the fucking what's really going on with that shit. Because like, I mean, right, that's crazy. Like right when you start this thing, you have the whole Venezuela thing happen. Yes. Where we apparently went over there to get all their oil and then which actually kind of makes sense. Now, now that we did the Iran war, it would kind of make sense that we would want to go get Venezuela first, right? So it's maybe that was part of the plan the whole time. And now that you have the Venezuelan or the Iran thing happening and choking off all of that oil, like how does that affect? How does that affect? I mean, I first of all, I had no idea that different states could import oil from different countries. Yeah, I didn't know that was how it worked. Well, it works. That's the way it works in California. California is California's situation because they don't have an interstate pipeline. They have in-state pipelines, but they don't have an interest. In other words, California can't just like buy a bunch of oil, you know, from Texas. Yeah. For example, all right. And so California could entirely like produce and refine its own oil just in California. But there were policy decisions not to do that. But at the same time, because that we don't have with existing technology, we don't have the technology to replace fossil fuels right now. We just don't. Yeah. Okay. I know how the father win mills and solar panels can't do it. Oh, there's no way. There's so many of them. I know death, valley is crazy. The amount of like solar panels that we'd have to have to like even come close. And that's it. And solar, you know, wind and sun, right? Solar, they only replace electricity. In other words, you can't like you can't manufacture steel with solar power. You could do it with nuclear, but you can't like solar and wind power like that only can address basically like our electricity needs. In other words, about 30% of our energy consumption. Believe me, I wish I hadn't learned a lot of the shit that I've learned in the making of this, you know, documentary because it's fucking terrifying because it's like the technology, this whole idea of like just stop oil, it's like completely unrealistic. This idea that we could just like flip a switch, if we just had the political willpower, we could just stop using fossil fuels and switch to renewables is frankly, it's a fantasy. It's what I'm finding. Yeah. And that's scary. You were of the opposite belief before you started this. You thought it might have been possible. Yeah. Yeah, I was, I was thought that, you know, I was thought that nuclear power might need to be a part of the equation, but I didn't understand just how completely reliance our world is upon fossil fuels right now. I wonder what, how much to have you learned about the nuclear power possibility? Like how how much of a reality do you think that could be? I think that in my opinion, like that's the answer. If we accept that like climate change is like a, you know, is a serious threat, like assuming that that's true, then I think that in all of the above energy approaches, the only answer in that nuclear has to be a big part of that equation. I mean, what else? Again, because solar and wind can only address like, you know, electricity, it doesn't address like transportation or manufacturing, okay, which is what most of the energy is used for. Yeah. So, and then what frustrates me is I see some of the same voices that 50 years ago in California, you know, we're pressuring the government in California to put a moratorium on nuclear power in California. Some of those same voices today are there like the just stop oil, just leave it in the ground. We can just, you know, flip a switch and go to net zero. It's, it's a fallacy. It's, it's a, you know, it's a comforting idea, but it's completely divorced from reality in my opinion. You know, because like, look, even with, especially with AI coming online right now in the energy demands of that, you know, you start factoring that in, the amount of energy that's derived from fossil fuels now compared to the 1970s, like we're using just a little bit more in terms of percentage. In other words, there is no energy transition going on. The idea that there's an energy transition away from fossil fuels. Yeah. There really isn't. But we're using way more energy, right? Yes. True. But I'm saying as a percentage of the amount of energy we're using, sure, we're using more renewables. But as a percentage of the total energy we're using worldwide, fossil fuels, it's now about like 86% like in the 70s is about like 83, 84%. So it's slightly more now. Right. And it was 50 years ago. Right. And then with the, with the onset of AI and all this stuff, I mean, it's going to be exponentially growing. It's not just going to be, it's not going to be a steady rate. Like this is going to be an exponential growth as technology and AI and fucking quantum computer start to become a thing. Like how much energy is that chicken? I take, right? That's crazy. They think about all the plants on Taiwan that we depend on to manufacture all the chips and everything. They need that natural gas from the rental least that's now choked off. They run a natural gas. So what happens if they can't make those chips? What happens like six, eight, 12 weeks from now? Right. Right. Right. Okay. We're just now starting to feel the impacts of this. And right now it's just the price of the pump. But our whole economy is based off oil, right? That's what we have to put the petrol dollar, right? It's all based on that's propping up the our currency is being the world currency is because of the oil that comes out of the Middle East. And those, all those countries over there that export all that oil, the deal they made was to only take US dollars so they could invest it in all these other companies and a lot of them AI companies that are basically like doing a circle and fueling our economy in return. So like not only are they choking off all that oil and raising all the gas prices and creating all this destabilization and the energy sector, but they're also like going to fucking I wonder what it's going to do to the fucking American economy in general, you know, like our stock market and all that stuff. Everything's going to get more expensive. Yeah, not just gas. Yeah. Oh, right. Cause the petroleum is used to make most things, right? Plastics or they use that to make plastic. These headphones, yeah, our phones, you know, the chairs we're sitting in. Yeah. The petroleum is used to make most things right plastics or they use that to make plastic He's headphones. Yeah our phones. You know the chairs were sitting in yeah, the remote control that used to turn on TV the TV itself Yeah, it's it's everywhere God dude Well, bro, I see you know. Oh, yeah everything man. I mean like Yeah, I don't know. I don't know what's going on dude I'm just I'm trying to make head. I can't make heads or tails of what the fuck's going on in this world right now It's just so at least you try. I'm trying I learned the more confused I get But bro, thank you for doing this man. Appreciate it. This has been thank you. This has been fucking phenomenal We where where can I tell people to go to? We just blink to your movies or do you have like a website or anything people do your website? links and then the latest show narco menonites is on crave right now Which you can watch if you're in Canada, but I think it'll be available in the US I will see them. Okay cool. I went when is what's the plan with that with the world you creating one or the oil on two Yeah, I'd say the oil documentary would be out like later this year maybe early next okay It's gonna be a feature doc not a series. Okay. Okay cool fantastic bro. Well. Thanks again, dude. Thank you. This is awesome We have patreon questions We do all right. We got people on our our patreon that ask you specific questions, so we'll do that separately That's it for the podcast. Can I everybody?